

COMMONWEALTH PRICKLY PEAR BOARD.
THE
BIOLOGICAL
CAMPAIGN
AGAINST
PRICKLY-PEAR
BY
ALAN P. DODD
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH PRICKLY PEAR BOARD
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND,
30th OCTOBER, 1940.


COMMONWEALTH PRICKLY PEAR BOARD.
THE
BIOLOGICAL
CAMPAIGN
AGAINST
PRICKLY-PEAR
BY
ALAN P. DODD
Wholly set up and printed by
A. H. TUCKER, Government Printer,
Brisbane, 1940
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH PRICKLY PEAR BOARD
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND,
30th OCTOBER, 1940.


Cactoblastis cactorum.
(a) Female moth (b) Male moth
(c) Eggstick ( d ) Larvæ
(e) Cocoon showing pupa
[By courtesy of the
Queensland Department of Agriculture and Stock.


CONTENTS
PAGE.
I. General Discussion and Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Introduction . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 1
Survey of the Problem . . . . .. .. .. . . . . 1
The Work of the Board .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 2
The Results . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . • • 4
The Present Position .. .. .. .. .. . . . . I
Control of the Less Important Prickly Pears .. .. . . • • 9
Reclamation of the Prickly Pear Lauds .. .. . . . . . . 10
11. The Prickly Pears .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 14
Introduction into Other Countries .. . . .. . . • . 15
The Introduction of Prickly Pear into Australia . . . . .. 16
The Major Pest Pears .. .. .. . . • • • • . . 19
The Problem and Difficulties of Control . . . . • . • . 25
The Administration of the Pear Lands .. . . . . • . . . 26
111. Tee Board and its Policy .. .. .. .. •. 27
Co-operation with State Departments .. .. . . • . 29
The Cost of Biological Control .. .. . . . . • . 29
The Policy of the Board .. .. . . . . . . . . 30
Organisation of the Work in Australia . . . . . . • . . . 32
The Overseas Programme .. .. .. . . . . • • 33
Prickly Pear Insects Supplied to Other Countries . . . . .. 34
IV. The Cactus Insects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Host Restriction .. .. .. . . . . • . • . 36
A Survey of the Cactus Insects . . . . . . . . • • 37
The Cactus Phycitids .. . . . . . . • . • • 38
Other Lepidopterous Enemies . . . . . . .. • . 40
The Cactus Beetles .. . . . . . . . . . . • • 40
The Dipterous Enemies .. . . . . .. • • • • 42
The Plant Sucking Bugs . . . . . . .. . . • • .. 43
The Scale Insects and Mealy Bugs . . .. . . • • 43
The Prickly Pear Red Spider .. . . . . . . •. 45
V. The Plant Diseases of the Cactaceae .. .. .. •. .. 46
VI. The Host Limitation Aspect .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Methods Adopted in the Starvation Tests .. .. •. 53
General Conclusions . . . . . . .. •. • • .. 55
Plants on which Feeding and Development Occurred .. .. 55
The Species of Insects Tested . . .. . . .. • ■ .. 57
Attack on Other Plants by Introduced Insects .. .. .. 68
VII. Establishment of the Insects in Australia .. .. .. .. 72
Transportation . . . . . . . . .. . . • • .. 72
Acclimatisation . . . . .. . . . . • • • • .. 73
Efforts to Establish the Various Insects . . . . • • 75
The Lepidopterous Enemies . . . . . . . • • ■ .. 75
The Coleopterous Insects . . . . . . . . .. • • .. 86
The Plant Sucking Bugs . . . . . . .. .. • • .. 91
The Dipterous Insects . . . . .. . . ■ . • • .. 95
The Cochineal Insects . . . . . . .. . • • ■ .. 96
The Scale Insect, Diaspis echinocacti . . . . . ■ • • .. 105
Spider Mites . . . . . . . . .. .. • • • • • • 165


PAGE.
VIII. CaOTOBLASTIS CACTOHDM AND ITS CONTROL OF PmOELY PEAE . . 107
The History of its Introduction to Australia . . . . . . • • 108
Breeding in Cages .. .. . . . . . . . . • . 110
Establishment in the Field .. .. .. .. .. .. HI
Life History and Habits .. .. .. .. .. . • •• HO
Progress in the Field .. .. .. . . . . . . 135
Cactoblastis and the Less Important Prickly Pears . . . . . . 145
IX. Enemies or Cactoexashs and Other Conteox Factors . . . . 147
Temperature .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . • ■ • 147
Disease .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..148
Various Enemies .. .. .. •• •• ..149
Parasites .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..151
The Two Major Parasites . . ■ ■ - • • • • • ■ . 156
Effect of Parasites on Cactoblastis . . .. .. .. . . 165
Appendix—The Personnel ot tee Board and its State . . . . . . 174
Literature ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..176


The Biological Campaign Against
Prickly-Pear
By ALAN P. DODD
I. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY.
INTRODUCTION.
The control and eradication of prickly-pears in Australia through
the agency of insect enemies is a graphic illustration of the solution of a
weed pest problem.
This bulletin is intended to be a record of the biological investiga-
tions carried out during the campaign. The progress of the work will
be surveyed from 1920, when the Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board
was formed, up to the present year, 1940. The activities of the Board
will be treated more fully than in previous bulletins and published
articles dealing with the subject.
The Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board, an independent organisa-
tion representing co-operative effort by the Governments of the Common-
wealth, Queensland and New South Wales, was appointed in 1920 for
the express purpose of attempting to control prickly-pears by establish-
ing in Australia the insect enemies and disease organisms that attacked
these plants in their natural home, America. In 1939 it was decided
that the successful accomplishment of the great experiment had reached
the stage where the continuance of the policy could be effectively pursued
by the twm States. Hence, toward the end of that year, the work of the
Board terminated. Queensland took over the main personnel and equip-
ment of the Board operating within the State and created a Biological
Section of its Department of Public Lands for the purpose of maintain-
ing efficient supervision over prickly-pear control. In New South Wales,
the Prickly Pear Destruction Commission, a branch of the Department
of Lands, which is now responsible for the biological activities in that
State, has appointed one of the Board’s officers to its staff. Thus,
although the Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board has disbanded, the
biological operations will be carried on by the scientific officers who are
fully acquainted with the project on account of their many years’
experience with the now 7 defunct Board. Furthermore, the Common-
wealth Government, through the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, will continue to co-operate wdth the States in the elucidation
of problems that may arise in the future.
SURVEY OF THE PROBLEM.
The problem of pricMy-pear in Australia can be stated briefly as
that of a vigorous, rapidly-spreading weed occupying very large tracts
of grazing country, where mechanical and chemical methods of eradica-
tion were economically impracticable since the cost of treatment was
greater than the value of the land. Prickly-pears are natives of North
and South America. Of the various species that became established in


Australia, two, Opuniia inermis and 0. strict a, assumed major pest im-
portance, while other forms reached noxious weed dimensions in certain
districts.
The two main pest pears obtained their footing dining the period
when the country was being opened up for grazing, when population
was sparse, and pastoral holdings of very large acreage. From about
1900 onward, they spread very rapidly, until the peak of this great
plant invasion was reached about the year 1925. At this time roughly
60,000,000 acres were affected, of which about 30,000,000 acres com-
prised infestations so dense that the land was useless from a productive
viewpoint. More than 80 per cent, of the occupied area was in Queens-
land, the remainder being in New South Wales. The pear territory has
an annual rainfall of 20 to 30 inches; it comprises good grazing land,
with large areas suitable for dairying and general farming. The value
of the land, before it could be improved for production purposes, varied
generally between ss. and 30s. per acre. Under the most practicable
methods of chemical or mechanical treatment, dense prickly-pear could
not be eradicated at a cost less than £lO an acre. Thus it will be readily
understood that the application of ordinary weed control measures was
out of the question. In the peak years the pest was spreading at an
alarming rate. The continued cost of checking the invasion of pro-
perties was often too great a financial load for landowners; hence, year
by year, more land became unoccupied and more holdings and home-
steads deserted.
THE WORK OF THE BOARD.
Although biological control had been suggested many years earlier
as tbc only possible method of arresting the prickly-pear invasion, and
although a Queensland Prickly Pear Travelling Commission had in 1914
recommended the introduction of insects and plant diseases from
America, the project did not get under way until the appointment of
the Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board in 1920. The first steps taken
by the Board were to send entomologists to study pricldy-pear enemies
in America and to establish bases for the breeding of the imported
agencies in Australia,. Its policy has comprised;
(a-) The search for and investigation of all insects attacking
prickly-pears and other cacti in North and South America ;
{!>) The survey of the plant disease organisms affecting these
plants ;
(c) The study of the life histories and habits of the insects ;
(d) The selection of the insects of greater potential value ;
(e) The investigation of the food plant restriction of prickly-
pear insects, including starvation tests on plants of economic
importance ;
(/} The collection in America of stocks of the selected insects and
their transport to Australia ;
(g) The acclimatisation in Australia of the introduced insects ;
(J%) The large-scale rearing in Australia of certain insects, their
establishment in the field, and later their mass distribution ;
{i) The study of the progress of the established insects.
The investigations have concentrated on the insect enemies. The
survey of the plant disease aspect indicated that fungus and bacterial
organisms were unlikely to prove of particular value, and that many of


the diseases of prickly-pear were already present in Australia. Further-
more, it would have been most difficult to prove that disease organisms
could not transfer their activities to other plants.
Work in America.
Entomologists were engaged on the investigation of the insect
enemies of prickly-pear from late 1920 continuously until 1937, either
in North or South America or in both continents simultaneously. Most
attention was paid to the United States, Mexico and the Argentine, on
account of the greater number of cactus insects occurring in those coun-
tries. Experimental and breeding centres were maintained in the
United States for 12 years, and in both Mexico and the Argentine for
several years. In addition, visits were paid to practically all parts of
America where prickly-pear occurred at all freely.
Approximately 150 different species of insects, restricted to feeding
and breeding on prickly-pear and other types of cactus plants, were dis-
covered. Many of these forms attacked cacti other than prickly-pears
and would not live on the latter. The life histories and habits of the
insects were studied, both in the field and under cage conditions. About
50 different species of insects were forwarded to Australia, often in large
numbers, more than 500,000 individual insects having been despatched
from America.
The Australian Organisation.
The headquarters of the Board has been at Sherwood, a suburb of
Brisbane; this laboratory has been the receiving house for all American
insects, as well as the quarantine and acclimatising centre. Field
stations for the breeding of insects were established at several localities
in the heart of the prickly-pear territory of Queensland and New South
Wales. The Sherwood laboratory and each of the field stations were
equipped with hundreds of cages for the purpose of rearing insects in
large numbers ; at Sherwood, large quarantine insectaries were pro-
vided for the receipt of the insect stocks from America. Liberations
were carried out with Australian-reared material and not with the sup-
plies secured from America. In addition to their activities in the
breeding and distribution of insects, the field stations have been con-
veniently situated for surveying the progress of events and for studying
the welfare of the insects in the field.
The Host Restriction Question.
In the introduction of insect enemies of prickly-pear from America,
careful thought had to be given to the question of determining whether
the imported insects would not themselves become pests of plants of
economic importance. The Board adopted a fundamental safeguard
that all the imported insects must be restricted to feeding and breeding
on prickly-pears. This policy was carried out in two ways. Firstly, a
study was made in America of the host plant relations of each species of
insect in the field, and all available information on the subject was
sought from scientific sources. Secondly, each species of insect, which it
was desired to establish in Australia, was subjected to starvation tests on
a great many kinds of plants, such as vegetables, fruits, general crops,
shade and timber trees, in order to learn whether, in the absence of its
food plant, the insect possessed the ability to breed on, or to cause
appreciable injury to, any plant other than prickly-pear. It was
learned that most of the insects could not continue to live on any of the
supplied plants. In two or three instances, prickly-pear insects were


able to feed and to develop on certain other plants or fruit, although all
evidence pointed to their absolute restriction to cacti under field condi-
tions in America; naturally, no attempt was made to establish these
forms. The starvation tests served a very useful purpose, since they
indicated the insects that could be introduced into Australia without
any danger of economic plants becoming liable to attack.
THE RESULTS.
Tlie original plan 1 of the Board was to establish an insect complex
o£ several oi many species, the combined activities of which might
accomplish a definite degree of control. By 1928, however, it was
apparent that Caetablaslis cactorwn, which had been introduced three
years earlier, would bring about the destruction of the two major pests,
0. inermis and stricta, unaided by other insects. Thereafter, the policy
was altered to provide for the importation of insects for other specific
purposes, such as control of the tiger pear, 0. aumntiaca, and the tree
pears, 0. fomentosa and streptacanfha.
In all, 12 species of prickly-pear insects were introduced and
established. Since 150 kinds of cactus insects were discovered in
America, and as about 50 species were imported, the fact that a greater
number of forms was not acclimatised may not seem a very successful re-
cord. It is true that the Board failed to establish various insects after re-
peated trials. There are, however, several reasons why the number of accli-
matised insects has not heen higher. In the first place, many of the
insects were restricted to cacti other than prickly-pcars. Other species
caused so little damage that they would have been of no value. Thirdly,
some forms were discarded because they did not pass the stringent food
plant limitation policy as determined by the starvation tests on plants of
economic value. Lastly, the success of Cactoblastis rendered unneces-
sary the introduction of further enemies of the major pest pears. Had
these factors not operated, there is little doubt that many kinds of
prickly-pear insects could have been established in this country.
Progress by Periods.
In the earlier years of the campaign it was anticipated that the
control and eradication of prickly-pear would be a gradual process, in
which the dense areas would be thinned out, individual plants com-
pletely destroyed here and there, and the fruiting and hence the rate
of spread reduced. Certainly, no one could have visualised the out-
standing devastation wrought by Cactoblastis within the space of a few
years.
If Cactoblastis had not been introduced the biological experiment
would still have been justified by results. The insects imported earlier
Lad definitely indicated that they would have exercised some measure
nf control. Chelinidea, cochineal and red spider were, prior to the
advent of Cactoblastis, reducing the density of impenetrable areas,
hilling seedlings and individual older plants, destroying immature fruit,
und generally devitalising O. inermis and stricta.
It will be of interest to show the progress of the investigations in
the following approximate chronological arrangement :
1921-25 :
The introduction, rearing in numbers, and establish-
ment in the field of several insects, including the
moth borer Olycella, the plant-sucking bugs
Chelinidea, and the cochineal Dactylopius.


1925-27 :
The introduction of Cactoblastis cactorum, its large
scale rearing, and first liberations. Attempts to
acclimatise various other insects failed. Cheli-
nidea, cochineal and red spider increase to large
numbers and give promising results.
1928-30 ;
The mass distribution of Cactoblastis throughout the
pear areas and its rapid multiplication.
1930-32 :
The general collapse and destruction of the original
stands of prickly-pear, brought about by enor-
mous numbers of Cactoblastis. The eclipse of
Chelinidea, cochineal, red spider and Olycella,
which were unable to survive in competition with
Cactoblastis.
1932- :
Heavy regrowth replaces the original prickly-pear ;
the Cactoblastis population suddenly diminishes
as a result of starvation following the collapse of
the primary pear.
1933- :
The recovery of Cactoblastis and the consequent
destruction of the regrowth. Attention paid to
enemies of tiger pear and tree pears.
1935-40 :
The virtual complete control of the major pest pears
by Cactoblastis. The former dense pear country
reclaimed and brought into production. Destruc-
tion of tiger pear by the Argentine cochineal.
The Story of Cactoblastis Cactorum.
The conquest of prieldy-pear has been due almost entirely to this
remarkable insect. Its introduction brought a complete change in the
outlook within a few years. Its progress has been spectacular ; its
achievements border on the miraculous. Great tracts of country,
utterly useless on account of the dense growth of the weed, have been
brought into production. The prickly-pear territory has been trans-
formed as though by magic from a wilderness to a scene of prosperous
endeavour.
C. cactorum is a native of Argentine and adjacent parts of South
America. The larvae are gregarious, tunnelling in the segments and
stems of prickly-pear, and reducing the plants to a rotting mass. One
consignment only of material was introduced into Australia, 2,750 eggs
being sent from the Argentine in March 1925. After being reared in
cages through tw 7 0 generations, the small original number had multiplied
to 2,540,000 by March 1926.
The first trial liberations were made in February-March 1926.
Large-scale rearing in cages was continued until the end of 1927, by
which time 9,000,000 eggs of the insect had been released at many
selected places in Queensland and Xew South Wales ; already, the
increase at the earliest liberation sites had been so great as to render
unnecessary further rearing at the field stations. A campaign of mass
distribution was commenced in 1928 and was completed in 1930, the
material being collected from the field centres where the insect had
multiplied to very large numbers. The huge total of approximately
3,000,000,000 eggs was released throughout the prickly-pear territory.


"Hie capabilities of Cactoblastis were apparent almost from the out-
set. Within 15 inontlis after the first trial liberations had been made
in early L92C, many large plants of priekly-pear had been destroyed at
'various points. By June 1928, at several of these early liberations the
insect occurred in great quantity, had dispersed over a considerable
area, and had caused the collapse of hundreds of acres of dense pear.
The big distribution programme of 1928 to 1930 resulted in general
establishment. In 1930 to 1932 an enormous Cactoblastis population
occurred throughout the priekly-pear territory, and the great areas of
the pest throughout Queensland and north-west New South Wales were
reduced to decayed pulp quite suddenly. The rapidity of the onslaught
was astonishing; mile after mile of dense growth collapsed in a few
months under the concentrated attack of phenomenal nunihers of the
larvae. The last big area of original pear in Queensland succumbed to
the insect in 1933, seven years after the initial liberations had been made.
Recin-ring Growth.
The sudden disappearance of the extensive hells of primary pear
resulted in a very great diminution of the Cactoblastis population. The
insect had multiplied so rapidly that it had brought about its own star-
vation. As a consequence, there was a big wave of regrowth in 1931
to 1933. This secondary growth grew very quickly and flourished for
a time vmchcched by the greatly depleted numbers of the insect. By
1933, it was obvious that Cactoblastis was recovering and would soon
regain the ascendancy ; actually, its increase in this succulent young
growth was faster than in the primary pear. At the end of 1934, the
large areas of regrowth had been brought under subjection. There
have been no subsequent recurrences on a big scale. Regrowth has
appeared in many places, and has remained for a few years in certain
areas, hut since 1933 its incidence lias not given rise to apprehension.
Resistant Types of Priekly-pear.
Although the major pest pears generally have proved suitable to
the requirements of C. cactonim and have consequently been more or
Less readily destroyed, there are certain forms, particularly of 0. inermis,
which the insect has experienced difficulty in eradicating, owing to its
inability to make rapid progress.
The less important of these resistant types varies to some extent,
but is always a robust plant, with thick segments of a highly mucilagin-
ous character and an abnormal carbohydrate content. The younger
growth provided a suitable food supply, but the larvae were unable to
survive in the starchy older segments. Destruction of this type, which
occurred in rather restricted areas at intervals, was accomplished after
several attacks. In each onslaught the larvae died after they had
destroyed the terminal growth, and the plants responded vigorously by
a greater production of young segments which permitted the develop-
ment of a greater number of insects of the succeeding generation.
The more common resistant form, known as “ yellow pear,” was a
chlorotic, slow-growing, usually stunted plant, bearing few fruit, and
with a. nitrogen content less than one-half that of normal green inermis.
It was a product of pool 1 soils and was generally found on hilly or ridgy
timbered country. Yellow pear did not occur freely in Queensland,
but it was dominant in two districts in New South Wales, the Bingara-
Inrerell country in the north and the Hunter Valley. In these sections
Cactoblastis made very slow progress. Experimental work proved that


the insect’s failure was due to the low nitrogen content. When nitrogen
was supplied the plants turned green, thus providing better nutrient
conditions and permitting more facile destruction. The solution of the
problem was secured by killing the standing timber which absorbed the
available nitrogen in the soil. The application of this practice has
resulted in a very marked reduction in the acreage under yellow pear.
Enemies of Cactoblastis.
It has been a guiding principle of the Board that all insects should
be introduced into Australia free from their American parasitic enemies,
which, if established, would prevent the rapid increases necessary to
effect control of prickly-pear. Cactoblastis has, however, become sub-
ject to the attentions of various Australian enemies, including birds
and predatory and parasitic insects. The few kinds of birds known
to feed on C. cactorum do very little damage. Among other predators,
the mound ant, Iridomyrmex, causes appreciable losses in local areas,
but over a great part of the prickly-pear territory these pugnacious
insects are not prevalent for the reason that soil conditions do not favour
their requirements ; on the whole they are not important enemies.
The main agents exercising some degree of control are various
internal parasitic insects of the order Hymenoptera. Twenty different
kinds of native parasites have been reared from Cactoblastis in
Australia. As most of these are very rare enemies, they need not be
considered. However, two species attack the pupal stage in all districts
every year. The average degree of mortality among the pupae as a con-
sequence of this attack is not more than 10 per cent, in Queensland, and
increases to 22 per cent, in the Hunter Valley, New South Wales. Thus,
these parasites exercise a certain amount of control, hut they do not
seriously interfere with the efficiency of the pear destroyer. Careful
observations from year to year have determined that these enemies are
not increasing in importance. Furthermore, investigations of their life
histories and habits have enabled the deduction to be made that their
effect will never reach the point where the progress of Cactoblastis will
be endangered.
During the period when the Cactoblastis larvae were concentrated
in numbers in the original tracts of prickly-pear, disease epidemics
caused very big losses on several occasions. The responsible agents were
fungus and bacterial organisms. It was learned that these factors
operated under a particular set of circumstances—namely, a crowded
larval population and an inadequately nutritious food supply. Since
the disappearance of the dense primary pear, diseases have been
virtually non-existent, and the larvae have been particularly healthy.
THE PRESENT POSITION.
As regards the two major pests, 0. inermis and stricta, in Queens-
land the original prickly-pear and the succeeding waves of heavy re-
growth have been destroyed. In most districts all that remain are
scattered, often very widely scattered, plants. There is no trace of the
pest over many extensive tracts of former dense pear. Patches of
heavier growth, varying from a few to a maximum of a few thousand
acres, occur at infrequent intervals. The largest single compact area
would not exceed 5,000 acres, compared with hundreds of square miles
of impenetrable fastnesses 15 years ago. The majority of the remaining
areas are in the south-west border districts of the State. It is doubtful
whether the total of all existing patches of dense or moderately heavy


infestation, whether of regrowth or of seedling origin, would reach
100,000 acres —a contrast to the 25,000,000 acres of heavy pear of 1925.
Certainly, the present quantity of these two plants would not exceed 1
per cent, of the former great masses.
In New South Wales the progress of destruction is not as advanced
as in Queensland, but the infestation has been reduced by at least 80
per cent. There is a good deal of persistent regrowth and of heavily
scattered seedling pear in the north-western districts. Some primary
pear survives, as well as regrowth, in the Bingara-Inverell and Hunter
Valley sections.
The Present Status of Cactoblastis.
The bringing into production on a comprehensive scale Of the former
pear territory has transformed the character of the country, more
particularly in Queensland, where the hulk of the pest was concentrated
and where the infestation was both compact and continuous over large
tracts. The brigalow and belar scrubs and the timbered forest lands
have been, and are still being, converted into dairying and agricultural
farms and to a much greater degree into open grazing pastures.
Cactoblastis is faced with conditions differing radically from those
of ten years ago. Both the amount and the continuity of its food supply
have been reduced enormously. Its destruction of seedling pear and
regrowth and its control of the more scattered infestations must now be
accomplished by the numbers that multiply on each local area from a
small initial nucleus. The rate of increase and, therefore, the time re-
quired to effect control are influenced to a much greater degree by
seasonal conditions than formerly. The open nature of the new pastures
and the absence of the protection previously afforded by the trees and
shrubs, as well as by the dense masses of priekly-pear, render it more
susceptible to an unfavourable local environment, such as high tempera-
tures and lower-than-normal precipitation affecting the growth of grass
and herbage. Overstocking by sheep and cattle is another element that,
by destroying the protecting grass and thereby bringing the pupal stage
in more direct contact with lethal temperatures, plays a role in limiting
the insect’s powers of multiplication. At the present stage mild
summers and seasons of average rainfall are necessary to ensure the
most effective application of its destructive force.
Yet, under the new order the Cactoblastis population is being well
maintained. The proportion of widely scattered, and even isolated,
plants supporting the insect is consistently high. Concentrated numbers
of larvae are still attacking, reducing and destroying many of the
remaining areas of heavier growth. There is no sign of deterioration
of the stocks ; the fecundity of the female moths is as high and the
potential rate of increase as great as in the past. Parasitic and other
enemies are not exercising an undue amount of control ; their import-
ance is not growing.
It can be said that over a great part of the former wide area
occupied by inermis and stricta these pests are under control, for the
scatteredness of the remaining plants is of little consequence and does
not prevent the full use of the land for grazing purposes. In some dis-
tricts in southern Queensland and in New South Wales prickly-pear is
still sufficiently abundant to assume weed proportions, but the surviving
heavy or relatively dense infestations should be progressively reduced to
unimportant features.


The position must be reached before long, if it has not already
been attained in many districts, where a further lessening of the remain-
ing scattered prickly-pear cannot be accomplished by the insect. A
balance will be struck between the plant and its enemy. The continued
control of prickly-pear depends on the continued success of Cactoblastis.
If, for any reason, the insect were to be reduced to impotence, the pest
would again get out of hand. There is no gainsaying this statement.
At the same time, it is most unlikely that the whole of the old territory
would be reconquered by the plant. Closer settlement and the greater
present value of much of the land would permit the application of other
control measures. Whatever happens in the future, a considerable
portion of the pear country has been permanently retrieved. On the
other hand, the lands in the more western districts of lower rainfall and
the grazing country away from the main avenues of communication,
being unsuitable for division into small holdings, would probably be
again overrun, for control methods would, as in the past, be economically
impracticable. This rather gloomy picture is presented for the purpose
of showing to what extent the future position must rely on Cactoblastis.
It is emphasised, however, that the insect has the situation well under
control at this juncture. There is not, in 1940, any indication whatso-
ever that prickly-pear will not continue to be held in complete subjuga-
tion by its extremely capable enemy.
CONTROL OF THE LESS IMPORTANT PRICKLY-PEARS.
The chief objective of the biological campaign has been the control
of the major pest pears, Opuntia inermis and 0. stricta. It was thought
that the insects introduced for the eradication of these two plants might
effectively destroy the tiger pear, 0. aurantiaca, and the tree pears, 0.
iomentosa and streptacantka. When success in the fight against the
two important prickly-pears could be visualised, and the inefficacy of
Cactoblastis and other established insects in combating the minor species
could be judged, the Board devoted considerable attention to the
importation of particular insect enemies of tiger pear and the tree pears.
The low-growing tiger pear, 0. aurantiaca, is the most serious of
these plants. It spreads rapidly and is extremely difficult to eradicate
by chemical and mechanical methods, even at a great cost. Tiger pear
is widely distributed in southern Queensland and in New South Wales.
In the former State many thousands of acres infested with scattered
plants to dense patches occur in the Warwick, Eoma-Surat, St. George-
Thallon and Goondiwindi districts, while smaller areas are found in
A'arious other places. In New South Wales the pest exists in a great
many localities, notably in the Moree-Bingara, Tamworth, Hunter
Yalley and Camden districts; the areas are not as extensive as in
Queensland, and vary from scattered infestations to thick growth. As
a result of investigations conducted in the Argentine in 1931 to 1935
two insects have been acclimatised in Australia. The moth borer,
Tucumania tapiacola, introduced in 1935, is established at points in the
Hunter Yalley and at Tamworth and Warwick, but up to the present is
not exercising any appreciable degree of control. The cochineal, Dacty-
lopius sp. near confusus, imported in 1932, has been distributed generally
in both States. It has made excellent progress, especially in Queens-
land. In the Eoma-Surat, St. George-Thallon and Warwick districts
the denser areas of tiger pear have been thinned out to the degree of 80
to 90 per cent. ; furthermore, the insect is bringing about good destruc-
tion among the scattered infestations, where it is killing not only the
large plants but the young plants and even the rooted single segments


an inch or two high. On present prospects, the control of 0. aurantiaca
by this cochineal seems assured. In New South Wales the results are
not so striking, but the work of cochineal is efficient and is continuing.
Except for scattered plants of 0. tomentosa in southern districts, the
tree pears are restricted to central Queensland. Concerning 0.
streptacantha, there are, in the aggregate, a few thousand acres of dense
to moderately heavy growth and a good deal of scattered plants and small
patches. The taller 0. tomentosa occurs densely over thousands of acres
of brigalow scrub country in the Springsure district; smaller very dense
areas are found in parts of the Rockhampton district, and the plant is
scattered generally over a wide area.
A Mexican strain of the cochineal, Dactylopius opuntiae, has been of
value in the dense patches of 0. streptacantha, where it has destroyed the
undergrowth of seedlings and young plants and reduced the infestations
considerably. In the case of large plants the injury is restricted to the
killing of occasional segments, hut when the plants are cut down the
cochineal completes their destruction. The ordinary form of D. opun-
tiae, which attacks 0. inermis and stricta, thrives on 0. tomentosa and
has, in many places, appreciably lessened the density of heavy infesta-
tions. Furthermore, it is a most efficient enemy of seedlings and young
plants of this tree pear, but does not cause serious injury to the scattered
older plants.
The Cerambycid, Moneilema ulkei, has brought about good destruc-
tion in a few localised areas of 0. streptacantha , but its rate of increase
is too slow to render it a serious controlling factor; it is not successful
against 0. tomentosa. Another Cerambycid, Lagochirus funestus, was
imported from Mexico in 1935 for the control of tree pears. Consider-
able numbers have been released, and rearing and distributing is being
continued. This insect possesses definite potentialities. Already it has
caused marked destruction to both 0. tomentosa and streptacantha in the
vicinity of various liberation sites.
Although these tree pears are weed pests, they are far from being
such dangerous plants as 0. inermis, stricta and aurantiaca. They have
not increased rapidly, and, more particularly in the case of 0. tomen-
tosa, seedlings and young plants are being kept in check by cochineal.
Most of the present infestation comprises old plants. A gradual reduc-
tion in their prevalence should be accomplished by the established
insects.
Opuntia monacantha, which was formerly widely distributed in the
more coastal areas of Queensland and New South Wales, was virtually
exterminated by the cochineal, Dactylopius ceylonicus, within a period
of a few years after the insect’s introduction in 1913. More recently
the cochineal has successfully destroyed patches of this plant in Victoria
and South Australia.
RECLAMATION OF THE PRICKLY-PEAR LANDS.
The widespread destruction by CactoMastis cactorum has, during
the period 1930 to 1940, resulted in a radical transformation of the
former prickly-pear lands from a state of virtual uselessness to one of
prosperous productivity, more especially in Queensland which con-
tained five-sixths of the affected area and in which there were very
extensive compact belts overrun by dense infestations of the pest. As
the reclamation programme commenced in the last decade and is still
being prosecuted energetically, the full value of the increased produc-
tion from the old pear territory will not be realised for some years.


Unfortunately, it is not possible to give adequate figures showing
what the eradication of prickly-pear has been worth. The infested
lands have not been kept separate for the purpose of Governmental and
other records. Similarly, statistics are not available to indicate the
actual use now being made of the former pear areas. The increase in
the number of sheep and cattle, the expansion of dairying and agricul-
ture, cannot be given for the reclaimed country-as a whole. It is, how-
ever, possible to furnish certain figures and to paint a general picture
illustrating the great changes that have eventuated.
In Queensland 22,000,000 acres of former dense pear country have
been selected for settlement. This figure does not tell the whole story
of the freeing of the lands from the stranglehold of the weed. Certainly,
it embraces the large compact areas, but it does not take into account the
very big acreage of heavy pear included in relatively small individual
areas on grazing properties and other holdings already held by settlers,
nor the great extent of the more scattered infestations. The value of
these 22,000,000 acres prior to the destruction of the prickly-pear was
almost nothing. But freed from the pest the capital value of this land
would average 10s, an acre, without taking into consideration the worth
of the new improvements in fencing, water facilities, removal of timber,
&c. Hence, here alone, the State has gained an asset of at least
£10,000,000, because of the availability for grazing, dairying and agri-
cultural purposes of hitherto useless land. The production from these
lands will, of course, be worth many times this sum.
The settlement of so many millions of acres has not, as yet, meant
any particular increase in Government rental revenue. In order to
induce speedy settlement and development, the new areas were opened
under very liberal conditions of tenure; rents for the first few years of
occupancy were fixed at a nominal figure only, and rentals on land
already held were reduced appreciably. How-ever, this initial develop-
ment period is passing; shortly, Crown revenues will begin to increase
and for some years will become progressively higher to reach substantial
figures.
In considering the question of bringing the retrieved territory into
production it should be emphasised that practically the whole of the
pear-infested districts was more or less heavily timbered, either in the
form of brigalow and belar scrubs or of open Eucalyptus forests.
Although the pest had been conquered, the land was of little value for
farming, dairying or grazing on account of the standing timber. There-
fore, reclamation has required the destruction of the trees by ringbark-
ing or by felling and burning. Again, the country was poorly supplied
with surface water, which has had to be provided by catchment tanks
and dams on each new holding or in the case of pastoral areas on
individual paddocks. Thirdly, the new blocks have had to be enclosed
with boundary and divisional fences, plain wire and post fences in
dairying and farming communities, wire-netting fences in sheep areas
for the exclusion of rabbits and dingoes. Lastly, in the extensive tracts
of former impenetrable prickly-pear, such as in the Rannes-Baralaba,
Dalby-Chinchilla, Wandoan-Tarooni, Milmerran and Goondiwindi dis-
tricts, hundreds of miles of roads giving access to the new settlers have
had to be constructed. Timber destruction, water provision, fencing
and roadmaking have been carried out expeditiously, and the work is
still going on. The unwanted trees have been killed over millions of
acres ; many hundreds of earth excavations for water catchment and
storage have been formed ; thousands of miles of new fencing have
been erected. The total amount expended on these improvements


Timber destruction
£
. . 150,000
Water provision
. . 90,000
Fencing
.. 30,000
Buildings, woolsheds, &o...
.. 75,000
Year.
Number of Sheep.
Bales of Wool.
1927
1,349,300
31,624
1939
2,187,400
54,685
cannot be stated. However, some idea of the great capital outlay can
be shown by one illustration. In the Roma district approximately
1,000,000 acres of heavily-timbered, former dense pear land has been
developed for grazing purposes ; the cost of the improvements is
estimated at £345,000, or nearly 7s. an acre, divided as follows :
The reclamation in Queensland can he divided into two classes.
Land has been made available in areas of from 640 to 5,000 acres for
farming and dairying, while larger areas of from 5,000 to 25,000 acres
have been granted for the growing of wool and the rearing and fatten-
ing of beef cattle. Division into the smaller mentioned areas has been
possible on the better class land adjacent to railways and nearer the
main centres of population. Such closer settlement has been carried
into effect in the Dawson Valley within 150 miles of Rockhampton, in
the Burnett River district, between Toowoomba and Roma, and in the
Milmerran country. In these districts, as well as in certain sections
where the pear areas were not so extensive, cotton, wheat and maize,
and fodder plants as sorghum and Sudan grass are being grown success-
fully on reclaimed land. The area of former prickly-pear country pro-
ducing these crops has not been computed. However, as an example of
what is being done with reclaimed land, it can be pointed out that in
the year 1938 the township of Wallumbilla, in the Roma district,
despatched 240,000 bushels of wheat, at least 75 per cent, of which was
produced on former heavy pear country.
The greatest expansion in the more closely settled areas has been
in the dairy industry, aided by the establishment of grasses such as
Rhodes grass in. the fertile tracts of brigalow and belar scrub. The
area under impenetrable prickly-pear now converted to dairy pastures
must exceed 1,000,000 acres, on which many hundreds of new settlers
are now prospering. For example, at Chinchilla in 1926, the year
Cactohlastis was first released, a small factory produced 400,000 lb. of
butter. In 1939 a modern factory produced 3,100,000 lb. of butter.
This seven-fold increase can be attributed solely to the disappearance of
prickly-pear ; allowing Is. per lb. to the producer, the increased revenue
to dairy farmers around Chinchilla in 1939, compared with 1926,
amounted to £135,000. At Gayndah, on the Burnett River, where the
better class land was covered with dense prickly-pear, butter production
has risen from 515,200 lb. in 1926 to 2,596,720 lb. in 1939, a five-fold
improvement. A similar story could be told of various other districts.
Although the stimulus given to farming and dairying has been very
considerable, the expansion of the pastoral industry has been much
greater, more particularly as regards woolgrowing. The major portion
of the recaptured territory in western and south-west Queensland is
being rapidly transformed into sheep pastures. The development of
the land is yet in its infancy. However, it is estimated that within a
few years 5,000,000 sheep will be grazing on land that was until 1928
overrun with prickly-pear ; this will mean a permanent increase of
between 20 and 25 per cent, in the State’s flocks. Already the increase
has reached considerable proportions. The Roma Land Agent’s district
has furnished the following information :


1926.
1930.
Dalby
2,600
3,600
Chinchilla . .
1,100
1,800
Goondiwindi
1,500
2,800
The increase of 838,100 sheep and 23,060 bales of Wool is due
directly to the development of former prickly-pear territory. At the
present average price of £l6 10s. per bale, tbe extra production in 1939
represents £385,000. During the same twelve-year period the number
of sheep in the Goondiwindi petty sessions district has almost doubled—
viz., 425,500 in 1927 and 815,500 in 1939. Then, again, in the Dalby-
Chinehilla sector, where a considerable portion of the reclaimed country
is being devoted to agriculture and dairying, the sheep flocks have grown
from 291,900 in 1918 to 768,550 in 1938. The extension of the wool
industry is taking place mainly in the more southern pear areas of
Queensland. Most of the retrieved land in central Queensland and
southward toward the main western railway is being used for the graz-
ing and fattening of beef cattle. No statistics have been obtained to
indicate the number of cattle pastured on the new T areas.
There are many hundreds of new settlers, with their new homes,
dairy and wool sheds, and other improvements, dotted over the re-won
country. The influx of population and capital, the expenditure on
pastoral, agricultural and dairying development, and the increased
production have brought new prosperity to the many towns and smaller
settlements in or adjacent to the former prickly-pear regions. Town-
ships, stagnant from a business standpoint 15 years ago, have been
revitalised; public buildings, offices, shops and residences have sprung
up everywhere, while butter factories have been enlarged and
modernised. Between 1926 and 1939 the population of three towns has
increased as follows :
In the nine-year period 1930 to 1939, 175 new residences were
erected in Dalby, 175 in Goondiwindi, and 150 in Chinchilla. More
than £200,000 was expended on new building' programmes in Dalby
between 1928 and 1940. Since 1930, £175,000 has been spent in
Goondiwindi and £75,000 in Chinchilla for similar purposes.
The reclamation progress in New South Wales has been less
spectacular than in Queensland. In the first place, the area infested
by prickly-pear in New South Wales was less than one-fifth of the
Queensland total. Secondly, dense pear was limited to separate districts
and did not form unbroken compact tracts as in the northern State. A
good deal of the overrun land was of rather inferior typo. Much of the
infested country was included in pastoral holdings, and a good deal
occurred in State forests. On account of these various reasons, there
has not been, as in Queensland, wide scope for settlement projects.
Yet, most of the former pear lands of New South Wales have been
brought into production, mainly for sheep grazing, to some extent for
beef cattle, and to a minor degree for wheatgrowing, dairying and
general farming. There has been considerable activity in the replacing
of the timber by pastures, in fencing, and in other development work.
There has not, however, been a marked increase of new settlers, since
most of tbe recovered areas have been utilised to enlarge adjacent
pastoral properties.


II. THE PRICKLY-PEARS.
Prickly-pears are included in the Gactaceae, a plant family peculiar
to America and rather remote from other botanical orders. The Cacta-
ceae is a large group, and contains a great wealth of types, from the
giant Carnegeia gigantea of North America and Stetsonia of South
America to tiny Mamillaria and other dwarf plants.
Prickly-pears belong to the Platyopuntia or flat-segment section of
the genus Opuntia, and to Nopalea, a closely-related genus with few
species. In their comprehensive and splendidly illustrated monograph
of 1919, Britton and Eose recognised about 350 species of Opuntia. As
many of the species exhibit considerable variation in habit of growth,
spininess, colour of the flowers, and other characters, students of the
group have encountered great difficulty in deciding whether diverse
forms are distinct species or merely varieties. Furthermore, many
species have been grown for so long in cultivation that their origin has
been lost ; thus, some species have been described and named from
garden forms and have never been found growing in the wild state,
except as escapes from cultivation. Britton and Eose adopted a con-
servative attitude on the question, and the 350 species of Opuntia
recognised in their monograph could safely be increased to 400.
The genus contains many types, and has been divided into three
subgenera —T ephro cactus, Gylindr opuntia, and Platyopuntia. The
first-named group is South American in origin, and occurs in the arid
regions of and adjacent to the Andean system ; the segments or cladodes
are usually more or less globular, as in 0. aoracantha and O. glomerata
of western Argentine ; at higher altitudes one finds low mound-like
plants, such as 0. weberi and 0. floccosa. The Cylindropuntias are very
distinct in appearance from the true prickly-pears. As the name
implies, they possess cylindrical cladodes, frequently so densely supplied
with spines as to form a covering armature; the lower segments become
woody stems, but the upper growth is usually of a succulent nature.
They occur in south-western United States, Mexico, the West Indies,
and northern South America, being especially abundant in southern
Arizona. The Devil’s rope, 0. imbricata, naturalised in Australia, is a
typical Cylindropuntia.
The true prickly-pears or Platyopuntias possess flat segments.
Britton and Rose simplified the classification by dividing them into 29
series. For the purposes of the present publication, it seems advisable
to group the many species under four headings, as follows :
1. Tree pears—
Plants attaining a height of from 15 to 30 feet, usually
with a definite woody trunk and several branches. In Australia,
0. tomentosa and 0. streptacantha are typical forms.
2. Shrub pears—
Plants of more or less upright shrubby growth, branching
from near the ground ; without a definite trunk ; attaining a
height of from 3to 10 feet but occasionally taller. This is a
very large group and contains the Australian pest pears, 0.
inermis and 0. stricta, and the taller 0. elatior and 0. mona-
eantha. The last-named is often termed a tree pear; it is a tall,
straggly plant without a definite trunk, and its affinities are
nearer to the shrub pear group.


3. Dwarf pears—
Similar to the shrub pears but smaller, usually prostrate
or decumbent, rarely attaining a height of 2J feet. The
tortispina and polycantha series of North America and the
common Argentine 0. sulphurea belong here. An Australian
representative is 0. opuntia (= 0. compressa ).
4. Narrow-jointed pears—
Low-growing or medium-sized plants with narrow, more
or less brittle segments. Many species occur in the West
Indies and the Argentine. The tiger pear, 0. aumniiaca, is a
typical member of the group.
The characteristic feature of prickiy-pears—and, in fact, of nearly
all cacti—is that the stems contain chlorophyll and function as leaves.
The so-called leaves of prickly-pear are flattened stems, botanically
termed cladodes, and more generally referred to as segments, joints or
pads. The true leaves are produced as short stiff bracts on the young
growth and soon fall off. This physical character is an adaptation to
a dry environment, in that the thick segments are able to store and
retain moisture which wmuld rapidly be lost through transpiration in
ordinary leaves. The water content is extremely high, usually in excess
of 80 per cent.; thus, the plants are able to withstand long periods with-
out rain and to obtain the maximum benefit from spasmodic precipita-
tions. A detached segment can remain alive, and even produce new
growth, for months without contact with the soil. The flowers measure
from 1 to 3 inches across, and are brightly coloured, being yellow', orange,
red or pink. The fruit are succulent, more or less pear-shaped (hence
the popular name “prickly-pear”), and are produced very freely; they
contain many hard-coated seeds, wdiich remain viable for many years.
Prickiy-pears occur in greatest abundance in sub-tropical regions
•with a moderate annual rainfall of 20 to 30 inches, as in southern Texas,
parts of the West Indies, the central plateau of Mexico, and portions of
the Argentine. In general, they are unable to withstand severe winter
conditions, yet low'-growing species are found at high altitudes in the
Eocky Mountain and Andean systems and on the Canadian prairies,
where they are snow-covered in winter. A moderate rainfall is not a
prerequisite to their development ; many kinds of prickly-pear flourish
in the 40 to 50-inch annual rainfall belt of Florida, and under similar
moisture conditions in southern Brazil and northern Argentine. On
the other hand, various species inhabit areas with an annual rainfall of
8 to 15 inches, as west Texas and southern Arizona, wdiere they grow
freely in the lower valleys and on the slopes of the foothills, but rarely
on the open mesas. It is erroneous to consider prickiy-pears as desert
plants ; although they are adapted to life in areas w'here there are long
dry periods, they prefer a moderate rainfall
INTRODUCTION INTO OTHER COUNTRIES.
After tlie discovery of America prickiy-pears were ip Induced into
various countries and became established in the Mediterranean region,
South Africa, India and other places. Their increase to the propor-
tions of serious weed pests has occurred in South Africa, India, Ceylon,
Madagascar and Australia. The dissemination of prickiy-pears was
due to three reasons —firstly, the establishment of the cochineal in-
dustry ; secondly, the edible value of the fruit ; and thirdly, the singu-
larity of the plants and frequently the beauty of the flowers of these and
other cacti as garden specimens.


Until its supersedence by aniline dyes the cochineal industry
flourished in many places, notably the Canary Islands. In the peak
years, between 1870 and 1880, the world’s output of commercial cochineal
exceeded 7,000,000 lb. weight annually. The effort to start the industry
in new countries failed in many cases ; not only was the incorrect
prickly-pear food plant supplied to the insect, but the introduced cochi-
neal was not the commercial species, Dactylopius coccus. In this way,
the Indian cochineal, D. ceylonicus ( =D. indicus) , was first described
from India and Ceylon although it is indigenous to South America.
In Mexico and other Latin-American countries certain kinds of
prickly-pear are cultivated for the fruit, known as “ tunas,” which are
sold in the town and village markets and are a staple article of diet.
So, too, the fruit are eaten in the Mediterranean region. The value of
prickly-pear to the natives of southern Madagascar is so important that
published articles have expressed the fear that the destruction of the
plants by cochineal insects may bring about the starvation of one native
tribe.
With regard to the third reason for the distribution of prickly-
pears, various species of Opuntia as well as other cacti are sold freely
as ornamental plants in many countries, including Australia. The
writer was informed in Uruguay that 0. auraniiaca was formerly plenti-
ful on the Cerro (hill) of Montevideo, and that its scarcity at the time
of his visit in 1924-25 was largely due to the fact that so many plants
had been taken away as curiosities.
THE INTRODUCTION OF PRICKLY-PEAR INTO AUSTRALIA.
To which reason can the importation of pricldy-pears into Australia
be attributed ? Certainly, the first introduction was due to the desire
to establish the cochineal industry. After calling at the Canary Islands,
where the commercial cochineal then flourished, Captain Arthur Phillip
with the first colonists called in 1787 at Rio de Janeiro, where several
prickly-pear plants and some cochineal insects were taken aboard. It is
on record that he desired to cultivate cochineal in the new colony in
order “to dye his soldiers’ coats red.” Both the plants and the insects
reached Port Jackson in safety, but there is no subsequent information
of their progress. The prickly-pear must have been Opuntia mona-
cantha, the only species growing in the neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro;
it could hardly have been either 0. inermis or 0. stricia, the two main
pest pears, which have never been recorded from Brazil. Governor
Phillip has been freely blamed for the origin of Australia’s prickly-pear
problem. Certainly, he was responsible for the introduction of the first
Opuntia plants into the new country, but on all available evidence the
establishment of 0. inermis and 0. stricta cannot be laid at his door.
With the exception of 0. monacantha, whose introduction can be
considered rather definite, the origin of the other Australian pest pears
cannot he traced. In the case of 0. inermis, 0. stricta and 0. auran-
tiaca, it is significant that they grew naturally or had become established
in the immediate vicinity of trade ports of consequence, 0. inermis at
Galveston in Texas, 0. stricta at Ahdparaiso in Chile, and 0. auraniiaca at
Montevideo in Uruguay. Therefore, the theory may be tenable that
each of these plants was collected and brought into Australia as a
botanical curiosity.
About 26 species of Opuntia and other cacti have become naturalised
in Australia, either as serious weed pests, minor weed pests, or as escapes
from gardens. As three kinds have been discovered in the past three


years, other species may exist in certain places. The main pest pears,
0. inermis and 0. stricta, and the lesser pest pears, 0. aurantiaca, 0.
tomentosa, 0. streptacantha and 0. monacantha , will he discussed later.
Brief notes on the occurrence of the other forms are of interest.
Tree Pears —
0. megacanthd, one of the most commonly cultivated forms in
Mexico. —One area of many plants occurs at Rockhampton,
Queensland ; a hedge at Scone, New South Wales, has been
destroyed in recent years.
Opuntia sp., known at Joconoxtle, a native of Mexico. —An over-
grown hedge exists near Rockhampton.
0. ficus-indica and 0. amyclaea, or relations of these cultivated
species, are found in gardens and very occasionally as escapes.
0. pachona, a native of Mexico. —One large plant in the Moree dis-
trict, New South Wales, was destroyed some years ago.
Nopalea cochinellifera, from tropical America. —A few plants
occurred at Rockhampton and Charters Towers, Queensland.
Shrub Pears—
0. lindheimeri, the common prickly-pear of south-east Texas —
Several clumps are growing near Parachilna, South Australia.
0. rufida, a native of northern Mexico—Several patches occur at
Blinman, South Australia.
0. elatior (= nigricans) , a native of tropical South America—
Scattered plants are established in the Scone and Camden dis-
tricts, New South Wales.
0. dillenn, indigenous to Florida and the West Indies—A few
plants near Brisbane have been destroyed. References to this
plant in other Queensland localities appear to represent a spiny
mutation of 0. inermds.
Dwarf Pears—
0. opuntia (= 0. compressed) , a native of eastern United States —
Established in scattered quantity at Singleton, New South
Wales.
0. microdasys , indigenous to northern Mexico —Frequently grown
in gardens ; a small patch at Cuttabri, New South Wales, has
been destroyed.
Narrow-jointed Pears—
Nopalea dejecta, from tropical America —One small area near
Rockhampton, Queensland.
Opuntia sp., apparently related to West Indies plants of the 0.
tuna group—Patches at Wallumbilia and Uaidley, Queens-
land, and a few plants at Goondiwindi, Queensland, have been
eradicated.
Cylin dropnntias—
0. imhricata, common in parts of the United States—One small
area at Warwick, Queensland ; scattered plants and clumps in
several New South Wales districts ; occurs in South Australia.
0. sudulafa, a native of Peru —A few plants at Gayndah, Queens-
land, have been destroyed.


Other Cacti—
Acanthoeereus pentagonus, from tropical America—Scattered
plants and patches in one area in central Queensland.
Harrisia martinii, from the Argentine—Several patches at widely-
scattered places in Queensland.
Harrisia sp. —Established in one area at Goondiwindi, Queensland.
Cleistocactus haumanni, from the Argentine—Small patches found
growing at several places in Queensland.
Nyctocereus serpentinus, from Mexico —Large clumps are present
in various localities in southern Queensland.
Concerning the lesser pest pears, 0. monacantha is a member of the
shrub pear group, although it has been termed “ the smooth-leaved
tree pear” in Australia. It is a native of the coastal areas of Uruguay
and southern Brazil. Britton and Rose include monacantha as a
synonym of 0. vulgaris Miller ; but as the name vulgaris has been used
for many species of Opuntia, including inermis in Australia, it has been
deemed advisable to retain the name monacantha in this publication.
This plant is established in South Africa, India and Ceylon. In
Australia it is or was more widely distributed than any of the other
prickly-pears, occurring in Western Australia, South Australia, Vic-
toria, New South Wales and Queensland, usually in the form of over-
grown hedges or of scattered plants. In Queensland it was not un-
common in coastal districts from Brisbane to Cooktown, and was often
grown as living fences around Chinese market gardens. It assumed
pest proportions in one district only—namely, along the Suttor River,
about 150 miles west of Maekay. Owing to the destructive efforts of
the cochineal insect, Dactylopius ceylonicus, monacantha has been virtu-
ally eradicated in Queensland and New South Wales during the past 25
years.
The velvety tree pear, 0. tomentosa, inhabits Mexico and is not
uncommon in the vicinity of Mexico City. In Australia scattered
patches and plants occur at several localities in southern Queensland,
but its main domicile is in central Queensland, from Rockhampton for
150 miles west to Emerald and for 120 miles north and south of the
Central Railway between these two towns. In the vicinity of the town-
ships of Gogango and Edungalba, 40 to 50 miles west of Rockhampton,
it grows very densely to a height of 30 to 40 feet in the brigalow ( Acacia
harpophylla) scrubs. The largest belt of tomentosa is found on the
headwaters of the Brown River, south-east of Springsure, where there
are thousands of acres of tall dense tree pear in brigalow scrub country.
The white-spined pear, O. streptacantha, is one of the dominant
plants of the central plateau of Mexico. In Australia it is restricted to
central Queensland, from Rockhampton west to Emerald and south
toward Camboon. It was used for hedges and fences, which can still be
seen in places. In general, the plants are scattered, but there are
several dense areas and a great deal of scattered infestation in the Dingo-
Blackwater sector; another dense paten- of several hundred acres
occurs in the Banana district. In these areas streptacantha has in-
creased rather rapidly ; yet, in other places hedges, which must have
been established at least 50 years, have shown little disposition to spread
outwardly.
The tiger pear, O. aurantiaca, one of the low-growing, narrow-
jointed pears, is indigenous to the southern portion of the province of
Entre Rios, Argentine, and to the southern part of Uruguay. It is a


Tree pear, Opuntia tomentosa, and spiny pest pear, O. stricta, Westwood, Qld,, 1923.
Common post pear, Opuntia inermis, and tiger pear, O. aurantiaca, Roma, Qld., 1926.
[Face page 18,


Large plants of OPuntia incnnis, showing the heavy crop of fruit.
Prickly-pear cacroaching on grazing pastures, a typical view in pre-Cactoblastis days.


Prickly-pears and other cacti, near San Luis Potosi, Mexico.
An unusually heavy development of prickly-pear, Opuntia lindheimeri, Texas, U.S.A.


A prickly-pear plant completely destroyed by larvae of the moth barer, Melitara
doddalis, Texas, U.S.A.
A consigument of prickly-pear insects in Wardian oases at Uvalde, Texas, ready for
despatch to Australia.


pest of considerable importance in South Africa, where it is known as
“ jointed cactus.” In Australia it is found at many places in New
South Wales as far south as the latitude of Sydney, and in southern
Queensland from Gatton and Roma to the New South Wales border.
The infestation in Queensland is extensive, but is mainly of a scattered
nature ; however, there are many thousands of acres infested with dense
patches to scattered plants in the Roma, Thallon, Goondiwindi and
Warwick districts. Undoubtedly, tiger pear has spread very rapidly
during the last 20 years. Under Australian conditions the plants do
not fruit freely ; furthermore, most of the fruit are either sterile or
contain very few seeds. The spiny segments of aumntiaca break off
very freely. The small terminal pieces may be blown by the wind or
become attached to animals ; hence, the plant is splendidly adapted to
rapid increase and to establishment in new areas. It is extremely
difficult to eradicate even by careful and costly chemical treatment, on
account of the fact that the small detached pieces among the grass are
not seen and these soon give rise to a new infestation. Thus, control by
poisoning can be merely a partial check ; many instances could be quoted
where scattered infestations have been poisoned annually for many
years without effecting eradication.
THE MAJOR PEST PEARS.
The two major Australian pest species are closely-related shrub
pears, attaining a height of 3to 6 feet. 0. inermis and 0. stricta were
regarded by Britton and Rose as forms of the same species, 0. stricta.
However, under Australian conditions the two are readily separated ;
indeed, they very rarely hybridise.
The Australian inermis is similar in all respects to 0. hentonii,
which grows quite commonly along the shores of the Gulf of Mexico
from the Louisiana border south to the vicinity of Corpus Christi, and
is relatively abundant around the seaport of Galveston. Britton and
Rose included both 0. hentonii Griffiths and 0. inermis D.C. as synonyms
of 0. stricta Haw. The exact relationship between hentonii and inermis
has not been established. Thus, although the Australian plant is un-
doubtedly hentonii, the name inermis, which has been in general use for
so long, is retained in this publication.
The Australian stricta is identical with 0. stricta of Florida, where
it grows freely on the north-eastern coast, especially around Fernandina,
and on the west coast around Hudson and Cedar Keys. 0. airampo,
described from plants established in Chile, is the same species.
The first record of inermis in Australia would appear to be that of
a plant brought in a pot from Sydney to Scone, New South Wales, about
1839 ; there is reason to believe, however, that it was growing in cultiva-
tion at Parramatta, near Sydney, prior to this date. When the Scone
specimen developed, cuttings were planted out in nearby fields. The
first introduction into Queensland is said to have been made direct from
Parramatta to Yandilla, in the Warwick district, about 1843. Between
1840 and 1850 landowners obtained cuttings from either the Scone or
Parramatta source, and grew them as hedges around their homesteads
in the then outlying pastoral areas. When the hedges flourished to the
point of becoming troublesome the plants were cut down and thrown
out. This would seem to be the usual manner in which the pest obtained
a footing. Thus, the incursions of prickly-pear did not advance outward
from one centre but filled up the gaps between various initial focuses.
Before 1863, 0. inermis was established at several places on the Darling


Downs, near Goondiwindi, at Dulaeca, between Wandoan and Taroom,
Queensland, and at Scone and on the upper Gwydir River, New South
Wales. About 1870 a hedge was planted at Blackall, Queensland, thus
giving rise to the infestation in that district. The spiny pear, 0. stricta,
is stated to have been first grown as a hedge near Rockhampton about
1870.
The early spread of the pear must have been relatively slow, but it
suffered no check. In the sparsely-settled country of large cattle pro-
perties, even when the increase became marked, there was a general lack
of effort to attempt to stem the plant’s progress—a statement which is
probably true in the history of most weed pests. The Brisbane
“Courier,” in August 1884, stated that “the rapid rate at which in
scrubby portions of the Darling Downs prickly-pear is spreading is
causing serious apprehension, and points to the necessity of devising
some means whereby the growing evil can be overcome.” By 1893 many
thousands of pounds had already been spent on pear eradication ; yet
it was not declared a noxious weed in Queensland until that year.
In 1900 an area of 10,000,000 acres was affected, but the most rapid
rate of spread began after the breaking of the great drought in 1902,
during which adverse period prickly-pear had been freely fed to stock.
This remarkable plant invasion advanced with such celerity that in
1920 the infestation encompassed an area estimated at 58,000,000 acres.
The increase from 10 to nearly 60 million acres within 20 years would
mean an annual increase of 2,500,000 acres, and this figure must have
been exceeded in the later years. At the peak of its invasion, in 1925,
the affected area must have been greater than 60,000,000 acres. It is
not intended to convey the impression that the whole of the pear terri-
tory was covered by the weed ; probably about one-half, or 80,000,000
acres, would have represented heavy infestation ; the remaining
30,000,000 acres would have comprised land on which the plant was
scattered. But scattered plants frequently became dense masses within
three years.
The main prickly-pear territory extends from the vicinity of
Mackay, Queensland, in latitude 20 deg., to Newcastle, New South Wales,
in latitude 33 deg. south, a distance of about 900 miles. Except around
Rockhampton, a coastal belt of 50 to 100 miles in width is little affected,
although scattered plants and patches occur from Townsville to the
south coast of New South Wales. The western limit of the pear belt is
roughly 200 miles from the coast in central Queensland, 400 miles inland
at Charleville, and about 350 miles from the coast at the Queensland-
New South Wales border.
About four-fifths of the occupied area was in Queensland, where
the infestation was almost continuous, with no large intervals of pear-
free country. In addition to the main territory, there was an isolated
area of considerable extent around Blackall, in central Queensland, and
a smaller infestation around Charters Towers, in the North. The main
pear belt falls within the watersheds of the Darling, Burnett and
Fitzroy River systems.
In New South Wales the heavy infestations were more or less
divided into separate districts, which may be grouped as follows :
Mungle Scrub, Mungindi-Collarenebri, Moree-Inverell, Pilliga Scrub,
Gilgandra, and the Hunter Valley. With the exception of the last-
named district, all these groups lie west of the Great Dividing Range.
A smaller area is found around Camden, south-west of Sydney ;
scattered patches occur in south coastal districts ; while in the northern


PROPORTION OP ANNUAL RAINFALL DURING
SUMMER MONTHS.
4 Months.
6 Months.
December-March, October-March,
inclusive.
inclusive.
Central Quebnsland-
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Clermont
61
74
Rockhampton . .
63
73
Western Queensland
Dalby
47
65
Roma
49
65
Charleville
51
65
South-west Queensland—
St. George
46
61
Goondiwindi
45
61
North-west N. S. Wales —
Collarenebri
43
60
Moree
43
60
Hunter Valley—
Scone
43
59
Jerry’s Plains . .
42
58
and north-western portions of the State a good deal of scattered infesta-
tion and of small heavier areas exists in localities other than the
enumerated main districts.
The pest pear of New South Wales and of the greater part of
Queensland is 0. inermis. In central Queensland, 0. stricia is distri-
buted over several million acres. It is usually associated with inermis,
but between Biggenden and Munduhbera, in the Burnett River district,
the infestation was virtually pure stands of strict a,. From Rockhamp-
ton to Wowan, and between Blaekwater and Emerald, strict a is much
more prevalent than inermis, but the northern extension of the pear
territory toward Mackay is almost exclusively inermis. The southern
limit of strict a, lies on the watershed of the Main Divide about 40 miles
north of Chinchilla ; thus, this species has not invaded the basins of
the. Condamine, Maranoa, Warrego, and other rivers of the Darling
system.
The main priekly-pear territory, from the Hunter River, New South
Wales, right to the northern extremity inland from Mackay, Queens-
land, has an annual rainfall of 20 to 30 inches. At Charleville, Bollon
and Collarenebri, points on the extreme western limit, the precipitation
drops slightly below the 20-inch mark. Around Toowoomba, and in
the vicinity of Rockhampton, the rainfall increases to 30 to 40 inches
annually. In many coastal areas of Queensland, inermis grows quite
freely in 40 to 50-inch districts. However, 90 per cent, of the heavily-
infested lands possess an average precipitation of 20 to 30 inches.
The precipitation is greater in summer than during the winter
months, and there is a more or less definite w r et season from December
to March. The summer rainfall preponderance is more pronounced in
the northern than in the southern sections of the prickly-pear belt, as is
illustrated by the following figures
Throughout the main territory, where the altitude does not exceed
1,200 feet, the annual mean temperature varies from 73 deg. F. at
Rockhampton 1 to 62 in the Hunter Valley. The mean maximum falls
between 85 deg. at Clermont and 75 deg. in the Hunter Valley, and the
mean minimum between 63 deg. at Rockhampton and 48 deg. in the
Hunter Valley. The maximum shade average for the hottest month of


the year ranges between 90 and 97 deg. F., while the mean minimum
average for the coolest month varies between 30 and 50 deg. F. During
mid-summer shade readings exceeding 100 deg. F. are of frequent
occurrence in the more inland sections, while in the winter months light
to heavy frosts are commonly experienced, except in the more coastal
areas. Snow is unknown in the prickly-pear country.
In New South Wales and southern Queensland the main pear
region has an altitude of 600 to 1,200 feet, but in the Fitzroy and Bur-
nett River watersheds the elevation is mostly from 200 to 600 feet. In
the Inverell-Bingara district and the upper Hunter River Valley of
New South Wales, inermis grows densely at elevations of 1,500 to 2,500
feet; smaller areas are found at similar altitudes around Toowoomba
and Warwick, Queensland.
The affected country is, with little exception, flat or slightly undulat-
ing, but near Rockhampton, in the Toowoomba and Warwick districts,
and in the Inverell-Bingara sector, prickly-pear has successfully pene-
trated into the hills. In the Hunter Valley, most of the infestation
occurs on the numerous ranges of hills and their lower slopes ; the
fertile valley lands have been maintained relatively free from the
plants’ otherwise certain incursions.
The same vegetation type persists from the north-west districts of
New South Wales through the Queensland pear country to its northern
limits ; this comprises open forest grass lands supporting a moderate
cover of larger trees, mostly several species of Eucalyptus, and smaller
trees and shrubs, interspersed with brigalow (Acacia harpophylla ) and
helar (Casuarina lepidophloia) scrubs. These so-called scrubs vary in
extent from a few acres to large tracts of many square miles ; the
brigalow and helar, either in pure stands or intermingled, grow tall and
straight (50 to 60 feet) and relatively dense, to the exclusion of all
Eucalypts; there may or may not be an under-cover of sparse low
trees or shrubs, such as wilga ( Geijera ) ; the ground is bare or very
sparingly grassed. The hilly areas in Queensland and New South
Wales are lightly to rather heavily clothed with Eucalypts, while the
Pilliga Scrub in New South Wales is a heavy forest of Eucalyptus and
Callitris (cypress pine). Within or adjacent to the boundaries of the
infested territory, there are tracts where the pest has not secured a
footing. A marked feature in Queensland is the absence of prickly-pear
on the hard, poor soil country, on which spotted gum, Eucalyptus macu-
lata, is one of the predominating trees.
The presence of trees or shrubs, except in the case of compara-
tively small areas, would seem to be a prerequisite for the successful
establishment of the pest pears. Thus, adjoining heavy infestations in
timbered sections, the almost treeless plains of north-west New South
Wales, the Jimbour Plain -west of Dalhy, and the grassy downs between
Roma and Mitchell and in the vicinity of Surat have escaped invasion.
The general height of both inermis and stricta is from 2 to 6 feet.
The density varies with the age of the infestation and with the type of
soil and environment. In the brigalow and helar scrubs, the pest
luxuriated to its maximum perfection, covering the ground to the utter
exclusion of grass, and forming an impenetrable barrier to man and
beast; in such situations the pear mass might weigh as much as 800 tons
an acre.


The Spread of Prickly-pear.
Prickly-pear is disseminated in two ways—(a) by segments, (&)
by seeds. The segments, which may be detached from the parent plant
by animals, wind, or flood waters, are able to withstand considerable
exposure or immersion without drying up or rotting, and every broken
off portion is liable to take root. But the main distribution is by seed.
Both mermis and stricta produce heavy crops of pulpy fruit, which are
very palatable to animals and birds, especially crows, emus, and scrub-
magpies or currawongs. The tough-coated seeds pass undamaged
through the digestive system, and the moisture and fertility of the bird
and animal droppings form an excellent germinating bed. It is not
uncommon to find dozens of seedlings springing from one such source.
The seeds are viable for very long periods and are capable of germinat-
ing for at least 15 years after their production.
When one considers the enormous quantity of fruit produced dur-
ing the heyday years, it is evident that a very small percentage of the
seeds succeeded in forming new plants. Despite the great hardihood of
both plant and seed, the young seedling is quite delicate and needs a
protective or other suitable environment. Certain seasons of moderate
rainfall have proved favourable to the development of seedlings. In
years with a heavier rainfall yielding a thicker growth of the natural
grasses, little young pear makes its appearance. The failure of prickly-
pear to become established on open downs and plain lands is probably
due to the unprotected nature of the bare ground in dry seasons and to
the profusion of native grasses in good years.
Adaptability to Australian Conditions.
The rapidity with which prickly-pear has increased in Australia is
regarded as one of the botanical wonders of the world. But there is
another point, equally worthy of comment, that appears to have escaped
notice. The home of 0. inermis and 0. stricta is the coastal section of
Florida and Texas, where the average annual rainfall is 40 to 50 inches.
Is it not remarkable that these plants should, in Australia, have adapted
themselves so successfully to a very different environment, with the
lower precipitation of 20 to 30 inches annually, and with an inland
extension of 400 miles from the coast ? In Queensland and New South
Wales the inermis territory is at least 100 miles from the sea, and the
major portion has an altitude of 600 to 1,200 feet. Yet, in its native
Texas habitat, this plant is invariably found, less than 50 miles from the
coastline and at elevations less than 100 feet above sea level.
Viability.
Mention has already been made of the viability of detached seg-
ments and of the seeds. The pertinacity of the plant can be illustrated in
many ways. Quite healthy plants bearing fruit are found in dead stumps
or in forks of living trees at heights of up to 25 feet. Those severely
damaged by insect attack will produce a big crop of new growth in
the ensuing summer, and the new segments can bear fruit twelve months
later ; such plants often yield a greater quantity of new growth than
uninjured examples, evidence of very strong recuperative powers. A
mass of pear apparently killed as a result of insect activity or of chemical
treatment will, unless the butts have completely rotted, grow vigorously
and present a-flourishing appearance in a few months. Any detached
pad not wholly destroyed will produce shoots and roots from very small
portions of live tissue.


Different Forms in the Same Species.
Both 0. inermis and 0. stricta exhibit considerable variation in
growth characteristics, according to their environment. The former is
normally a plant with very few large spines ; stricta, a spiny plant
usually, is often almost devoid of large spines in shaded situations.
Without taking into account abnormal growths, such as the peculiar
“cauliflower” developments on inermis and the rare mutation of the
same species in which the fine spicules have been replaced by dense
masses of true spines, the various types of growth are of importance
from both the biological and chemical control aspects since they denote
both physical and chemical differences.
The normal inermis, which is found on fairly good land in open or
semi-open country, is a vigorous bushy plant with broad, moderately
thick, green segments producing a heavy yield of fruit. Although the
succulence and vigour of this type varies with the quality of the soil,
its physical characters are sufficiently stable to permit its recognition.
In the belar and brigalow scrubs the crowded plants are inclined to be
straggly in habit ; the segments are green and succulent but are com-
paratively thin and narrow ; relatively few fruit are produced. This
type, known as “ scrub pear,” is more readily destroyed by chemical
and biological action. A tall vigorous growth, often referred to as
“ cattle-camp pear,” is found ore ground with a high nitrogen content
in the vicinity of stockyards and animal camps ; this form has proved
very susceptible to cochineal attack.
Then there are three types of inermis with an abnormally high
starch and mucilaginous content. In open brigalow country where the
trees are rather widely spaced, on land that has been cleared of brigalow
scrub, and in certain other locations, the plant may attain great vigour ;
the lower segments are stem-like, and the upper growth is much thicker
than normal. Subsequent to attack and partial destruction by insects,
it produces an unusual quantity of new growth. Since this form has
shown marked resistance to the activities of Cactoblastis, it has been
termed “ vigorous resistant pear.” The so-called “bull pear” possesses
similar thick segments, and is recognised by the peculiarity that most
of the fruit are not only sterile but are frequently proliferous. A third
mucilaginous form, of less vigorous growth, occurs on open basaltic
plateau areas, mainly in the Hunter Eiver district.
“ Yellow pear,” readily recognised by its yellowish appearance, is
a product of poor soil and is found chiefly on gravelly or stony ridges.
It is dominant in the Hunter River district, occurs freely in the hilly
portions of the Inverell-Bingara sector of New South Wales, and is
present in smaller areas in other places. Its growth is stunted and slow; it
bears little fruit. Yellow pear is deficient in nitrogen ; an application
of a nitrogenous fertiliser quickly stimulates growth and a change to a
green plant. This type frequently possesses a bulbous underground
butt, where starch and moisture are conserved.
0. stricta does not have so many recognisable types. There is the
normal spiny plant and the more succulent scrub growth with thinner
segments bearing few spines. On hard ridges and poor soil generally the
plants are of a straggly but upright growth, and the upper segments are
thicker than the normal; as in the case of yellow inermis, this form of
stricta is not readily destroyed by insect attack.


THE PROBLEM AND DIFFICULTIES OF CONTROL.
The problem of prickly-pear control and eradication has been one
of cost. The great bulk of the infested territory is natural grazing
country, where the land is generally worth less than £1 an acre. Of
course, since the disappearance of the pest, clearing of the timber,
encouragement of grass production, and general improvements in the
way of fencing, buildings and water conservation have rendered much
of the land worth more than £1 an acre in districts suitable for closer
settlement.
Dense pear costs, even by the latest poisoning methods, from £5 to
£2O an acre to eradicate, many times the value of the land. In April
1924, the Queensland Prickly Pear Land Commission stated: —‘ ‘To
clear Queensland of prickly-pear is at present quite impossible. The
cost of the first clearing alone, even if practicable, would probably
exceed £100,000,000.”
The weed gained its hold when land holdings were large and
population sparse. By the time the demand arose for closer settlement
the more valuable brigalow and belar scrubs were completely overrun.
To quote again from the first Annual Report of the Queensland Prickly
Pear Land Commission, “It will never be known—not even remotely—
what the pear pest has cost the State. Revenue, homes, and even lives,
of all it has taken its toll. Without the introduction of the pest to this
country, how different might the picture have been. The lands immedi-
ately west of the Great Dividing Range would have become a field for
really successful closer settlement with all that that implies. Instead
we have millions of acres of nothing but a veritable wilderness of pear.”
To-day, thanks to biological agencies, the vision of successful closer
settlement has become a reality.
In the onward march of the plant many large pastoral properties
were abandoned. Until recently, old homesteads could be seen, not
only completely surrounded by prickly-pear but with the pest growing
through the ruins. As insect attack has succeeded, fences buried for a
quarter of a century beneath the green octopus have reappeared to indi-
cate that man had once laboured in the >vilderness.
But if in the earlier days of the plant’s progress little effort was
made to check the invasion, this state of laxness did not prevail later,
when smaller holdings were the order and settlers attempted to wring a
living from the pear country. A ceaseless war was waged against the
advancing scourge. Digging up and burning, crushing, and dragging
out by the roots with rollers pulled by horses or bullocks w r ere among
the methods adopted. Many settlers lost their capital in the fight and
abandoned their lands to the invader.
The earlier poisons used for prickly-pear destruction were either
too costly or did not completely kill the plants. In 1912 the Queensland
Government established an experimental station at Dulacca under Dr.
Jean White-Haney for the investigation of chemical methods of destruc-
tion. After trials with a great many compounds, Dr. White-Haney was
able, at the conclusion of the work in 1916, to make the definite announce-
ment that arsenic pentoxide was undoubtedly superior to all other
chemical specifics. Since that date arsenic pentoxide has been the main
constituent of all effective pear poisons. However, all chemical methods
are limited by the cost of application, and can be used only when the
scattered nature of the infestation or, in rare cases, the high value of
the land permits their economical employment.


Value of Prickly-pear.
With the problem looming so large for many years, naturally all
sorts of proposals have been advocated for the utilisation of prickly-
pear for commercial or fodder purposes. Bach and every one of the
suggested uses possessed one common limitation, impracticability. As a
food for stock, prickly-pear has little nourishment. It can be used as a
bulk ration with the necessary concentrates, and on account of its high
water content is able to sustain animal life during drought periods. In
so far as control is concerned, the fodder aspect is beside the point. All
the cattle in Australia fed solely on prickly-pear would not have been
able to cope with the annual increase of the pest, let alone reduce the
huge area under its domination.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PEAR LANDS.
Although various Commissions had investigated and reported on
the problem, it was not until 1924 that Queensland appointed a Prickly
Pear Land Commission with administrative and judicial control over
the infested territory of that State. After eight years of most valuable
work this body was merged in the Land Administration Board in 1932.
The energetic policy of the Commission has been directed toward the
checking of the plant’s progress, the eradication of scattered pear, the
poisoning of areas either isolated or on the fringe of the main infestation,
and the general policing of the great area of 65,000,000 acres under its
control. By firm but sympathetic measures it has forced landowners to
keep their holdings clear and has assisted them by substantially reduc-
ing the price of poisons.
In 1924 New South Wales established its Prickly Pear Destruction
Commission, with similar functions to the Queensland organisation but
with more restricted powers. This Commission, which is still in active
operation, has performed valuable service in the prevention of the
further spread of the weed in that State.
Both of these bodies came into being at the time when biological
control was commencing to show promise of success. Naturally, there-
fore, they have taken an active part in the insect campaign, a matter
that will receive attention later in this publication.


III. THE BOARD AND ITS POLICY.
Biological control of prickly-pear was advocated in Australia as
early as 1899. As the dimensions of the pest increased, and as the
difficulties of mechanical and chemical eradication became more obvious,
the idea gained ground that, if the natural enemies could be acclimatised,
the enormous available food supply must result in their rapid multiplica-
tion to numbers that should gradually exercise some curb on the progress
of the plant invasion. In 1912 the Queensland Government appointed a
Travelling Commission, comprising Dr. T. Harvey Johnston, then
occupying the Chair of Biology at the University of Queensland, and
Mr. Henry Tryon, at that time Government Entomologist to the State,
to investigate the avenues of control measures. The Commission spent
eighteen months in visiting the many countries where pricldy-pears were
indigenous or had become acclimatised, and in its subsequent compre-
hensive and most valuable report made definite recommendations for the
introduction under safeguards of certain insects and diseases from
America. During its travels the Commission forwarded to Australia
from Ceylon small stocks of the cochineals, Dactylopius ceylonicus and
_D. greenii; the former insect was successfully reared by Dr. Jean White-
Haney at the Dulacca Experiment Station, was liberated in the field,
and in the space of a few years almost completely destroyed the
scattered areas of Opuntia monacaniha. At this stage, it should be men-
tioned that among the prickly-pear insects encountered by the Travelling
Commission was Cactoblastis cactorum, larvae of which were found in
the Botanic Gardens at Ha Plata, Argentine. Mr. Tryon actually
brought some of the caterpillars alive to Brisbane, but failed to rear them
through to the adult stage. Had this effort been successful, the control
of prickly-pear may well have been brought about years earlier than
has been the ease.
The striking destruction of 0. monacantha by the cochineal, Dacty-
lopius ceylonicus, gave a decided impetus to the biological control move-
ment, But the Great War of 1914-18 intervened to postpone action.
In 1916 the Commonwealth Advisory Council of Science and Industry
approached the Governments of Queensland and New South Wales on
the question of a joint investigation. The consent of the Governments
to the formation of a co-operative body was obtained in September,
1919. The Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board was inaugurated and
held its first meeting in April 1920; monetary contributions from the
three Governments commenced on June Ist, 1920, on which date
Professor T. Harvey Johnston was appointed Scientific Controller.
The Board was established for the purpose of investigating the
biological control question, and has not dealt with other methods —i.e.,
chemical and mechanical —of destruction. The original scheme was for
a period of five years. Subsequently, the three Governments agreed to
the continuance of the investigations —firstly, for a two-year period, and
later for four periods of three years. The final term ended on 31st
May, 1939, on which date the Governments ceased financial contributions.
However, pending the completion of certain investigations and of
arrangements for the Governments to take over its work, the Board
continued in office until 1940, the personnel being transferred to the
Commonwealth and State organisations in the latter part of 1939;
during this period, expenditure was met from the Board’s accumulated
balance.


Originally, the Board was constituted with a membership of three,
representing respectively the Commonwealth Institute of Science and
Industry (later the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research), the
Queensland Department of Public Lands, and the New South Wales
Department of Agriculture, with the Scientific Controller as an
associate non-voting member. This representation has been continued,
except for two changes. With the resignation of Professor Johnston in
1923, the position of Scientific Controller was abolished in favour of that
of Officer-in-Charge without a seat on the Board. In 1926 a scientific
member exercising a vote was co-opted to the Board. The individual
members have been changed from time to time. The Commonwealth
representative was first the Director of the Institute of Science and
Industry and later the Secretary of the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research. The Queensland member has been a prominent
official of the Lands Department, either the Under Secretary of that
organisation, the Deputy Chairman of the Prickly Pear Land Commis-
sion, or the Chairman of the Land Administration Board. The New
South Wales representative has always been the Under Secretary of the
Department of Agriculture. The scientific member has held the Chair
of Biology at the University of Queensland. The Secretary and
Accountant of the Board has been an official of the Queensland Depart-
ment of Public Lands.
Dr. Johnston resigned the position of Scientific Controller in
February 1923. The position of Officer-in-Charge, then created, was
held by Mr. J. C. Hamlin from February 1923 to May 1924; by Mr.
W. B. Alexander from May 1924 to August 1925; and by the writer
from October 1925 until the closing down of the Board’s activities.
During the first five years the contribution from the Governments
was £B,OOO annually, of which the Commonwealth gave £4,000 and the
two States each £2,000. The yearly amount was raised to £12,000 in
1926 and to £lB,OOO in 1928 ; it was then reduced to £12,000 in 1930 ;
all on the same proportionate basis of contribution. The sum was
further reduced to £9,300 in 1931, of which the Commonwealth granted
£4,500 and the two States each £2,400. In the last two years of the
Government contributions the Commonwealth vote was brought down to
£3,750 and £3,000 respectively. During the 19-year period from Ist
June, 1920, to 31st May, 1939, the sums received from the Governments
amounted to £193,540, of which the Commonwealth contributed £94,460
and Queensland and New South Wales each £49,540.
The Board has been an independent body, exercising complete con-
trol over its investigations, finances and staff. The members, being
senior public officers, have been in the position to advocate and protect
the interests of the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Queensland,
as well as to obtain direct co-operation between the Board and Common-
wealth and State Departments. The Board has made a practice of
holding meetings two or three times each year ; on many of these occa-
sions tours of inspection through prickly-pear districts were undertaken,
in order to study the progress of the campaign and to familiarise the
members with the various aspects of the problem.
It has been the function of the Officer-in-Charge to plan and
recommend the lines of investigations in Australia and in America.
When the Board has decided its policy on any particular phase, this
officer has been responsible for the carrying out of the work.


CO-OPERATION WITH STATE DEPARTMENTS.
Close contact between the Board and the State bodies dealing with
prickly-pear administration and control has been maintained. In New
South Wales the co-operation has been with the Department of Agricul-
ture and the Prickly Pear Destruction Commission, the latter being a
section of the Department of Lands. The main distribution of Gacto-
hlastis cactorum and of other insects in that State has been carried out
or arranged for by these two bodies. However, the cost of producing
the supplies of Cactoblastis cactorum has been met by the Board.
In Queensland the association between the Board and the Prickly-
Pear Land Commission has been of a very closely-knit nature. The
Board has been enabled to expand its activities on account of the finan-
cial assistance rendered by the Commission. The latter body provided
a yearly sum of £750 for six years for the investigation of the plant
pathological side of the control problem, and has reimbursed the Board
for all rail freights within the State. In 1927 a joint scheme for the
intensive breeding for distribution of Cactoblastis cactorum was put
into action. The Commission incurred all expenditure in the construc-
tion of buildings and cage equipment at the Gogango and Goondiwindi
held stations, thus allowing the Board to extend its activities at the
Chinchilla field station. From 1927 until 1939 this body paid all
running and maintenance costs of two field stations for part of the period
and of one field station for the remainder of the time. All expenditure
incurred in the employment of labour and motor vehicles for activities
concerned with the mass distribution of prickly-pear insects has been
met by the Commission. In order to co-ordinate the biological work of
the State and the Board, the Officer-in-Charge of the Board’s investiga-
tions was made Scientific Adviser to the Commission.
The association between the Board and the State prickly-pear
organisations has operated to the satisfaction of all parties and has been
of fundamental importance in the success of the campaign. Since the
aim of this publication is to discuss the efforts to control prickly-pear
by biological methods, it is not practicable to draw a line between the
activities of the different bodies which have been in such close
co-operation. In order to present a clear picture of the work accom-
plished and the results obtained, the operations of the State Commissions
with respect to insect distribution are necessarily included in the story.
THE COST OF BIOLOGICAL CONTROL.
It lias already been stated that the total amount of the contributions
from the three Governments during the nineteen years of the Board’s
tenure has been £193,540. The whole of this sum was not expended on
prickly-pear investigations, for, during the last few years of the Board’s
existence, a considerable portion of the annual expenditure was incurred
on investigations dealing with other pastoral weed pests—viz., Xanthium
and Bassia. The amount expended on these additional problems, which
are not discussed in this publication, has been approximately £20,000.
Furthermore, when the Board ceased to function, all remaining assets in
the way of buildings and equipment, as well as certain unexpended sums
of money, were transferred or returned to the contributing Governments.
The actual expenditure on prickly-pear control has been approximately
£168,600.
In view of the undoubted success of the campaign, it should be of
interest to show the whole cost, including activities financed directly by
2


Plant pathological work
£
4,500
Equipment and upkeep of field stations . .
. . 21,650
Insect distribution
. . 37,800
Freight on insect material . .
1,050
£65,000
Commonwealth Government
£
.. 83,000
New South Wales Government
.. 51,000
Queensland Government
. . 106,000
Queensland and New South Wales, of the experiment. The expenditure
by Queensland, additional to that provided by annual contributions to
the Board, has been approximately £65,000, made up as follows:
No figures are available for direct expenditure by New South Wales.
However, an estimated sum of £6,400 on insect distribution would cover
all additional activities by that State.
Combining these figures, we find that the total cost of the campaign
has been about £240,000, the expenditure incurred by the three Govern-
ments being as follows:
THE POLICY OF THE BOARD.
The original aim of the investigations was the establishment in
Australia of a number or complex of natural enemies that would attack
the several pest species of prickly-pear throughout the infested territory.
This policy was continued with such modifications as were deemed
necessary from time to time. The scope of the Board’s operations may
be divided broadly into the following categories ;
(a) The search for and study of all natural enemies in North
and South America;
( b ) The testing of the insects against crop and other plants to
prove that they were restricted to prickly-pear and were
unable to live on plants of economic value;
(c) The forwarding to Australia of supplies of the various forms
that might be of value in the campaign;
(d) The breeding, either in America or under quarantine
conditions in Australia, of material free from parasites and
predators;
(e) The acclimatising of the introduced forms in Australia;
(/) The demonstration of the controlling value of the introduced
insects through the medium of field liberations, which later
were to provide bases for the supply of material for general
distribution;
(g) The study of the progress and welfare of the established
insects.
The attempt to control and eradicate prickly-pear in Australia by
biological agencies must be classed as a great experiment in scientific
research, an experiment which in 1920 was almost unique. Previously
the same idea had been put into operation in the Hawaiian Islands, where
certain insects had been introduced and released for the control of
lantana. Since 1920 other experiments toward the biological control of
weed pests have been initiated. The Hawaiian example was not,
however, a precedent for the systematic study, introduction, establish-
ment, large scale rearing, and mass distribution of insects to combat a


plant invasion. The intensity and scope of the prickly-pear insect
campaign has been without equal. Naturally, the scientific world has
watched the progress of the investigation with keen interest.
As the Board was attempting pioneering Work it was faced with
many difficulties. The breeding of insects in very considerable numbers
had not previously been undertaken, except in the ease of small parasitic
insects that could be housed in a small space. Hence, practical methods
had to be devised. Uniform procedure could not be laid down for all
insects; often the experience gained with one insect could not be applied
to a related form. In the matter of forwarding insects to Australia,
the mode of shipping, the most suitable stage in the life-cycle, and the
most appropriate time of the year had to be learned with each species.
Since the success of the introduction of prickly-pear insects depended
fundamentally on the assurance that the released material was free from
American Hymenopterous and other parasites, the breeding of clean
stocks required care. Particularly was this the case with the various
species of cochineal, Dactyiopius, which in America are held firmly in
check by small Coccinellid and other enemies. The accidental
importation of an insect’s parasites might have completely nullified its
value as a prickly-pear destroyer. That the parasites were eliminated
before material was released in the field is evidenced by the fact that in
no instance have American enemies been found associated Math the
prickly-pear insects that have become established in Australia.
The testing of each kind of insect on plants other than prickly-pear,
a subject which will he discussed later, raised many difficulties in the
way of procedure.
The establishment of prickly-pear insects was far from being the
simple matter of obtaining supplies from America and releasing them in
Australia. This statement may be better understood vdien it is realised
that after nineteen years of investigations the Board succeeded in
establishing in this country not more than 12 of the 150 different
species of cactus insects discovered by its officers in America, that four
species only have been of any value for the control of Opuntia inermis
and 0. stricta, and that Cactohlastis cactorum alone has proved capable
of eradicating these turn major pests.
Changes in Policy.
The scale of the Board’s operations Was curtailed or at least affected
to some extent by two factors— (a) the finances at its command, and
(i) its non-permanent tenure of office. As the original agreement was
for a period of five years, some measure of success or promise of success
had to be achieved within that time, in order to justify continuance of
the investigations. Thus, the initial plan had as its objective the intro-
duction of a number of kinds of insects from a region which afforded
facile opportunities. The United States was the obvious choice of
localities; in the first four years many kinds of insects were despatched
from Florida and Texas, before a high degree of knowledge had been
secured concerning their potentialities as pear destroyers. In 1924 the
original scheme was widened to embrace the investigation of all prickly-
pear insects in the many cactus regions of North and South America.
By this time it was realised that the destructive powers, low rate of
increase, or other factors would render many kinds of insects of little
value in Australia, and that discrimination must be exercised in selecting
for introduction the forms whose apparent worth warranted the effort,
always provided that these insects had been proved incapable of living
on. other plants.


When Cactoblastis cactorum had demonstrated its remarkable
powers of destruction the necessity for an insect complex no longer
existed, since this one insect w'as able to bring about destruction of the
whole plant without aid. Hence, the introduction programme was
greatly curtailed.
The fear that Cactoblastis might not be as successful in controlling
the widespread secondary growth as it had been in destroying the
original stands of prickly-pear was responsible in 1931 for a further
change of plans. Efforts to introduce insects which might assist in the
control of regrowth were, however, abandoned after a year or two when
the value of Cactoblastis in destroying the new waves of prickly-pear
had been realised.
By 1931 it was apparent that Cactoblastis would not eradicate the
tiger pear, Opuntia aurantiaca, and the tree pears, 0. tomentosa and
0. streptacantha. Thus, for the next few years special overseas investiga-
tions were carried out with the object of introducing insects for the
control of these plants.
Throughout the investigation the insect enemies have been given
precedence over the fungus and bacterial diseases, since the former
offered the greater promise of control. Plant pathological organisms
are, in general, dependent on favourable climatic conditions for their
sporadic activity. Initially some attention was given to this phase but
the work was dropped in the third year. Later a special study of the
plant diseases was conducted for 5| years in 1925 to 1931. It was
then ascertained that many of the more important organisms peculiar
to prickly-pear were already established in Australia. With this
knowledge, and hearing in mind the extreme difficulty of satisfactory
tests with plant organisms on economic plants, the Board decided to
terminate the investigations.
ORGANISATION OF THE WORK IN AUSTRALIA.
On the formation of the Board work was immediately commenced in
America. This subject is discussed later. The first insects from America
reached Australia in April 1921, and for some months were housed at
the University of Queensland, pending the construction of the
laboratory at Sherwood, one of the western suburbs of Brisbane, six
miles from the city.
The Sherwood laboratory has functioned as the headquarters of the
work, as the receiving and quarantine centre, and as a general investiga-
tional and research station. In the earlier years considerable rearing of
insect supplies was undertaken, but this phase of the operations was
transferred later to the field stations. In addition to general laboratory
and cage equipment, its main features are two large ant-proof insectaries
with fine mesh copper-gauze walls and glass roofs; these are fitted with
shelves which hold cages for the rearing of insects until their release
from quarantine. The laboratory was transferred to the Queensland
Department of Public Lands in late 1939.
Field stations for the main rearing operations were opened in the
heart of the prickly-pear territory, at Westwood, 30 miles west of
Rockhampton, central Queensland, in early 1922; at Biniguy, near
Moree, north-west New South Wales, in early 1923; and at Chinchilla,
200 miles west of Brisbane, in September 1923. The Westwood station
was transferred a few miles to Gogango in 1927, and the latter station
is still in operation, being transferred to the Queensland Lands Depart-
ment in late 1939. The Biniguy centre was removed to Gravesend in the


same district in late 1924; this station was closed down in 1931. The
Chinchilla station operated until it was closed down at the end of
1936. A fourth field station, built at Goondiwindi, in south-west
Queensland in late 1927, is still in existence under the Queensland
Lands Department. The final station was opened at Scone, in the
Hunter River district, New South Wales, in April 1930, and was
transferred to the New South Wales Prickly Pear Destruction Commis-
sion in September 1939.
Sherwood, Westwood, Biniguy and Chinchilla were each furnished
originally with a stock of cages, one or more wire-gauze insectarics, and
a large wire-gauze enclosure. The use of the insectaries and enclosures
for mass breeding work was abandoned about 1926, when they had
proved unsuitable for the required purpose. The cage equipment was
considerably enlarged during 1926 to 1929 to permit the breeding of
Cactohlastis cactorum for the extensive distribution programme. At the
same time large open galvanised-iron sheds, 100 feet by 30 feet with a
maximum height of 20 feet, w*ere constructed to protect cages accommo-
dating cocoons and moths from weather effects. At the peak of the
Cactohlastis rearing activities about 2,500 cages 'were in use. The general
type of breeding cage is an oblong frame with a removable lid and no
bottom, standing in a wooden tray on legs which are placed in tins of
water for protection against ants. The frames are covered with fine
mesh wire-gauze, which has proved more suitable than cotton voile and
cheese cloth, although the latter are used for certain requirements. The
trays, several inches deep, are filled with soil, sand or sawdust, in
which the base of the prickly-pear segment or plant is placed. The
cages are of several sizes, the most common type being one of 72 inches
by 36 inches with a height of 24 or 27 inches. Many smaller cages,
32 inches by 20 inches by 24 inches high, are in use. In the quarantine
insectaries at Sherwood, cages 32 inches by 20 inches by 36 inches high
with a door occupying one-half of a longer side are in vogue.
In addition to being a centre for the rearing and distributing of the
various insects, each field station has been the base for field observations
on the progress of events; Gogango for central Queensland, Chinchilla
for western Queensland, Goondiwindi for south-west Queensland and
north-west New South Wales, and Scone for the remaining pear districts
of the latter State. Since the closing down of the Chinchilla station the
survey of conditions in western Queensland has been carried out from
Sherwood.
THE OVERSEAS PROGRAMME.
In the United States.
The study of cactus insects in the United States was commenced in
October 3920, and was continued without intermission until September
1933. The greatest amount of work was conducted in Texas; Florida,
New Mexico and Arizona received considerable attention, and visits
were made to California, Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, Idaho, Wyoming
and Utah. Throughout the greater part of this thirteen-year period, and
continuously for eight years from 1924 to 1932, the headquarters of the
investigation were established at Uvalde, a township in Texas about
80 miles west of San Antonio and about 65 miles north of the Mexican
boundary. Uvalde proved to be a very convenient centre for operations
in the United States and later in Mexico. As prickly-pear was prevalent
in the vicinity, its choice for an investigational station had many
advantages.


Brownsville, at the mouth of the Rio Grande, Texas, was chosen for
rearing work during the winter months of 1920 to 1924, and again for
several months in 1932-33. St. Augustine, in north-eastern Florida, was
used for cochineal breeding work for several months in 1932.
At Uvalde, and to a smaller extent at the other centres, insects from
various parts of the United States, and at times from Mexico, were
brought for rearing and life-history studies. The main equipment
comprised a considerable number of rearing cages. The testing
programme on economic plants was carried out at these bases.
In Mexico.
Exploratory trips were made to various sections of Mexico in 1921,
1922 and 1923. More intensive and continuous investigations were
carried out for five years from 1926 to 1931 and again for over two
years in 1933 to 1935. Field stations were set up at Piedras Negras, on
the United States border, for twelve months in 1926-27; at San Luis
Potosi, on the central plateau, for fifteen months in 1930-31; and at
Cuernavaca, south of Mexico City, for two years in 1933-35. At other
times Mexican insect material was brought to the Uvalde station for
study. The sections of the Republic given most attention were the
north-eastern States of Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, the central plateau
from the United States border to Mexico City, and the lower elevations
to the east and south of Mexico City. In addition, visits were made to
the west coast States of Sonora, Sinaloa and Nayarit, and to Guerrero
and Oaxaca in the south.
In the Argentine.
After two earlier visits in December 1920-January 1921, and
December 1924-March 1925, continuous investigations were conducted
from August 1931 to March 1936, with intermittent work to June 1937.
The greater portion of the western, north-western, northern and north-
eastern sections of the Republic was traversed rather thoroughly. A
rearing station was established at Tucuman from August 1931 to
March 1936, and a second station at Santiago del Estero was in
operation for two years in 1932-34.
Other Areas.
Entomological officers of the Board carried out investigations in
most cactus areas of North and South America. Although insect enemies
were located in all the visited regions, the cactus fauna found in each
area did not appear to warrant more intense study. The surveyed
regions were —in Central America: Guatemala, El Salvador and
Honduras; in the West Indies; Cuba, Jamaica, Haiti, San Domingo,
Porto Rico, Barbados and Trinidad; in northern South America;
Venezuela, northern Columbia and Curacao; in Brazil: the States of
Bahia and Pernambuco in the north, and in the south the States of Rio
de Janeiro, Minas Geraes, San Paulo, Parana, Matto Grosso, Santa
Catharina and Rio Grande do Sul; in western South America: Ecuador,
Peru and Chile; other parts of South America: Paraguay and Uruguay.
PRICKLY-PEAR INSECTS SUPPLIED TO OTHER COUNTRIES.
From time to time consignments of prickly-pear insects have been
supplied by the Board to other countries for biological control experi-
ments.


South Africa.
Particular mention can be made of the South African efforts to
control its various pest pears. Not only have insect stocks been given
to that country, but very full information dealing with insect life
histories, rearing technique, and other aspects has been furnished.
Furthermore, in 1927 and again in 1932, an entomologist of the South
African Department of Agriculture visited Australia, studied the
progress of the work, and investigated the methods being practised at
the Board’s stations.
From consignments forwarded from the Argentine to Australia via
Capetown, the South African authorities were given permission to
remove small stocks of the following insects: — Cactoblastis cactorum in
1925; Cactoblastis doddi in 1934; and Daciylopius sp. near confnsus in
1932. The last-named insect is now firmly established and appears to be
causing effective destruction to Opuntia aurantiaca, the “jointed cactus”
of South Africa.
Concerning Cactoblastis cactorum, two consignments were taken
from Australia by South African entomologists—viz., 12,000 eggs in
1927 and 112,600 eggs in 1932. This insect is now widely distributed
in quantity on the pest pears of that country.
The Mexican strain of the cochineal, Daciylopius opuntiae, attacking
O. streptacantha, was supplied in 1937, after experiments by the Board
had shown that it would thrive on the South African pest pears, on
which it is reported to be well established.
In late 1938 and early 1939, 1,000 cocoons of the Cerambycid,
Lagochirus funestus , and 850 adults of another Cerambycid, Moneilema
ulkei, were forwarded to South Africa.
Ceylon.
The cochineal, Daciylopius opuntiae, introduced into Australia from
the United States for the control of O. inermis and O. strict a-, was found
to make very good progress on O. dillenii and 0. elatior (=O. nigricans) ,
which are weed pests in Ceylon and India. The Board sent a small
supply of this insect to Ceylon in 1924. As a result of this effort, marked
destruction of these two prickly-pears has taken place in Ceylon and in
many districts in India.
Dutch East Indies.
In 1934 material of Daciylopius opuntiae was forwarded from
Australia to Java for the control of 0. elatior, which is distributed in
various places in the Dutch Bast Indies. It is understood that the
cochineal has been established successfully.
New Caledonia.
CactoMastis cactorum was supplied to the Noumea Chamber of
Commerce on two occasions; 10,000 eggs were forwarded in 1932 and
25,000 eggs in the following year.


IV. THE CACTUS INSECTS.
The earliest knowledge of an insect attacking prickly-pear dates
back for hundreds of years. When the Spaniards conquered Mexico in
the latter part of the sixteenth century there was every indication that
the cultivation of the cochineal insect, Dactylopius coccus, had been
carried on for hundreds of years. In the eighteenth century, possibly
earlier, other species of cochineal infesting prickly-pear were recognised
under the general name of “wild cochineals.” The attempts to
establish the cochineal industry in other countries in the eighteenth and
early part of the nineteenth centuries have been mainly responsible for
prickly-pear assuming pest proportions in India and South Africa, and
possibly in Australia.
Following the recognition of the cochineals, other cactus breeding
insects were described and named between 1875 and 1912. In the latter
year the first comprehensive treatment of the insects of the cactus family
appeared in the bulletin “The Principal Cactus Insects of the United
States,” by Hunter, Pratt and Mitchell. This excellent work listed 324
kinds of insects, either attacking directly or associated with cactus plants
in the United States, including certain forms from Mexico and Central
America. Of the 324 species, 92 were deemed to be injurious to the
plants. The valuable information in this bulletin has been the basis on
which the Board’s entomologists have built their knowledge of the insect
enemies of prickly-pears and other cacti.
Officers of the Board commenced investigations in 1921, and without
interruption continued to study the cactus insects of North and South
America for a period of sixteen years. The greatest attention Was given
to the United States, Mexico and the Argentine, but visits w r ere made to
most of the more important cactus areas in North and South America,
including Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, the larger islands of the
West Indies, Columbia, Venezuela, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Chile,
Peru and Ecuador.
As a result of these studies between 150 and 160 different kinds of
insects definitely injurious to cactus plants have been located; of this
number about 50 species have proved new to science. With the exception
of certain Dipterous scavengers, which are largely but not solely cactus
enemies, all the insects are deemed to be restricted to feeding in or on
cacti. The number of species w'ould undoubtedly have been increased
considerably had longer investigations been conducted in many of the
visited countries, and had the work not demanded a study of prickly-pear
enemies primarily, instead of being all-embracing as regards other types
of cactus plants.
HOST RESTRICTION.
The family Cactaceae, being a very distinct group of plants with
peculiar characters of growth and habit, has naturally evolved its own
insect complex. One finds not only species but genera and even groups
of genera that are restricted to prickly-pear and other types of cactus
plants. Almost without exception the cactus insects do not attack other
plants. Furthermore, insects with a wide range of host plants rarely
turn their attention to cacti; this statement is true even of omnivorous
insects such as grasshoppers. In Australia prickly-pear flourished
unchecked by native insects or by introduced insects of polyphagous
habits; the Rutherglen bug, Nysius vinator, occasionally attacks the
fruit and younger growth, and a few incidental records have been made


The first plant of prickly-pear in Australia to bo destroyed by Cactoblastis cactoram. Chinchilla, Qld., September, 1926,
six months after the original liberation of eggs had been made.
{Face page 36.


An abandoned selection at Chinchilla, Qld., in May, 1928.


The same view as on opposite page In October, 1929, showing destruction by Cactoblastis cactorum; note the new fence,
evidence of re-occupation.


Destruction of dense prickly-pear, Opuntia inermis, in open forest country, by
Cactoblastis cactorum, Chinchilla, Qld.
(a) Upper view; taken in April, 1928, prior to attack by the insect.
(b) Lower view; eighteen months later, in October, 1929.


of other insects feeding on the plants. The knowledge that cactus insects
are confined to plants of that group has been of fundamental importance
in assessing the possible danger to plants of economic -value through the
introduction of prickly-pear enemies into Australia.
Host restriction among cactus insects goes further than the limita-
tion of attack to plants of the Cactaceae. Many species, especially among
the moth borers (Lepidoptera) , confine their attention to certain types
of cacti. Thus, forms that attack Platyopuntias (prickly-pear) do not
attack Cylindropuntias. Similarly, the moth-borer enemies of genera
such as Echinocactus and Echinocereus, have not been recorded from
either Platyopuntias or Cylindropuntias. Among the beetles (Coleop-
ter a) the Moneilema Longicorns are mainly prickly-pear insects, but
some species attack both prickly-pears and Cylindropuntias in the same
district, and occasionally they have been reared from other cacti. Most
of the Cferstaeckeria weevils are confined to prickly-pears, but one species
is an enemy of Cylindropuntias. The Cactophagus weevils attack prickly-
pears and Cereus but have not been found in Cylindropuntias.
Turning to the plant-sucking bugs, the members of the genus
Chelinidea are Opuntia feeders, infesting both prickly-pears and
cylindrical forms; one species seems to he confined to Cylindropuntias;
they do not include other cacti in their diet. The fruit bugs, Narnia, and
Leptoglossus, are inclined to be general cactus enemies.
The cochineals, genus Dactylopius, are restricted to Opuntia and the
closely-related Nopalea, and are not known to attack other types of cacti.
One species would appear to he limited to Cylindropuntia hosts, and the
others to prickly-pears.
In addition to host restriction, considerable host preference or host
adaptability is encountered. This is strikingly illustrated among the
cochineals, where each species usually possesses several hosts but at the
same time shows a definite range of selection, freely attacking certain
prickly-pears and refusing or being unable to live on other prickly-pears
which do not exhibit marked differences of growth from the preferred
food plants. In western United States, the bugs Chelinidea vittiger and
Narnia snowi occur in areas where various Platyopuntias and Cylindro-
puntias abound; G. vittiger is rarely found on the cylindrical forms,
while N. snowi obviously prefers the fruit of these plants to those of
the prickly-pears.
The seed midge, Asphondylia opimtiae, infests the fruit of many
kinds of prickly-pear, but rarely does it attack the fruit of Cylindro-
puntias. In the Argentine, Caetohlastis cactorum breeds in various
prickly-pears differing widely in growth habits; yet, 0. sulphurea, one
of the commonest plants in its range of distribution, has not been
recorded as a host plant. On the other hand, 0. sulphured is the usual
food plant of the closely-related Caetohlastis doddi, which insect does not
attack the prickly-pears normally selected by cactorum.
One finds, too, variation in the degree of success with which a
cactus insect attacks its range of host plants. Thus, cochineal insects
may increase freely on and cause much damage to one kind of prickly-
pear, yet multiply slowly and have little injurious effect on a closely-
related species.
A SURVEY OF THE CACTUS INSECTS.
On account of the succulent character of the plants the majority
of cactus insects are internal feeders in the larval stage. This statement
applies to almost all the Lepidoptera (moths), Coleoptera (beetles) and


Diptera (flies and midges). Probably because of the absence of true
leaves there are very few surface feeders among the insects with biting or
chewing larvae. This is in contrast to the experience among plants of
more normal type, where, especially among the Lepidoptera, leaf-eating
external-feeding larvae usually predominate. The surface feeders
among the cactus insects are mainly those with sucking mouth parts—
i.e., plant bugs [Heteroptera], and scale insects including mealy bugs
( Homoptera ).
It is not the intention in this publication to deal at length with the
whole of the cactus insects, their life histories, habits and distribution.
However, more or less brief information concerning the more important
species and groups of insects is furnished, since some knowledge of 'lie
subject is necessary toward an understanding of the biological control
campaign.
The most important group among the cactus insects is that of the
Phycitid moth-borers, of which there are at least s'o species divided
among a number of closely-related genera forming a natural cactus-
feeding complex. The larvae are solitary or social tunnellers in the
stems and segments or in the fruit of prickly-pear and other cacti.
One or more species in this group occurs in practically all the cactus
regions of North and South America. A small number of kinds of
boring larvae is included in other families of Lepidoptera, but the
Phycitidae is the dominant group.
Numerically in importance follow in order the Longicorn beetle-
borers of the genus Moneilema, the plant-sucking Coreid bugs of the
genera Ghelinidea, Narnia and Leptoglossus, the Curculionid weevils
of the genus Gerstaecheria, the cochineal insects of the genus Dactyl-o-
pius, and the Calandriid weevils of the genus Cactophagus. Mention
should be made of the Syrphid scavenging flies of the genera Yolucella
and Copestylum, which are to a large extent cactus insects, although
they are not restricted to breeding in these plants.
THE CACTUS PHYCITEDS.
The taxonomy of this group has recently been revised by Carl
Heinrich (Proc. U.S. National Museum, Vol. 86, pp. 331-413, 1939),
who has divided the species into 17 genera and has erected new genera
for the reception of many of the species. The Board’s officers have
studied the life history of most of these insects, but herein only the
more important or more interesting forms will be discussed. A striking
feature of the group is the bright colouration of the larvae, especially
the full-grown larvae of many species, which are frequently blue, bluish-
green, orange-red with black transverse spots, or white with black or
blue transverse bands. The full-grown Melitara larvae are very
beautiful, being an intense translucent indigo blue. Cactoblastis larvae
are bright orange or orange-red with rows of transverse black spots.
Those of the genus Olycella are white, banded with black, dark blue or
purplish, the colour of the bands becoming more intense as the larvae
develop; thus, full-grown larvae of 0. jimctolineella are deep blue-black
and white.
Another peculiarity of the genera Cactoblastis, Melitara and
Olycella is that the eggs are deposited in very regular chains, to which
aggregation the term “eggstick” is now applied generally. The egg-
sticks in the genera Melitara and Cactoblasiis usually contain from 35
to 100 eggs, but may possess the extreme number of 150 eggs; Olycella
sticks rarely have more than 25 eggs. The individual egg is about three


times as broad as long, with the broad or inner margins fitting close
against those of its neighbours so that the eggstick is compact and its
outline most regular. The first egg is attached to a spine or spicule
(spine hair) of the plant, and the slightly curved stick is suspended at
right angles to the spine and on a plane almost parallel to that of the
pear segment. A stick containing 100 eggs measures Ijr to 1-| inches in
length.
Cactoblastis, with four species, is a South American genus. C.
cactorum and C. doddi are restricted to prickly-pears; the former occurs
in Argentine, Uruguay, Paraguay and southern Brazil, while doddi
inhabits western Argentine. Another western Argentine form, C.
bucyrus, does not attack prickly-pears, but tunnels in cacti of the Gereus
and Echinocactus type. C. mundelli, from Peru, has been recorded from
one host plant only, the Cylindropuntia, 0. exalt at cl The adults and
larvae of the four species are very much alike; the larvae are gregarious.
C. cactorum and G. doddi possess two generations annually, but there are
insufficient data on the life history of the other species.
In North America, Cactoblastis has its counterpart in the genus
Meiitara with four species or forms, all of which are confined to Platyo-
puntias (prickly-pears) and are gregarious in the larval stage. M.
prodenialis occurs from east Texas to Florida and has either two or
three generations a year. The other forms have an annual generation;
M. dentata is distributed from Colorado and Kansas to the Canadian
border, M. doddalis from west Texas to Arizona, while the remaining
form, which has not been named, inhabits the country on either side of
the Rio Grande in Texas and northern Mexico.
On account of their social habit the larvae of Cactoblastis and
Meiitara cause considerable injury to prickly-pears. They tunnel freely
through the plants, and their activities are accompanied by fungus and
bacterial rots which hasten the destruction.
The genus Olycella, with four or more species, is confined to the
United States and Mexico. As in the case of Meiitara, the larvae feed in
prickly-pears and do not attack other cactus types. They are gregarious
in their young stages, but later become solitary and are found in
excavations beneath tumour-like swellings in the segments. 0. jimctoli-
neella, prevalent in south-east Texas and north-east Mexico, has two
generations during the year, wdiile the western form, 0. subumbrella,
occurring from west Texas and Arizona to Wyoming, has one annual
generation.
The three or four species of Tucmnania occur in Argentine,
Uruguay and Paraguay. The solitary larvae, which vary in colour from
light orange to deep purplish or reddish, are found in low-growing
prickly-pears. T. tapiacola, from north-west Argentine, causes consider-
able damage to low-growing narrow-jointed prickly-pears, such as 0.
discolor and 0. utldlio; it has either two or three generations each year.
Ozamia, with seven or more species, is a widely-distributed genus
found in the United (States, Mexico, the West Indies, Brazil and
Argentine. Two of the Argentine forms breed in the steins of Gereus,
but the other species, including one in the Argentine, are fruit enemies.
0. odiosella at times destroys many prickly-pear fruit in Texas and
California; the wine-coloured larvae are solitary in habit; there are
three or four generations annually.
The three known species of Sigelgaita attack the fruit of prickly-
pears and other cacti in Peru and Chile. Alberada parabates and Cahela
ponderosella are widely-distributed common insects in Cylindropuntia


stems in the United States and Mexico. The gregarious blue larvae of
Cactobrosis fernaldialis destroy the barrel cactus, Ferocactus wislizeni,
in Arizona. Oiyca phryganoides is a large cream-coloured larva infesting
prickly-pears in Haiti and San Domingo, while the greyish larvae of
Amalfrida leithella are found in prickly-pear segments in Venezuela
and Columbia.
One of the most interesting insects in the group is the Argentine
Salambrona analamprella. In the earlier part of the summer the larvae
feed in the buds, flowers, young fruit and young growth of prickly-
pears. However, from the end of January to August the larvae of
subsequent generations are carnivorous in that they attack and destroy
cochineal insects, Dactylopius ; in fact, this insect is one of the chief
enemies of cochineal in the Argentine.
OTHER LEPIDOPTEROUS ENEMIES.
Among other cactus Lepidoptera, mention need be made of three
members of the family Pyraustidae and one of the family Gelechiidae.
The red and white larvae of Noctuelia elautalis feed in the buds and
flower heads of prickly-pear in Texas. Although they are often abundant,
they do not cause a great amount of injury. The larger Pyraustid,
Lcmiifera cyclades, is of interest in that, like those of Melitara and
Cactoblastis, the larvae are social in habit. The creamy-white larvae
tunnel long central cavities in the main stems and larger branches of
tree pears in Mexico, and are found less freely in shrub pears.
The genus Mimorista distributed from the United States to
Argentine contains three or four species of rather small yellow moths.
M. flavidissimalis is prevalent in southern Texas, north-east Mexico, the
West Indies and Central America. The whitish larvae live partly
internally and partly externally beneath webbing on the young growth
of prickly-pears and sometimes of Cylindropuntias. They are solitary in
habit, but several may occupy one segment; the very young segments
only are attacked, never older growth. There are several generations
during the year; in midsummer the life-cycle may be completed in as
short as 21 days. This insect brings about considerable destruction
among the young pads.
The Gelechiid, Metwplcura potosi, is found in Mexico, where the
dull red larvae live singly in cells 1 to 2 inches in diameter in both the
younger and older segments of various prickly-pears. As many as 15 to
20 larvae, each in an individual cell, may occur in one pad. The adults
emerge practically throughout the year, and there appear to be three
overlapping generations.
THE CACTUS BEETLES.
The Cerambycid Longicorns.
Foremost in this group is the genus Moneilema, which includes
moderate to rather large, stout black wingless beetles distributed through
Mexico and the western half of the United States. At least 25 different
species occur. The larvae bore in the basal portions and older stems of
prickly-pears and Cylindropuntias, and occasionally in other types of
cacti. They are capable of major injury; two or three larvae in the base
of a weighty tree pear may cause the whole plant to collapse. Among
Mexican enemies of prickly-pear, M. variolare would seem to be second
in importance to the Cactophagvs weevils. The adults are longlived and
have been known to survive for the lengthy period of 529 days. There


is either one annual generation, or a main generation and a second
partial one. Some of the species are frequently very numerous; the most
abundant forms are M. ulkei and M. armata in Texas, M. laevigata in
New Mexico, M. gigas in Arizona, and M. variolate and M. rugosipennis
in Mexico.
Of more than passing interest is Lagochirus funestus, which is
indigenous to the southern portions of Mexico. There is one generation
a year. The eggs are laid in networks on the main trunks and larger
branches of various tree pears, and the larvae tunnel more or less
gregariously in the hard woody stems. As a result of the activities of
the larvae, main branches or even large plants break off and are
destroyed. The larvae attain a length of 21 inches; the bulky cocoons
are composed of the chewed plant fibre.
Another Longicom, Coenopaeus palmeri, occurs from west Texas
to California. It attacks several kinds of Cylindropuntias, but has not
been found infesting prickly-pears. The smaller plants, as well as
branches of larger plants, are often killed by the larvae. The only
Longicorn enemy of cacti known from South America is Alcidion cerei-
cola, which breeds in Stetsonia and other Cereus forms in the Argentine.
The Curculionid Weevils.
The chief weevil enemies of Cactaceae are included in the genera
Gerstaeckeria and Cactophagns.
Gerstaeckeria contains at least 12 species of small weevils occurring
in the United States, Mexico and the West Indies. They are mostly
restricted to prickly-pears, but one species is a Cylindropuntia insect.
The larvae live in individual cells in the disc or at the edge of the
segments; usually they cause little damage, but occasionally bring about
rotting of the affected pads. The most abundant and widely-distributed
species is G. porosa, found from Texas and Arizona north to Wyoming
and Idaho; the conspicuous circular cells produce a “shot-hole” effect in
the segments. In addition to the usual habit, the larvae of this species
breed in the spring months in the unopened flowers, thus causing sterility
of the fruit. Other forms which are often prevalent are G. doddi in
southern Texas and northern Mexico, G. nobilis in coastal Texas, and
G. hubbardi in Florida.
The only South American Curculionid infesting cacti appears to
be the moderately large weevil, Huarucus cacti. The larvae feed in the
segments and stems of prickly-pears, Cylindropuntias and Cerei in Peru,
and are capable of effecting considerable damage.
The four species of the large Calandriid weevils of the genus Cactop-
hagus are distributed from southern Arizona and California to Central
America. The larvae breed in the segments and stems of Platyopuntias,
Nopalea and Cereus, but do not seem to attack Cylindropuntias. They
are undoubtedly the most destructive cactus insects in Mexico. C.
validtis is common in the west coast State of Sinaloa, where it is very
injurious to shrub pear types, as many as seven or eight larvae occupy-
ing one segment. 6'. spinolae inhabits central Mexico and is very abund-
ant at lower elevations in the general vicinity of Mexico City, attacking
various tree pears and Cereus. Owing to the activities of the larvae
inducing rot conditions, segments, branches, and even large plants are
destroyed. Where plots of prickly-pear are cultivated for the fruit,
hand picking of the beetles is undertaken in order to reduce the infesta-
tion. Even so, the depredations of this insect are so severe that the
fields have to be re-planted at intervals of a few years. At one village


the inhabitants collected for our officers 5,000 beetles in one day. The
adults are able to remain alive for twelve months. C. fahrei is destruc-
tive to tree pears and Cereus in southern Mexico, while C. striaioforatus
attacks the same plants in the Central American republics of Salvador
and Guatemala.
THE DIPTEROUS ENEMIES.
The cactus Diptera comprise gall or cell-forming insects, and
scavengers or wound breeders. The larvae of several species of Ceci-
domyid midges form cells in the pads of prickly-pears in the United
States and Mexico. They are not common and do not injure the plants
to an appreciable extent. Two or three kinds of Lonehaeid flies with
similar larval habits occur in Mexico and the Argentine.
Of considerable interest and importance is the Cecidomyid seed-
midge, Asphondyliu ojnmliae, which has a wide distribution, being found
from Colorado to Texas and California in the United States as far as
Oaxaca in the southern 1 highlands of Mexico. It attacks the fruit of a
great many kinds of prickly-pears and occasionally infests Cylindro-
puntias. It is often very plentiful in local areas. Many records have
been made of heavy infestations; in such cases, 80 per cent, or even more
of the fruit in an area were attacked, and the seeds destroyed as a result.
Thus, Asphondylia is capable of effecting a considerable degree of control
of the seeding. The life-cycle is peculiarly adapted to the host plant.
There is one generation annually. The midges emerge in the early spring
and oviposit in the young buds. The buds produce normal flowers; the
fruit grow normally for a time but then become either greatly swollen or
attenuated; the seeds are unformed and soft. The fruit do not ripen,
and instead of falling at maturity remain on the plant throughout the
summer and winter. The growth of the very small larvae is scarcely
perceptible during the summer and early winter; after December deve-
lopment is accelerated, and pupation takes place in February and
March. The adults emerge in March and April, and soon afterward the
fruit shrivel and drop off. In the case of Opuntia lindheimeri and one
or two other prickly-pears, the infested fruit assume vegetative
characters, produce new growth, and, to a lesser extent, new fruit.
This peculiarity has not been observed among other attacked species
of Opuntia.
The Scavenging Flies.
Decaying cactus attracts a great many kinds of insects which breed
in rotting vegetable matter. There is, however, one group which,
although not primary enemies of prickly-pear, are of considerable
importance in bringing about the destruction of the plants. These insects
are the Syrphid flies, Copestylum marginatum, and many species of the
genus Votucella- the latter segregate appears to occur in all cactus
regions of North and South America. They are mainly cactus insects,
but are known to breed in other decaying vegetable matter. Most of the
scavenging insects are associated with cactus in an advanced stage of
decomposition. However, the Syrphid flies will attack green segments,
provided that some prior factor has commenced to set up a certain
amount of decay. Thus, the adult flies are attracted to, and lay eggs in,
cactus plants infested with moth or beetle larvae, injured by mechanical
means, and attacked by bacterial and fungus diseases. The activities of
the Syrphid larvae greatly enlarge the injuries. Wounds, that would
otherwise dry up and heal, are so extended as to cause the complete
decay of segments and in extreme cases of whole plants.


THE PLANT-SUCKING BUGS.
Considering the succulence of both the stems and the fruit, the
number of kinds of plant-sucking bugs attacking prickly-pears and other
cacti is not as great as might be expected. The cactus bugs, with the
exception of the Capsid, Hesperolohops picta, belong to the family
Coreidae and are included in the three genera, Ghelinidea, Narnia and
Lepioglossus.
Ghelinidea, with four species, occurs from the United States to
northern South America. The insects feed by puncturing the segments
and fruit. Pale yellowish areas develop around each puncture and pro-
duce a characteristic spotting of the affected parts. Where the bugs are
abundant and the attack is intensive, young growth, flower buds and
green fruit wither and fall off, and the plants present an unhealthy
appearance. The very young segments and flower buds are destroyed
as soon as they begin to develop. Hence, Ghelinidea is of importance in
checking fruiting. The adults are rather sluggish, and rarely take wing,
although they have been known to fly for several miles. They are long-
lived, and have been recorded to survive for as long as 542 days or 18
months. There are two generations annually. The two common species
are C. tabulata and C. vittiger. The former is distributed from southern
Texas through Mexico and Central America to northern South America,
and is very abundant in Mexico. It attacks priekly-pears generally, and
occasionally feeds on other cacti, including Cylindropuntias. C. vittiger
is found in northern Mexico and throughout the cactus areas of the
United States from the Atlantic to the Pacific coasts. The usual host
plants are priekly-pears, but Cylindropuntias are infested to some extent.
The larvae are more social in habit than those of C. tabulata, and
hundreds will congregate on one segment. In southern Arizona and the
Mexican State of Sonora, C. hunteri occurs on Cylindropuntias; this
insect has not been located on priekly-pears.
The Narnia' and Lepioglossus bugs are primarily fruit feeders,
although they will puncture the segments. They appear to cause very
little damage, even when in numbers. Where the insects were concen-
trated under cage conditions, most of the fruit ripened normally and few
■were destroyed. Narnia pallidicornis is distributed from Texas to Cali-
fornia and over the greater part of Mexico. It favours Platyopuntias,
but often attacks Cylindropuntias, and it has been recorded feeding on
Gereus fruit. N. snowi, which occurs from Colorado and west Texas to
California, is found on both priekly-pears and Cylindropuntias; in some
areas it seems to favour the fruit of the former, and in other localities
those of the cylindrical forms. Other species of Narnia inhabit Mexico,
Central America and northern South America. Several species of the
related genus Lepioglossus are found in Mexico, Central America, Brazil
and the Argentine. These insects puncture the fruit of Opuntia, Gereus
and other cacti.
THE SCALE INSECTS AND MEALY-BUGS.
The only scale insects known to be restricted to cactus plants are
Biaspis echinocacti and the Bactylopius mealy-bugs. The small scale,
Diaspis echinocacti, is widely distributed in North and South America,
and has been established in Australia for many years. It attacks
prickly-pear and various other cactus types. Occasionally it causes
damage to individual plants, but as it is heavily controlled by parasites
generally it is of little importance as a destructive agent.


The soft-bodied scale insects or mealy-bugs comprise several species
of cochineal, Dactylopius, a genus restricted to Opuntia and Nopalea
food plants. D. newsteadi attacks Cylindropuntias, but the others are
confined to priekly-pears. One or more species occurs in most of the
prickly-pear regions from the United States to the Argentine.
Although each species infests various kinds of prickly-pears, decided
preferences and avoidances are exhibited in the selection of host plants.
Even in the ease of the same species of cochineal, material obtained on
one Opuntia food plant in one part of North America could not be induced
to live on another species of prickly-pear, although the latter plant
was freely attacked by the same insect in another section of the continent.
This peculiarity would suggest that there are biological strains or races
which cannot be separated on grounds other than that of host plant
behaviour. Six species have been recognised during the Board’s
investigations.
Dactylophis coccus, the commercial cochineal, which was formerly
cultivated extensively in Mexico, Central America and South America,
attacks various tree pears. Our entomologists located material in Peru,
but not elsewhere in America. D. opuntiae is the dominant species in
the United States and Mexico, and lives on many prickly-pears of tree,
shrub and dwarf types. D. confusus from the United States infests
various kinds of shrub and dwarf prickly-pears. D. newsteadi appears
to be restricted to Cylindropuntias in the United States and Mexico. D.
ceylonic.us inhabits Argentine, Uruguay and Brazil, where it attacks
many Platyopuntias, including tree, shrub and narrow-jointed forms.
An undetermined cochineal from the Argentine, closely related to D.
confusus, is confined mainly to low-growing and narrow-jointed prickly-
pears.
The name cochineal is familiar as the red dye which is obtained from
the bodies of the insects. All the species contain this colouring matter,
but the cochineal of commerce, D. coccus, is the largest insect and
possesses more of the dye substance. The insects are conspicuous on
account of the pure white silky protective covering, formed of fine waxy
filaments secreted from the bodies. The covering of D. coccus is light
and powdery, that of the remaining species dense and woolly. The eggs
are laid beneath the body of the female and hatch within a few minutes
or hours into active, very small, six-legged larvae or crawlers. The
female crawler soon inserts the proboscis deep in the plant tissue,
begins feeding, and remains stationary for the rest of its life; it cannot
be removed from the plant without breaking the delicate proboscis. The
legs soon become functionless, wings are not developed, and the insect
is little more than a soft sac. The females are either solitary or
congregate in small or large clusters. The male crawler moves about
freely, feeds at various points since it is able to remove and re-insert the
proboscis, and finally spins an oval white cocoon which produces a
delicate two-winged fly.
The female can deposit as many as 400 eggs; when egg-laying is
completed the body collapses and the insect dies. There are four or five
generations each year. The crawlers are carried by air currents, which
is the chief manner of dispersal. Cochineal prefers situations sheltered
from direct sunlight. It increases most rapidly during dry periods or
at least in the absence of heavy rains, which reduce the infestation by
washing off the cultures. The insects feed on any part of the prickly-
pear plants, but prefer fruit and young growth. Cultures often occur
in some quantity on the main stems of 0. stricta and the tree pear, 0.
tomentosa. When the infection is heavy, the segments shrivel and are


destroyed and the fruit ripens prematurely before the seeds become
mature.
THE PRICKLY-PEAR RED SPIDER.
The red spider or spider mite, Tetranychus opuntiae, is not an insect
but belongs to the Acarina. It occurs in Texas and over a large section
of Mexico. The normal host plant in Texas is the shrub pear, Opuntia
Undheimeri ; in Mexico, however, both shrub and tree pears are attacked
as well as Cylindropuntias. The mites live on the surface of the seg-
ments. The irritation caused by their feeding sets up in the plant a
reaction in the form of circular areas of whitish or grayish cork. In a
severe attack, the corky areas coalesce and cover the segment, which falls
from the plant and withers completely. T. opuntiae is very prevalent
and seems to be the most serious enemy of prickly-pear in the Browns-
ville district of Texas, where it causes the destruction of many segments.
Like cochineal, it is favoured by dry weather; heavy rains reduce or
even stop its activity for some time.


V. THE PLANT DISEASES OF THE CACTACEAE.
In treating, rather briefly, the fungus and bacterial diseases attack-
ing prickly-pears and other cacti, it is necessary to state that the
subject has not been given the same attention by the Board as that
devoted to the insect control phase. The main investigations have
comprised the following:
(а) Collection of diseased material in the United States and the
Argentine in 1921-23, and its submission to specialists for
determinations of the causal organisms;
(б) Study by a plant pathologist of the diseases of prickly-pear
in the United States in 1926-28;
(c) Study by plant pathologists of the diseases of prickly-pear
in Australia in 1927-30.
In addition, observations on plant disease conditions have been made
by entomological workers throughout the course of the Board’s
operations in North and South America and in Australia. It must be
■admitted that such reports have, as a rule, merely indicated the general
nature of the disease and have not attempted to determine the organism
involved. However, the activities of certain diseases, as the bacterial
soft rots, and the anthracnose fungi, Gloeosporium lunatum and Phyllo-
siicta concwva, are readily recognised by any scientific worker.
The succulent nature and high water content should render prickly-
pear very susceptible to fungus and bacterial diseases. Actually,
however, these agents play a minor role in the natural control of the
plants. The relative unimportance of plant diseases is probably due
to the circumstance that prickly-pears inhabit regions where the rainfall
is moderate but irregular, and tbe sky generally clear with a warm to hot
sun operating in both summer and winter. Continued humid weather
with cloudy to overcast skies happens very infrequently; hence, plant
diseases rarely find atmospheric conditions favouring their rapid
propagation. Of the many diseases associated with prickly-pear, a few
are capable of causing considerable damage, but the destruction is
partial and rarely brings about the complete death of the plants unless
assisted by insect or other agency.
Secondary parasitic or wound organisms are of greater importance
than the primary diseases. This statement applies particularly to
diseases which follow or accompany the work of internal-feeding larvae,
the tunnelling of which presents conditions favourable to the develop-
ment of wound parasites.
A great many kinds of fungi have been isolated from prickly-pear.
In many eases the importance of, or the role enacted by, the organisms
has not been determined. Many fungi, for example, are saprophytic,
living in the dead tissue destroyed by some other agent. The diseases
of prickly-pear may be grouped into the following classes :
A. Primary parasites—
(a) Various anthracnose fungi, which usually show a definite
type of activity in the manner of circular lesions in the more
succulent growth;
( h ) Other fungus rots destroying the tissue, but not marked by
a characteristic manner of action ;
(c) Sun-scalds and other more or less surface fungi, which attack
the outer layers of the plant and do not penetrate deep into
the tissue.


B. Secondary organisms accompanying or following the activities
of internal-feeding insect larvae—
(d) Bacterial soft rots and fungus rots in the more succulent
growth;
(e) Fungus rots in the main stems and butts.
Anthracnose lesions have been observed freely in North and South
America, in the West Indies, and in Bermuda. Among the several
different organisms responsible for this type of attack, the most
important are Gloeosporium lunatum and Phyllosticta concava in North
America and Montagnella opuntiarum in South America. G. lunatum
and P. concava are established in Australia, but M. opuntiarum has not
been recognised in this country. The more usual activity of these
organisms is restricted to circular lesions, | inch to 1-J inch in diameter,
in the upper, and therefore the more succulent, segments of prickly-
pears and other cacti. The dead tissue in these areas may fall out and
thus produce a “shot-hole” effect. There may be several lesions on a
segment, and under favourable climatic conditions these may coalesce
and cause the destruction of the pad. Occasionally the disease may
spread through the segments in a few days from one point of infection
without producing the typical circular lesions.
In the United States Gloeosporium lunatum is active mainly from
the autumn to the spring and early summer; it rarely operates during
the hot dry mid-summer period. Sporadic outbreaks, causing consider-
able damage to prickly-pears, have been recorded on several occasions. In
October 1925, the disease was very active in Texas, following continued
warm cloudy weather, and in some instances plants were completely
destroyed. Another widespread appearance of this fungus was
reported in west Texas, southern New Mexico, and southern Arizona in
January-February 1926. Other records of particular activity in Texas
have been made as follows:—April-June 1928; April-June 1931;
August 1931; and January 1932; in the last instance, many small plants
of Opuntia lindheimeri in one area were totally destroyed by the fungus.
Observations on appreciable damage caused by an anthracnose disease,
presumed to be 6. lunatum, have been reported from Mexico, the West
Indies, Central America and Venezuela.
Definite association between anthracnose and injuries caused by
Chelinidea bugs has at times been recorded, the fungus appearing to
gain entry to the segments through the feeding punctures of the insects.
G. lunatum has been observed acting in conjunction with the work of the
Asphondylia seed-midge; it attacked the fruit from which the adult
midges had recently emerged and then penetrated into the segments.
This organism was identified from several widely-separated areas
in Australia in 1925-26, and probably had become established some years
previously. Under Australian conditions the circular lesion character
is rarely encountered. As a primary parasite it is found mainly in
“yellow pear,” where it is often active around entrance holes of newly-
hatched Cactoblastis larvae. It is frequently associated with Cacto-
blastis larvae in the rapid decay of succulent segments, 'and has been
identified among other fungi in the rotting of the basal portions of plants
attacked by the same insect.
The most conspicuous anthracnose is Phyllosticta concava, since the
lesions are blackish in colour. Unlike G. lunatum, this fungus has not
been found working in association with insect injuries. It has been
recorded from Bermuda, Florida and Texas, and is mainly active in
the winter and spring. P. concava, first recognised in Australia in 1929,


occurs over the whole of the prickly-pear territory, from Mackay to the
Hunter River. It is purely a winter disease; activity commences in
May or June, reaches a peak in July and August, and ceases in
September or occasionally in October. Except in the central and
northern pear areas of Queensland, its occurrence is not general but is
restricted to local outbreaks in favourable situations. In central
Queensland the fungus is very active each season, both in open and
timbered country, and destroys many segments of Opuntia inermis and
O. strict a. At the end of the winter the damage is very pronounced,
but is of a temporary nature, since the activities of the fungus cease with
the approach of warmer weather and the affected plants soon produce
new growth from the uninjured lower segments. On rare occasions
young plants growing in shaded situations have been completely
destroyed by this organism. Lesions of this fungus have been noticed on
0. aurantiaca and very rarely on 0. tomentosa.
The work of Montagnella opuntiarum in the Argentine resembles
that of G. lunatim in the United States. Activity is generally confined
to round areas of dead tissue; under suitable climatic conditions the
disease is capable of causing serious injury to various prickly-pears and
Cerei.
With respect to other fungus rots destroying the tissue, the most
important would seem to be Sclerotima cactacearum in the Argentine.
The disease makes its appearance in brown spots; these coalesce and
spread over the surface, while the fungus attacks the tissue and
penetrates through the segment to bring about its destruction.
Sclerotima has the capacity to effect severe injury to prickly-pear plants.
Among the superficial diseases there are various fungi which are
very conspicuous but which rarely have a serious effect on the health of
the plants. The so-called “sun-scalds” and “zone-spots” result from
the attack of several organisms, including Hendcrsonia opuntiae,
Macrosporiuni sp., and Gloeosporium cactorum. Another obvious disease
is Perlsporium. wrightii. Hendersonia op-untiae, a typical sun-scald very
widespread in the United States, forms a yellowish or reddish-brown
scaly growth on the surface of prickly-pear. In cases where the corky
layer covers the segment, destruction may follow by asphyxiation on
account of the clogging of the stomata or breathing pores by the
mycelium of the fungus.
The organisms, which frequently accompany Cactobl-astis and other
internal-feeding larvae are of value in extending the scope of the
injuries initiated by the insects and in expediting the decay of the
segments. Bacterial soft rots have been found associated with Melitara
larvae in North America, mainly in Texas and Florida, and with Cacto-
Mastis larvae in the Argentine. These rots are true wound parasites,
and are provided with a favourable medium for their propagation by
the tunnelling of the insect larvae, especially by the rapid progress of
gregarious larvae such as Cactoblastis and Melitara.
In Australia the bacterial soft rot or rots—for more than one
organism may be involved—accompany the work of Cactoblastis in the
upper segments of prickly-pear. The disease is restricted to succulent
growth and does not operate in the thicker basal portions. Thus, the
complete disintegration of the plants is not brought about by any assist-
ance rendered by this organism, except in the case of young plants. It
is transported on the skin of the larvae, and is unable to spread from one
segment to another unless it is carried by the insects. The effect of the
disease is to bring about liquid putrefaction of the pads. Activity


occurs when the Cactoblastis larvae are feeding vigorously, chiefly in
March-April, August-early September, and Novernber-Decernber, but
even at these times much of the destructive work of the insect is. not
accompanied by soft rots which require favourable weather conditions
for their development.
The fungus Gloeosporium lunatum, which is a primary parasite in
America, is more frequently a wound organism in Australia, working
in association with Cactoblastis larvae in the succulent growth. Like
the bacterial rots, it materially helps in the destruction of the segments
when climatic conditions are favourable. The decay set up by this
fungus is in the nature of a soft, but not liquid, rotting.
The disintegration of the lower segments and butts of 0. inermis
and 0. stricta during or following a severe attack by Cactoblastis would
seem to be a physiological breakdown in which various fungi may be
contributing factors. Any one of several fungi or any combination of
several of these organisms may be isolated from the decaying plants.
Apparently, the fungi play a definite role in the destruction, but they
do not operate until the plant is supporting or has recently supported a
large number of the larvae. These specific diseases are not present in
the rotting upper growth, and are not transmitted by the larvae, which
very often do not enter the basal portions. It would appear that the
plant is weakened by the attack of many larvae, the tissues commence
to breakdown, and the fungi are given the opportunity of completing the
work of eradication.


VI. THE HOST LIMITATION ASPECT.
In conducting the establishment of prickly-pear insects in Australia,
the question of their restriction to plants of the cactus family was of
fundamental importance. The greatest safeguard against the possibility
of the introduced insects attacking other plants was deemed to be a
sound knowledge of their host plant limitations in America. Thus, it
was essential to ascertain whether each species of cactus insect was
definitely confined to feeding and breeding in cacti in its native habitat.
Throughout the investigations the Board has endeavoured to learn,
both from studies carried out by its officers and from available informa-
tion from scientific and other sources, the food plants of all cactus
insects, more especially the species of potential value for the control of
prickly-pear in Australia. Not only has the question been studied with
each kind of cactus insect, but the habits of related insects feeding on
other types of plants have been considered. It was decided that the
“safest” insect for introduction must be one absolutely confined to
cactus food plants and included in a genus or complex of which all
members were similarly restricted. A cactus insect possessing more or
less close non-cactus relations was viewed with greater suspicion,
particularly when any of the related insects were known to be pests of
economic importance.
In the United States, where the insect enemies of all cultivated
plants and of timber and shdde trees have been investigated exhaustively
by economic entomologists and other agricultural workers distributed
throughout the country, it would have been difficult for any insect pest
to have escaped notice. The insect enemies of cultivated plants in the
Argentine are rather well known. In other countries the host restriction
of cactus insects has usually been considered from the standpoint of
their relationship to other cactus insects whose food plant limitations
have been proved. Again, in certain instances officers of the Board
have conducted special investigations in the field to determine whether
a prickly-pear insect was attacking plants other than cacti.
The study of the life history, habits, and food plants of the various
insects has been carried out so comprehensively as to justify the claim
that the secured information proved whether any species found breeding
in priekly-pears was or was not restricted to cactus hosts.
It is a truism that insects select their own food plants. And it
must be presumed that each species chooses the plants most suited to its
particular needs. Therefore, the likelihood of an insect attacking plants
other than its normal hosts ought not to be very great. But there have
been many examples of this departure from stability, chiefly when
insects have been introduced into areas where plants other than those
of their native habitat occurred, and when new plants have been brought
into the range of distribution of an indigenous insect. Stability of
food plants cannot be guaranteed for any insect.
There was good reason to consider that the danger of cactus insects
attacking other plants was more remote fhali in the case of insects of
most plant groups. In the first place, the cactus family is a rather
isolated one and is not closely related to other botanical orders.
Secondly, most cactus insects are included in genera, or even groups of
genera, of which all members are cactus feeders solely.
Yet, despite all considerations of probable behaviour, and notwith-
standing the knowdedge gained of the host restriction of cactus insects
in America, some other safeguard had to be devised before prickly-pear


insects could be released in Australia. Furthermore, the Australian
public required some form of proof that the introduced insects would
not themselves become pests of plants of value. Scientific opinion to
the effect that, as the insects did not feed on plants other than cacti in
their native home, they would not do so in Australia, would not have
satisfied the man on the land.
It was decided that experiments should be carried out in order to
secure evidence of the reaction to plants other than prickly-pear of each
species of insect which might be considered desirable for introduction
into Australia. The possibility of the insects attacking other plants
was determined by starvation tests. It became a fundamental policy of
the Board that, before an insect was deemed to be “safe” for release
in Australia, it must, in so far as possible, be proved incapable of passing
through its life-cycle on any plant other than a cactus host, even under
the artificial conditions of starvation and of close confinement with the
tested plant. Development of the life-cycle within a non-cactus host
under the test conditions was regarded as positive evidence that
precluded the attempted establishment of an insect. A similar view-
point was adopted in cases where, although the insect was unable to
complete its life-cycle, its feeding at some stage of the life history on a
plant of economic value caused more or less serious injury.
Apparently, the plan of endeavouring to prove by experiments
whether insects could develop in plants unrelated to their natural hosts
was a new procedure, at least in so far as it concerned the introduction
of insects from one country to another. The consensus of scientific
opinion was not favourable and could see little value in the proposed
starvation tests, arguing that natural host restriction in America must
be the all important factor. Admittedly, too, the Board’s scientific
workers at the outset 'did not anticipate positive results from starvation
tests. This initial attitude, or underlying conception, that the experi-
ments were for the purpose more of satisfying the public than of
obtaining information that could be put to practical application, may be
offered in explanation of the circumstance that two insects, after being
tested on a large variety of plants in the first years of the investigations,
were later found capable of feeding, or even breeding, on plants or
particular parts of plants that had been omitted from the original
experiments. To be more explicit, Mimorista and Ghelinidea were not
in the early years tested fully on various fruits because they either did
not attack the fruit of prickly-pear ( Mimorista ) or did so incidentally
( Ghelinidea). They fed and developed on the stems and segments of
prickly-pear, and for this reason the feeding trials made use of foliage
and succulent stems of the various plants. Dater, both insects were
found capable of feeding or developing on certain kinds of fruit. One
should, however, emphasise that the Board’s investigators were
embarking on 1 an almost unknown line of enquiry, since little w'ork of
any sort had been conducted on the subject of the possible development
of insects on plants other than their normal hosts. After the first two
or three years the scientific officers came to the conclusion that
starvation tests served a very useful purpose. This modification in
outlook followed the first indications that cactus insects could derive
sustenance from a non-cactus plant.
If starvation tests under close confinement were artificial and could
not be interpreted to advantage, one must agree that some of the results
were surprising. It was learned that a few cactus insects could develop
from egg to adult on some alien host seemingly as readily as on prickly-
pear. Although the insects did not attack these plants under natural
conditions in America, there could be little justification for establishing


them in Australia. If development from egg to adult was possible on
some fruit, vegetable, or other crop plant in confinement, how could
proof be obtained that the female cactus insect would never recognise
the suitability of the potential food plant? No guarantee could be
given in such cases that the selection of hosts by the female was
necessarily so stable that eggs would not be deposited on anything but
prickly-pear in Australia.
The experiments have been valuable from another angle. Thus,
where a prickly-pear insect showed itself unable, although given every
opportunity, to complete the life-cycle or to prolong existence on any
among a wide selection of plants, the negative results could be considered
to favour the future immunity from attack of commercial plants in
Australia, more especially in those cases in which the larvae had
obviously endeavoured to continue normal development and had failed
in their attempts.
In weighing the evidence secured from the starvation experiments,
and in arriving at a decision as to the advisability of introducing any
particular prickly-pear enemy, several factors had to be taken into
account, viz.: —■
(a) The value of the insect, based on the knowledge of its life
history, rate of increase, nature of the damage, probable
adaptation to Australian priekly-pears and to Australian
climatic conditions, and other points;
(Z») The particular need for the insect in the Australian
campaign;
(c) The relation of the insect to other cactus insects and to pests
of economic importance;
(d) The results of the feeding tests and their completeness;
( e ) The potential importance of the insect as an enemy of other
plants, if it showed ability to feed on non-cactus hosts.
Obviously, some forms would have greater pest potentialities
than others, depending on the rate of increase, duration of
the life-cycle, habits, difficulty of control measures, &e. A
rapid-breeding, free-dispersing insect, such as Mimorista or
Ozamia, -would be of greater possible danger than a slower-
breeding, wingless form, such as Moneilema.
With regard to the relationships of the insects, a case in point is
that of the Calandriid weevil, Cactophagus, which was not introduced
more on account of the pest importance and control difficulties of the
related insects, the sugarcane weevil, Rhdbdocnemis, and the banana
weevil, Cosmopolites, than because of the actual results of the starvation
tests with the insect itself.
When the Board was satisfied that a prickly-pear insect could be
imported with safety to Australia, full information concerning its
relationship, life history and habits, together with the results of the
starvation tests carried out in America, were supplied to the Common-
wealth Department of Quarantine, with a request for permission to
introduce material. Finally, when the supplementary starvation
experiments in Australia were completed, the Department gave authority
to liberate the insect in the field. In addition, the Government
Entomologists of Queensland and of New T South Wales were invited to
express their opinions concerning the completeness and satisfactoriness
of the evidence.


METHODS ADOPTED IN THE STARVATION TESTS.
The procedure was to carry out in America series of experiments
with each species of insect on all important commercial plants which the
insect might conceivably attack, and, if the results were satisfactory, to
supplement this work with Australian tests on the most important
plants used in America and on indigenous and other plants unavailable
in America. A departure from this plan was made in the case of
Cactoblastis caciorum, all tests with which were conducted in Australia
for the following reasons: The material of this insect was shipped from
the Argentine during a short visit by an officer and the time element did
not permit experiments in the Argentine; the probable behaviour of
Cactoblastis toward plants other than prickly-pear was judged from the
results of comprehensive tests with its closely-related North American
moth borers, Melitara prodenialis and Olycella junctolineella.
The tests were of the starvation type. The insects were confined
with the economic plant, on which they must either feed or starve. In
the earliest work a series of preference experiments with the economic
plant and prickly-pear in the same cage was run in conjunction with
the main series. This method was soon discontinued. Later on, a few
preference tests were conducted with Mimorista and Cactophagus.
Generally, each species was tested on between 30 and 60 different
kinds of plants, including the more important vegetables, fruit, cereals,
other farm crops, and shade and timber trees.. In some cases the whole
list of plants was not used for each of several closely-related insects of
nearly identical habits, as for example the various species of Melitara
and Moneilema. If, and when, positive evidence was forthcoming of
the ability of a particular insect to live on some economic plant or plants,
and a decision was made to refrain from attempting to establish it in
Australia, the programme of tests was not completed; thus, trials with
Ozamia were restricted to a comparatively small number of fruits.
With each species of insect, the testing programme as a rule
occupied from one to as long as three years, and many hundreds or even
thousands of individuals were employed. If the evidence of one or
more series of experiments was inconclusive, or raised doubts concerning
the inability of the insect to develop in certain plants, the tests were
repeated many times on all such plants.
Positive tests —that is to say, proof of a capacity to attack plants
other than cacti—with one insect were considered as being applicable
to closely-related species with similar habits; thus, when Ozamia
odiosella and Cactophagus spinolae were found capable of' developing in
an economic plant, other species of Ozamia and Cactophagus were not
further investigated. On the other hand, where the tests with an insect
were satisfactory, related species were put through a similar series of
experiments —e.g., the various species of Melitara and Moneilema.
The insects were given every opportunity to attack the plants under
rather close confinement in fine cloth or wire-gauze sleeves and cages
placed over or around the plant or portion of the plant. With all
experiments, control tests were carried out concurrently under similar
cage conditions, with the object of comparing the behaviour of the
insect toward the alien and the natural food plant. No series of tests
was considered satisfactory unless simultaneously the insect developed
and completed its life-cycle on prickly-pear in the small cages used for
the economic plant experiments.


Selection of Plants.
The choice of plants was to a considerable degree dependent on the
feeding requirements of the particular insect. A plant-sucking bug
might feed, conceivably, on almost any plant. On the other hand,
internal-feeding larvae could not possibly change their habits to such
an extent as to live externally on foliage. Neither would any useful
purpose have been served by testing boring larvae of the size of Cacio-
Tjlasiis or Moneilema on plants with stems of insufficient diameter to
allow their development.
In the case of internal-feeding larvae, which constitute the majority
of cactus insects, special attention was paid to plants with succulent
stems and to fleshy fruit which reproduced, more or less, the physical
characteristics of prickly-pear. Discretion had to be exercised, even
with these plants, in weighing the results of the experiments. An insect
like Cactoblastis, which lives as an active larva in the prickly-pear stems
throughout the winter months, would not find an adequate food plant
in a summer annual such as maize or in fruit which develop and mature
during the summer; but insects like Mimorista and Ozamia, with several-
generations a year and with a quiescent winter period, possessed life
histories which might enable them to breed successfully in summer
annuals and fruit.
Stages of the Insects Used in the Tests.
The life-cycle stages selected for testing varied according to the
insect and its habits, and were as follows: —
1. Lepidoptera, whose larvae tunnelled in the stem or fruit—
(a) The fundamental experiments were those with newly-
hatched larvae, in order to ascertain whether the insect could
pass through its life-cycle on a non-cactus host plant;
(i) Partially-developed larvae, one-third to one-half grown,
were transferred from prickly-pear to the economic plant.
This series was of an indicative nature, and determined the
plants which possessed some degree of palatability to the
larval requirements. Larvae that had developed for a time
in prickly-pear showed much greater potentiality to continue
development on another food plant than newly-hatched
larvae;
(c) Adults, for oviposition, in Mimorista only.
2. Coleoptera, whose larvae tunnelled in the stems —
(a) Adults for feeding, longevity, and oviposition;
(&) Newly-hatched larvae for feeding and life-cycle develop-
ment;
(c) Partially-grown larvae, for feeding and developing, as
indicative tests.
3. Diptera, the seed-midge, Asphondylia, only—
(a) Adults for oviposition and life-cycle development.
Satisfactory methods for testing Asphondylia larvae
could not be devised.
4. Eeteroptera, plant-sucking bugs—
(а) Adults for feeding, longevity, and oviposition;
(б) Newly-hatched larvae for feeding and life-cycle develop-
ment ;


Dactylopius opunliac on a plant of the tree pear,
Opuntia tomentosa.
Cochincal, Daclylopius opunliac, on Opuntia
incrmis.
[Face page 54.


Destruction of O. incrmis by cochineal, D. opuntiac, in belar serub country at Dulacca, Qld.
(a) At left. Prior to cochineal attack, October, 1622.
(b) At right. The same area in November, 1626.
(By courtesy of Mr. J. B. Henderson,)


Destruction of opuntia shield by the cochineal, Daclylopius opuntiac,
Westwood, Qld.
(a) Upper view; taken in July, 1924.
(b) Lower view; two years later, in July, 1926, the prickly-pear has virtually
disappeared.


The cochineal, Dactylopius sp. near coafusus, attacking the tiger pear,
Opuntia aurantiaca.
(a) Top left. A healthy plant.
(b) Top Tight. Completely destroyed plant.
( c) Lower picture. Close-up of coo lineal cultures on a plant.


(c) Partially-grown larvae for feeding and completion of life-
cycle.
5. Homoptera, the cochineals, Dactylopius—
(a) Newly-hatched larvae for feeding and life-cycle development.
With the exception of the adult males, the newly-
hatched larva is the only mobile stage of these insects. Once
the larva has commenced to feed, it cannot be removed from
the prickly-pear plant without causing its death.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.
Conclusions that can be drawn from the results of the starvation
tests with prickly-pear insects may be given for their general scientific
interest;—
(1) With the exception of the cochineal insects, Dactylopim spp.,
all insects attempted to feed, either as adults or larvae, on
certain plants;
(2) Larvae of many species that had developed for some time on
prickly-pear were prone to continue feeding and growing
when transferred to certain other hosts. This tendency was
much greater with partially-developed larvae than with
newly-hatched larvae which had not fed on prickly-pear. In
some cases, the change in diet appeared to have no effect on
the rate of growth;
(3) Few prickly-pear insects were capable of commencing and
completing the life-cycle on other plants, although they
might feed and grow to some degree during phases of their
development;
(4) Insects reared from egg to adult on non-cactus food plants
were the Lepidoptera, Mimorista flavidissimalis and Ozamia
odiosella, and the Coleopteron, Cactophagm spinolae. The
adults reared on the alien host in no way differed from cactus-
bred material;
(5) Mimorista was reared on tomatoes and Ozamia on peaches
without difficulty. These fruit appeared to be adequate
hosts for the continued breeding of the insects. Yet, under
natural conditions both are restricted to prickly-pear;
(6) Insects feeding in or on the stems or segments of prickly-
pear were more likely to derive nourishment from fruit than
from other portions of the tested plants;
(7) In the main, cactus insects deprived of their normal food
were inclined to feed on plants or portions of plants with
physical characteristics rather similar to those of prickly-
pear. Similarity of texture rather than botanical or
chemical relationship appeared to be the determining factor;
(8) Two plants were outstanding as regards their liability to
furnish a food supply for the tested insects —viz., the fruit
of peach and tomato. This would seem to indicate that these
fruit possess some quality in common with prickly-pear that
is palatable to various prickly-pear insects.
PLANTS ON WHICH FEEDING AND DEVELOPMENT
OCCURRED.
It may be of interest to quote the cases where larvae made
perceptible growth and where adults derived apparent nourishment


from their feeding, in order to convey some idea of the different plants
on which priekly-pear insects were able to find another diet adapted,
or at least not wholly unsuited, to their requirements. These instances
are furnished irrespective of the testing methods applied and of the
ability of the insect either to complete development or to continue to live
as adults.
(a) Larvae—
Olycella jimctolineella .. In stems of castor-oil, Bid nits
communis.
Cactoblastis spp Peach, tomato, and melon fruit.
Tucumania tapiacola . . Tomato fruit.
Ozamia odio sella .. .. Apricot, plum and peach fruit;
bean pods; unripe maize grain.
Mimorista fl avidissimalis . Apple, peach, plum and tomato-
fruit; stems of maize cobs.
Metapleura potosi .. .. Peach and apple fruit.
Moneilema spp. .. .. Fig and cucumber fruit; maize and
sorghum stems; cabbage.
Cactophagus spinolae .. Tomato and papaw stems; banana
fruit.
Gerstaeckeria doddi .. Apple and peach fruit; sugarcane
sorghum and maize stems.
Chelinidea spp Tomato fruit.
(b) Adults—
Moneilema spp. .. .. Peach and fig fruit and twigs;
turnip plants.
Cactophagus spinolae . . Pumpkin and banana fruit; maize
stems.
Gerstaeckeria doddi .. Apple and tomato fruit; sugarcane ;
maize, Sudan grass and millet
stems; potato tuber.
Chelinidea spp. .. .. Peach, fig, apple, grape and tomato
fruit; green tops of pineapple
; fruit.
In addition, the midge Asphondylia opuntiae laid eggs within, and
thereby destroyed, young fruit of fig, apple and peach.
In the above list there are 23 kinds of plants, which are distributed
among the following 12 botanical families:—
Bromeliaceae .. Pineapple.
Musaceae .. .. Banana.
Rosaceae .. .. Peach, plum, apple, apricot.
Leguminosae . . Bean.
Moraceae .. .. Pig.
Cruciferae .. .. Cabbage, turnip.
Passiflorae .. . . Papaw.
Vitaceae .. .. Grape.
Cucurbitaceae .. Pumpkin, cucumber, melon.
Euphorhiaceae .. Castor-oil.
Solanaceae .. .. Potato, tomato.
Gramineae .. .. Maize, sugarcane, sorghum, sudan grass,
millet.


The wide range of plants on which feeding or appreciable growth
took place is worth comment. Three plants which appear most
frequently—viz., peach, tomato and maize—are not closely related.
Concerning the frequency of attack, it will be observed that peach
occurs eight times, tomato seven times, apple and maize each six times,
and fig four times. Although maize and apple were attacked almost as
often as peach and tomato, feeding and larval development were
considerably more pronounced in the ease of the two last-named.
THE SPECIES OF INSECTS TESTED.
The various prickly-pear insects to which starvation tests on
economic plants have been applied can he divided into the following-
groups, as under: —
A: Tests satisfactory; insects unable to develop on any plant other
than a cactus host —
1. Establishment attempted in Australia—
(a) Became successfully established—
The Phycitid moth borers, Cactoblastis caciorum and
Tucumania tapiacola from Argentine, Olycella juncio-
lineella from Texas; the Cerambycid beetle borers,.
MoneUema ulkei from Texas, MoneUema variolare from
Mexico, Lagochirus funestus from Mexico.
The Coreid bugs, Chelimdea iahulata and G. vittiger from
Texas.
The cochineal insects, Dactylopius opuntiae from the United
States and Mexico, D. newsteadi from the United States,.
D. ceylonicus and D. sp. near confusus from Argentine.
(b) Have failed or apparently failed to become established—
The Phycitid moth borers, Melitara prodeniaiis, M. dentaia,.
M. doddalis and M. sp. from the United States, Cacto-
blastis doddi from Argentine. The cochineal, Dactylopius-
confusus, from Florida.
2. Not introduced or establishment not seriously attempted on
account of low potential value for control of prickly-pear—
The Cerambycid beetle borers MoneUema crassa and M. armata
from Texas, M. laevigata from New Mexico, M. gigas from
Arizona, M. rugosipennis from Mexico, Coenopaeus
palmeri from Texas.
The Coreid bugs, Chelinidea canyona and Narnia pallidicornis
from Texas.
B: Tests unsatisfactory; not established in Australia on account of
feeding or oviposition on plants other than prickly-pear—
The Phycitid fruit enemy, Ozamia odiasella from Texas.
The Pyraustid moth borer, Mimorista flavidissimalis from Texas..
The Geleehiid moth borer, Metapleura- potosi from Mexico.
The Cecidomyid seed midge, Asphondylia opuntiae from the
United States.
The Calandriid weevil, Cactophagns spinolae from Mexico.
The Curculionid weevil, Gerstaeckeria doddi from Texas.


The Results with the Different Insects.
The plants submitted to the cactus insects included:—
Vegetable crops—
Lettuce, cabbage, onion, turnip, carrot, pea, bean, asparagus,
potato, sweet potato, egg plant, tomato, okra, pumpkin,
marrow, cucumber, watermelon, rockmelon, piemelon,
rhubarb, capsicum.
Fruit, fruit trees, and plants—
Orange, lemon, mango, persimmon, custard apple, pear, nectar-
ine, peach, plum, apricot, apple, fig, grape, banana, pine-
apple, Kai apple, pecan, papaw, strawberry, avocado,
Queensland nut ( Macadamia ), Cape gooseberry, Ciruela
(Spondias) , passion.
Cereals and grasses—
Maize, wheat, oats, millet, sugarcane, sorghum, sudan grass,
Australian native grasses.
General crops—
Tobacco, cotton, lucerne, clover, peanut, Queensland arrow-
root, cassava, flax.
Shade and timber trees—
Araucaria, Eucalyptus, Acacia, Casuari-m, Banksia, Sterculia,
palm.
Other plants—
Hibiscus, Allanmnda, castor-oil, agave, rose.
The complete list was not submitted to each species of insect, but
was varied to some extent. In general, each insect was tested on more
than thirty kinds of plants, the aim being to include all the more
important ones, from an economic standpoint, on which the insect might
be able to feed and develop. A few plants were not used generally, but
were added for some particular insect because of the host relationships
of allied species; for example, Hibiscus and Allamanda were included in
the experiments with Lagochirus only.
In a publication of this size, the tests cannot be discussed at length
nor the details set out. The results with the various insects will be
reviewed very briefly, and items of particular interest selected for
■discussion.
The Phycitid Stem Borers.
The Genus Melitara.
This typical cactus complex of four closely-related forms with
gregarious larvae living in the segments of prickly-pear inhabits the
United States. The four forms, M. prodemalis, 31. doddalis, M. dentata,
and M. sp., were tested very thoroughly.
Generally, both newly-hatched larvae and those one-third to one-
half grown transferred from prickly-pear did not feed on or burrow
into the various plants and fruit. A few larvae of one or other of the
forms penetrated the following fruit, lived for a short time, and died
without showing any appreciable development:—Apple, peach, green
tomato, and watermelon. Two larvae bored for 2 inches into the cut off
end of a maize stalk but soon died. Melitara larvae were less inclined to
-enter alien host plants, or having entered such plants to attempt develop-
ment, than larvae of the related genera, Gactoblastis and Tucumania.


Thus, in contrast to the behaviour of the two lastnamed insects, newly-
hatched larvae of Melitara did not penetrate into green tomatoes.
The Genus Cactoblastis.
This South American group contains four or five allied species,
whose larvae live gregariously. Economic tests were carried out with
the two Argentine forms, C. cactorum and C. doddi.
Newly-batched larvae of C. cactorum made no attempt to enter any
plant or fruit except pineapple, where they burrowed into the green
tops of the fruit; they vacated the tops within 24 hours and made no
further attempt to feed. Larvae, one-half to two-thirds grown,
penetrated pineapple, tomato, and melon fruit; the tunnelling in pine-
apple was,not extensive and little nourishment appeared to be derived.
Green, but not ripe, tomatoes and melons were entered readily; for a
few days the larvae appeared to feed normally but made no appreciable
growth and gradually died; very definitely they were unable to complete
development in these fruit.
Cactoblastis doddi showed a greater capacity to obtain food value
from tomatoes. Newly-hatched larvae entered the fruit; in the case of
fully-developed green tomatoes they fed and made appreciable growth,
but were unable to complete development; in immature tomatoes the
larvae died very quickly. Newly-hatched larvae did not succeed in
burrowing into melon and peach fruit. However, partially-grown
larvae, transferred from prickly-pear, entered melons, tomatoes, and
peaches without difficulty. They did not make growth in melons, but
developed appreciably in tomatoes and peaches. With tomatoes two
larvae, out of a total of 265, reached the pupal stage, but the pupae died.
In peaches, 16 larvae, in a total of 250, succeeded in spinning cocoons,
from which 7 undersized moths were secured; the 3 female moths
deposited several very short eggsticks.
This insect was tested-very thoroughly, 3,500 larvae being used in
the experiments. Partially-grown larvae were able to complete develop-
ment in tomatoes and peaches, and in the latter fruit even to produce
adults. However, there was no doubt that the young larvae could not
complete the life-cycle on these fruit. Efforts to establish this species-
in Australia were unsuccessful.
Olycella junctolineella.
Several forms of Olycella occur in Mexico and the United States ;
all attack prickly-pear but not other cactus types. The larvae are
gregarious in the early stages and solitary later. 0. junctolineella has
been the only species considered for introduction to Australia. It was
tested on over 50 kinds of plants and fruit; owing to the large size of
the well-developed larvae, fruit of the dimensions of peach and tomato
were not included in the experiments. Newly-hatched and half-grown
larvae entered melon and marrow vines, cabbage, banana stem, and
castor-oil ( Ricinus communis). They were unable to feed and died
quickly on all but castor-oil, in w T hieh the half-grown larvae ingested
the pithy interior and increased slightly in size.
Tucumania tapiacola.
This representative of a South American genus of solitary larvae
infesting low-growing prickly-pears was tested most comprehensively,.
3,750 larvae being used for the purpose. Larvae succeeded in entering.


several plants and fruit, but made little attempt to feed except in
banana, peach, and tomato fruit. Feeding was very limited in banana
and peach and growth was not recorded.
Newly-hatched larvae penetrated tomatoes rather freely. They
were unable to live in the green fruit. By maintaining a constant
supply of ripe and ripening tomatoes, it was possible to rear them to a
maximum size of one-half grown. Half-grown larvae made some growth
in well-grown green tomatoes but were unable to complete development.
The Phycitid Fruit Borers.
Ozamia odiosella.
The genus Ozamia contains several species, most of which attack
the fruit of prickly-pears and other cacti. 0. odiosella, from the United
State, possesses four or five generations annually; in the spring and
early summer the larval stage may be completed in less than three weeks.
Starvation tests were not comprehensive on account of the definite
results secured from the initial experiments. One-third to one-half
grown larvae were unable to develop in figs, marrows, grapes, green
tomatoes, and sorghum flower heads and stems. However, they fed
freely in nearly-ripe apricots, fully-grown green plums, half-grown
peaches, half-grown dwarf bean pods, and green maize cobs; developed
as rapidly as in prickly-pear fruit and produced normal moths in each
case. From a total of 50 larvae used in these five experiments, 26
moths were reared, in comparison with 38 moths from the control tests
on Opuntia fruit.
Newdy-hatched larvae were used in two experiments only. They
made no attempt to feed on the stems and bolls of cotton. In the
second test, 10 eggs on the point of hatching were placed on nearly-ripe
peaches on the trees; the young larvae at once commenced to feed within
the fruit and grew rapidly; 3 pupated within 18 days and produced
normal moths. In the control experiment, using firm, colouring prickly-
pear fruit, 4 larvae pupated in 24 days. The more rapid development
in the peaches was probably due to the riper nature of the fruit, for in
breeding cages at this time larvae pupated in ripe Opuntia fruit in 16
days.
No further experiments were carried out, as the insect was
immediately deemed to be “unsafe” as far as introduction to Australia
was concerned.
In spite of the results of the tests, it is quite certain that 0. odiosella
does not attack peaches in the United States, since it is found commonly
in areas w ? here peaches are grown regularly. At Uvalde, Texas, wdiere
the tests were carried out, several large peach trees, bearing good crops
of fruit, grew among, even shading, the cages in which Ozamia was being
reared in numbers and from which surplus moths w 7 ere permitted to
escape. Examination of all fruit on these trees revealed no evidence of
attack by this insect.
Other Moth Borers.
Mimorista flavidissimalis.
This Pyraustid genus contains three or four species, all of which
are cactus enemies. M. flavidissimalis, which occurs in the West Indies,
Central America, Mexico, and Texas, has several generations annually;
in mid-summer the life-cycle may be completed in 21 days, and the
larval period may be as short as 12 days. The larvae feed in or on the
young growth of prickly-pear, and do not attack older growth, fruit, and
flowers. The winter months, when there is no new growth on prickly-
pear, are spent in the pupal stage.


Comprehensive tests in 1922 to early 1921 on 50 kinds of plants
were quite satisfactory; no evidence was secured that the insect could
develop on plants other than prickly-pear. However, fruits were not
specially included in the experiments, because the larvae do not attack
prickly-pear fruit. Mimorista was introduced into Australia, and four
small liberations were made in 1924 to early 1926; no trace of the
survival of the species could be found after three months had elapsed
from the date of liberation. By 1926, it was realised that under
Australian conditions the essential young growth was not available for
considerable periods and the insect was not likely to become established.
Efforts to bring about acclimatisation were abandoned in that year.
By 1.932, however, circumstances had altered. Owing to the
establishment of Cactoblastis cnctorum, prickly-pear injured by this
insect was producing new growth much more freely and continuously
than hitherto. It was not then apparent that Cactoblastis would
control regrowth. The introduction of Mimorista was therefore
re-considered. Inasmuch as tests with other prickly-pear insects had
by this time indicated that various fruit were more likely to provide a
suitable diet than succulent stems, the Board decided to treat the second
introduction as an initial one and to regard the earlier liberations as
having failed to effect establishment. Hence, further starvation tests,
mainly with fruit, were carried out in Texas in 1933,
Larvae increased slightly in size but were unable to complete
development in apples, peaches, and plums. Larvae 2to 3 days old had
no difficulty in developing in immature pods of dwarf (French) beans;
70 larvae gave a return of 38 normal moths, 17 to 24 days after the
tests were commenced; the control experiments on young growth of
prickly-pear gave the higher return of 89 per cent, moths after 18 to
21 days. In oviposition tests, the moths did not lay eggs on beans.
The most interesting experiments were those with tomatoes. The
plant stems were not attacked, but the fruit were entered readily. The
larvae were able to complete the life-cycle in full-grown green, ripening,
and ripe tomatoes, but not in the immature fruit. From 25 newly-
hatehed larvae supplied with green and ripening fruit, 10 moths were
obtained in 24 to 36 days; growth was more rapid in the prickly-pear
controls, the life-cycle being completed in 16 to 19 days.
Oviposition tests were then carried out; 16 moths were released in
a cloth cage over a branch bearing large green and ripening tomatoes;
60 eggs were laid, invariably on the surface of the fruit and not on the
foliage and stems or the cloth cage. The young larvae penetrated the
fruit and grew steadily, hut not as quickly as on prickly-pear shoots; 21
pupae were obtained, and 15 moths emerged after a life-cycle of 29 to
15 days, compared with 21 to 26 days in the control experiments. The
tomato-reared moths, which seemed identical with typical examples,
were then used in a. similar experiment. Again, eggs were laid freely,
and the larvae were developing normally in the tomatoes when the tests
were closed.
Thus, under close confinement, Mimorista—
(a) oviposited on tomatoes;
( b ) completed the life-cycle successfully;
(c) produced moths able to deposit fertile eggs on the same fruit.
Hence, the insect was rejected from the programme. It is quite
certain that Mimorista does not attack tomatoes in the field in Texas.
Here, again, the unknown quantity was the selection of hosts by the
3


female insect. If establishment were effected in Australia, the females
might at some time in the future realise that tomatoes furnished an
adequate food supply for the larvae.
Metapleura potosi.
This Gelechiid, which is the sole member of the genus, occurs in
Mexico. The larvae form individual cells in the prickly-pear segments.
The life-cycle may be completed in 50 days in mid-summer; probably
there are at least three generations annually.
This insect was tested on many kinds of fruit and plants in 1927-28.
Newly-hatched larvae entered bananas, apples, and peaches, grew
slightly, but were unable to develop. One-third grown larvae, trans-
ferred from prickly-pear, burrowed into several fruits and plants. A
few survived for a maximum of 28 days in pineapples and 34 days in
bananas, but showed very little increase in size. One example among
many in peach fruit developed to almost full size and survived for 45
days; similarly, one individual lived for the same period in an apple
and was three-fourths grown at death.
Although the larvae entered various fruit, they were unable to
complete development. The results indicated that Metapleura was a
“safe” insect to introduce to Australia. However, by the time the
experiments were completed, Cacfoblastis cactorum had demonstrated
its destructive powers, and the need for other internal-feeding Lepidop-
tera was not so great. Furthermore, an insect with three generations
annually, whose comparatively small, solitary larvae showed a capacity
to feed, even to a limited degree, in important fruit such as peaches and
apples, might not be as innocuous as the tests had shown. The Board,
therefore, decided to discontinue work with this form. If an efficient
controlling agent of the Australian pest pears had not been discovered,
the advisability of importing M. potosi may have been viewed from a
rather different angle.
The Cerambycid Stem Borers.
The Genus Moneilema.
This purely cactus segregate contains many species of rather large
wingless Longicorns occurring in the United States and Mexico. The
larvae are solitary and tunnel in the stems, usually the basal portions,
of prickly-pears and other cacti. The adults are long-lived. In most
species there is one annual generation, but in some cases tw r o generations
can be completed in a year.
Very full starvation tests on economic plants were conducted with
the following species:— M. ulkei, M. armed a,, M. crassa, M. laevigata, and
M. gigas from the United States; M. variotare and M. rugosipemiia from
Mexico.
The adults attempted to feed by gnawing stems and fruit. The
feeding was not beneficial and did not sustain existence, except in a few
tests on peach twigs and fruit, fig twigs and fruit, and turnip plants
with M. idkei, where the beetles lived for maximum periods of 50 to 73
days. In all the experiments with the various species, oviposition
occurred in one instance only; a female M. variotare, which had been
collected from the field and had already fed on prickly-pear, deposited
one egg in a cabbage; the larva hatched and died within four days.
Newly-hatched larvae succeeded in entering the plants occasionally,
but soon died. One larva of M. laevigata lived within a cucumber fruit
for 54 days and increased somewhat in size. Larvae, which had


commenced development on priekly-pear before being used in the experi-
ments, survived for 40 days in fig fruit and in sorghum and maize stems,
grew appreciably, but were less than one-half grown at death.
Larvae were able to derive nourishment from cabbages; however,
their tunnelling set up rapid decay and they were unable to develop. If
a succession of cabbages was used, and the larvae either transferred by
hand, or permitted to enter the fresh head placed against the rotting
example, they obtained sufficient nourishment to develop considerably.
In an extreme case, under these very artificial conditions, a larva of M.
trassa became full-grown and formed a cocoon after 70 days; several
cabbages w T ere used in this experiment.
The starvation tests clearly indicated that all species of Moneilema
could be introduced wdth safety. Serious efforts to establish these
insects were confined to M. ulkei and M. rariolare, which were considered
to be more adapted to Australian climatic conditions than the other
forms.
Lagochirus funestus.
This Mexican Lougicorn is the only cactus representative of a
genus, in which two other species attack plants of the family Euphor-
biuceae, including cassava and castor-oil ( Bicinus) in Mexico and the
West Indies. The larvae of L. funestus live gregariously in the main
branches and trunks of tree pears; there is one generation annually.
Before the starvation tests were performed, an investigation was
carried out in Mexico of general crop plants growing in the vicinity of
prickly-pear infested with this insect; attention was paid to castor-oil
and cassava, which were found to be infested by Lagochirus araeni-
formis. No evidence was obtained that L. funestus attacked plants
other than prickly-pear.
In the testing programme, cassava, castor-oil, and other Euphor-
biaceous plants were included. The adults did not oviposit nor feed on
any plant, except that in a few cases they slightly gnawed the bark.
Larvae were placed in incisions in the stems and were thus given every
opportunity to develop. The newly-hatched larvae made no apparent
growth in any plant. Larvae, less than one-half grown transferred from
prickly-pear, did not feed, except in the case of sugarcane, where they
chewed the softer pith for a few days and then gradually shrivelled and
died. The insect showed no ability to survive on any plant other than
prickly-pear. Hence, the Board did not hesitate to recommend its
introduction to Australia.
Coenopaeus palmer!
A Lougicorn that infests Cylindropuntias in the United States.
Lnder cage conditions the adults fed readily on prickly-pear and
deposited eggs, from which a few larvae completed the life-cycle. How-
ever, it was decided that an insect restricted to the woody cylindrical
forms of Opuntia was unlikely to be of value in Australia. Meanwhile,
a small series of starvation tests was completed on fruit trees and crops,
such as sugarcane, maize, and cotton. Neither the adults nor the larvae
were able to survive on any plant.
The Oactophagus Weevils.
This cactus genus contains four species distributed from Central
America to the United States; the food plants are various prickly-pears
and Cerei. C. spinolae, the most destructive enemy of prickly-pears in


Mexico, was the form considered for introduction to Australia. The
long-lived adults are able to survive for several weeks without food.
The first series of tests was performed in 1927-28. The adults did
not oviposit but punctured the stems of large maize plants and caused
definite injury. Small larvae, that had begun development in prickly-
pear, were unable to live in maize stems or in other plants, except
tomato and papaw (papaya). One larva prolonged existence for 70
days in a tomato stem and was about one-third grown at death. iLarvae
tunnelled rather freely in papaw stems; the majority died within 150
days, but one example pupated in 62 days and yielded a small adult.
By early 1928 Gactoblastis had furnished evidence of its controlling
ability, and the establishment of other insects for Opuntia inermis and
O. stricta was not so necessary. Having in mind the relationship of
Caciophagus to such insects as the banana borer, Cosmopolites, and the
sugarcane borer, Bhab do mentis, and reviewing the results of the starva-
tion tests, the Board discontinued the investigations with this insect.
When it was realised that Gactoblastis cactorum would not control
the tree pears, 0. iomentosa, and 0. streptacantba, the introduction of
Caciophagus was re-considered in 1933. At that time these weevils
were the only known effective enemies of the large forms of prickly-pear,
for the Longieorn, Lagochirus fuuestus, was unknown until 1934, when
it was discovered as a direct result of investigations with Cactophagm
spinolac.
An officer of the Board made a three-months' survey in Mexico of
the relationship of this weevil to crop and other plants, paying special
attention to those growing in close proximity to cacti infested with the
insect. Heavily-attacked Opuntia and Cereus hedges frequently
surrounded the cultivated fields and garden and orchard plots, contain-
ing plants such as banana, sugarcane, maize, cassava. The evidence
was very definite to the effect that Caciophagus was restricted to cactus
plants.
Further starvation experiments were then initiated with sugar-
cane, banana, maize, papaw, and pumpkin, various parts of these plants
being tested under different cage conditions. Very interesting data
were obtained from the tests on banana. In small cages surrounding
the lower or upper parts of the plants, the beetles made punctures in
the stems and midribs of the leaves, caused minor injury, and did not
oviposit. Xo feeding took place when a wire-gauze cage was placed
over a whole plant bearing a bunch of fruit; the beetles spent days
wandering around the cage seeking to escape, until they died.
When small cages were used to cover bunches of bananas the
results were different. The beetles survived for as long as seven months,
feeding on the flower sheaths, very young fruit, and large green fruit,
which rotted from the injuries. A few eggs, averaging less than one
egg per female, were laid in the partially-eaten fruit; the larvae fed on
the pulp, and, if the fruit were in contact, succeeded in moving from one
banana to another example which had been similarly damaged by the
beetles; under these conditions the larvae developed as readily as in
prickly-pear and produced normal adults. In a preference test with
banana fruit and prickly-pear segments together in a small cage, the
beetles fed exclusively on prickly-pear, in which eggs were deposited
very freely.
Newly-hatched larvae were unable to survive in uninjured green
bananas. In the case of fruit ripening, or on the point of ripening, they
succeeded in developing, if fresh supplies of ripening fruit were placed


in contact with the decaying examples; under these circumstances some
larvae transferred several times, became full-grown, and pupated after
a larval life of 60 to 105 days.
The adults did not feed or oviposit on papaw plants and green
fruit; they fed to some extent on picked ripe fruit. Newly-hatched
larvae were not able to burrow into the stems, leaf stalks, and fruit. In
most tests with maize plants there was little attempt at feeding; hut in
one experiment the adults punctured the stems and survived for as long
as 105 days; the injuries resulted in the stunting of the plants’ growth
and in the production of small cobs. Newly-hatched larvae sometimes
entered the stems and the cob stalks, but soon succumbed. There was
no feeding or oviposition by the beetles on sugarcane, except when they
were given the opportunity of puncturing the cut-off ends of the stalks.
Young larvae placed in incisions in the stems did not survive. The
adults fed rather freely and were able to live for some time on picked
pumpkins. Several eggs were deposited in the fruit stalks or at the
junction of the stalk and the fruit; the young larvae burrowed into the
stalks and base of the fruit but did not live more than a few days.
The results of the starvation tests were considered very carefully.
In view of the ability of the adults to live for extended periods on banana
fruit, although under very unnatural conditions, and of the larvae to
develop in the fruit in certain circumstances, the investigations with
the Cactophagus weevils were terminated. The intervening discovery
of Lagochirus funestus had some bearing on this decision, more especially
as the economic plant tests with this insect had been completely
satisfactory.
The Gerstaeckeria Weevils.
This cactus group contains many kinds of small weevils inhabiting
the United States, Mexico, and the West Indies. Most of the species are
restricted to prickly-pears, the larvae forming small cells in the segments.
In mid-summer the larvae may complete development and enter pupal
cells within 21 days.
A number of economic tests was carried out with G. doddi in Texas.
The adults punctured the stems and fruit of various plants and appeared
to obtain some nourishment from ripe apples, sugarcane, and millet.
Young larvae, transferred from priekly-pear into small cavities in the
tested plant, became full-grown in ripe apples, ripening peaches, and
sorghum stems,' and grew appreciably in maize and sugarcane stems.
The Board’s officers were now convinced that the Gerstaeckeria
weevils were not particularly injurious to prickly-pears and were
unlikely to be of value in Australia. The testing programme was,
therefore, abandoned.
The Seed Midge, Asphondylia opuntiae.
This Cecidomyid is widely distributed in the United States and
Mexico. There is one annual generation; the adults emerge in the
early spring and oviposit in the ovary of the young flower buds. The
larvae grow very slowly during the summer and early winter, lying
among the soft undeveloped seeds; in the late winter they increase in
size quickly, and there is a short pupal period. The affected fruit does
not ripen and remains on the plant until after the adults have emerged.
As the life-cycle and habits are specialised to priekly-pear, Asphondylia
seemed to be a very “safe” insect for introduction, since the adaptation
of its life history to other plants appeared most improbable.


Methods by which the very small eggs and young larvae might be
transferred from the Opuutia fruit, in a manner that would permit
normal development to continue, could not be devised. Hence, oviposi-
tion experiments were conducted, the midges being released in cages
over branches bearing flower buds and young fruit. Eggs were laid in
the buds of peach and plum, but died from exposure when the flowers
opened. Oviposition was attempted in young fruit of peach and apple,
and very freely in young commercial figs with a diameter of approxi-
mately | inch. Eggs were deposited in many figs and in a few peaches
and apples. In all instances where oviposition occurred, an air-space or
pocket was present in the fruit, centrally in young figs and between the
seed and the pulp in the peaches and apples. When there was no air-
space no eggs were deposited. Thus, in one series of experiments with
figs, where the male and female flowers completely filled the cavity,
oviposition did not take place. An air-space is found in the young
Opimiia ovary. The fruit containing eggs, whether fig, peach, or apple,
invariably fell off in less than 30 days and the young larvae were unable
to develop. As many fruit dropped from the plant before the eggs
hatched, this result could not have been brought about by the feeding of
the larvae but must have been a consequence of the act of oviposition.
The evidence suggested very definitely that A. opuniiae could not
attack figs, peaches, and apples successfully, because the early falling of
the fruit prevented development of the larvae. Conclusive proof to
this effect would have been most difficult to obtain, and would have
entailed lengthy and comprehensive experiments with a great many
varieties of different kinds of commercial fruit in addition to figs,
peaches, and apples. As in other cases, the Board’s decision to discon-
tinue work with this insect was influenced by the improved prospects
evident, in 1929 of success in the campaign against priekly-pear.
The Coreid Bugs.
The Genus Chelinidea.
This group of four species is definitely a cactus complex, and is
found from the United States to northern South America. C. vittiger
and d. tabulata are very widely distributed insects, the former through-
out the United States and in northern Mexico, the latter from Texas
through Central America to Venezuela. There are two generations
annually; the adults are capable of surviving for very long periods,
extreme records of 542 days having been made with C. vittiger and of
424 days with C. tabulata. They feed mainly on the priekly-pear
segments, but are not averse to the flower buds and green fruit. Their
habits are rather sluggish; the adults rarely fly, but occasionally form
swarms and take flight for distances up to several miles.
C. vittiger, C. tabulata, and C. canyona were among the earliest
insects used for economic plant tests, in 1922-24. Adults and newly-
hatched larvae of each species were supplied with between 40 and 50
different kinds of plants. Since these insects feed primarily on the
priekly-pear segments, and attack the fruit more or less secondarily,
fruits of economic value were not expressly used in the experiments,
although certain varieties, as peach, fig, eitrus, and garden peas, were
included. The newly-hatched larvae failed to survive on any plant
more than a few days, and did not, in any instance, moult to the 2nd
instar. The adults punctured various plants, and were able to sustain
existence for some time on peaches and figs, and for a shorter period on


garden peas. The results of the starvation tests with all three insects
were considered to be satisfactory. Permission to liberate was obtained
in 1924.
Later, in 1929-30, when C. tdbulata was discovered feeding on
several kinds of fruit in the field in Australia, experiments were carried
out to ascertain what damage the insect could cause, and whether it
could carry through the life-cycle on any kind of fruit. In addition to
adults and newly-hatched larvae, larvae of the several instars were used.
Newly-hatched larvae and those of the Ist to 3rd instars failed to
make any development on all fruit except tomatoes. Green tomatoes
were not attacked. The insects derived nourishment from picked ripe
tomatoes, on which most of the newly-hatched larvae died in the Ist
instar; some reached the 2nd and 3rd instars; in rare cases they moulted
for the third time and died within two days of entering the 4th instar.
The behaviour was consistent in large numbers of experiments.
Obviously, they could not complete development on this fruit.
Adults and large larvae of the 4th and sth instars punctured several
kinds of fruit, and, where the feeding was concentrated, either destroyed
the fruit or affected the flavour. Existence was not prolonged greatly
except on apples, grapes, pineapple tops, and picked green tomatoes,
where the insects survived for maximum periods of from 122 to 147
days. Eggs were laid in many experiments, but the young larvae died
immediately. In the case of tomatoes, no feeding occurred on green
fruit on the growing plants; but when given a continuous supply of
picked fruit the bugs lived for a maximum of 147 days, feeding chiefly
on the green tomatoes and largely avoiding the ripe fruit.
The investigations proved that C. tabulata could feed on and injure
certain fruit of economic value, but served to show, also, that it could
not pass through the life-cycle on a host plant other than prickly-pear.
Hence, if and when fruit were attacked in the field, the invasion must
be of a temporary nature and could not be continued in the absence of
prickly-pear in the vicinity.
Narnia pallidicornis.
The genus Narnia, with several species distributed from the United
States to northern South America, is restricted to the cacti; the bugs
feed on the fruit and occasionally on the growth. In the early part of
the Board’s investigations considerable attention was paid to A. paUidi-
cornis in the United States. By 1924 it was apparent that the bugs,
even when in numbers, caused very little damage to prickly-pear fruit
and did not destroy the viability of the seeds. Therefore, it was dropped
from the programme.
Meanwhile, tests had been conducted with adults and newly-hatched
larvae on the foliage and stems of 39 kinds of economic plants. Very
little or no feeding occurred on any plant, neither did the insects
survive for more than a short period. Fruits w'ere not included in the
experiments. Since Narnia are mainly fruit-feeders, it is quite possible
that tests on certain fruit would have yielded different results.
The Cochineal Mealy Bugs,
The various species of cochineal, genus Dactylapms, attack prickly-
pears, both Platyopuntias and the very similar Nopalm; one form
infests Cylindropuntias. They are very nearly-related insects with
almost identical habits. At the commencement of the Board’s investiga-
tions two species w 7 ere acclimatised in Australia; D. ceylonicus on 0.


monacantha had been imported in 1913, while 1). opuntiae was intro-
duced by a private individual in 1921 and was established on 0. inermis
and 0. stricta.
Nevertheless, the Board decided to study the host restriction
question. Starvation tests were carried out with D. opuntiae and />.
confmvs in the United States, with supplementary experiments in
Australia, more than 60 kinds of plants being utilised. With the
exception of the winged males, the newly-hatched larva or “crawler 77 is
the only mobile stage; once the female larva has commenced to feed on
the host plant, it cannot be removed without breaking the mouth-parts.
The “crawlers” were permitted to wander over the leaves, fruit, and
stems of the economic plants. The results may be stated very briefly.
In no instance did the young larvae settle down on or appear to make
any attempt to feed on a plant other than prickly-pear.
The Prickly-pear Spider Mite.
The prickly-pear red spider, Tetranychus opuntiae, occurs in Texas
and the more northern sections of Mexico. The host restriction aspect
is complicated because of the doubt whether it is a distinct species. Most
specialists on the group consider the prickly-pear form identical with
the world-wide T. telarvus, which attacks a great many plants of economic
importance. However, it would appear to be a biological species or race
confined to prickly-pears.
Efforts to secure infection on other plants were unsuccessful. The
mites were transferred in hundreds from prickly-pear on to the foliage
of more than 20 kinds of plants, including those which are very subject
to attack by T. telarius, notably rose, turnip, bean, strawberry, and
grape. Segments of 0. inermis heavily infected with red spider were
placed among the foliage of the economic plants and were allowed to
remain for several weeks until the segments had dried out completely
as a result of the feeding of the mites. In all experiments no trace of
red spider could be found subsequently on any of the plants. On the
other hand, in all control tests the mites immediately infested clean
segments of prickly-pear. The results suggested rather definitely that
the prickly-pear form woidd not readily attack other hosts.
ATTACK ON OTHER PLANTS BY INTRODUCED INSECTS.
There have been several instances where two of the established
prickly-pear insects, by feeding or attempting to feed, have damaged
the fruit of other plants in Australia. The insects were Cactublastii
cactorum and Chdinidea tabnlaia. Possibly a few other eases have
occurred and have not been reported, but the number could not have
been great. The establishment of prickly-pear insects was viewed with
apprehension by the average citizen, and several years passed before
there was general recognition that the various insects were restricted to
the one food plant and would not turn their attention to plants of
economic importance. The questions “What else will these insects
attack besides prickly-pear?’ 7 and “What will they live on when they
have destroyed the pear? 77 —so frequently repeated in the earlier years—
are now rarely heard.
It was not long after the establishment of Cuctoblastis that alleged
attacks on other plants were reported, sometimes in the Press under
appropriate headlines. The Board’s officers investigated many cases
where damage to tomatoes ami other fruit, in which Cactoblastis was
supposed to be the offender, was caused by the common pest, Tleliothis
armigera. Similarly, reports of Chelinidca injury to tomatoes and


other vegetable and fruit crops were nearly always due to the green
vegetable bug, Nezara viridula, or some other well-known insect.
Cactoblastis Larvae Damaging Other Plants.
The five known cases where this insect caused damage to a plant
other than prickly-pear all occurred, strangely enough, in May 1930.
Tomatoes suffered in four instances, and pie or preserving melons in
the fifth case. Three of the tomato incidents took place near Mitchell,
western Queensland, and the fourth at Laidley, southern Queensland.
The circumstances were practically identical. The tomato plants were
growing not more than 25 feet away from prickly-pear, which collapsed
quite suddenly from the concentrated attack of the insect. The larvae,
which were about two-thirds grown, with no food-supply left were
wandering over the rotting pear, soil, herbage, tree-trunks, fence posts,
&e., and were dying in large numbers. Some had entered green tomatoes,
which were destroyed or rendered unfit for use. They were not feeding
in the fruit, which, quite obviously, were unpalatable; were dying in or on
the outside of the fruit; or were vacating the tomatoes to continue the
search for food. The sum total of the damage was very small.
The melon episode, which occurred at Nindigully, south-west
Queensland, exhibited features different in certain particulars from
those quoted above. The larvae survived for some time in. the fruit and
appeared to derive some benefit from their feeding efforts. Further-
more, the attack on the melons, instead of ceasing in a few days, con-
tinued for several weeks. The vines were growing among large clumps
of prickly-pear which were rotting very rapidly as a result of a very
heavy Cactoblastis population. In wandering around, many of the
starving larvae succeeded in penetrating the melons, usually immature
fruit with a softer or thinner rind. On 24th May, 1930, several injured
fruit containing larvae were collected; on 6th June, one fruit when
opened was found to contain many dead and some living unhealthy
caterpillars. Feeding ceased about 9th June and the last survivor died
on 26th June. The insects made no attempt to enter fresh melons placed
alongside the attacked examples. A second inspection on 9th June
revealed that larvae were dead in numbers within and on the surface
of the fruit, while further larvae, wandering from collapsing prickly-
pear, were burrowing into other fruit. This state of affairs continued
until late July. By this time the larvae in prickly-pear were almost
full-grown; yet when such nearly-mature individuals entered melons
they did not complete development and form cocoons. Despite the
fact that they were able to prolong existence in the melons, they showed
no increase in size. It is possible that the insects remained alive for
two to four weeks in the fruit because of the normal comparative
inactivity during the mid-winter season. Throughout the two months’
period, when larvae continued to attack the melons, there was never any
indication that they transferred from one fruit to another; having
tunnelled into the melons, they died therein, on the surface, or in the
immediate vicinity.
Since 1930 there have been no recorded cases of Cactoblastis larvae
injuring plants other than prickly-pear.
Chelinidea tabulata on Fruit of Non-Cactus Plants.
Six instances appear to be known in which adults of Chelinidea
tabulata have attacked economic plants. Three of these eases were not
brought to the Board’s attention until some time after the alleged event,
but it would seem that the records were authentic. All occurred


between November 1928 and April 1931, when the bugs were in very
great numbers over the major part of the prickly-pear territory. Rather
peculiarly, five of the eases happened within a radius of 5 miles in the
Gravesend district of New South Wales, not concurrently but at intervals
over a period of two years. In each of the Gravesend occurrences, the
attack was localised to a few plants in a home garden situated at
distances varying from 600 yards to 1£ mile from the nearest area of
prickly-pear. The three cases not investigated referred to the adults
feeding on grapes, tomatoes, and green apricots and peaches respectively ;
it was stated that the insects caused very little damage and that they
either died or disappeared from the plants in a short space of time.
Of the two occurrences investigated by the Board’s officers, the
first dealt with a home garden containing several nectarine, apricot,
peach, plum, and fig trees, all bearing young fruit, and lemon trees. The
adult bugs arrived in numbers, obviously a flying swarm, in one day,
and commenced to feed on the nectarines and apricots, but not on the
other kinds of fruit. They remained about 10 days, gradually
diminished in numbers, and then disappeared. Virtually no damage
was caused; the apricots and nectarines ripened normally and their
flavour and texture were not appreciably affected. At the same time,
other home gardens with the same fruit trees showed no trace of the
bugs. In one garden apricots were not attacked, although the trees
were growing alongside prickly-pear in which Chelinidea was abundant.
In the second investigated case the bugs appeared similarly in large
numbers and attacked the grapes on several vines in the garden. Their
numbers steadily dwindled, and within a month none could be located.
There was no material damage; the grapes ripened and their flavour
was not noticeably impaired. No evidence of egg-laying was found or
reported in any of the Gravesend district cases.
The final example of these insects feeding on plants other than
prickly-pear was of greater dimensions, when the bugs invaded the town
and surrounding gardens of Roma, western Queensland. A mile to a
mile and a-half north-west of the town a large area of prickly-pear, in
which (Jhelinidea was present in very great numbers, was suddenly
destroyed by Cactoblastis in January 1931. Early in February,
following a storm with a strong north-west wind, the bugs invaded the
town in force, and congregated very freely on the sides and verandahs
of houses. They attacked fruit and vegetables in home gardens and
were observed feeding on dates, peaches, ripe grapes, rockmelons, and
watermelons. In one vineyard the adults were scattered lightly over an
area of about an acre, and were feeding on ripe and ripening fruit; a few
grapes here and there fermented, apparently as a result of the feeding
punctures. The total quantity of grapes destroyed in the vineyard
and in several gardens did not exceed 10 lb. in weight. A few late
peaches and several lb. of tomatoes were spoilt. No damage was caused
to dates, rockmelons, and watermelons. By 11th March most of the
bugs had disappeared. Some were still feeding on tomatoes, dates,
watermelons, and picked pumpkins. Many hatched eggs were observed,
but larvae could not be found except on the picked pumpkins, where Ist
instar larvae occurred with the adults. The pumpkins showed little sign
of injury. Four weeks later, on Bth April, a thorough inspection
revealed that the insects had completely disappeared from the township
and neighbouring gardens.


After 1931, owing to the rapid destruction of prickly-pear by
Cactoblastis cactorum, the Chelinidea population decreased rather
quickly. Many eases must have arisen where the bugs were suddenly
deprived of a food supply and died from starvation. Yet there have
been no reports of their attack on cultivated plants since the Roma
happening.


VII. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INSECTS IN
AUSTRALIA.
This section deals with the introduction of the various insects and
the efforts to establish them in numbers in the field.
The fact that of the many species imported from America very few
have been acclimatised or have become numerous in Australia indicates
the difficulties in the way of transferring insects from one country to
another for the control of a weed pest.
TRANSPORTATION.
Consignments of insects from North and South America have, from
the commencement of the investigation, been made in specially
constructed Wardian cases, a modification of the type used for the
transport of living plants. Dead sphagnum moss, which absorbs and
retains moisture, was placed at the bottom of the cases, which were then
filled with plants or cut portions of priekly-pear securely wedged or
fastened to prevent dislodgement during transit. Ventilation was
provided by very fine mesh wire-gauze on both sides of the sloping roof,
the gauze being protected by strong outer wire and iron strips.
Material from North America was forwarded from its source —
Florida, Texas, or elsewhere in the United States, or some point in
Mexico—by fast passenger train service to San Francisco, the port of
despatch. The cases were carried on deck from San Francisco to
Sydney, from which point they were transferred by rail to Sherwood.
Approximately six weeks elapsed from the time the insects had been
placed in the cases until their removal at Sherwood. The several
consignments from South America were despatched from Buenos Aires
by steamer to Capetown, and there transferred to the first boat sailing
for Sydney. The journey from the Argentine to Sherwood occupied
eight to ten weeks. Except in the case of three consignments from North
America and two from the Argentine, no member of the Board’s staff
accompanied the material, whose protection was undertaken by officers
of the steamships. In the early stages of the work small trial shipments
were made in the chill room of steamers, but the experiments were not
very successful and were discontinued.
Since the inception of the investigations 67 separate shipments
comprising 1,230 Wardian cases have been forwarded from America to
Australia. These eases contained the very large number of more than
500,000 insects divided between 48 different species. The years 1927
to 1930 saw the greatest activity in importations, the peak season being
1928-29, when 375 Wardian cases were transported from the United
States. Shipments were suspended in 1930-31, and were then continued
on a minor scale until 1935, the last consignment reaching Australia in
December 1935. Of the 67 shipments, 59 were made from the United
States and Mexico and 8 from the Argentine.
Most of the insects have been sent in the larval stage. With
Lepidoptera, eggs may have been placed in the cases in America, but
the insects reached Australia as larvae ■ if large larvae were despatched,
they often entered the pupal stage during the journey. Coleoptera and
Hetcrojitera were forwarded as adults or larvae; where adults were
consigned, oviposition frequently occurred during transit, so that on
arrival at Sherwood the cases held eggs and young larvae as well as
adults. Cocoons containing pupae and pupating larvae of Cerambycid
beetles have been sent on a few occasions.


A plant of Opuntia incrmis severely attached by the red spider, Tetranyclus opuntiac,
July, 1926; the segments are covered with the whitish corky layer.
Prickly-pear in a brigalow scrub collapsing under the combined attack of red spider
and cochineal, Biniguy, N.S.W., June, 1929.
[Fo-cc page 72.


An old roadway bordered by dense prickly- pea r; chinchilla, Qld., May, 1928.


The same roadway as on the opposite page, eighteen months later, November, 1929, showing the result of Cactoblastis activity.


Opuntia monacsntha being destroyed by the cochineal, Dactylopius ceylonicus, in
South Australia, February, 1936.
(a) Upper picture: general view.
(b) Lover picture: close-up showing the cochineal insects on the collapsing
plants.
(Photos, by courtesy of Dr. J. Davidson.)


As a general rule, shipments from North America that reached
Sherwood just before or during the winter gave poor results, since the
insects died without producing progeny. Experience proved that
success was much more likely when the insects were despatched in the
latter part of the North American winter and thus arrived in Australia
in the spring or early summer. In the case of the seed midge, Asphon-
dylia, the procedure had to be reversed so that the insects came into
Australia at the beginning of winter.
ACCLIMATISATION.
The consignments of insects were for the purpose of (o) carrying
out starvation tests on economic plants supplementary to those already
conducted in America, and (b) attempting to establish the insects.
Asphoiidylia is again an exception; shipments were made to see whether
its rather specialised life-cycle could be adapted to Australian
conditions; starvation tests were not carried out in America until
experiments had indicated that the adults could be induced to emerge
at the correct time in Australia and that the insect would attack the
fruit of Opuntia inermis and 0. stricta.
On arrival at Sherwood the insects and any prickly-pear containing
eggs and larvae were placed in cages in the quarantine insectaries,
where they were retained until the tests on economic plants had been
conducted and permission had been granted for their liberation in the
field. Frequently insects were reared through one or more generations
in the quarantine insectaries, pending the completion of the test
programme. Reared material was then removed to outdoor cages. When
sufficient numbers had been bred at Sherwood supplies were forwarded
to the field stations for the main rearing operations.
Supplementary shipments of those insects, for which permission to
liberate had been granted, were kept in the quarantine insectaries until
the adult had been reached. This procedure was a safeguard
against the possibility of the introduction of parasites and other enemies
of the prickly-pear feeders. Particular care was taken with the
cochineals, the many enemies of which are of small size; these insects
were reared through several generations in America and then through
at least three generations in the Sherwood insectaries. Moneilema
Longicorn beetles, which are not known to possess parasites of the adult
stage, have been removed direct from the Wardian cases to outdoor
rearing cages; but the American prickly-pear material containing eggs
and larvae was placed in quarantine cages until the insects reached the
beetle stage.
The various kinds of insects imported into Australia may be divided
into the following groups according to the results secured from the
efforts at establishment:—
(а) Introduced a few times; not persevered with on account of
the unsatisfactory results of the tests on economic plants
or discarded for other reasons such as the obvious difficulties
of acclimatisation, the low rate of increase, or the small
amount of damage likely to be caused to Australian prickly-
pears;
(б) Many shipments over an extended period, for the sole
purpose of experimenting with the behaviour under
Australian conditions. Asphondylia opuntiae is the one
species of this group ;


(c) Imported either once or a few times, and successfully
established. Cactoblastis cactornm is the outstanding
example;
(d) Introduced many times over a period of several years before
becoming established;
(e) Imported in large numbers for several years, and then
discarded because establishment appeared hopeless.
Considerable difficulty has been experienced in establishing certain
North American insects on account of the opposite seasonal cycle in
Australia. In the ease of the cochineals, Dactylopius, little trouble has
been encountered, for these insects possess a short life history and have
several generations annually. The Cerambyeids, Moneilema and Lago-
chirus, have not proved difficult, since they have the capacity to remain
for many weeks as unpupated larvae in cocoons and to pupate and
emerge when warmer weather prevails. However, with Lepidopterous
insects possessing one or two generations each year, the acclimatisation
hurdle has been the Australian winter, mild though it is at Sherwood
where the screen temperature rarely falls below 40 deg. F. In America
emergence of the moths would occur in summer, between April and
August. Moths of the imported material generally emerged at Sher-
wood in these months, and encountering winter conditions died without
depositing eggs. Hence, introductions were continued until a propor-
tion of the larvae, instead of growing rapidly during the autumn months
at Sherwood, equivalent to spring in North America, were induced to
develop gradually through the autumn and winter and to emerge as
adults in September to November. This difficulty had not to be faced
w ith the Lepidoptera, Cactoblastis and Tucumania, from the Argentine,
where the rotation of seasons agrees with that in Australia.
The insects that have become established in Australia are natives
of moderate rainfall regions, 20 to 40 inches annually, namely southern
Texas and certain parts of Mexico and the Argentine. The investiga-
tions determined that prickly-pear insects, especially Lepidoptera, from
the drier regions of 10 to 15-inch annual precipitation were not adapted
to areas, witli a higher rainfall. Thus, larvae of Melitara doddalis
collected in west Texas, southern New Mexico, and southern Arizona
usually succumbed to disease effects in cages at Uvalde, Texas, which
has a rainfall of 25 inches; the same fate befell this insect in Australia,
larvae in cages dying rapidly when wet or humid weather occurred.
Similarly, Cactoblastis (doddi from the drier western Argentine was not
acclimatised in Australia, although it is very closely allied and has
practically identical habits to Cactoblastis cactornm.
Bearing in Cages.
Because of the danger of importing natural enemies of the prickly-
pear insects, the introduction of large numbers of an insect for direct
release in the field has not been practicable. Breeding in cages has been
an essential item in the programme. The object of the rearing work
has been to increase the numbers of an insect to the point where sufficient
have been available for liberating in the field with a reasonable chance
of establishment. Adequate supplies have been maintained in cages and
surplus numbers released in selected localities. When the insect has
become well-established in the field, cage rearing has been discontinued.
In the case of Cacioblastis cactornm, this favourable position was
reached within two years after its introduction. On the other hand,
various species have been bred in cages for several years; usually in
these instances, liberations failed and rearing efforts were finally
abandoned.


The main difficulty in breeding insects in large numbers has been
that cage conditions cannot be made natural, owing to the restricted
space. Of course, the rearing of limited quantities could have been
accomplished rather readily. But when large numbers have been
involved, and the situation has required that the potential rate of
increase should be fully exploited and losses reduced to a minimum,
problems have risen. The most serious disadvantage of cage rearing
has been the liability of disease epidemics to break out among the
confined insects, particularly among (Lepidopterous larvae after wet or
humid weather. An outbreak of a bacterial or fungus disease has in
the space of a few days nullified the patient rearing efforts of two or
more years. The tendency of prickly-pear to rot suddenly after insect
or mechanical injury has been another troublesome factor; a wet rot
condition in the food supply has often proved the precursor of a disease
epidemic among the insects. The rearing cages have needed constant
attention. Many species of Lepidoptera have been very susceptible to
disease. Cactoblastis cactorum was comparatively immune to the
disabilities of cage conditions; its relative hardihood has been the chief
reason for its great success. Although many methods have been tried,
it has not been possible to bring about the rapid increase of various
insects. For example, Moneilema beetles were reared for many years
with a poor degree of success, notwithstanding the fact that they had
adapted their life-cycle to the Australian seasons.
EFFORTS TO ESTABLISH THE VARIOUS INSECTS.
It is intended to furnish for each species of prickly-pear insect
introduced into Australia a short history of the fate of the imported
material and of the attempts, unsuccessful or otherwise, to bring about
establishment in the field. Firstly the Phycitid moth borers will be
discussed, but the introduction of Cactoblastis cactorum will be reviewed
in a later chapter dealing with the history of that insect.
THE LEPIDOPTEROUS ENEMIES.
Cactoblastis doddi.
This close relation of C. cactorum occurs in the drier western
sections of the Argentine. Its usual host plant is the low-growing
prickly-pear, 0. sulphured, but it breeds successfully in the tree pear,
0. ficus-indica. The larvae are gregarious; there are two generations
annually; in fact, the life history and habits are very similar to those
of C. cactorum.
This was one of the first insects introduced by the Board. A small
consignment of eggs and larvae was taken from the Argentine in May
1920. Most of the insects succumbed during the voyage, but some larvae
were alive when they reached Australia in July 1920. However, the
survivors died before they reached the pupal stage.
Years later, after it had become definite that C. cactorum did not
successfully attack the tree pear, Opuntia tomentosa, and rarely
deposited eggs on that plant, C. doddi was again imported. The results


Shipped from Argentine.
Return at Sherwood.
Date.
Insects.
Date of Emergence.
Moths and Eggs Obtained.
July, 1934
1,000 large larvae. .
October-November,
182 moths ; 89 females
1934
laid 14,010 eggs
November, 1934, .
500 eggs . .
February-March,
220 moths ; 111 females
1935
laid 10,175 eggs
July, 1935
4,500 large larvae. .
October-November,
821 moths ; 396 females
1935
laid 35,100 eggs
Generation.
Eggs
Placed
in Cages.
Pupae
Return.
Moths
from
Pupae.
Proportion
of
Females.
Average
Eggs per
Female.
Total
Eggs.
Generation
Increase or
Decrease.
%
0/
/o
0/
/o
o/
/o
Nov., 1934-Feb.,
1935
13,250
17
64
36
63
32,100
+ 142
Feb., 1935-Nov.,
1935
30,280
25
64
46
73
165,958
+ 448
Nov., 1935-Feb,,
1936
22,000
17
66
36
57
51,765
+ 135
Feb., 1936-Nov,,
1936
22,000
6
26
39
118
17,126
— 22
Nov., 1936-Feb.,
1937
15,000
15
17
30
77
8,738
— 42
Feb., 1937-Nov.,
1937
8,730
4
40
47
89
5,353
- 39
Nov., 1937-Feb.,
1938
5,350
3
10
31
Died out
Bate of Liberation.
Eggs Liberated.
Results.
March-April, 1935
8,550
2 eggsticks found in December, 1935; no
trace thereafter
November, 1935
122,740
Some larva: developed, but no evidence of a
second generation could be found
December, 1935
50,500
A few colonies of a second generation were
observed in July, 1936 ; no later trace
February, 1936
24,765
7 eggsticks were located in October, 1936,
and one colony of large larvae in Decem-
ber, 1936 ; not seen subsequently
from the three consignments were quite satisfactory, as shown in the
following summary: —
The first Australian generation was reared at Sherwood. Subse-
quently, most of the breeding work was undertaken at Gogango. 0.
tomentosa was mainly used as the food plant, but the insect was bred
without difficulty on 0. inermis, stricta, streptacaniha, and ficus-indica.
The history of the rearing work is summarised in the following table:—
It will be noted that the first three generations made fair progress,
but thereafter each generation resulted in a decrease until the insect
died out at the end of the seventh generation. The liability of the
larvae to die during humid conditions showed that ('. doddi was not
suited by the Queensland climate.
Bearing experiments were carried out for two years on '‘yellow”
0. inermis at Scone. The winter generation gave a small increase each
season. The moths of the summer generation emerged and oviposited
in April and May; the eggs remained through the winter, and then
either failed to hatch or the young larvae died soon after hatching in the
early spring.
In 1935 and early 1936, when the insect was making fair progress
in the cages, four liberations were effected on 0. tomentosa at Gogango,
with the following results: —


Melitara prodenialis.
This gregarious species, whicii occurs commonly in Florida and on
the Gulf Coast of Texas, received marked attention over a long period.
It possesses two or three generations annually, and causes considerable
damage to various species of priekly-pear. The potential rate of
increase is satisfactory, although not as great as in Cactoblastis cactorum.
It is indigenous to regions with a climate and rainfall very similar to
.the Australian prickly-pear territory. Furthermore, two of its host
plants, 0. stricta in Florida and 0. inermis in Texas, are identical with
the Australian pest pears. In view of the circumstances there appeared
to be no valid reason why prodenialis should not become acclimatised;
yet repeated efforts failed.
Nine consignments, with a total of 3,500 insects, were despatched
from Florida in 1921 to 1921.. In most eases a few moths emerged;
these either did not oviposit or laid a few eggs from which no success
was obtained. One shipment gave good results. From 1,150 young
larvae sent from Florida in April 1923, 56 moths emerged at Sherwood
in August-December 1923, and deposited 340 eggs. The first Australian
generation gave a return of 967 eggs in February-March 1924. As the
larvae evinced a decided preference for O. stricta and were difficult to
rear on O. inermis, the main breeding work was carried out on the former-
plant at Westwood, where three generations were completed each year,
as in Florida. The cages needed careful watching in order to remove
decaying prickly-pear, wet rot conditions inducing disease outbreaks.
At the end of the sixth generation, in February 1926, the original
number of 340 eggs had been increased to 155,000, As success now
seemed assured, liberations were commenced and cage stocks were
reduced to 47,700 eggs. The seventh generation produced another
substantial increase from 47,700 to 155,000 eggs. Further material was
released in the field, and 52,670 eggs were accommodated in rearing cages
in May 1926. From this point onward poor results were secured; the
great majority of the insects died in the larval stage, and each generation
showed a decrease. 9,000 eggs were laid in the 1927 autumn; a few
moths emerged in September 1927, but deposited no eggs, and the insect
died out at the end of the eleventh Australian generation.
Small stocks were maintained on O. inermis at Chinchilla for four
generations, at the end of which the initial number had been almost
doubled. However, none of the fifth generation larvae succeeded in
entering the pupal stage.
During the period when the insect was thriving in the cages two
liberations were effected on O. stricta at Westwood. 110,700 eggs on
the point of hatching were released in February 1926. The larvae
made excellent progress' and severely damaged the plants. In April
and May pupae were present in considerable numbers; a survey revealed
that 60 per cent, of the pupae produced moths. At least several
thousand moths must have emerged; yet during the winter mouths
scattered larval colonies only could be located. No trace of insects has
been found since December 1926. The second liberation of 103,000
eggs was made in April-June 1926; 90 per cent, of the eggs hatched and
the larvae entered the pear segments. Some cocoons were observed in
the 1926 spring, but no insects were seen thereafter.
Three later shipments, with a total of 7,000 larvae, were sent from
Florida, in October 1927, February 1930, and February 1933. The
mortality during transit was extremely high; very few moths were
obtained and the consignments were failures.


M. prodenialis was found on the Gulf Coast of Texas in March
1927, when it was causing considerable damage to Opuntia inermis and
other shrub prickly-pears. With the exception of the bug, Chelinidea
ritfiyer, no other species was located attacking 0. inermis in America.
Hence, the establishment of this form in Australia appeared very
desirable. The Texas insect differs in certain particulars from the
Florida form; there are two generations a year, compared with three
in Florida, and the Texas females deposit more eggs and longer egg-
sticks.
The first shipment of 5,000 large larvae in April 1928, was made
at the wrong season of the year. 1,100 moths emerged at Sherwood in
the early winter months of May and June. Little oviposition occurred ;
of the 932 eggs deposited, very few hatched and the young larvae soon
died. A second venture was successful. A large consignment of 14,000
well-grown larvae, despatched in August 1928, produced 7,570 moths
at Sherwood in October-November, and the females laid the large
number of 239,500 eggs. A third shipment of 12,000 large larvae in
August 1929 was a partial failure; 1,753 moths and 21,170 eggs were
obtained at Sherwood. The eggs were added to the stocks representing
descendants of the previous year’s material.
Establishment in cages was secured from the August 1928 consign-
ment. Of the original 239,500 eggs, 166,500 were liberated and 62,700
placed in rearing cages. The insect immediately adapted itself to the
change of seasons, and at each field station except Gogango gave the
normal two generations each year, the adults emerging in the early
summer and again in the late summer and autumn. The Texas form,
in contrast to the behaviour of the Florida stocks, preferred O. inermis
to O. siricta. It was reared on stricta at Gogango for 18 months, during
which time five generations were completed; the numbers decreased in
the first two generations, increased to some extent in the third, and
again decreased, to die out at the end of the fifth generation.
The main rearing work was conducted at Chinchilla, Goondiwindi,
and Scone. As the insect was a natural enemy of O. inermis and had
quickly adapted its life-cycle rhythm to Australian conditions, there
seemed to be no valid reason why it should not become established in
the field. The difficulties encountered in this connection were in the
nature of a challenge to the workers. Hence, rearing operations were
continued for 16 generations over an 8-year period before the efforts
were abandoned. The stocks accommodated in cages averaged 78,000
eggs each generation. The first year saw slight increases, and the second
year considerable decreases. Thereafter, an increase, varying between
42 and 340 per cent., was secured in each of the next twelve generations
until December 1936, when breeding was discontinued.
Owing to the susceptibility of the larvae and pupae to diseases the
cages required much attention. Even so the mortality was high. In
three only of the sixteen generations did the number of larvae that
developed to the pupal stage exceed 20 per cent.; on these three occasions
the increase at the end of the generation was between 3 and How-
ever, in a few instances results at one or other of the rearing stations
were considerably better. In one generation at Scone, 40 pupae were
reared from each 100 eggs accommodated, and a 17-fold increase was
obtained. The average number of eggs deposited by each female
fluctuated between 41 and 75 in each generation, but higher figures were
sometimes secured at individual stations; the best oviposition was an
average of 103 eggs by 424 females at Scone.


Between November 1928 and the end of 1936, 16 liberations were
made with a total of 1,360,000 eggs, at Gogango, Brisbane, Chinchilla,
Warwick, and Goondiwindi in Queensland, and Tamworth, Seone, and
Camden in New South Wales. Two liberations were on Opvniia avrav-
tiaca, two on 0. stricta, and the remainder on 0. inermis. The young
larvae experienced difficulty in entering the segments, and for this
reason two experiments completely failed at the outset. In all other
instances some or many larvae developed successfully, and emerged
pupae were found at the end of the generation. However, not more
than a few r colonies of the second generation could be discovered, and,
except in one case, the insect disappeared in the second or third genera-
tion. A few examples may be quoted:
A liberation of 17,600 eggs was made on inermis at Scone in
November 1931. Many colonies of larvae developed. At the end of
the generation 250 emerged pupae were examined. A few eggsticks
were found; the larvae from these eggs did not reach maturity, and the
insect was not found subsequently.
Prom 68,630 eggs placed on inermis at Scone in April-May 1933,
pupae were numerous in November-December. Of 1,035 pupae
examined, 331 had produced moths. No evidence of a second genera-
tion could he found.
113,600 eggs were released on succulent inermis at Goondiwindi in
November 1936. Many larvae entered the pupal stage in February.
E'bur colonies of young larvae were noticed in May 1937; nothing has
been seen since that date.
In the case of one liberation of 188,000 eggs at Scone in April-
June 1932, a few colonies of larvae of the second generation were
found. One colony of the third generation was observed in September
1933. In November 1934, two colonies were seen at a point mile
distant from the original site; these larvae would have represented the
fifth generation.
The failure of the liberations is not readily understood. Cage
rearing had indicated that prodenialis was not a hardy insect under
Australian conditions. This circumstance, combined with the difficulty
encountered by the young larvae in establishing themselves in the
segments of growing plants, may supply the explanation. Of course,
there is a possibility that the moths may have dispersed widely and that
the insect still survives at one or more localities.
Melitara dentata, M. doddalis and Melitara sp.
These three forms are very closely related, and possess similar
habits, with the life-cycle occupying the full year. They inhabit the
central-west and south-west regions of the United States, and are
capable of being very destructive to prickly-pears. Large consignments
were forwarded to Australia. Experiments with small larvae were
abortive, for they died on the voyage or after their arrival in Australia.
The method of shipping full-grown larvae was more successful; the
insects pupated on the voyage, the moths emerged at Sherwood, and the
eggs deposited by these moths were then placed direct on to O. lucruns
and O. stricta.
Melitara dentata.
Between August 1925 and August 1926, three consignments were
made with a total of 9,030 eggs or young larvae; a small percentage of
the larvae survived the journey, but none reached maturity. 1,250 large
larvae despatched from Colorado in June 1926 yielded 449 moths.


■which deposited 21,500 eggs at Sherwood in August-September. 10,270
eggs were placed on 0. stricta in cages at Westwood; many larvae made
good progress until heavy rains occurred in December; all succumbed,
when nearly full-grown in December-January. From 9,900 eggs on
O. inermis at Chinchilla, 30 pupae were obtained in February 1927; 154
eggs were laid, but the young larvae soon died. A final shipment of
6,000 large larvae from Colorado in June 1927 produced 523 moths,
from which 13,330 eggs were secured in August-September. The eggs
were transferred to O. inermis at Chinchilla, and O. stricta at Gogango,
but all died in the larval stage.
Melitara doddalis.
Three consignments, aggregating 35,750 eggs, forwarded in
September of 1924, 1925, and 1926 were almost complete failures. From
one shipment 17 moths emerged at Sherwood in March after a life-cycle
of six months; the females laid 215 eggs, but the young larvae died
during the winter.
In a shipment accompanied by an officer of the Board in August
1925, the moths emerged and oviposited during the journey. 7,750 eggs
were caged on O. inermis at Sherwood, and after a six months’ life-cycle
yielded 120 moths in February-March 1926. These moths laid 4,190
eggs, which were sent to Chinchilla. The second generation reverted to
the normal annual life-cycle, and in January-February 1927 produced
59 moths, which deposited 1,312 eggs. From the third generation, 4
pupae were obtained in February 1928, but no moths emerged.
2,000 full-grown larvae forwarded from the United States in
August 1926 resulted in a return of 374 moths, which deposited
3,272 eggs; the larvae from these eggs died within three months. The
following August a larger shipment of 12,500 larvae produced 3,946
moths at Sherwood in September-October 1927; 36,250 eggs were
deposited and were divided between the Gogango, Chinchilla, and
Gravesend stations. . Most of the larvae died, either in the young stages
or when nearly full-grown; 810 cocoons were obtained, but only 63
moths emerged in March-April 1928, and these laid 982 eggs. However,
the insect died out in the second generation.
The final effort to establish this insect was the most comprehensive.
217 Wardian cases containing 65,000 large larvae despatched from west
Texas and Arizona in August 1928 gave a return of 9,875 moths, which
deposited 84,200 eggs. 58,450 eggs were placed direct on inermis plants
in the field at Gravesend, New South Wales; the larvae died in the early
stages; one colony only developed, to produce 8 cocoons in February
1929, but no moths emerged. The remaining 25,750 eggs, accommodated
on inermis in Chinchilla cages, returned 1,594 pupae in February-
March; 423 moths laid 1,706 eggs; the second generation larvae, how-
ever, died in the following winter and early summer.
By sending full-grown larvae from the United States, moths and
eggs were secured in numbers in Australia. A small proportion of the
first generation larvae survived, accelerated the normal development,
and produced moths six months later in the autumn, which is the
emergence season in North America. Actually, too, larvae of the second
generation reverted to the normal annual life-cycle. Doddalis suffered
so severely from disease epidemics that obviously acclimatisation of this
insect from a 10 to 15-ineh rainfall region could not be brought about
in the Australian prickly-pear belt, which has an annual precipitation
of 20 to 30 inches.


Melitara sp.
Three shipments of this unnamed form from southern Texas were
sent between December 1922 and October 1926, with a total of 21,500
eggs. The larvae did not thrive and none reached the pupal stage.
650 full-grown larvae, despatched in September 1925, returned 198
moths which laid 4,770 eggs at Sherwood in November. Most of the
young larvae died within a month of hatching; 10 cocoons were obtained
in April 1926, but no moths emerged.
Four consignments of large larvae, aggregating 32,150 insects, were
forwarded from Texas in September of 1925, 1927, 1928, 1929. The
returns were satisfactory, inasmuch as 10,185 moths emerged at Sher-
wood in October-November and deposited 201,890 eggs. Rearing in
cages was carried out at Gogango, Chinchilla, Sherwood, and Gravesend,
while 51,500 eggs were placed direct on inennis plants in the field. The
results were very similar in each year at each field station. A small
percentage of the larvae developed, to produce pupae in the late summer;
moths emerged in April and May; they laid very few eggs, which, meet-
ing early winter temperatures, did not hatch, or hatched and died as
yo\ing larvae.
A second generation was secured on one occasion at Gogango. From
10.000 caged eggs, 133 moths emerged after a life-cycle of six months
and deposited 2,865 eggs in April. The second generation reverted to
the normal annual life-cycle, and returned 33 moths in the following
April: these moths laid 185 eggs which did not hatch.
This insect inhabits a 20-inch rainfall area, and its normal host
plant, O. lindheimeri, is rather closely related to O. inermis. However,
it appears to be restricted to a certain type of lindheimeri, in which the
young larvae remain almost inactive in small cells for several months.
The failure to adopt with success the cell habit in inermis would seem
to be the reason wdiy the species could not be acclimatised in Australia.
Olycella junctolineella.
This insect is not uncommon in the more coastal parts of south Texas
and north-east Mexico, where it attacks O. lindheimeri and other shrub
pears. Nine small shipments, totalling 2,382 eggs and young larvae,
were despatched from Texas between July 1921 and October 1923,
being sent in March and in every month from June to December. From
each consignment a few moths were obtained in Australia, but the three
successful ones were forwmrded at the end of the North American
summer and produced moths at Sherwood in January to March.
The larvae soon showed a partiality for O. inermis. Establishment
was effected in the 1922-23 summer, when 127 moths deposited 5,000
eggs. The second generation returned 1,245 moths, which laid 105,000
eggs in April to August, 1923. The third and fourth generations gave a
respective return of 642,000 eggs in August to December, 1923, and
874.000 eggs in January to May, 1924. Thus, in four generations the
numbers had increased 174-fold, and the seasonal rhythm of two genera-
tions a year, with adults emerging in the early and again in the late
summer, had been established.
Rearing operations wmre conducted at Chinchilla and Gravesend
until the end of 1927, the number of eggs placed in the breeding cages
in each generation varying from 50,000 to 225,000. Disease epidemics
eaused heavy losses on more than one occasion. Over several generations
the mortality in the larval stage averaged 90 per cent, at Chinchilla
and 84 per cent, at Gravesend. The best return at a field station in any


generation was 26 cocoons from every 100 eggs. The reproductive
capacity of the female moths was comparatively high. The average
number of eggs laid by each female over several generations of rearing
operations was 128 at Chinchilla and 107 at Gravesend. On one
occasion 716 females laid an average pf 197 eggs per individual.
The best increase in any generation was 6-fold. Hence the large
scale breeding was not very successful. It was soon ascertained that
this species possesses a peculiar inherent weakness factor preventing
rapid multiplication. The small eggsticks containing from 5 to 25
eggs are deposited on the young growth and fruit, which the larvae
enter. The affected young segment or fruit soon turns black and either
rots or dries up. Most of the young larvae do not escape from this
condition, and the early larval mortality assumes the proportions of
60 to 75 per cent. Thereafter, the survivors live as solitary larvae in
the larger segments, where further individuals are trapped by the sap
reactions of the plant. This rotting of the young growth invariably
follows the entrance of the newly-hatched larvae of this insect, whether
in cages or in the field, and is of a different nature from the decay set
up by the activities of Cactohlastis or Melitara larvae. In 1923-24,
efforts at Westwood to rear the larvae on 0. stricta gave little success.
Yet in the field in this district larvae developed rather readily on
stricta and in the younger segments of 0. streptacantha.
With the advent of Cactohlastis cactorum, an insect of much greater
promise, the breeding of Olycelld was discontinued. Meanwhile,
between March 1924 and April 1927, 1,525,000 eggs had been released
in the field. The largest liberation of 850,000 eggs was made on inermis
at Chinchilla, with the object of establishing a base of supplies for wider
distribution. 550,000 eggs were divided between four liberations on
inermis in the Gravesend district. A liberation of 115,740 eggs was
made on inermis at Gogango in November 1926. However, prior to this
date the insect could be located in scattered numbers in the Gogango-
Westwood sector, evidently as a result of moths escaping from the
Westwood cages in 1923-24. About the same time larvae occurred in
the neighbourhood of Brisbane, the descendants of escapes from the
Sherwood cages.
The species was moderately abundant over an area of many square
miles at Chinchilla by the end of April 1928. The following year, as a
consequence of rapid destruction of the prickly-pear by Cactohlastis, its
numbers diminished suddenly. No sign of the insect in this district
has been found since 1930. The experience at Gogango was very
similar. Until the middle of 1930 larvae occurred in scattered quantity
at intervals for a distance of 15 miles from Gogango and Westwood.
After 1931 a few larvae were observed in two local areas from time to
time until March 1936. Possibly the insect still survives, although no
individuals have been seen during the last four years.
In the Gravesend district, by 1927 Olycella was comparatively
abundant in the vicinage of one liberation site, and it occurred sparsely
over a wider area. It appeared to be increasing steadily until the end
of 1929, and had dispersed for a radius of about 15 miles. The following
year witnessed a sudden decrease. Very-few larvae were to be seen in
1931 and 1932; early in 1933 small numbers were observed at various
points in the district. Since 1933 larvae have been found sparingly on
many occasions at several sites in one part of the district. As the last
observation was in December 3938, probably the insect still survives.
At Scone, 111,650 eggs were liberated in April 1926. The insect
became established in very limited numbers and has never increased.


Larvae have been noticed each year up to the present time within a few
hundred yards of the original point of release. They have not been
found further afield, although fourteen years have elapsed since stocks
were liberated.
The decline of this insect coincided with the widespread destruction
of the primary pear through the activities of Cactoblastis. It was unable
to hold its position in the competition for the food supiply with an insect
of greater destructive powers and a higher rate of increase. Obviously,
it was starved out, and to such a degree that when regrowth followed the
collapse of the original pear it had virtually ceased to exist. In the few
areas where Olycella has survived, Cactoblastis has never brought about
complete destruction of the standing growth; in these places a certain
amount of priekly-pear has always been present, to permit the insect to
maintain a rather precarious existence.
Tucumania tapiacola.
The solitary larvae of this Phycitid attack low-growing, narrow-
jointed prickly-pears in the Argentine, and were introduced into
Australia for the control of the tiger pear, 0. aurantiaca. Two consign-
ments of insects were forwarded from the Argentine, but one would
have sufficed. The first shipment, despatched in late November 1934,
was packed with a mixed assortment of 14 moths, 78 pupae, an unknown
number of newly-hatched larvae, and a few large larvae. On arrival at
Sherwood in February 1935, the eases contained larvae and pupae,
from which adults had commenced to emerge. Emergence continued
until early April, for a total of 731 moths, of which the 330 females
deposited 18,215 eggs. The second shipment of 54 moths and 300 eggs,
sent in late February 1935, was received at Sherwood in April 1935,
and gave a poor return of 15 moths, the 7 females laying 1,037 eggs.
All rearing work in Australia was carried out on 0. aurantiaca, for
some time at Sherwood and Goondiwindi, and for a longer period at
Scone, until its cessation in 1939. For two seasons between 35,000 and
50.000 eggs were used to stock the rearing cages; later, the numbers
were reduced. Establishment in cages was effected without difficulty.
Prom 16,475 eggs laid by moths from the introduced material in
February-April 1935, the first Australian generation yielded 1,504
moths, which emerged from late March to November; the 639 females
deposited 75,160 eggs, an average of 118 eggs per individual, and a
generation increase of Prom later generations the rate of
increase fluctuated considerably, the best results being obtained at Scone.
As a rule, about 10 per cent, of the eggs developed to the pupal stage.
The highest return in one generation occurred at Scone, when 30 per
cent, of the 12,200 eggs reached the pupal stage, and the moths deposited
220.000 eggs, a 17-fold increase for the generation.
The generations have been irregular, and moths have continued to
emerge practically throughout the year, even in small numbers in mid-
winter. There have, however, been two complete generations each year,
and an incomplete third generation in the autumn. It was learned that
the success of rearing operations depended on the provision of succulent
young growth of aurantiaca for the newly-hatched larvae, which were
unable to penetrate the somewhat leathery cuticle of older segments.
Normally, the eggs are laid singly on the spines or spine hairs of the
plant. They are small and fragile, and cannot be handled freely as in
the ease of the eggsticks of Cactoblastis, Melitara, and Olycella. Hence,
in the rearing work the moths were confined in small cages or glass jars,
in which were suspended threads or frayed bits of cloth. The females


deposited the eggs on the doth, the pieces of which were then placed
on the aurantiaca in the cages. Similar methods were adopted in
liberating this insect. The fecundity was most satisfactory, the average
number of eggs laid by each female generally exceeding 100 in any
generation. On one occasion at Scone, 220,070 eggs were obtained from
1,190 females, an average of 185 eggs per individual. In another
instance 73 females gave the very high average of 293 eggs.
630,000 eggs were liberated on O. aurantiaca during 1935 to 1939,
mainly in the two seasons 1935-36 and 1936-37. The selected areas
were at Warwick and Nindigully, Queensland, at Tamworth and at
three localities in the Hunter Valley district, New South Wales.
Tucumania is established in five of the six areas in small or compara-
tively small numbers. It cannot be claimed that the insect shows evi-
dence of rapid increase. However, in three localities it has had to
contend with the rather sudden destruction of the food supply by the
cochineal, Dactylopius sp.
At Warwick, where 25,000 eggs were released between May 1935
and February 1936, the cochineal rapidly reduced the quantity of
aurantiaca to very small dimensions. A few Tucumania became estab-
lished, and larvae could still be found among the limited amount of
remaining pear in 1940. 57,700 eggs were put out at Nindigully in the
1936-37 summer. Here, the destructive efforts of the cochineal were
sudden and very complete; very little aurantiaca remains. Tucumania
was not thought to have survived, but late in 1939 two cocoons were
collected among Cactoblastis cocoons from a point several miles from the
original liberation site.
At Tamworth, where a liberation of 128,000 eggs was made in the
1936-37 season, the insect was comparatively numerous in both 1938 and
1939, and had caused appreciable damage. As the larvae are solitary
and prefer to feed in segments close to the ground in the middle of the
aurantiaca clumps, their work is easily overlooked unless they are in
numbers. This insect appears to be quite well established in the three
Hunter River liberations. In these areas the larvae are present not
only in aurantiaca but in small shoots of inermis arising from plants
damaged by Cactoblastis.
The work of Tucumania as a controlling agent of aurantiaca is
unlikely to be spectacular, and will depend on whether it can multiply
sufficiently. So far the cochineal, Dactylopius sp., has proved a much
inore efficient enemy of this plant.
Ozamia odiosella.
Four small consignments, totalling 35 moths and 315 larvae,
forwarded from Texas in 1921-22, yielded 62 moths at Sherwood. Most
of the moths did not oviposit; a few eggs obtained in September-October
1922 did not hatch. At the time very little was known concerning the
life history of this fruit enemy. Further shipments were not made on
account of the unsatisfactory results from the tests on economic plants.
This disposes of the Phyeitid moth-borers. Among the Fyraus-
tidae, two species were imported, Laniifera cyclades and Mimorista
flavidissimalis.
Laniifera cyclades.
Two trial shipments were made with this gregarious insect. 150
small larvae forwarded in August 1926 produced one moth only at
Sherwood. In May 1927, 1,200 large larvae from Mexico returned 882


cocoons at Sherwood; 350 adults emerged from late August to early
October, but all these moths died without ovipositing. The same difficulty
of inducing the females to lay eggs in confinement was encountered in
North America.
Mimorista fiavidissimalis.
Nine consignments were sent from Texas between July 1921 and
October 1923, the total contents being 45 moths, 126 eggs, 547 larvae,
and 68 pupae. These gave a combined return at Sherwood of 800 moths,
hut in some instances a generation or partial generation was completed
during the voyage; adults were obtained from each shipment. In the
case of two shipments received in April and July, the moths emerged
hi the winter and did not oviposit. From material received between
August and December 1921, two or three generations were reared
during the 1921-22 summer, hut the stocks died out in the 1922 winter.
The following season the earliest introduction reached Sherwood in
September 1922. Each generation resulted in an increase up to the
end of the fourth Sherwood generation, which produced 1,494 moths in
February-April 1923. The next generation decreased to 353 moths in
April-June. The sixth generation yielded the small number of 30
moths in July to September 1923. However, the insect had been carried
successfully over the winter, and multiplied quickly in the summer
months.
The main breeding work was conducted at Sherwood. As the larvae
can subsist on the very young growth only, and as the growing period
of prickly-pear in Australia is, roughly, from late September to the
end of January, difficulty was experienced in providing an adequate
supply of young growth during the late summer for the quick succession
of generations. Given a sufficiency of young shoots, the species increased
rapidly through six generations in the summer, decreased considerably
in the pre-winter seventh generation, and dwindled in the winter
generation to small numbers of moths that emerged in August-Septemher.
In addition to the work at Sherwood, rearing operations at Westwood
met with fair success in 1924-25; the following season was one of
drought; young growth of prickly-pear could not be obtained, and the
last stocks succumbed in May 1926.
Special methods —e.g., cutting down the plants to the basal
segments—were used to secure the necessary supply of young growth for
the rearing cages. Observations over a period of several years had now
confirmed the fact that 0. inennis and O. strict a did not naturally
produce new shoots in the late summer and autumn. The probability
of Mimorista finding conditions suitable to its needs in any portion of
the priekly-pear belt was remote, and for this reason rearing work was
abandoned in late 1926.
Three liberations, each of approximately 500 moths, were made in
parly 1925 in coastal areas near llrisbane, hut evidence of the insect’s
presence could not be found on subsequent inspections. In February
1926, 485 moths were released at Westwood; larvae were observed in
the vicinity until May 1926, probably two generations later, hut then
the insect disappeared completely.
Several years later, because of the activities of Vactoblasiis
cactorum, the position concerning young growth had altered radically,
as the partially-destroyed plants and butts put forth new shoots almost
throughout the year. Under these changed circumstances the acclimati-
sation of Mimorista appeared feasible. A small shipment of 135 larvae


in December 1932 returned 90 moths at Sherwood in January. Pour
generations were raised between February and June 1933. Larvae of
the fifth generation were on hand in the following month, when as a
consequence of the results of the starvation tests on economic plants the
stocks were destroyed.
One other Lepidoptcrous insect was introduced to Australia.
Metapleura potosi.
Approximately 7,900 moths of this Mexican Gelechiid were placed
in cases filled with priekly-pear and despatched from North America in
two consignments in September and October 1927. On arrival at
Shemvood the material contained many larvae, which readily completed
development in O. inermis and produced 2,530 moths in December 1927
to April 1928. The moths laid eggs very freely. By the end of May,.
3K* moths of the first Australian generation had emerged, and larvae
were pupating in numbers. All material was then destroyed as a result
of the decision to discontinue work with this insect. The ease with
which Metapleura was reared at Sherwood suggested that establishment
could have been effected without difficulty.
THE COLEOPTEROUS INSECTS.
The Moneilema Longicorns.
Several species of these wingless beetles have been introduced into
Australia, mainly with the object of selecting the one or two forms that
appeared most promising and most likely to become established. The
experience with each of the closely-related species, M. armata, M. laevi-
gata, and M. mgosipennds, the arid region form, M. gigas, and the Texas
species, M. crassa, was not heartening. The chief efforts have been
concentrated on M. ulkei, and to a less degree on its near ally, M.
variolare.
Moneilema crassa.
This Texas species, which is usually found in small numbers in the
same areas as the more abundant M. ulkei, was shipped on two occasions,
in August 1925 and in April 1929. The first consignment of 30
adults and 725 larvae produced 83 adults in January-February 1926;
5 beetles of the succeeding generation were reared in October-November
1926, and the insect then died out. The second shipment comprised
688 adults; 484 beetles and some larvae were alive on arrival; however,
the next generation gave 2 adults only.
Moneilema gigas.
The common form of southern Arizona was forwarded on four
occasions between July 1925 and October 1926, the original contents
totalling 1,450 beetles and 1,790 eggs. 1,132 beetles, or 78 per cent.,
survived the journey, but no progeny were reared. From the 1,790
eggs, some larvae were received, and 36 beetles emerged several months
later. The insect then died out.
Moneilema armata.
This west Texas insect was shipped four times, 1,430 beetles being
sent between November 1924 and October 1926; 1,103, or 77 per cent.,,
of the beetles were alive on arrival at Sherwood. A few adults were
reared from larvae present in the Wardian eases. No descendants -were
obtained.


Moneilema rugosipennis.
Of 2,120 beetles sent from Mexico in June 1927, 694 survived the
journey. These beetles produced a few adult progeny in late 1928.
Moneilema laevigata.
Six consignments of this New Mexico form were despatched between
September 1925 and August 1927, with 2,142 adults, 210 larvae, and
1,110 eggs. 1,240 beetles were received alive, as well as many larvae,
few of which developed to the adult stage. From the final shipment, 13
progeny were bred in November 1928; a few beetles were obtained in
November 1929, March 1930, and December 1930. The species failed
to survive the fifth generation of larvae in 1931.
Moneilema corrugans.
Of 124 adults from New Mexico, 78 reached Sherwood alive in
September 1926. No larvae were obtained.
Moneilema obtusa.
Fifty adults sent from Utah in July 1926 died in transit and left
no larvae.
Moneilema ulkei.
Seven consignments, comprising 1,137 adults and some larvae,
•despatched from Texas between June 1921 and September 1923, gave a
return of 366 adults and a certain number of larvae. In June 1924, a
small stock of material at Sherwood represented the result of the
establishment efforts. Two shipments in October 1924 and November
1925, of 1,820 adults and 900 eggs yielded 1,440 adults, which were
released at Westwood in a large wire enclosure planted thickly with
prickly-pear. The enclosure which should have provided natural
conditions was not a success. When dismantled it contained some
larvae from which 100 beetles were obtained in September 1926. Five
further shipments, made between July 1926 and September 1929,
with a total of 8,822 adults and 498 cocoons, returned 7,726 living
beetles and many young larvae from which several hundred adults were
reared.
This insect was not readily established. After various methods had
been tried, the best results were secured when a few pairs of beetles
were placed in a wire-gauze cage, of 6 ft. by 3 ft. by 3 ft., or of similar
dimensions. The cage was filled with prickly-pear, younger growth
being provided for the feeding of the adults and large butts or stems
for the development of the larvae. Most kinds of prickly-pear proved
suitable for the purpose; in later years O. tomentosa was used to the
greatest extent. Since the eggs are deposited just below soil level and
are liable to desiccation, frequent damping of the cages has been
practiced to obtain better returns.
The main rearing work has been conducted at Gogango, but a
certain amount has been performed at Sherwood, Chinchilla, and Scone.
In Texas ulkei has one main generation and a partial second generation
annually, the adults emerging in the spring and in small numbers in
the autumn. At Gogango two generations have been completed each
year under cage conditions, but in the field where the insect is more
subject to weather influences there would appear to be one main genera-
tion. At the other stations one annual generation has occurred, with
occasionally a small partial generation in the autumn at Sherwood.


Rearing conducted at Sherwood, Chinchilla, and Scone for several
years with stocks of a few hundred at each place was not satisfactory,
altliongli comparatively small increases were obtained on several
occasions.
At Gogaugo, the stocks decreased in each of nine successive genera-
tions until 1930. Thereafter, each season yielded an increase of material
until rearing work was discontinued early in 1939. The cages were
stocked each generation with between 1,500 and 2,500 adults for the
greater part of this period, and surplus beetles were released in the
field. During 17 generations between 1931 and 1939, the average
increase was 128 per cent.; the highest return gave an increase of
270 per cent. Thus, multiplication was not rapid.
Liberations were carried out at intervals from late 1926 until early
1939; 35,000 beetles were divided between 15 areas in central Queens-
land, the greater number being released from 1933 to 1938. Three early
liberations on O. stricta failed for the reason that Cactoblastis soon
eradicated the pear in the vicinity. Although the insect breeds success-
fully on O. tomentosa in cages, trial liberations on this tree pear have
not been successful; after a lapse of several years, occasional individuals
can be found. Most of the releases have been effected among areas of
O. streptacantha, and the insect appears to have survived in almost all
of the experiments. In several localities it is firmly established over
restricted areas, and has brought about definite injury, large strepta-
cantha plants having been completely destroyed. One overgrown hedge
of this tree pear, 300 yards long, has been virtually destroyed through
the combined activities of cochineal insects and M. ulkei.
Six liberations on O. inennis were carried out in the Hunter Valley
with a total of 5,600 beetles, mostly in 1932-33. The insect has survived
in each locality and has been observed 2 miles distant from the release
points. In one area the density of the prickly-pear has been consider-
ably reduced by the larvae destroying the larger plants.
Moneilema variolare.
Two consignments of 2,015 adults of this Mexican species,
forwarded in July 1927 and July 1928, returned 904 beetles. Cage
rearing was carried out on 0. inermis for a period of ten years, firstly
at Sherwood and Chinchilla and later at Scone. The insect soon
adjusted its life-cycle to the Australian seasons, giving an annual
generation with the main emergence of adults in Noveraher-Decomber.
It increased gradually for a few years until the peak number of 2,260
beetles was secured in 1932-33. Thereafter the stocks decreased
progressively until breeding was discontinued in 1938-39. Two libera-
tions were carried out with 1,044 adults on O. inermis at Seone in the
1932-33 and 1933-34 summers. Adults were observed rather freely at
one site and in very small numbers at the second locality in 1938,
evidence that the insect had completed at least four generations in the
field,
Coenopaeus palmeri.
This Longicoru from south-western United States is restricted to
Cylinclropuntias. However, eggs were deposited on the prickly-pear
O. lindheirneri at Uvalde, Texg,s, and a small trial shipment of about
50 developing larvae was despatched in August 1925. One adult only
was reared at Sherwood.


1935-36
Adults.
3,045
1936-37
, . 35,217
1937-38
. . 42,002
1938-39
. . 13,543
1939-40
. . 24,653
Lagochirus funestus.
This Mexican Longieorn was introduced for the control of the tree
pears, 0. iomeniosa and 0. sireptacanthu. Four shipments were
received at Sherwood between January and December 1935. Prom the
original total of 4,350 larvae and 350 cocoons, 2,900 adults were obtained,
an excellent return of 69 per cent. The main emergence occurred 3-4
months after arrival, but beetle's from each consignment continued to
appear for twelve months.
In the first Australian generation raised at Sherwood, 788 adults
were placed in cages in April-December 1935; these returned 2,850
adult progeny from December 1935 to July 1936, an increase of 262
per cent. The initial experience with this insect augured well for the
future and contrasted sharply with the results secured from the various
shipments of Moneilema. In fact for a large Cerambycid with not more
than two generations each year, L. funestns possesses an unusually high
capacity for increasing. This is reflected in the circumstance that
within five years of the first introduction more than 100,000 individuals
have been released in the field. From one lot of 684 adults accommodated
in cages, 12,462 adult progeny were reared, a generation increase of
17-fold.
The main breeding operations have been conducted at Gogango and,
in early 1940, are still being continued. The adopted method has been
to use a total of between 2,000 and 4,000 adults each generation, six
pairs of beetles being placed in a wire-gauze cage, 6 ft. by 3 ft. by 3 ft.,
well filled with stout limbs of O. tomentosa, with some younger growth
for the adults’ feeding. In Mexico, there is one annual generation, the
adults emerging after mid-summer rains. The insect has adopted this
life-cycle in the field in Australia, where the main emergence has
occurred in December and January, However, in the Gogango cages,
two almost complete generations have been secured each year. The
accelerated development in confinement is probably due to the watering
of the cages in dry periods.
During four years at Gogango, the average increase of stocks has
been in each of the eight generations. Small numbers have been
successfully reared on O. inermis for two seasons at Scone, where the
life-cycle has occupied twelve months.
The first beetles were released in the field in early 1936, the distribu-
tion each summer being as follows:
Most of the insects were distributed as newly-emerged adults;
however, cocoons containing pupae were used in certain liberations, the
number of adults being estimated from the emergence percentage in
check cages; 70 liberations have been made on the tree pears, O. tomen-
tosa and O. streptacantha, mainly in central Queensland.
The first liberation was made on O. tomentosa with 2,362 beetles in
March-May 1936. By December 1936 many branches and trunks had
broken off and several large plants had snapped 2 to 6 feet from the
ground, due to the activities of the larvae. Emergence of the first field
generation occurred in December-January; in March 1937, oviposition
networks were numerous over a radius of 200 yards. In common will)


all other releases, the population decreased in the 1937-38 summer, but
made a good recovery in the following season. By June 1939, a great
many trunks and branches had been destroyed, larvae being most
abundant at a point 440 yards from the original site of release. The
progress is indicated by the collection of 10,000 cocoons from this area
in December 1939; the removal of this number exercised little appreci-
able reduction in the population, and larvae were very numerous in
June 1940.
L. funcsius is a destructive insect. The eggs are laid in narrow
channels forming networks on the larger branches and trunks of the
tree pears. The larvae feed in company and bore for several feet down
the stems which are weakened and break off. Very large plants of both
O. iomentosa, and O. streptacantha collapse near ground level when the
larvae attack the main stems. The adults emerge in December and
January, and oviposition is general in January and February. The
beetles fly readily and probably travel for some distance, since colonies
of larvae have been found in isolated plants a mile distant from the
nearest liberation site.
In the 1937-38 summer, all liberations in central Queensland
.suffered a setback from abnormal weather conditions. New releases
made at the time were affected so severely that many were complete
failures or resulted in the establishment of very few colonies. Good
rains in November were followed by four months of unusually high
temperatures and no rain of any value; drought conditions were general
throughout the district. The tree pear plants presented a very withered
appearance, owing to the heat and lack of moisture. The November
rains caused the larvae to pupate. The adults emerged freely in
December and January: oviposition was poor, or where eggs were
deposited, the young larvae failed to make any development. The
mortality among the eggs and newly-hatched larvae was apparently due
to insufficient moisture in the outer layers of the tree pear stems.
The various liberations made a partial to good recovery in the
1938-39 season. The insect appears to be established at all points
where it has been released. Considerable numbers occur in many
localities, and in these places effective destruction is being wrought.
Unfortunately, Lagochirus is subject to the attack of crows, rodents and
large lizards, which devour the pupating larvae and pupae in the bulky
fibre cocoons situated near the breaking point of the stems.
The Weevil Borers.
Cactophagus spinolae.
One consignment of this Calandriid weevil was introduced for the
purpose of conducting economic tests. Of 4,000 adults despatched from
Mexico, 3,562 were received alive at Sherwood in July 1927. The insect
thrived in the restricted space in the quarantine insectaries, and the
larvae rapidly reduced O. inennis to complete decay. Adults of the
first Australian generation commenced to emerge in December 1927.
By May 1928, 3,247 beetles had been reared; thousands of larvae of the
second generation had been produced, and many of these were pupating.
In this month all stocks were destroyed in consequence of a decision
to refrain from establishing the species in Australia. There is little
doubt that C. spinolae would have easily acclimatised. It would seem,
also, that it would have proved a valuable enemy of the Australian pest
pears.


Adults of Lagochirus funestus (dieting network of furrows in which the eggs are
deposited.
Large plant of Opuntia streptacantha with branches broken off and on the ground,
as a result of the tunnelling of the Lagochirus larvae.
[Face i.agc 90.


Chelinidea tabulata on Opuntia incrmis; the spotted appearance of the
segment is due to the feeding punctures of the insects.
Larvae of chelinidea feeding on prickly-pear segment and fruit; note the
characteristic spotting.
(By courtesy of Dr. A. J. Nicholson.)


Prickly-pear insects being tested on plants of economic value,
(a) Top left. Asphondylia midges placed in wire-gauze sleeves over young figs,
Uvalde, Texas.
(b) Top right. Wire-gauze sleeves enclosing peaches, Uvalde, Texas.
(c) Lower picture. Tests on various plants being carried out in the quarantine
insectary at Sherwood.


Rearing cages and sheds at the Chinchilla Field Station.
The recteation hall at Boonarga, near chinchilla, Qld., a farming community pays
its tribute to Cactoblastis.


The Gerstaeckeria Weevils.
Five species of these smaller weevils were introduced into Australia..
Gerstaeckeria doddi, G. nobilis, G. porosa. —Four consignments
totalling 1,500 adults were for-warded from Uvalde, Texas, between
March 1921 and June 1922. No attempt was made to separate the
three species. It is probable that G. dodtfli, the common Uvalde species,
predominated in the mixed material. 1,216 beetles were alive on arrival
at Sherwood. G. doddi and G. nobilis readily became established in
the cages, but G. porosa failed to survive. Good stocks were on hand in
1925; it was then considered that these insects were not capable of
causing major damage to priekly-pears, and efforts to establish them
were abandoned.
Gerstaeckeria hubbardi —One trial shipment of this Florida form
was made with 178 beetles in March 1921, 143 beetles survived the
journey, but no descendants were obtained.
Gerstaeckeria clathrata, which feeds on the Cylindropuntia, O.
lepiocmdis, in Texas and is not known to attack priekly-pears, was
forwarded to Australia on two occasions, in July and September 1921.
Of 400 original adults, 234 reached Sherwood alive. No larvae were
obtained.
Other Coleopterous Insects.
Disonycha varicornis.
This Chrysomelid attacks the Cylindropuntia, O. leptocaidis, in
Texas. An experimental shipment of 200 beetles in July 1921 was not
a success; a few were living on arrival at Sherwood, but no larvae were
secured.
THE PLANT SUCKING BUGS.
Three species of Chelinidea and two of Narnia were introduced
from North America.
Chelinidea vittiger.
The darker-coloured Florida form was sent on five occasions
between March 1921 and December 1922. Of an original 1,200 adults
and larvae and about 400 eggs, 400 adults and larvae were received at
Sherwood, the first consignment giving no return. The insect made
rather slow progress for some time. By May 1923, the Australian
stocks consisted of 67 bugs. Rearing work was carried out at West-
wood, where the supply had increased to 700 adults in July 1925. The
following summer saw better progress, and 2,880 insects were liberated;
a further 1,000 were released in April 1927. Breeding was then
concluded.
Four liberations were effected in the 1925-26 summer in the
Gogango-Rockhampton district. Three years later, in the 1928-29
season, small numbers were established in two of the areas, and a few
bugs were found 3 miles from one of the release sites. C. vittiger now
occurred in many parts of the district. As the larvae varied consider-
ably in colour, it was no longer possible to distinguish between the
Florida and Texas varieties. Further notes on the progress of the
species are included in the information given on the Texas form.
Nine consignments of the lighter-coloured Texas variety, aggre-
gating 2,260 adults and larvae and a small number of eggs were forwarded
between March 1921 and October 1923. 1,316 adults and larvae, and
several hundred eggs were obtained at Sherwood. However, the first


consignment would have sufficed, for although the first Australian
.generation produced 6 adults only, the second yielded 54, and the third
generation more than 1,000. In cage rearing, the insect did not make
good progress at Biniguy (later Gravesend) and Chinchilla, but did
well at Sherwood and Westwood. At the latter station, from 8 adults
that survived the 1922 winter 600 were obtained in the summer and
2,200 in the autumn; a disease outbreak then reduced the stocks. How-
ever, fair increases occurred at Westwood in 1925-26 and at Gravesend
in 1925-26 and 1926-27; breeding was discontinued at the former station
in early 1926 and at Gravesend in August 1927.
A total of 36,300 bugs was liberated between February 1925 and
August 1927. Several sites were selected in the Gogango district in
central Queensland and in the Gravesend district of New South Wales.
One liberation was made at Biggenden, Queensland, and others were
effected in New South Wales in the Mangle Scrub, in the Mungindi
district, the Pilliga Scrub, and at Scone. No trace of their survival was
subsequently found in New South Wales other than at Scone and in the
Gravesend district.
Cntil June 1928, the insect was not located at any point in the
■field. Unlike C. tabidwta, its establishment was not apparent
immediately. A few were seen at Biggenden in 1929 and 1930. At
Scone, several hundred larvae were observed in April 1929, but the
species then disappeared. In the Gogango district, large numbers were
found in December 1929 in an area 2 miles from one of the liberation
sites. During the next six months, vittiger was recorded from many
places in the district as far as 30 miles from the nearest point of
release. It was abundant in several localities in the 1930-31 season,
had dispersed widely, and was observed 50 miles away. The following
year, owing to the rapid destruction of the prickly-pear by Cactoblastis,
the heavy concentrations were reduced to very small numbers. Few
bugs were seen around Gogango in 1932-33, but fair numbers occurred
in several areas 70 miles from the original, liberations. One adult,
noticed on a patch of O. streptacantlui 85 miles south of Gogango in
August 1934, is the last record of the survival of vittiger in central
Queensland.
Turning to the Gravesend district, in 1928-29 the bugs were present
in small quantity at one liberation site and were found 5 miles away.
They were more numerous the following year; in 1930-31 they were quite
prevalent in these two areas, and were seen in small numbers at many
points for a radius of several miles. Next year Cactoblastis had destroyed
the food supply; the bugs had disappeared from the two areas where
they had been so numerous and very few were located throughout the
district. One small colony of larvae was found in December 1933 at
least 30 miles distant from any liberation area. The species has not
been seen since that date. Thus, it vanished completely from the Grave-
send sector within less than three years from the time when its popula-
tion had reached the highest mark.*
Ohelinidea canyona.
This species, which has a restricted distribution in Texas, may not
be specifically distinct from the widespread C. tabidata. Under cage
‘After this manuscript had gone to press, advice was received from Mr. H. T.
Nicholas, formerly an officer of the Board and now attached to the New South Wales
Prickly Pear Destruction Commission, that a small colony of this insect was located
at a point 6 miles from Bingara and about 20 miles from the location of the
December 1933 record. Thus, the species has re-appeared after an interval of
nearly seven years.


conditions the two forms interbred freely, and the hybrid progeny had
successfully completed three generations when the experiments were
terminated. Eight shipments were made between July 1921 and
October 1923, with a total of 1,924 adults and larvae. A considerable
proportion survived the journey in each sending; in several lots,
oviposition occurred freely during transit, and eggs and young larvae
were numerous in the Wardian cases.
Although canyona was readily established in small numbers, it
made little progress in the rearing cages at the field stations where
breeding was discontinued in 1926. However, a small stock was
retained at Sherwood; this comprised approximately 200 bugs in 1927;
the following year the number had decreased to 109. The insect then
increased markedly to about 1,800 individuals in 1929. Another
improvement to 3,240 bugs secured the following year was succeeded by
a reduction to a stock of 3,000 in December 1930, at which time the
work was terminated. One liberation of 1,000 bugs was effected at
Westwood in December 1925, but the species was not located in the
field on later inspections.
Chelinidea tabulata.
Bight consignments with a total of 1,616 bugs were sent from Texas
between July 1921 and October 1923, and gave a return at Sherwood
of 1,320 adults and larvae. Establishment was obtained from the
second shipment despatched in September 1921. This species was
acclimatised without difficulty. It soon adjusted its life-cycle to the
reversal of seasons, passing through two generations each year; the
second generation reached the adult stage in the late summer and
autumn, remaining as adults through the colder months and ovipositing
in the spring. It increased rapidly at each of the four field stations,
Westwood, Sherwood, Chinchilla and Biniguy (later Gravesend in the
same district), and did not suffer appreciably from disease epidemics
that caused serious mortality in cage stocks of the other species of
Chelinidea. Rearing operations were completed at the Queensland
centres in 1926 and at Gravesend in 1927, by which time the insect was
established in large numbers at various places in both Queensland and
New South Wales.
The first liberation was made with the small number of 100
immature bugs near Dulacca, Queensland, in December 1922. During
the four years, 1924 to 1927, 94,370 adults and larvae were divided
between 44 liberation areas at intervals throughout the prickly-pear
territory. Subsequently, in 1927 to 1929, the Quensland Prickly Pear
Land Commission collected approximately 12,500,000 bugs from two of
the early liberations, mainly from Dulacca, and distributed them over a
wide area. At the same time the New South Wales Department of
Agriculture distributed considerable numbers from a liberation in the
Gravesend district.
The increase of G. tabulata was very rapid. Two illustrations of
its progress may be quoted. Prom the original small number of 100
bugs released in December 1922 near Dulacca, Qld., by June 1926,
after the completion of seven generations in the field, many millions
had been produced; the bugs were concentrated in very great numbers
over several hundred acres of dense inermis and had spread for several
miles. Twelve months later enormous numbers were distributed over
several thousand acres in this vicinity.
At Blackwater, central Queensland, 5,050 bugs were liberated in
December 1924. Three generations later, in June 1926, they were
4


very dense oyer 20 acres of heavy prickly-pear and were found 2 miles
away. After an interval of another year, the insects were in very great
numbers over 50 square miles and had destroyed virtually the entire
fruit crop in this area; they had dispersed for many miles.
In 1929, a marked increase and dispersal had occurred in many
districts. Very great numbers clustered on the prickly-pear over
thousands of acres at various liberation sites. At Blackwater, the dense
pear for miles had become yellow, owing to the severity of the attack.
The insect continued to progress until 1931, when it had spread through-
out the prickly-pear territory of both States, and had multiplied
enormously in many districts. Where the numbers were concentrated,
the plants were sickly and quite yellow from the density of the feeding
punctures. The bugs congregated on the younger growth and destroyed
the new shoots and the fruit. Thus, tahulata had a very definite
controlling value. It evinced a decided preference for 0. inermis, as
compared with other prickly-pears. However, on occasions, it has been
very numerous on local areas of 0. tomentosa and 0. streptacantha.
The decline of the insect was first noticed in early 1931 in the
neighbourhood of Chinchilla, where the bugs were much less numerous
than a year earlier. By 1932, the decrease was obvious; between Dalby
and Roma and in the St. George-Thallon country, the former vast
population was now reduced to a light infestation, following the sudden
collapse of the primary pear from the onslaught of Cactoblastis cactorum.
Tahulata continued to dwindle as other areas became subject to Cacto-
blastis activities, but local concentrations were observed in most districts
until 1934.
Since 1934, the insect has occurred in numbers in a few districts
where the original inermis had not collapsed completely from Cactoblastis
attack, as in the Bingara-Inverell and Hunter Valley districts of New
South "Wales, or where other prickly-pears, chiefly 0. streptacantha ,
have furnished permanent breeding grounds, as in central Queensland.
It has almost vanished throughout ■western and south-west Queensland,
where it had multiplied to vast numbers by 1931.
The inability of C. tahulata to survive in most districts in competi-
tion with the much more effective pear destroying agent, Cactoblastis ,
deserves comment. Although the adults are capable of flying for
considerable distances, apparently they succumbed to starvation as the
food supply was destroyed, and did not attempt to seek fresh areas
where the pear had not yet collapsed.
Narnia paJlidicornis,
Seven consignments of this fruit-sucking bug were forwarded from
Texas between July 1921 and October 1924. Of the original total of
3,126 adults and larvae, 1,500 survived the journey, each shipment
giving some return. When material was received in the spring and
early summer, small numbers of the first and second Australian genera-
tions were reared at Sherwood. However, in each year the insect failed
to survive during the succeeding winter. The last adults died in the
winter months of 1925. It was then considered that these bugs caused
very little damage and were not worth further effort.
Narnia snowi.
This insect attacks prickly-pear and Cylindropuntia fruit in the
south-western parts of the United States. One consignment of 950 bugs
shipped in October 1924 gave a return at Sherwood of 486 survivors.


As in the ease of N. pallidicornis, first and second generation material
was reared during the 1921-25 season, and the species succumbed in the
1925 winter.
THE DIPTEROUS INSECTS.
The Seed-Midge, Asphondylia opuntiae.
This Cecidomyid, which is widely distributed from Texas to
California and over a considerable portion of Mexico, possesses a life-
cycle peculiarly adapted to its host plant. The midge adults emerge in
the early spring, March and April, and oviposit in the young flower buds
of prickly-pears. The larvae show very little activity or growth during
the summer and winter until February, when they develop rapidly to
produce adults after a short pupal period.
Many consignments of fruit infested with larvae were forwarded
from the United States for the purpose of determining:
(а) Whether the life-cycle of the imported material could be
shortened or lengthened so that emergence might occur in
September and October during the flowering period of
prickly-pear in Australia;
(б) Whether the insect could successfully attack the fruit of 0.
inermis and 0. stricta.
Six small shipments were despatched in 1921 and 1922 in the months
of June, August, September, October, November and December. The
June shipment gave no result, but from the other five sendings adults
emerged at Sherwood from late December to late February. Although
development had accelerated in comparison with the behaviour in North
America, the midges emerged after prickly-pears had ceased flowering;
hence, these experiments were unproductive.
They had, however, indicated that the earlier the material was
despatched from the United States, the earlier the midges would emerge
in Australia. Success appeared possible if the fruit could be shipped
as soon as they showed the characteristic signs of midge infection, in
order that the supplies would reach Sherwood at the beginning of the
winter. In 1925 to 1929, nine consignments, mostly of considerable
dimensions, were forwarded, four in April, three in May and one each
in June and August. Emergence from these shipments occurred
considerably earlier at Sherwood than in the 1921 and 1922 experiments.
April despatches gave the best results; the earliest midge adult appeared
on 18th September, and emergence continued into October. The life-
cycle had been shortened from the normal twelve months to six months,
and the flies emerged during the main flowering period of Australian
prickly-pears.
Furthermore, it was ascertained that the insect was capable of
breeding in 0. inermis and 0. stricta, and of adapting its seasonal life-
cycle rhythm to Australian conditions. Adults that emerged at Sher-
wood in late September and October 1927 oviposited freely in the flower
buds of the two pest pears; larval infection was obtained in 300 fruits
of 0. inermis and 150 fruits of 0. stricta. The aidults of the first
Australian generation appeared from 10th September to early October
1928, after a life-cycle of exactly twelve months.


Month.
Despatched.
Month
Received.
Emergence.
December
January
February
November
December . .
January—early February
October
November ..
January—early February
September
October
January
August
September ..
late December—early January
May
June
Oetober-November
April
May
mid September —late October
The experience with Asphondylia as regards the time of despatch
of infested fruit from the United States and the date of emergence of
the adults in Australia is shown in the following tabulation: —
Thus, when material reached Sherwood at the beginning of the
winter, the midges emerged in the spring, September and October in
Australia being comparable to March and April in the United States.
In view of the results of the experiments with plants of economic
value, in which the midges laid eggs in certain fruit other than prickly-
pear, all work with Asphondylia ceased in 1929.
The Scavenging Flies.
Among the great many insects that breed in decaying cactus
material, certain Dipt era assume an importance greater than that of
typical rot-loving insects, since they follow up and very materially
enlarge the injuries caused by the primary insects. These forms are
found mainly in the Syrphid genera Copestylum and Volucella, and in
the Stratiomyid genus Hermetia.
Between March 1921 and April 1923, ten consignments of rotting
prickly-pear, containing a mixture of larvae of various species, were
forwarded from the United States. Each shipment produced many
flies at Sherwood, the most abundant species being Copestylum margina-
tum, Volucella esuriens, V. pusilla, V. fasciata and Hermetia illucens.
The adults, although they fed readily on decaying prickly-pear and other
rotting vegetable material, could not be induced to deposit eggs. They
were confined in glass jars and in cages of various dimensions, or were
released in a large wire enclosure, 16 feet long by 14 feet wide by 9
feet high. No attempts at mating were observed, and no larvae were
secured.
THE COCHINEAL INSECTS.
Prior to the commencement of investigations by the Commonwealth
Prickly Pear Board, cochineal insects had been imported to Australia on
at least five occasions.
As early as 1787, Governor Phillip obtained at Rio de Janeiro
prickly-pear plants infested with cochineal. It is known that the
material safely reached Australia, but there is no record of its subse-
quent fate. The species was probably Dactylopius ceylonicus, which
occurs on Opuntia monacantha in the neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro.
In 1913, the Queensland Prickly Pear Travelling Commission despatched
consignments of Dactylopius ceylonicus and D. greenii from Ceylon and
South Africa. Lastly in 1920, D. opuntiae was imported from North
America by the late Mr. Temple Clerk. The history of these introduc-
tions will be dealt with in the discussion on the various species of
cochineal.
In the earlier years of the Board’s operations, the specific identity
of the cochineal was not always known at the time of despatch but was


determined later in Australia. One of the main objects of the many
introductions was to ascertain which of the Australian prickly-pears
were suited to the insects’ requirements. Since the host restriction of
these insects is rather complex, experimental work had to be conducted
in Australia to discover the species or forms of cochineal that would
develop most successfully and cause most damage to the various prickly-
pears of pest importance. The host preference aspect was complicated
by the circumstance that there appeared to be biological forms of the
same species possessing marked differences in their capacity to survive
on, and to effect injury to, the different kinds of prickly-pear.
Dactylopius ceylonicus.
This insect, which has been generally known under the name D.
indicus, is indigenous to South America, but has been established for a
great many years in India and Ceylon. The Queensland Prickly Pear
Travelling Commission sent material on 0. monacantha from Ceylon,
and the insects reached Brisbane in February and July 1913. They
were successfully reared on monacantha by Dr. Jean White-Haney
at the Dulacca Experiment Station, but could not be induced to attack
the main pest pears, 0. inermis and 0. strict a, nor, subsequently, 0.
tomentosa, 0. streptacmtha and 0. aurantiaca. Reproduction was
rapid. In May 1914 stocks were released on large monacantha plants
at Bowen and Charters Towers, north Queensland; nine months later
the infested plants were almost completely killed. Other patches of
this pear at Charters Towers infected in April 1915 were virtually
destroyed by June 1916.
0. monacantha was a scattered but not uncommon plant in coastal
and sub-coastal districts of North Queensland, where it was often grown
as tall dense hedges around Chinese market gardens. One large area
extended for many miles along the Suttor River, 100 to 150 miles inland
from Mackay. Within a few years this species was practically wiped
out in Queensland. Since 1923, occasional plants only have been
reported, and a small stock of ceylonicus has been maintained at Sher-
wood for the purpose of infecting these occurrences. In more recent
years, scattered patches and overgrown hedges of monacantha in New
South Wales, in the vicinity of Melbourne, and in the Adelaide district
of South Australia have been destroyed by this insect.
The virulent effect of this species of cochineal is very striking, more
especially as 0. monacantha is a large straggly plant with very thick
lower stems. The severity of the damage is out of all proportion to the
concentration of the insect’s population, and suggests a toxic influence.
In the Argentine, D. ceylonicus attacks various types of prickly-
pear, including 0. monacantha and related forms as 0. honaerensis, the
tree pear 0. quimilo, and the low-growing narrow-jointed relations of O.
aurantiaca, such as 0. discolor and 0. utkilio. The Board introduced
material on 0. honaerensis in May 1925; as in the case of the earlier
introductions from Ceylon, the Argentine stocks made good progress on
0. monacantha but refused to live on 0. inermis, stricta, aurantiaca and
other forms. In December 1932, a small quantity imported on 0.
discolor, which is a very close ally of atirantiaca, failed to survive.
Finally in March 1934 another Argentine shipment was received
on 0. quimilo, honaerensis, utkilio and discolor. Efforts to bring about
infection of 0. inermis, stricta, streptacantha and tomentosa were unsuc-
cessful. Insects from utkilio and discolor were transferred to aurantiaca,


but the rate of increase was slow. One liberation was made on auran-
tiaca in the Hunter River district, N.S.W., in December 1935, but it
did not become established. In view of the success obtained with another
Argentine cochineal against aurantiaca, the breeding of D. ceylonicus
on this plant was discontinued,
Dactylopius greenii.
This species, until recently known as D. confusus capensis or D.
capmsis, was described from South Africa and has not yet been
identified in America, where it must have originated. The Queensland
Prickly Pear Travelling Commission forwarded material on Nopalea
cockinellifera from Ceylon in February 1913, but the insects did not
survive the journey. Another consignment sent by the Commission
from South Africa on 0. nwnacantha in June 1913 was reared by Dr.
White-Haney on that prickly-pear at Dulacca. A liberation was made
at Bowen, Qld., in 1915, but there is no record of its subsequent
establishment. The Board imported the insect from South Africa in
July 1921. In addition to 0. monacantha, the cochineal attacked
Nopalea dejecta and N. cockinellifera. It could not be induced to breed
on any other Australian prickly-pear. A small quantity was main-
tained at Sherwood until 1929 when it died out. Infected joints were,
released on monacantha at Cairns in March 1926; the insect became
established but increased slowly; the plants then became infested with
and were rapidly destroyed by D. ceylonicus.
Dactylopius coccus.
A small supply of the cochineal of commerce was introduced from
South Africa on Nopalea cochinellifera in June 1921. The insect was
transferred to 0. tomentosa but would not exist on other prickly-pears.
It maintained itself on 0. tomentosa without making much headway,
and was kept at Sherwood for several years until it died out in 1929-30.
Infested joints were placed on 0. tomentosa at Helidon, Qld., in
April 1926; the experiment was not successful, as no evidence of
establishment could be found on later inspections.
Dactylopius confusus.
This form was introduced from Florida on the low-growing 0.
austrina on four occasions between August 1922 and April 1923. It
refused to attack 0. inennis and strict a but transferred to monacantha.
A small stock maintained on the latter plant for several years in cages
made very little progress, and rearing work was eventually given up.
Subsequently, confusus was found in Florida infesting not only
dwarf prickly-pears such as 0. austrina but shrub pears as stricta and
dillenii. Two shipments of material on 0. stricta, dillenii and poly-
carpa were received in September and November 1932, at a period when
the control of prickly-pear regrowth by Cactoblastis was uncertain. No
difficulty was experienced in securing infection from all three Florida
plants on Australian stricta. However, the dillenii material made much
better progress on stricta than the imported stricta and polycarpa
stocks; hence, this strain was used for breeding work and the other
supplies were destroyed.
The insect increased very rapidly. Liberations were made on 0.
stricta in nine areas in the Gogango district and four areas in the
Gayndah district in early 1933. Each of the Gogango releases was
established by June 1933, but in the early summer of 1933-34 all but
one decreased to occasional cultures. The remaining liberation made


fair progress until February 1984, when Cactohlastis destroyed the
plants. At Gayndah, the insects could not be found twelve months
after their release, Cactohlastis having in the interim killed the growth
in each area. Confusus has not been located since 1934. Probably it
would have become acclimatised had not the liberations been made just
at the stage when CactoUasfis recovered very rapidly to destroy the
prickly-pear on the areas where the cochineal had been placed.
This Florida strain on the shrub pears would not live on 0. tomen-
tosa and aurantiaca. It was able to develop on inermis with difficulty.
Small stocks were reared on that plant for several generations over a
two-year period, but as the insect made little headway the work was
discontinued.
Dactylopius sp., near confusus.
This Argentine species has for host plants the low-growing broad-
jointed 0. sulphured and narrow-jointed prickly-pears as 0. utkilio and
discolor. It was introduced to Australia on 0. aurantiaca in December
1932. The original host was an unidentified prickly-pear with rather
long narrow tuberculate joints, possibly a relation of sulphured, found
in the province of Catamarca. Prom this pear, stocks were transferred
successfully to sulphured, and from the latter plant to aurantiaca under
cage conditions in the Argentine. The cochineal developed very well
on aurantiaca in Australia and readily attacked another prickly-pear
whose specific identity is unknown; this plant resembles tiger pear but
is of more robust growth and may be related to the 0. tuna group of
the West Indies. It would not live on 0. inermis and stricia. Bearing
work on tiger pear was conducted at Goondiwindi and Scone, the increase
being rapid. The first liberations were made in September-Octoher 1933
at Warwick, Nindigully, and Goombungee, Qld., and at Tamworth and
points in the Hunter Valley, N.S.W. Other areas of aurantiaca were
infested later.
A second consignment of material was received on 0. utkilio and
discolor, two close relations of aurantiaca, in March 1934. The insects
attacked aurantiaca immediately, but the utkilio-discolor strain did not
seem as vigorous as the earlier stocks. (Liberations of descendants of
this second importation, made at Warwick, Nindigully and the Hunter
Valley in 1935, became established. Owing to the general spread of
infection from the earlier releases, the identity of the two strains was
soon submerged.
Although scattered tiger pear occurs in many districts of southern
Queensland and New South Wales, the heavier infestations are mainly
restricted in area from a few acres to several hundred acres. The most
extensive, more or less compact, area was one of about 4,000 acres at
Nindigully, south-west Queensland, which comprised dense patches,
thickly scattered clumps and lightly scattered plants. In the Eoma-
Surat sector there is a very widespread infestation of aurantiaca,
embracing many thousands of acres of scattered plants with thick
patches at intervals. This Argentine cochineal has performed excellent
destructive work, especially in Queensland, where the control of auran-
tiaca by this agency appears probable. In New South Wales, the results
are satisfactory but the work has not been as uniformly good as in
Queensland.
At Nindigully, the first small shipment of cochineal was released in
September 1933. When the insect had become securely established,
more general distribution was carried out over the area. Most effective
destruction was wrought in 1937 and 1938. In August 1937 90 per
cent, of the tiger pear had been destroyed over 400 acres. By June


1938 the area of destruction had expanded greatly; extensive patches
of plants that were healthy in February 1938 were almost completely
killed four months later. In late 1939, six years after the first release,
the insects had destroyed fully 95 per cent, of the pear on the 4,000
acres, scattered plants and a little regrowth representing the former
heavy infestation.
At Warwick, on an area of 140 acres, much of which consisted of a
very dense infestation, 80 per cent, of the pear was destroyed in three
years from the date of the original liberation. In the Roma-Surat
sector, the first cochineal was released in late 1936 and early 1937; very
good destruction was accomplished in 18 months; within three years all
the heavier patches had been killed or very greatly reduced and many
of the scattered plants had been destroyed.
Smaller areas of aurantiaca at a few other places in Queensland
have been almost eradicated. In New South Wales effective destruction is
apparent at various points; in several areas, none of which is of large
dimensions, the insect has reduced the amount of tiger pear very greatly.
Dactylopius opuntiae.
This species, which has been referred to as D. tomentosus until very
recently, is the common cochineal of south-western United States and
of Mexico, where it infests many kinds of shrub and tree pears. The
first introduction to Australia was made in 1920 by the late Mr. Temple
Clerk of the Queensland Department of Lands. His material was
obtained from the Cactus Experiment Station at Chico, California, and
was later termed “Chico cochineal.” The original host plant is not on
record,' but it was probably one of the shrub pears of the O. lindheimeri
and engelmanni relationship. Mr. Clerk ascertained that the insect
would live on both O. inermis and O. stricta, and liberated material in
1921 on one or other of these plants at several places in Queensland —
viz., Dulaeca, Gayndah and Westwood; stocks were released at Scone,
New South Wales, on inermis. The cochineal became established at
each locality.
The Board imported D. opuntiae on O. lindheimeri from Texas on
eight occasions during 1921 and 1922, and on O. engelmanni from Tucson,
Arizona, on two occasions in 1922. Some insects in each consignment
survived the journey. These introductions became known as “Texas”
and “Arizona” cochineals. Material was obtained from Chico, Cali-
fornia, in 1921 on an undetermined shrub pear, but this form was not
transferred to any of the Australian prickly-pears.
The Chico, Arizona and Texas cochineals were all able to develop
on O. inermis, stricta, tomentosa, and certain other prickly-pears; they
did not develop on O. streptacantha and aurantiaca. Their capacity to
increase on and cause destruction to inermis and stricta varied consider-
ably. The Chico strain made good progress on inermis but was not
nearly as effective on stricta. The Texas form proved very destructive
to stneta and was not an efficient enemy of inermis. The Arizona
strain did not show much discrimination in its attack on these pest
pears, hut was somewhat more partial to stricta. There was, too, a
difference in the manner of attack, especially in the case of the Texas
and Arizona strains on stricta; the former tended to infest the lower
segments and stems, forming rings of cultures around the junctions of
the segments; the latter preferred to attack the upper growth. All
three forms readily attacked the tree pear, O. tomentosa, without
apparent differences.


The Chico strain was released on inermis at Dulacca, Queensland, in
July 1921, soon became firmly established, and before long was distri-
buted quite appreciably by private initiative. The Board established
the Texas and Arizona forms on both inermis and stricta in 1923 and
1924. In 1924 to 1926 the Queensland Prickly Pear Land Commission
conducted an energetic distribution campaign; supplies were furnished
to landowners, and motor trucks released material along all trafficable
roads in the prickly-pear territory. The Chico strain on inermis was
obtained from Dulacca, and the Texas and Arizona material on siricta
was collected from the Board’s original liberations at Westwood. In
New South Wales distribution of cochineal on inermis was carried out
by the Prickly Pear Destruction Commission. By 1927, the insect was
thoroughly established throughout all prickly-pear areas, and the
identity of the three strains was soon lost.
D. opuntiae wmought excellent destruction to both 0. inermis and
stricta in the early years after its establishment. The best effect on
inermis occurred in the Dulacca district. The first liberation was made
in a patch of brigalow scrub in July 1921; two years later the inermis
was thickly covered with cochineal cultures; by July 1924, some of the
large plants had been killed and the pear, which had been impenetrable,
was now traversed by cattle tracks. In October 1922, infested segments
were distributed over an acre of very dense, succulent inermis in a belar
scrub near Dulacca, at intervals of 20 feet along tracks cut 20 feet
apart; 9 months later, all prickly-pear on the acre was heavily attacked
and was beginning to collapse; by June 1924, 20 months after the
distribution, the pear was mostly dead, and it was possible to walk
freely over the area.
In 1926, further effective destruction had been brought about around
Dulacca, and good results were evident in many scrub areas in western
and south-western Queensland. Effective thinning out of dense pear
in the brigalow and belar scrubs was associated with the work of the
red spider, Tetranychus opuntiae. The insect did not progress as
rapidly in the Chinchilla district as around Dulacca; little damage w r as
caused for the first three years, after which appreciable destruction
occurred. Further west, between Mitchell and Charleville, cochineal
increased rapidly and did good work within 12 to 18 months after its
distribution.
The maximum efficiency appeared to be reached in 1926-27. The
following season there was a serious falling off in the insect’s population
and in its destructive qualities. However, it continued to bring about
a reduction in the density of inermis in scrub lands and to destroy young
regrowth springing up after Cactoblastis had caused the collapse of the
primary pear in brigalow and belar country.
It should be emphasised that D. opuntiae was not at any stage an
efficient enemy of 0. inermis in the more open forest country. The
prickly-pear of the scrubs was of a much more succulent nature; more-
over the density of the brigalow and belar foliage afforded protection
from weather effects. Its work in the open country was restricted to
the destruction of fruit, individual segments and seedlings, and did not
cause the death of established plants nor reduce the density of the pest
to a marked degree.
Since the widespread efforts of Cactoblastis, cochineal has played
a minor role. Nor did it recover to large numbers and so cause effective
damage to the succulent heavy regrowth that followed in the wake of
the Cactoblastis onslaught of 1930-32. Yet, if its later work has not
been spectacular, cochineal has been of value periodically in killing fruit


and younger growtji. It increases best in moderately dry weather; in
normal years it is most abundant in the spring and early summer,
September-November, and again in the autumn, April-May. Thunder-
storm and heavy monsoonai rains in mid-summer destroy its heavy
infestations.
' Turning to 0. stricta, the early damage by cochineal was much
more striking than in the case of inermis, and the later eclipse of the
insect quite as remarkable. The Texas strain was first liberated in the
Westwood district early in 1923. By June 1926 it was almost impossible
to find stricta plants free from cochineal within a radius of 20 miles;
dense prickly-pear in the brigalow scrubs had been destroyed, and very
effective damage had occurred in the more open country. At Black-
water, the first insects were released in May 1924; two years later all
stricta plants over a wide area, whether in scrub or open country, were
white with cochineal and were rapidly collapsing and dying. The good
results continued in 1927 when the stricta belts between Blackwater and
Emerald and in the Gayndah district suffered severe injury. At this
stage, it seemed likely that D. opuntiae would effect complete control of
O. stricta within a few years.
The whole of 1926 to the end of November 1927 was very dry in
central Queensland. Thus, conditions were particularly favourable to
the insect and unfavourable to the plant. Heavy rains fell from
December 1927 to May 1928. By June 1928, there was an amazing
decrease in the cochineal population; in fact, the cultures had become
quite sparse. Dense stricta in brigalow scrubs, that had been apparently
wiped out by the insect, had now produced a sturdy regrowth 2 to 3
feet high on which cochineal w y as very scattered and producing no injury.
The insect made a rapid recovery in the early summer of 1928-29; in
November 1928 many areas were again white with cultures, and fruit
and young growth were being destroyed to a considerable degree. Heavy
rains at intervals from December 1928 to April 1929 caused so serious
a setback that in May 1929 the infestation of cochineal was very light
indeed. Since that year, the insect has been of very little importance
in the control of 0. stricta; in fact its decline in central Queensland
has been greater than on 0. inermis in the southern districts of the
State.
In view of the excellent destruction caused by the Texas cochineal
in the early years after its establishment, and of the quantity of
regrowdh following the collapse of the primary pear from the attack of
Cactoblastis, it was decided in 1931 to re-introduce cochineal material
from Texas, with the object of determining w r hether the first efforts of
the insect could be repeated by further importations. It should be
emphasised that regrowth appeared to constitute a formidable problem
at the time, and there was no proof that Cactoblastis would effect
control. Two consignments of material were received from Texas on
0. lindheimeri and 0. inermis in December 1931 and April 1932.
The cultures on inermis had become established on that prickly-pear in
the cages at Uvalde, Texas, apparently from lindheimeri as the original
host. The material from 0. inermis transferred to Australian inermis
but made so little progress that the rearing work was given up after
two years. The 0. lindheimeri stocks, as in the case of the earlier
introductions, evinced a marked preference for 0. stricta, and were bred
with difficulty on inermis. On stricta, the insect multiplied rapidly.
Several liberations were made on that prickly-pear in the Gogango and
Gayndah districts in the first half of 1933. However, the Cactoblastis
population recovered quickly and by June 1934 had destroyed the


heavy regrowth. Thus, there was no opportunity of determining
whether the re-importation of the Texas cochineal would have given
useful results.
The D. opuntiae material imported on shrub pears from the United
States readily attacked the tree pear, 0. tomentosa. The destruction
caused to tomentosa has not been as striking as in the case of stricta and
inermis but, at the same time, has not varied in its intensity from severe
damage in the earlier years to little injury subsequently. The chief
effects of the insect on this plant have been threefold. Firstly, young
seedlings are destroyed very freely; in scrub areas the germination of
tomentosa is often very considerable, and the small seedlings are killed
by cochineal before they grow more than a few inches. Secondly, young
plants to a height of 3 to 5 feet frequently succumb to a heavy infesta-
tion of the insect. Thirdly, many heavy areas of tall plants in brigalow
scrubs in the Springsure district have been reduced to less than one-half
their density by cochineal action; under these circumstances large plants
collapse completely as a result of the insect attacking the main stem.
In the case of well-grown plants, little effective injury is caused among
scattered tree pear in open country, other than the destruction of
segments. Although the upper growth may become white with cochineal
and many segments be destroyed, the health of large plants is not
seriously affected, unless the cultures occur freely on the trunks.
In 1933, cochineal infesting 0. tomentosa in Mexico was found to be
D. opuntiae. Material was imported in November 1934, in order to
determine whether this Mexican strain on tomentosa would be more
destructive to that plant in Australia than the established stocks which
had originated from shrub pears in the United States. The insects
developed readily on O. tomentosa and ficus-indica and rather slowly
on 0. megacantha; they did not attack 0. inermis, stricta, streptacantha
and aurantiaca. Rearing was conducted in cages during 1935 and 1936,
but the Mexican form was found to be less injurious to tomentosa than
the D. opuntiae already infesting that tree pear in Australia. Libera-
tions were made in 1936, but there was no marked destruction subse-
quently in the vicinity of the points of release, nor any evidence
suggesting beneficial results from the introduction of the Mexican
material.
The so-called Chico, Arizona and Texas strains of D. opuntiae
refused to live on 0. streptacantha. However, this species of cochineal
was introduced from Mexico on streptacantha in June 1927. It
immediately transferred to local streptacantha and made good progress
in the rearing cages. The first liberations were made in late 1928;
later the insect was established in all areas where the plant occurs in
central Queensland. This cochineal has performed very useful work
among heavy infestations of streptacantha by destroying the under-
growth of young plants and so thinning out the density. On scattered
plants, little injury is caused; but, when large plants are cut
down, or collapse from the attack of the Longicorns, Moneilema and
Lagochirus, cochineal completes the destruction.
The strains of D. opuntiae imported from the United States were
found to be particularly effective against 0. dillenii and elatior (= nigri-
cans), two prickly-pears which were not common in Australia but were
serious pests in parts of Ceylon and India. The Board sent to Ceylon
the material which has since proved so highly destructive in those
countries.


Dactylopius newsteadi.
Various Cylindropuntias in North America are host plants of this
insect, which was imported from Texas on 0. imbricata in November
1924. 0. imbricata occurred as scattered plants and patches at various
places in New South Wales. In Queensland, there was one area near
Warwick of several acres of heavy infestation, which was increasing
quite definitely. The typical clump or patch of imbricata comprised
one or several large parent plants, 10 or more feet high, with very
woody stems; beneath and around the old plants there was a dense
young undergrowth.
The cochineal increased very well on imbricata but could not be
brought to attack any of the Platyopuntias, including 0. aurantiaca.
The first material was liberated in June 1925 and various releases
were made during the next year. The early destruction caused to
0. imbricata by D. newsteadi was most striking, and could be compared
with that by D. ceylonicus on 0. monacantha. Within twelve months
individual plants of medium size had been virtually destroyed. In two
years the heavy mass of seedlings and young plants among the dense
clumps had been killed and the large plants reduced to a few woody
stems.
The area at Warwick was infested with cochineal in January 1925;
nine months later, hundreds of young plants had been destroyed and
many large plants were heavily attacked and severely damaged. The
insect then decreased so rapidly that it had disappeared by December
1928; nor could it be found in April 1931, when it was decided to
destroy all the pear on the area by chemical methods. Four years later,
the area was free of imbricata. However, by June 1938, hundreds of
young plants up to 3 feet in height had developed; many of these were
heavily infested with cochineal, which had re-appeared after an interval
of several years since its last reported presence. In New South Wales,
the insect decreased rapidly once it had destroyed the young growth.
It was unable to kill the large plants. Most of the imbricata has now
been eradicated by poisoning and mechanical treatment. D. newsteadi
survives on the remaining scattered plants, around which it continues
to kill seedlings as they appear.
Enemies of Cochineal.
In North and South America, all species of Dactylopius are heavily
preyed upon by various Lepidopterous, Coccinellid, Dipterous and other
enemies. Particular care was exercised to see that predators were not
introduced to Australia with the cochineal stocks imported by the
Board; none of the American enemies has ever been recorded in this
country. However, the indigenous ladybird beetle, Gryptolaemus
montromieri, is an enemy of cochineal in Australia. In the early
years of the work it was feared that this Coccinellid might prevent the
increase of D. opuntiae and other species. Experience soon showed that
Gryptolaemus was not a serious enemy over the greater part of the pear
territory. It appears to be a coastal or sub-coastal insect, which is not
found in numbers 100 to 150 miles inland. Actually it is rarely seen
throughout the iuermis areas of western and south-west Queensland
and north-west New South Wales. It does assume some degree of
importance in central Queensland, particularly in the Rockhampton-
Gogango district where it reduces heavy concentrations of cochineal
in the early summer and again in the late summer; it is not very active
from November to March. But it is not a real control factor. Both
adults and larvae of the ladybird can be very numerous without


preventing the increase of cochineal. Cryptolaemus is abundant when
cochineal is plentiful, and, as a rule, does not cause marked mortality
unless the host population is dense.
THE SCALE INSECT, DIASPIS ECHINOCACTI.
Diaspis echinocacti is widely distributed in North and South
America where it possesses a wide range of host plants among the
Cactaceae. It has been established in Australia for many years,
apparently as a result of accidental introduction. The scale is some-
times found on O. inermis and stricta, but occurs more frequently on
fomentasa. Very occasionally it causes minor damage to individual
plants, but Hymenopterous and Lepidopterous enemies hold it firmly in
•cheek.
SPIDER MITES.
Tetranychus opuntiae.
The prickly-pear red spider occurs in Texas and northern Mexico,
being very prevalent on 0. lindheimeri in the Brownsville district of
Texas. Apparently, it was accidentally introduced with prickly-pear
material from Texas in 1922 or 1923, since it was first noticed in rearing
cages in the latter year. Establishment in the field on 0. inermis was
observed in 1924 at Chinchilla, Qld., and in the Gravesend district,
N.S.W. 3y 1926, the mite was abundant in the vicinity of Chinchilla,
further west near Morven, at Gogango, and in the Gravesend sector.
During this and the next year, the spread in the Chinchilla district was
extremely rapid, extending for 50 miles in all directions. Similarly,
the infection had dispersed over the 80 miles from Mitchell toward
Charleville, and over a wide area at Gravesend. By 1929, it occurred
generally between Rockhampton and Emerald, and for 100 miles south-
west of the former locality. The mite had now appeared at many points
throughout the pear territory.
T. opuntiae showed a marked preference for 0. inermis and was
not partial to 0. stricta, This fact was most obvious in central Queens-
land, where the two plants were freely intermingled. On rare
occasions infection was noticed on 0. tomeniosa. The feeding of the
mites on the surface of the inermis segments caused, as a result of the
plant’s reaction, a whitish or greyish layer of corky epidermis
commencing as circular patches around the areoles. In a severe attack,
the circular areas coalesced and completely covered the surface, choking
the stomata and causing the segments to break off, wither and dry up.
The mite was not particularly injurious to inermis in the more
open forest country. However, it caused severe damage to the succulent
pear in the brigalow and belar scrubs. Under favourable conditions,
the increase was very rapid; scrub areas of many acres of dense inermis
were reduced to a state of partial collapse in a few weeks. Seedlings
and young plants were completely killed, while among older plants much
of the upper growth was destroyed. For example, a scrub area of 600
acres of very dense pear 4 to 5 feet high was thinned out to the extent
of 75 per cent, in two years. Strongly attacked plants lost their vigour
and were often unable to produce new growth for two years after the
mite infestation had moved on; moreover, they were more readily
destroyed by cochineal later.
The mites were most active from late winter to early summer, and
again in the autumn. The life-cycle in September was found to be as


short as eight days; hence, it is not surprising that very rapid increases
occurred during August and September. The greatest damage was
caused in the brigalow and belar scrubs of the Chinchilla and Morven
districts in 1926 and 1927. In these areas, the mites had multiplied to
very great numbers before Cactoblastis cactorum had commenced to
bring about collapse of the primary pear. A good deal of injury was
caused in the Gravesend district of New South Wales and in central
Queensland between Rockhampton and Emerald.
The advent of Cactoblastis meant the eclipse of Tetranychus. After
1929 its decline was very rapid. By 1932, its activity had been reduced
to minor outbreaks in local areas; the vigorous regrowth was practically
free from infection. In one district only was there any recovery, the
mites becoming active on regrowth in the Wandoan-Taroom sector in
1933-34; hut Cactoblastis destroyed this regrowth in the following
season. Since 1935, T. opuntiae has vanished almost completely in all
districts, being observed in small numbers very occasionally at scattered
points.
Eriophyes sp.
Another small mite has made its appearance in Australia during the
past ten years. It has been reported from most districts. The effect
of its attack resembles that of red spider except that the corky areas
are irregular in outline and do not assume circular shape around the
areoles. The degree of injury is slight, and is limited to the occasional
destruction of individual segments. The origin of this form is not
known; it has not been recorded from prickly-pear in North or South
America.


VIII. CACTO BLAST IS CACTORUM AND ITS CONTROL
OF PRICKLY-PEAR.
In view of the striking success of Gactoblastis cactorum in the
eradication of Optmtia inermis and 0. stricta in Australia, it will be of
interest to discuss briefly its distribution and range of host plants in
South America. The insect is indigenous to the more northern
provinces of the Argentine, the republics of Uruguay and Paraguay,
and the southern districts of Brazil. The distribution extends from
latitude 20 deg. S. to 35 deg. S. In the Argentine it occurs through the
provinces of Entre Rios, Corrientes, Santa Pe, the northern portion of
Cordoba, Santiago del Estero, Tucuman, Salta, Jujuy and the Chaco;
it is not found in the more arid western provinces of Catamarea, La
Rioja and Mendoza. Although it was located many years ago in the
Botanic Gardens at La Plata, Argentine, the occurrence may have been
due to accidental introduction with prickly-pear plants from some other
part of the Republic; at any rate the insect has not been discovered in
the field in the province of Buenos Aires, south of the River Plata. In
Uruguay records of its presence have been made along the Uruguay
River from Salto south to Piriapolis near the mouth of the River Plata.
The distribution extends northward from Corrientes in the Argentine
through Paraguay into the southern part of the Brazilian province of
Matto Grosso. Larvae found in the southern Brazilian province of Rio
Grande do Sul, lying north of Uruguay, probably represent this species.
The known range of C. cactorum possesses a mean annual tempera-
ture varying between 61 deg. F. in southern Uruguay to 71 deg. P. at
Santiago del Estero, Argentine, and 73 deg. F. in Paraguay. The
altitude rises from sea level to 4,500 feet in north-west Argentine, but
the main distribution occurs at elevations below 1,200 feet. The annual
rainfall varies from 20 inches at Santiago del Estero, Argentine, to 50
inches in the north-eastern Argentine province of Corrientes, and to a
maximum of 60 inches in Paraguay. In Australia, the main prickly-
pear territory lies between latitudes 21 deg. and 33 deg. S.; the mean
annual temperature varies between 59 deg. and 73 deg. F.; the annual
rainfall is from 18 to 40 inches; the altitude reaches 2,500 feet, but the
great bulk of the pear region is less than 1,200 feet above sea level.
Thus, conditions in the natural home of C. cactorum correspond
generally to those encountered in this country.
In South America, the insect attacks a wide variety of prickly-pears.
The host plants include the following:—
Tree pears—
O. ficvA-indica, O. cordobensis and O. quimilo, but in the ease of the
last-named, small plants only are infested.
Shrub pears—
O. bnmnescens, O. monacantlia, O. canterai, O. delaetiana, O.
bonaerensis, and various other species related to the mona-
cantha-bonaerensis group. Several of these plants bear a
general resemblance to O. inermis and O. stricta in their habit
of growth.
Narrow-jointed pears—
O. salmiana, O. utkilio, O. discolor, O. auraniiaca and others of the
aurantiaca group.


This list includes all species of prickly-pears within its range of
distribution, except the low-growing 0. sulphurea with its broad thick
segments. This plant, which is very common in the province of Santiago
del Estero, Argentine, and in neighbouring areas, has not been recorded
as a host plant of C. cactorum; it is, however, the usual food plant of the
closely-related insect, Cactoblastis doddi. The tree pear, 0. quimilo,
another frequent plant in north-western Argentine, appears to be
immune from attack except in its early stages; young plants, however,
are often killed by the activities of the larvae. Other cactus types, such
as various species of Cerei which are rather numerous in north-western
Argentine, are not host plants, with the exception of Cleisiocactus sp.;
this rather slender Cereus is occasionally attacked in areas where the
insect is abundant in Opimtia utkilio.
Throughout its range of distribution, G. cactorum is encountered
generally and often abundantly. Around Concordia in Entre Rios,
every plant of the shrub pears, 0. delaetiana and another relation of 0.
monacantha, supported the larvae; many were seriously damaged.
Large plants of the tree pear, 0. ficus-indica, have been recorded as
severely injured. But one rarely finds a shrub pear or tree pear of any
size that has been completely destroyed by the insect. On the other
hand, the low-growing narrow-jointed prickly-pears suffer marked
destruction. In the province of Santiago del Estero, areas of 0. discolor,
which is very similar to 0. aurantiaca, were virtually eradicated by the
insect. -In Entre Rios province, 0. aurantiaca was often destroyed to
ground level, but the underground bulbs remained intact. Heavy
attacks have been frequently observed on the related 0. utkilio in north
western Argentine, many plants having been killed by the larvae.
The life history is very much the same under South American and
Australian conditions. In the Argentine there are two generations each
year, the moths emerging, as in Australia, in January to March and
again in September to November. However, in southern Uruguay, it is
possible that one generation occurs annually; pupae collected in
December produced moths in late January, two to three months later
than the normal after-winter emergence, and rather early, in view of
the cooler climate of this region, for the usual summer generation of
moths.
THE HISTORY OF ITS INTRODUCTION TO AUSTRALIA.
Cactoblastis cactorum was originally described by Berg in 1885
from specimens from Uruguay, where its food plant was stated to be,
probably erroneously, one of the Bhipsalis cacti. In 1914, it was found
attacking pricMy-pears in the Botanic Gardens at La Plata, Argentine,
by Mr. Henry Tryon, one of the two members of the Queensland
Prickly Pear Travelling Commission. Mr. Tryon, who was impressed
by the potentialities of this insect, collected material and actually
brought a small number alive to Australia; unfortunately the larvae
did not prosper and died before they reached the pupal stage.
In 1920-21, the Argentine was visited by two officers of the Common-
wealth Prickly Pear Board, one remaining in the Republic for several
months. The cactus gardens at La Plata had been discontinued by
this time. G. cactorum was not encountered, but two closely-allied
forms, now known as C. bucyrus and C. doddi, were discovered in
western Argentine. Another officer of the Board made investigations
in Uruguay and Argentine in late 1924 and early 1925. He was
successful in finding C. cactorum in Uruguay and in north-east and


Cactoblastis female moth at rest on a twig.
(By courtesy of Dr. A. J. Nicholson.)
Throe eggsticks of Cactoblast is on a young segment of prickly-pear.
(By courtesy of Dr. A. J. Nicholson.)
[Face f(i<ic 108.


Mass distribution of Cactoblastis cactorum. Chinchilla, Qld., October, 1929.
(a) Upper view. Cages containing great numbers of collected cocsons, under
the protection of large sheds.
(b) Lower view. Collecting the daily output of eggs.
22


Mass distribution of Cactoblastis cactorum, Chinchilla, Qld., October, 1929.
(a) Upper view. 25,000,000 eggs, one day’s collection from the field; two
boxes of waxed quills, in which the eggs were sent out for distribution, are shown.
(b) Lower view. Quilling and packing the eggs for free distribution to
landowners.


Bight. Larvae within a segment; they have eaten most of the
tissue and are visible through the semi-transparent cuticle.
(By courtesy of Dr. A. J. Nicholson.)
Cactoblastis cactorum larvae at work.
Left. Cuticle removed from prickly-pear segment to show
the large larvae feeding.


north-west Argentine. Later surveys by other officers of the Board
have added considerably to the knowledge of the distribution and food
plants of this insect.
Full-grown larvae were collected in 0. delaeiiana and another
mvnacantha relation at Concordia, Bntre Rios, at the end of January
1925, and were taken to Buenos Aires. The moths emerged in February
and laid eggs very freely. Six Wardian cases were filled with an
Opimtia of the moivacantka group; a total of 3,000 eggs was placed on
the priekly-pear in the cases. The consignment was despatched by
steamer from Buenos Aires in March, en route to Australia, via Cape-
town. On its arrival at Capetown, officers of the South African Depart-
ment of Agriculture examined the cases and reported that the material
was in excellent condition. Before re-consigning the shipment, they
removed a few colonies of larvae to maintain a small reserve in the event
of the main supply suffering misadventure during the remainder of the
voyage. Hence, the original insects from which the Australian stocks
were derived consisted of approximately 2,750 eggs.
The consignment reached Sherwood in May 1925, ten weeks after
its despatch from Buenos Aires, and opened up in splendid condition.
The larvae, which were about one-half grown, were removed to cages
in the quarantine insectaries and were supplied with 0. inermis in
addition to the Argentine food plant. They prospered during the winter
and pupated in late August and September, producing 1,137 cocoons, a
return of 41 per cent, from the original eggs. The moths emerged in
September and October 1925, to the number of 1,070, representing the
very high emergence of 94 per cent.; 527, or 49.8 per cent., of the moths
were females, which deposited an average of 191 eggs per female, a high
production in the light of later experience. The total number of eggs,
100,605, meant an increase of on the original sending of 2,750
eggs, a remarkable return from the consignment and a most favourable
augury for the future.
Thus, then, the sole shipment of this insect made the long journey
of ten weeks and 14,000 miles without scientific supervision, and yet
proved an unqualified success. In view of the lengthy period on ship-
hoard, when the insects received no attention, the consignment could
easily have been a complete failure, due to some common cause such as
rotting of the priekly-pear or disease conditions wiping out the larvae.
The introduction of C. cactorum changed the whole outlook
regarding priekly-pear control. Had that one shipment given poor
results, one can but wonder to what extent the success of the biological
campaign would have been prejudiced, or at least delayed. A second
consignment of material could not have followed in quick succession,
for the Board’s officer had returned to North America. South America
offered a limited number of priekly-pear insects in comparison with the
much greater variety in the United States and Mexico. There was no
particular reason in 1925 to believe that Cactoblastis might be more
successful in Australia than the Melitara group and other North
American cactus insects. Certainly, its remarkable achievements could
not have been foretold. Thus, if the one shipment had not resulted in
the establishment of the insect, further investigations in the Argentine
may not have been undertaken for several years. Perhaps when the
time and labour expended for little practical results upon the introduc-
tion of numerous other priekly-pear insects is considered, the acclimati-
sation of C. cactorum with a minimum of effort may be deemed an
appropriate compensation for those engaged in the work.


BREEDING IN CAGES.
The rearing of C. cactorum on a large scale under cage conditions
was carried out for eighteen months only, and was then rendered
unnecessary on account of the rapid multiplication of the stocks which,
at the end of the first Australian generation, had been liberated in the
vicinity of each field station.
In the breeding work, wire-gauze cages, mostly 6 feet by 3 feet by
3 feet high, were filled with 0. inermis, although at Gogango 0. stricta
was used to some extent. Between 800 and 1,000 eggs were placed in
each cage, this being considered the optimum number that would allow
development of the larvae without replenishment of the food supply
during the life-cycle. When prickly-pear segments rotted, they were
removed; if the decay reached considerable proportions, additional
prickly-pear was provided. The cages, were dismantled when the larvae
had pupated, and the cocoons were transferred to smaller emergence
cages. As the moths emerged, they were removed each day to oviposition
cages from which the eggs were collected daily.
The 100,600 eggs obtained from the Argentine material were
divided between Sherwood with 71,960 eggs and Chinchilla with 28,640
eggs. They hatched in October and early November 1925. The larvae
thrived in O. inermis-, pupation commenced in late December and early
January. Sherwood gave a return of 57 per cent., and Chinchilla of
53 per cent., cocoons from the accommodated eggs, a very good result.
The mortality among the larvae was comparatively low, although the
rainfall was above the normal. At Sherwood, the precipitations were:—■
November, 585 points; December, 585 points; January, 450 points; a
total for the three months of 1,620 points, compared with the average
of 1,166 points for this period. At Chinchilla, November was dry, with
15 points only, but 610 points were recorded in December, and 950
points in January, including a torrential downpour of 8 inches in a few
hours on Ist January; a total of 1,570 points in comparison with the
mean of 962 points for the three months. Since heavy rains had always
caused a high mortality from disease among larvae of Olycella juncto-
Hneella in cages, an experience repeated in subsequent years with the
various species of Melitara, all close relations of C act oblast is, early
evidence was secured of the comparative hardihood of C. cactorum
under cage rearing conditions.
The moths emerged in January and February 1926; 76 per cent,
of the cocoons at Sherwood and 70 per cent, at Chinchilla produced
moths to a total of 19,005. The proportion of females was 44.0 per cent,
at Sherwood and 48.6 per cent, at Chinchilla. The females deposited
an average number of 129 eggs at Sherwood and 146 eggs at Chinchilla.
The total eggs from this first Australian generation reached the high
figure of 2,539,506; Sherwood results showed a 24-fold increase, and
Chinchilla a 25-fold increase for the generation. The original number
of 2,750 eggs from the Argentine had multiplied by 922-fold in two
generations. Twelve months after the despatch of the small shipment,
2,263,000 eggs were released in the field in February-March 1926.
94,500 eggs were used for the second generation rearing
operations, which were now extended to the Gogango and Gravesend
stations. The eggs hatched in February and March 1926; most of the
larvae were almost full-grown at the beginning of the winter but did
not pupate until the spring. However, many of the earlier-hatched
larvae developed rapidly and produced moths in late March and April:
this partial generation was of small proportions at Sherwood and


Gogango, but represented about 30 per cent, of the Chinchilla and 40
per cent, of the Gravesend stocks; it was characterised by an undue
preponderance of male moths and a low reproduction of 64 eggs per
female.
At Sherwood and Gogango, the eggs of the partial generation
hatched before the winter; larval development caught up to that of the
•main generation and the moths emerged simultaneously in the spring.
At Chinchilla the incubation period was prolonged to 75 days; the
larvae hatched in July, the coldest month of the winter, yet they made
good progress and yielded moths three to four weeks later than the
main winter generation. At Gravesend many of the eggs died during
the winter; a certain number hatched after four months at the end of
August, but the young larvae were obviously of weak constitution and
few developed successfully.
Of the combined winter broods, 170,362 eggs were housed in cages,
for a yield of 2,281,850 eggs in the early summer, a 12-fold increase, or
a 23-fold increase from the 94,500 eggs used for breeding work in
February-March. Chinchilla gave the best results, with a return of 48
cocoons from every 100 eggs, and an increase of 16-fold; at Gogango,
where drought conditions prevailed and the prickly-pear in the cages
could not be maintained in a succulent state, the increase fell to 3-fold.
In October-December 1926, 1,700,000 eggs were liberated at various
points; 326,000 were placed on growing plants at the field stations, to
provide an additional rearing nucleus; and 210,900 were accommodated
in rearing cages.
The 1926-27 summer or third Australian generation completed the
cage breeding work. The 210,900 eggs gave a return of 3,304,375 eggs,
an increase of 15-fold; each 100 eggs produced 44 cocoons; 60 per cent,
of the cocoons yielded moths; and the females laid an average of 129
eggs. Again the Chinchilla station secured the best results; from
72,400 eggs in cages were obtained 49,270 cocoons, an excellent rearing
return of 68 per cent., and the generation gave an increase of 23-fold.
Additional cocoons were collected from the growing plants on which
326,000 eggs had been put out; the moths from this material deposited
2,928,880 eggs. Hence the total production was 6,233,255 eggs, all of
which were liberated in the field in February-March 1927.
In the space of two years since the despatch of the 2,750 eggs from
the Argentine, during which period four generations had been completed,
cage rearing had resulted in the liberation of approximately 10,200,000
eggs.
ESTABLISHMENT IN THE FIELD.
Early Liberations.
The first, liberations of G. cactorum in February-March 1926 were
designed to test the potentialities of the insect in different sections of
the priekly-pear territory. 2,263,150 eggs were divided between, 19
localities, of which 14 were in Queensland and 5 in New South Wales;
in a few cases areas of 0. stricta were chosen, elsewhere was-
the host plant. The selected sites extended from Emerald on the north-
western edge of the main pear belt in central Queensland, to Scone in
the most southern large pear area in New South Wales. Between
198,176 and 251,965 eggs were released in the vicinity of each of the
three field stations, Gogango, Chinchilla and Gravesend, but smaller
numbers of between 81,300 and 128,700 eggs were used for each of the
other 16 liberations. Bach liberation was carried out by an officer of
ttie Board. As the date of oviposition had been recorded for all eggs


and the approximate incubation period was known, it was possible to
effect all releases one to three days prior to the eggs hatching. Bach
eggstiek was lightly gummed to a small square of paper. The papers
were affixed with pins or Opuntia spines, so that the eggs rested against
the surface of the segments and were covered by the paper. In the
case of two liberations in the vicinity of Gloondiwdndi, a different method
was essayed, the eggsticks being placed within slits cut in the pear
segments; however, not one egg hatched, apparently owing to the heat
of the sap killing the developing embryo. Of the other 17 liberations,
14 gave a hatching in excess of 60 per cent, (in 7 areas more than 90
per cent, of the eggs hatched), 2 a hatching of 33 to 40 per cent., while
in the remaining instance a heavy rainstorm washed most of the eggs
from the plants and 5 per cent, only of the larvae became established.
That a considerable proportion of the hatching larvae succeeded in
developing in most of these initial liberations was made evident by the
enormous population that developed around these centres during the
next three years. Two important facts were gleaned from the first
release of eggs in the field, firstly that the eggs, when near the hatching
point, were liable to succumb to the direct heat of the summer sun, and
secondly that even in the dense shade of the brigalow and belar scrubs,
eggs placed on new growth usually died, seemingly from the heat
engendered by the osmotic pressure of vigorously growing prickly-pear
plants. Later, it was learnt that the moths rarely oviposited in exposed
situations on the plants or on the uppermost segments.
In the following summer, from November 1926 to March 1927,
7,933,250 eggs were liberated. Of this total, 1,433,000 were placed out
in the neighbourhood of the .three field stations, and approximately
6.500.000 were divided among 58 different localities throughout the
priekly-pear territory, the bulk of these releases being made with
80.000 to 100,000 eggs. Officers of the Board carried out most of the
distribution, but the co-operation of landowners was obtained for a few
liberations in Queensland, while in New South Wales the Entomological
Branch of the Department of Agriculture conducted several liberations.
At this juncture, after 10,196,150 eggs had been released in the
field, the Boards role in the general establishment of the insect ceased
in so far as the actual distribution was concerned, except in the case of
a few experimental liberations and in the placing out of further material
in the vicinity of the field stations.
Mass Production for Distribution.
The big distribution campaign was carried out on an intensive scale
during the four years between July 1927 and July 1931. The actual
distribution was undertaken by State authorities in Queensland and
New South Wales and by landholders. The Board’s part in the
programme was the provision of the great bulk of the material. In
order to increase the output of eggs, a great many additional cages, as
well as large sheds for their protection, were constructed at the field
stations, which by now included the new station at Goondiwindi. During
this period the stations became centres of great activity. For two to
th ree months in each Cactohlastis generation gangs of men were
employed for the collection of cocoons and eggs from the field, the
gathering of the eggs from the emergence cages, and the placing of the
eggs in quills or their pasting on paper. The eggs -were despatched
from the field stations ready for liberation.


Generation.
Cocoons Collected.
Eggs Obtained.
August-November, 1927
582,904
17,932,484
January-March, 1928
1,118,060
28,152,000
August-November, 1928
11,695,850
125,553,736
January-March, 1929
10,000,000
58,000,000
August-November, 1929
12,400,000
159,587,300
Total
35,796,814
389,225,520
After the termination of mass rearing of larvae in cages, the eggs
for distribution were obtained during the next five generations of the
insect between July 1927 and November 1929 by collecting cocoons
from the field into emergence cages, from which, as the moths emerged,
the eggs were taken daily. The cocoons were gathered from those of
the earlier liberations where the insect had made most progress. The
main localities for this work were four areas in central Queensland, six
in western Queensland between Dalby and Roma, two in south-west
Queensland, and four in north-west New South Wales. As evidence
of the enormous increase of C. cactorum, mention can be made of the
fact that at Emerald, in central Queensland, where 81,300 eggs had
been released in February 1926, over 6,000,000 cocoons were obtained
in July-August 1928, while in the following month 22,000,000 eggs were
gathered in the same area by five men in one week.
The number of cocoons placed in the emergence cages and the
number of eggs obtained from the emerging moths during the five
generations when this method was in operation were as follows:
Of this great total, 338,587,300 eggs were supplied to Queensland,
34.500.000 to New South Wales, and the remaining 16,138,220 liberated
in proximity to the field stations. Heat waves in January 1929
adversely affected emergence and oviposition, and the egg output was
not satisfactory. In the last generation the Gogango station housed
6.500.000 cocoons and secured 81,500,000 eggs, of which as many as
4.275.000 eggs were laid in one night.
By collecting cocoons from the field into cages, allowing the moths
to lay therein, and gathering the eggs daily, the age of the despatched
eggs was known and instructions could he given concerning the probable
date of their hatching. Thus, the material could be liberated just prior
to hatching, and the likelihood of losses from rain, heat, ants and other
causes minimised. The cost of production by this method was approxi-
mately £ls for every one million eggs.
Meanwhile, eggs were being deposited in concentrated numbers at
various points, and in 1929 the previous plans were superseded in favour
of the direct collection from the field of the eggs for general distribution.
Of course, the age of field eggs could not be guessed, unless they had
darkened immediately prior to hatching; with this exception, field-
collected eggs might have been any age from one day to one month.
These supplies required to be liberated as soon as possible after their
collection, and they batched irregularly over a period of up to three
weeks after their placing on the prickly-pear plants. Losses from
W'eather and other factors must have been greater than formerly, but
the revised procedure was justified by the great quantities of available
material and by the cost of production being reduced from £ls to £5
per million eggs. The distribution of field-collected eggs proved quite


January-March, 1929
.. 74,000,000
September-November, 1929
.. 436,200,000
January-March, 1930
.. 430,500,000
September-November, 1930
.. 523,400,000
January-March, 1931
.. 190,500,000
1931-1932
29,100,000
1932-1933
2,400,000
Total
1,686,100,000
successful. The Board’s stations collected from the field, packed and
despatched for distribution, the following numbers of eggs:—
Of this number, 1,176,900,000 were supplied to Queensland and
509.200.000 to New South Wales. The grand total of cage-reared and
field eggs collected and prepared for distribution from the Board’s
stations or liberated by its officers reached the huge figure of
2,100,000,000. The height of the distribution campaign occurred
between September 1929 and November 1930. Subsequent to March
1931, relatively small numbers of eggs were supplied for liberation,
mainly for special areas which had not been adequately treated during
the main operations.
Distribution in Queensland.
The Queensland authority concerned with the distribution of Cacto-
ilastis has been the Prickly Pear Land Commission. The close
co-operation between the Board and the Commission has been outlined
earlier in this publication. Prom September 1927 to March 1929,
220.606.000 eggs from the field stations were liberated by the Commis-
sion’s large staff of field officers from their respective centres in the
pear-infested territory. As each liberation was of approximately
100.000 eggs, a widespread establishment of the insect was rapidly
effected. From September 1929 to March 1931, 1,292,882,500 eggs
from the field stations were supplied for distribution to landholder
applicants free of all charges, the cost being borne by the Commission.
Meanwhile, during the summer of 1929-30, in order to complete the
programme of mass distribution, the Commission established bases for
the collection of additional eggs, and by means of motor vehicles and
gangs of men liberated them on Crown lands and along all roadways
throughout the compact pear belt of southern Queensland. In this
way the distribution was increased by approximately 692,700,000 to
the grand total of 2,208,200,000 eggs released by official methods in the
State. At one centre, eggs were so plentiful that 300,000,000 were
secured in February 1930, one man collecting as many as 4,000,000
eggs, or about 60,000 eggstieks, in eight hours.
The Commission discarded the Board’s method of pasting the eggs
on paper for one in which waxed quills were used. The results from
both methods appeared equally satisfactory. Two or three eggstieks
were placed in each quill, in the side of which a few small holes permitted
the escape of the larvae; as in the case of papers, the quills were pinned
to the pear segments. In the free distribution landowners, pins were
supplied with the quilled eggs, and each box of 500 quills contained a
printed circular of instructions giving the correct method of liberation.
Distribution in New South Wales.
Of the 543,700,000 eggs supplied by the Board, the Department of
Agriculture either conducted the distribution with its entomological
staff, assisted by officers of the Prickly Pear Destruction Commission


and of the Forestry Board, or furnished material to landowners free of
■cost. Later the Board provided several million eggs to the Prickly Pear
Destruction Commission; this latter body has collected and distributed
an additional 10,000,000 to 12,000,000 eggs. The State authorities
continued with the Board’s method of gumming the eggs on squares of
paper. As the prickly-pear infestation of New South Wales did not
include very extensive unbroken tracts as in southern Queensland,
distribution by motor vehicles along roadways was not necessary. Many
of the New South Wales liberations have been of comparatively large
size, from 500,000 to 2,000,000 eggs being released in one area.
General Notes on Distribution.
The distribution of Cactoblastis throughout the prickly-pear areas
•of Queensland and New South Wales was virtually completed by March
1931, six years after the consignment of 2,750 eggs had been forwarded
from the Argentine. During this period, the vast number of
2,750,000,000 eggs had been released in the field through official action.
These figures reflect the rapid multiplication of the original small stock.
In the light of later experience it may be questioned whether the general
establishment of the insect required so intensive an effort. However,
the material was available, and the cost of distribution was comparatively
low. The total funds expended on the production of supplies and
on their distribution did not exceed £25,000, a very small outlay in
comparison with the size of the problem and the results obtained.
The egg stage of C. cactorum possesses certain qualifications that
permit facile distribution. The normal incubation period occupies
three to five weeks, and is never less than 18 days; thus the eggs can be
collected and transported long distances with little danger of their
hatching prior to release. Secondly, the curious eggstick formation, in
which from 50 to 100 or more eggs make up a compact chain, simplifies
mass distribution. Thirdly, the hard shell of the eggs and the firmness
of the eggsticks allow handling, packing, transporting and liberating
with a minimum prospect of injury. It has been facetiously remarked
that nature designed the Cactoblastis eggstick for the express purpose of
its use in the biological campaign against prickly-pear in Australia.
The efficacy of the establishment of the insect by liberating eggs
w r as revealed by the initial field experiments. Hence, the original
methods were generally adopted. In some instances good results were
obtained by landholders collecting segments containing the larvae and
spreading them among the non-infested prickly-pear. The obvious
difficulties in the way of transporting the necessary large quantities of
prickly-pear containing the larvae precluded its wider use.
Certain individuals claimed that the broadcasting of loose eggsticks
among prickly-pear, a very cheap mode of distribution, was quite satis-
factory. Experiments demonstrated that when eggsticks were scattered
or broadcast by hand less than 1 per cent, of the larvae succeeded in
entering the plants. Another method tried by landowners consisted of
placing broken off segments flat among the plants, laying eggsticks on
top of these segments, and covering them with more detached pear.
This procedure was not unsuccessful, but it was very slow unless many
eggsticks were placed on each broken segment, and in this event the
subsequent overcrowding caused a heavy mortality among the young
larvae.
The purpose of the Government distribution was to bring about,
as rapidly as possible, establishment at sufficiently frequent intervals
so that the insect’s natural increase and dispersion would ensure a


general attack on the whole of the vast acreage of the pest within a short
period. This objective was attained. By the end of 1931 it could be
said that C. cactormi occurred on every square mile, almost on every
acre, of prickly-pear in Queensland and New South Wales. Distribution
was purely for the purpose of establishing the insect; it could not be
conducted on the greater scale essential to cause immediate destruction
for the collapse of every acre of dense pear required the activities of
millions of larvae.
While the official programme of distribution was being put into
effect, a good deal of haphazard spreading of Gactoblastis was being
conducted by private action. As soon as evidence of the insect’s destruc-
tive powers became apparent at the earliest liberation sites, landholders
were eager to see the same results reproduced on their properties.
For two or three years trafficking in Gactoblastis eggs assumed some
importance. In several areas the insect was concentrated in seemingly
countless numbers. Schoolboys, youths and men collected the eggs and
sold them at so much per ounce or per pound. On the edge of one small
township two enterprising boys had installed headquarters in a
dilapidated hut, on the door of which was inscribed in chalk “Cactus
Blastus Agints. ’ ’ A few people conducted the business on more
extended lines; they purchased the eggs in small lots from the local
collectors and hawked the bulk supplies by motor-ear for selling in
districts where the insect was not yet present in quantity. The distribu-
tion by private persons assisted in some measure the general establish-
ment of Gactoblastis. Many landowners realised the value of making
the effort to liberate the eggs in an efficient manner. But often it
seemed far too much trouble to paste the eggsticks on paper and fasten
them to the plants; hence, millions of purchased eggs were wasted by
being broadcasted among the prickly-pear.
LIFE HISTORY AND HABITS.
Generations.
In Australia, as in the Argentine, there are two generations a year,
a long winter and a shorter summer generation, the moths emerging in
September-Novemher and January-March. In addition, there is a third
partial generation in the late summer or autumn in central Queensland
and to a slight extent in southern Queensland. This extra generation
does not assume considerable proportions, except occasionally in local
areas of central Queensland. In the more southern pear districts of
New South Wales a very small percentage of the Gactoblastis population,
represented by occasional colonies of larvae, occupies the full year for
the completion of development.
In the winter generation, pupation in central Queensland usually
commences in August; emergence begins early in September, the peak
occurring in the second half of this month. In southern Queensland,
pupation begins at the end of August, and emergence reaches a crest
about the second or third week of October. In the Hunter Valley, the
most southern large prickly-pear district in New South Wales, the first
cocoons are spun at the end of September and moth emergence reaches
its height between late October and the middle of November. The
earliest larvae to pupate are generally associated with totally destroyed
plants, semi-starvation being responsible for a degree of acceleration in
both generations. In the summer generation, pupation commences in
central Queensland about the middle of December, and emergence
reaches its peak a month later. In the Hunter Valley, pupation begins


District.
Winter Generation.
Summer Generation.
Central Queensland. .
September 15
October 10
January 9
January 28
Southern Queensland
October 3
October 18
January 22
February 10
Hunter Valley
October 26
November 16
February 17
March 13
Central Queensland . .
. . 71
deg. F.
South Queensland
. . 67
deg. F.
Hunter Valley
. . 62
deg. F.
in late January and moth emergence attains the crest in late February
or early March.
The peak of emergence of each generation has been determined by
taking the average date on which the largest number of moths have
appeared from cocoons collected from many localities in each district.
Since 1928, the earliest and latest moth peaks have occurred as follows: —
Taking an average it will be found that emergence in central
Queensland is two -weeks earlier than in southern Queensland and six
weeks earlier than in the Hunter Valley. However, on several
occasions the difference in time between emergence in central Queens-
land and the Hunter Valley has been as great as seven to eight weeks.
The average mean annual temperature of the main prickly-pear territory
in these three divisions is:—
The period of emergence in any locality normally occupies about
four weeks in the summer generation, but from 55 to 70 per cent, of the
moths generally emerge within eight days. The rise to the peak is more
gradual than the decrease; in the Hunter Valley the ratio of increase
and decrease is often reversed. In the winter generation emergence is
distributed over an average interval of six weeks in each district. Most
of the moths appear within a period of two to three weeks, and the
daily numbers may rise and fall very sharply with fluctuations in the
nightly temperature. Typical graphs illustrating emergence in the
summer and winter generations appear on pages 118 and 119.
The partial third generation in the late summer and autumn arises
through the rapid development of a small proportion of the larvae that
should constitute the winter generation. Emergence is irregular. In
central Queensland the moths may emerge at any time between late
March and June; in southern Queensland these autumn adults appear
in April and May. In central Queensland any eggs deposited in March
and April hatch before the winter, and the larvae produce moths
simultaneously with the later part of the main winter generation. On
the other hand, eggs laid in May and June do not hatch until the end of
the winter, and the larvae become merged in the earlier portion of the
summer generation. In southern Queensland, where the partial
generation is of very small dimensions, the eggs deposited in April and
May usually pass the winter in the incubation period.
During the first twelve months after the insect’s introduction into
Australia, cage rearing at the Chinchilla, southern Queensland, and
Gravesend, north-west New South Wales, stations resulted in the rapid
development of between 30 and 40 per cent, of the larvae that should
have constituted the winter generation, the moths emerging in April.
This abnormal feature was no doubt due to improper acclimatisation,
and w r as not repeated.


A typical melt emergence during tie summer generation, lasting four weeks.
If etc the sharp falling off after the peak of emergence.


Number of Days
Note the sudden drop in the number of moths when the temperature fell to 38 deg. F. immediately prior to the peak
of emergence.
Life-Cycle.
The shortest life-cycle on record is one of 75 days at Gogango in
October-December. Adding the shortest known development of each
stage, the theoretical minimum life-cycle under prevailing atmospheric
conditions is 58 days, divided as follows:
Days.
Incubation period . . .. . . . . 18
Larval period .. .. . . . . 27
Pupal period . . .. . . .. 13
Since it would be impossible for the temperatures required to
influence the most rapid development of egg, larva and pupa to operate


Summer Generation.
Winter Generation.
Days.
Days.
Central Queensland
107 to 120
245 to 260
South Queensland
98 to 121
238 to 267
Hunter Valley
.. 106 to 123
236 to 258
during the successive stages of one individual, the life-cycle in practice
must necessarily occupy at least several days longer than the potential
minimum. In temperature experiments, the incubation, larval and
pupal periods have not been reduced below the quoted figures.
Eggs and pupae subjected to the same climatic conditions develop
at an even rate. This is not true of the larvae, for the reason that
nutritional and temperature values are not constant within a prickly-
pear plant over a given period. Experiments during the short summer
generation gave a difference of from 26 to 34 days between the pupation
of the first and last individuals among larvae that hatched on the same
day and were reared in cages of 12 cubic feet capacity; the time variation
in the life-cycle approximated the differences in the rate of development
of the larvae. The average duration of the life-cycle may be accepted
as the interval between the peaks of moth emergence in succeeding
generations. Over a period of years, this interval has varied within the-
following limits: —
The Adult.
C. cactorum, is a rather plain moth. In the female, the forewings
are of a brownish-grey, lighter along the anterior margin, and with
indefinite wavy transverse lines toward the distal margin; the hind-
wings are white at base and become smoky-brown on the outer half,
with a dark line along the posterior margin. The male forewings are
rather lighter in shade, and the hindwings are pearly-white except for
the narrow dark marginal line. The wing expanse is to If inch in
the female, and to If inch in the male. In the resting position the
length of the female is approximately 1 inch from the tip of the palpi
to the end of the wings. The insect is very similar to the several species
of Melitara, the wing pattern being almost identical.
In the resting position, the wings are parallel with and cover the
abdomen; the prominent palpi are turned slightly upward; the antennae
are crossed near their base and lie close together along the mid-dorsal
line. The hold is maintained by the last two pairs of legs, which are
directed backward; the forelegs are not used and are folded downward
from the femora which project forward. The moth stands at an angle
of about 30 degrees from the object, which is touched by the abdomen
and the apex of the wings.
Emergence normally occurs between 6.30 p.m. (dusk) and 8.30 p.m.,
the males tending to appear first; a few T moths emerge in the afternoon,
but practically none after 9 p.m. Usually, mating takes place 9to 12
hours after emergence, from daylight until 7.30 a.m. Copulation has
not been observed at night or after 9 a.m. Sometimes mating is delayed
until the second morning after emergence. Unlike the species of Meli-
iara, C. cactorum moths never remain in coition throughout the day.
During daylight, the moths may be found resting on tree trunks,
twigs, grass stems, the edges of prickly-pear segments and other
situations, generally within a few feet of the ground. They are not
readily disturbed; the females in particular will walk on to one’s hand
and immediately re-settle; the males may fly a few yards. In very hot
weather, moths in wire-gauze cages become very restive. At night they
fly in a jerky manner, usually a few feet above the ground. Where


there is an abundance of prickly-pear, the great majority do not travel
far. This is evidenced hy the circumstance that the eggs are always
deposited in greatest numbers in the immediate vicinity of plants
attacked by the previous generation, and is proved by the destruction of
prickly-pear radiating from a given centre. Where the prickly-pear
plants are scattered, the moths range more widely; many instances on
record indicate that individuals have flown as far as fifteen miles to
oviposit. Apparently they prefer to fly in the lighter open areas than
in the darker timbered country; thus, plants growing along roadways
through dense belts of prickly-pear were the first to be attacked.
The moths do not require food, and seemingly do not take in any
nourishment. This statement is equally true of the related genera,
Melitma and Olycello,; on the other hand, one allied species, Ozamia
odiosella, fed readily on drops of sweetened water. While the females
are positively phototropic, the males are very rarely attracted to light.
Atmospheric conditions probably influence the degree of phototropism.
On occasions hundreds of female moths have been seen flying around
electric lights in the streets of townships situated in prickly-pear
country. Kerosene lights in houses and electric lights in passing trains
have proved attractive; moths have been found resting in railway
carriages a long distance from the locality where they had entered on
the previous night.
Proportion of Sexes.
The relative proportions of male and female moths vary within
certain limits. Males predominate in the early part and females toward
the end of the emergence period of a generation. Material reared on
typical succulent prickly-pear will yield an average of 46 to 48 per
cent, females. The percentage of females may fall as low as 35 or rise
as high as 53, but is rarely below 40 or above 50 per cent.
Quite definitely, the food supply influences the degree of preponder-
ance of either sex. If the prickly-pear is succulent in quality and ample
in quantity, the female proportion will rise. On the other hand, under-
nourishment of larvae not only results in smaller moths but reduces
the number of females. This statement is not meant to convey the
impression that the food supply determines the sex. Probably, where
malnutrition operates, the female larvae, being larger, are more liable
to succumb. The influence of nutrition on the sex ratio can be
illustrated by a few typical examples.
(1) Large scale rearing experiments on growing plants, carried
out through three successive generations at Scone, N.S.W.,
produced an average of 51-3 per cent, females from a very
succulent type of inermis, compared with an average of
45-0 per cent, females from larvae fed on nitrogen-deficient
yellow inermis.
(2) Series of experiments at Gugango, Qld., in which the larvae
were furnished with an adequate or inadequate food supply,
yielded 47-6 per cent, from the fully-fed material, compared
with 42-1 per cent, females from the under-nourished larvae.
(3) Prom pupae collected in south-west Queensland from six
areas of succulent regrowth and from six areas of partially-
destroyed primary pear, 47-3 per cent, females were
obtained from the regrowth, and 40-7 per cent, females from
the poorer-quality primary pear.


Length of Adult Life.
Longevity among the moths would appear to be influenced by
temperature. The average life is approximately 9 days for both males
and females, and the maximum life 18 days. In September and October,
sudden drops in temperature to below 40 deg. F. will cause an appreci-
able mortality among the moths that have emerged on warmer nights.
Yet in June, moths lived as long as 18 days and survived readings as
low as 28 deg. F.; however, they did not oviposit.
Extremes of heat play an important part in shortening the life of
the moths. In constant temperature experiments, exposure to 112 deg.
P. for two hours had no marked effect, but a high mortality occurred
at 116 deg.; moths survived for three days at 100 deg. and for two days
at 104 and 110 deg. At Gogango, Qld., during a four-day heat wave in
January with shade temperatures reaching 106 deg. F., many moths
did not live longer than 48 hours. The mean maximum temperature for
the whole of that month was 91-0 deg. F., and moths did not survive
for more than 7 days; whereas in the previous month, with a mean
maximum of 86-5 deg. P., they lived for 11 days.
The Egg Stage and Oviposition.
The mode of oviposition, by which the eggs are laid in chains or
sticks, appears to be confined to the closely-related cactus moths of the
genera Melitara, Olycella and Cactoilastis. The eggsticks resemble at
a distance the prickly-pear spines to which they are affixed. In the
length of the eggsticks and the consequent number of eggs contained
therein, the habit is most accentuated in the species of Cactoilastis.
The sticks of C. cactorum may contain as many as 150 eggs; the
average figure is 70 to 90 eggs per stick, and a number in excess of 105
is rather unusual. A stick of 70 eggs measures approximately an inch.
Should the stick be short, it is often quite straight, but average examples
are curved to the extent of about one-quarter of a circle, the convexity
being away from the surface of the prickly-pear segment. It is attached
to a spine or spicule, from which it is suspended at an angle of roughly
90 degrees and is thus approximately parallel to the surface of the
segment. The first egg is cemented with a brownish glue to the spine,
and is irregular in shape; the second and sometimes the third eggs are
of unequal length, but the remaining eggs are very uniform. The
outline of the complete stick is quite unbroken. The individual eggs
in the stick measure 0-85 to 0-40 mm. in length by 0-90 to 0-95 mm. in
width; they are straight on their joining margins, and slightly convex
on the lateral margins; the apical margin of the terminal egg is broadly
convex. When the eggs are separated, it is found that the apical margin
is broadly convex and is received within the rather deep concavity of
the succeeding egg; hence in the stick, one division only is visible between
adjacent eggs.
Their weight varies within certain limits; the shorter sticks tend to
be made up of small-sized eggs, and vice versa. With average eggs, there
are from 2,750 to 3,200 to the gram; very small eggs may weigh 3,500
and very large eggs 2,500 to the gram. The moisture in the atmosphere
has some bearing on the weight. The surface of the eggs is strongly
irregularly reticulate or rugose; a definite amount of pressure is required
to break the ehitinous surface. The eggsticks possess a certain degree
of pliability, but become brittle in very dry weather. Freshly-deposited
eggs are pale straw yellow; they soon darken to dull yellow and turn
black prior to hatching.


The Act of Oviposition.
Oviposition occurs between 6.30 p.m. and 8.30 p.m. The first eggs,
are more usually deposited on the night following emergence, hut the
operation may be delayed for 48, 72, or even 96 hours. The manner in
which an eggstick is laid is most interesting. The female faces head
downward on the prickly-pear segment, places the tip of the abdomen
against the spine or spicule, and fastens the first egg to the upper surface
of the spine near its extremity. With the legs raised and the wings held
downward over the legs, the abdomen is gradually bent backward over
the thorax while the eggs are being deposited. Meanwhile, the insect
walks backward up the segment to the base of the spine, or, in the case of
a short spicule, to the base of the eggstick. If the eggstick is a long one,
she may continue to walk backward along the stick until her position is
reversed, with the head facing upward and the dorsal surface toward
the pear segment. The outward and at the same time downward
curvature of the eggstick is due to the abdomen moving in an arc during
the process. The eggs are deposited at the rate of one every 12 to 15
seconds; average eggstieks, containing 60 to 90 eggs, are completed in
15 to 25 minutes.
Number of Eggstieks Per Female.
The usual number of eggstieks laid by each female is three or four
more than five is infrequent. However, in one record, one individual
deposited ten sticks containing a total of 292 eggs. In some cases, three
or four sticks have been laid the same night; two average-sized eggstieks
in one evening are frequent. One female laid sticks containing 92, 71,
and 42 eggs on the third night after emergence, and two sticks of 75
and 112 eggs on the succeeding evening. Very rarely is more than one
stick oviposited on any night after the fourth.
There is a definite tendency for the first deposited stick to contain
the greatest number of eggs. Not uncommonly the second stick is the
largest, more rarely the third assumes this position, and very occasionally
the fourth or fifth eggstick. In any case, the first eggstick is nearly
always of average or above average size, whereas those laid after the
fourth evening are below normal size. The interval of rest between egg
laying is irregular; moths may oviposit on two or three successive nights,
or there may be a period of from two to five days between eggstieks.
Although the females may survive for ten to twelve days, or even
longer, few eggs are deposited after the fifth night.
Fecundity.
The number of eggs laid by each female varies very greatly, even
in the case of material reared simultaneously under the same conditions.
Fecundity is greatly influenced by two factors —
(a) the food supply of the larvae;
(i) prevailing temperatures during the pupal and adult stages.
Experimental work has shown that invariably some females do not
oviposit; the proportion is small among healthy stocks whose adult life
has coincided with favourable climatic conditions, but is of considerable
importance when nutrition of the larvae has not been satisfactory or
when either the pupal or adult stage, or both, has been subjected to
unsuitable ranges of temperature.
The greatest number of eggs recorded from one individual has been
392 at Scone, N.S.W. This female was among 22 large healthy pairs


which emerged on the same night and were isolated under similar
conditions. Among these females, 3 did not oviposit, and the lowest
production by an individual was 67 eggs. The variation in egg produc-
tion is illustrated by summarising the results from this experiment: —
3 females did not oviposit.
2 females deposited less than 100 eggs.
6 females deposited between 100 and 200 eggs.
2 females deposited between 200 and 250 eggs.
7 females deposited between 250 and 300 eggs.
2 females deposited more than 300 eggs.
The average number of eggs from each of the 22 females was 193,
or less than one-half the maximum production. The average fecundity
of the 19 females that oviposited was 223 eggs. In a similar experiment
at Chinchilla, Qld., with 19 pairs of moths, the highest reproduction
was 265 eggs; 5 females did not oviposit; the egg average from the
19 females was 132 eggs per female, or one-half the maximum number;
the average from the 14 productive females was 179 eggs per female.
It is probable that the figure of 392 eggs does not represent the
maximum fecundity. At Gogango, Qld., an average of 274 eggs per
female from 45 examples is the highest reproduction secured from a
number of moths. Judging by the quoted experiments at Scone and
Chinchilla, where the egg average from a given number of females was
approximately 50 per cent, lower than the maximum output of one
individual, it would seem likely that the highest producers among the
45 Gogango females must have laid a number in excess of 400 eggs.
Many other records of high fecundity have been obtained at Gogango,
such as—
-253 eggs per female from 11 females.
234 eggs per female from 28 females.
223 eggs per female from 190 females.
200 eggs per female from 140 females.
194 eggs per female from 277 females.
The best return at any other centre has been an average of 232 eggs
per female by 204 female moths at Scone, N.S.W.
The figures given so far refer to high reproductions. The experience
with large numbers of moths, collected in the pupal stage from typical
field areas in many districts over a period of years, has indicated that
100 eggs per female may be accepted as a general average. In securing
data from the field in each generation, this figure has been taken as the
normal. If the returns from many thousands of moths exceed 100 eggs
per female, oviposition is considered above the average; conversely
where the output is below this figure, reproduction is deemed below
normal.
The fecundity of C. cactorum appears to be highest in central
Queensland and the Hunter River, the two extremities of the main
priekly-pear territory. Over a period of years, the average reproduction
from large numbers of moths which have developed as larvae in the field
has been as follows: —
Eggs per Female.
Central Queensland .. .. .. .. 108
Western Queensland .. . . .. 95
South-west Queensland . . .. . . 87
Hunter Valley .. .. .. .. 112
Climatic conditions are, on the whole, more favourable to the insect
in the districts returning the higher figures. Thus, night temperatures


Panorama of prickly-pear recently destroyed by Cactoblastis cactorum, Moree district, N.S.W., June, 1929.
[F'J'V qxiyv 124.


Dense prickly-pear, Opunlia incrmis, prior to attack by insects, Chinchilla, Qld., October, 1926.


The same area as on opposite page three years later, October, 1929, as a result of the onslaught of Cactoblastis.


Destruction by Cactoblastis of prickly-pear on grazing country, Chinchilla, Qld., July, 1933.


Winter Generation.
Summer Generation
September-Noveinber
Jannary-March
Moths.
Moths.
Eggs per Female.
Eggs per Female.
Central Queensland . . 125
90
Western Queensland . . 103
87
South-west Queensland 99
7o
Hunter Galley . . . . 104
120
—
Sherwood.
Goondiwindi.
Mean
Minimum.
Egg
Average.
Mean
Minimum.
Egg
Average.
Deg.
Deg.
1937
57-9
151
57-2
107
1938 . .
59-4
157
60-0
137
1939
54-5
99
53-7
95
adversely affecting oviposition in the spring months occur less often in
central Queensland than in the more southern districts of the State,
while in the Hunter Valley periods of extreme heat in midsummer are
generally experienced before the insect enters the susceptible pupal and
adult stages. The low egg average in south-west Queensland as compared
with western Queensland may be explained by the circumstance that
climatic factors reducing oviposition are more severe over a greater
portion of the priekly-pear lands in the former sector.
The egg average from winter generation moths is higher than from
summer generation material in Queensland, but the position is reversed
in the Hunter Valley. The following figures summarise the results of
many years’ records:—
Sudden falls in night temperatures in September-October when
moth emergence is in progress reduce egg production, particularly when
the thermometer drops below what is considered the critical point of
50 deg. F. Not only are the moths disinclined to oviposit on the cooler
nights, but many individuals that have emerged on warmer evenings
succumb to the lower temperatures before they have deposited eggs. This
factor is of greater importance in the southern half of Queensland in
so-called late winters. The influence of fluctuating minimum temperatures
on the daily egg production is shown in the graph on page 126.
In the three years, 1937,1938, and 1939, pupae collected in the spring
from typical areas in western and south-west Queensland were housed in
wire-gauze cages at Sherwood and Goondiwindi for emergence and
oviposition data. Mean minimum temperature values for the two weeks
in each season when the main moth emergence occurred are herewith
compared with the egg average obtained from the whole of the moths in
the corresponding generations:—
Both in 1937 and 1938 the temperature during this critical two
weeks did not fall below 51 deg. P. in 1939, at Sherwood, there were
two definite peaks of emergence, on October 5-7, and October 12-14; the
temperature dropped below 50 deg. on four nights: October 8, 47 deg.;
October 11, 47 deg.; October 12, 49 deg.; October 13, 49 deg. Thus, the
drop in temperature values coincided with the period when moths were
emerging most freely, and egg production dropped by 36 per cent,
compared with the average of the two preceding years. At Goondiwindi,
the cooler nights in 1939 occurred bn October 8-13, immediately prior to
the peak of emergence on October 14-16; during the five nights of lower
temperatures the readings varied between 41 and 47 deg. F. The drop in


Illustrating the rise and fall in the daily number of eggs, with fluctuations in minimum temperatures during September and October.


1931
Eggs per Fciimlt
. . 78
1932
. . 36
1933
. . 79
1934
. . 87
1935
. . 73
1938
. . 93
1939
. . 47
1940
. . 58
egg production of 22 per ceut., compared with the average of the two
preceding years, was not as great as at Sherwood, due no doubt to the
fact that the cold snap happened just prior to the peak of emergence and
not during the peak period as at Sherwood.
Very high temperatures during either the pupal period or the adult
stage in midsummer lower egg production. Abnormal values causing
heat wave conditions, when they occur in the southern pear districts of
Queensland, are nearly always experienced in January; the summer
generation of V. cactorum enters the pupal stage in January, and moth
emergence reaches its peak in late January or early February. The
following figures give the general egg average from many thousands of
moths in various summer generations at Goondiwindi;—
It is significant that in 1932, 1939 and 1940, when the egg average
was low, extreme heat was experienced in January; in the remaining
years, January was a month of normal summer temperature values. In
1932, very hot conditions prevailed throughout the four weeks when
moths were emerging. The mean maximum reading of 98-5 deg. was
8 deg. above normal; values in excess of 100 deg., to the absolute maximum
of 108 deg., were recorded on eleven days. As a consequence, a consider-
able proportion of the moths died without ovipositing.
At Gogango in the course of series of cage-rearing experiments, a
beat wave occurred on January 13 to 19, with daily maximum readings
of 97 to 106 deg. During this hot period, the egg average did not exceed
50 per female, but it rose to 150 per female in the following week when
the highest reading was 85 deg, F.
Abnormally high temperatures during the pupal period may have
a deleterious effect on the fecundity of the adults which emerge after
temperatures have returned to normal. In both 1939 and 1940, heat waves
were experienced over the more southern prickly-pear regions of
Queensland; the egg average in these two summers was well below
normal. The year 1940 will serve for illustration. The severe beat
extended from January 12 to 31, culminating in extremely high readings
in the last week, when typical towns in the priekly-pear country, as
Roma, St. George, Mungindi and Goondiwindi, each experienced four
days when the thermometer passed the 110 deg. mark, to absolute
readings of 116 deg. at St. George and Mungindi. Moth emergence
reached its peak on February 5 in western Queensland and on February
9 in south-west districts: thus the pupae were subjected to the hot
conditions for the greater part of their existence, it was found that
the egg production of the moths that emerged in February, when
temperatures had become normal, was unusually low, averaging 55 and
5S eggs per female for western and south-west localities respectively.
Experiments were conducted by isolating many pairs of moths from
various localities; the results showed that—
{a) 44 per cent, of the females did not oviposit; from some areas
the figure was as high as 66 per cent.


(6) The females that oviposited gave an average of more than
100 eggs per female, but owing to the considerable number of
non-laying individuals, the egg average for the whole number
was reduced by 42 per cent.
(c) Many individual females deposited more than 200 eggs, the
maximum number being 292.
Applying these experimental results, it will be found that the
averages of 55 and 58 eggs per female from western and south-western
areas would have been increased to 95 and 100 eggs respectively had ail
females deposited eggs. Thus, the low egg production was due to the
circumstance that an abnormal proportion of the female moths did not
deposit eggs.
The size of the moths has an important bearing on their fecundity.
Small females do not deposit as many eggs as large examples. Size is
determined by the food supply of the larvae. Under-sized moths result
from malnutrition in the larval stage, either through direct starvation
or through the prickly-pear being unsuitable or deficient in certain
essentials. The largest moths are produced from succulent plants and
from young secondary growth. A few examples will serve to illustrate
the differences: —
(a) In series of concurrent rearing experiments, the following
comparisons were secured:—
Fully-fed Larvae:
Pood plant, O. iuernvis; 277 females deposited 194 eggs per
female.
Food plant, O. stricta; 172 females deposited 185 eggs per
female.
Semi-starved Larvae:
Food plant, O. merrnis; 579 females deposited 107 eggs per
female.
Food plant, O. stricta; 121 females deposited 101 eggs per
female.
Thus, under-nourishment of the larvae reduced egg
production by approximately 45 per cent.
(&) Several thousand pupae were collected from six areas of
succulent regrowth, and six areas of partially-damaged
primary pear where the more succulent upper growth had
been destroyed by the previous generation of larvae. The
egg average from the regrowth areas was 105 per female,
compared with 54 per female from the other localities.
(c) In large scale rearing experiments on growing plants,
conducted through three successive generations at Scone,
N.S.W., with succulent inermis and with the chlorotic
nitrogen-deficient type known as “yellow pear,” the
productivity averaged 135 eggs per female from the green
pear and 102 eggs per female from the yellow pear.
Fertility.
Hatching reaches 100 per cent, with remarkable uniformity; in
fact, it is unusual to find one unhatched egg in a stick. Any mortality
is due to extreme weather conditions or to attack by predators.
Occasionally, a few of the terminal eggs do not produce larvae, or very
short eggsticks are wholly infertile; in the latter event, the eggs may
represent the final oviposition of moths or are the product of females
suffering from a pathogenic disability.


Host Preference.
In the field the eggs are affixed to prickly-pear plants. So constant
is this habit that, of the many millions of eggsticks observed in the
field over a period of years, not more than ten sticks have been found on
any foreign object; these rare exceptions were attached to stems of
grass growing among or against prickly-pear plants. The segments
selected by the females are not necessarily green; eggsticks may be
deposited on dead segments of damaged plants or even on completely
dead plants. Under cage conditions, although the greater number of
eggsticks are laid on the prickly-pear, some are attached to the cloth,
wire-gauze or woodwork. Females that have been attracted by lights in
buildings frequently oviposit on the walls, curtains, etc.
Situation.
The eggs are usually deposited on the second, third or lower segments,
and more or less on the underneath side; terminal growth is rarely
selected. Hence most eggsticks are in situations where they are not
exposed to the direct rays of the sun except for short intervals.
Obviously this habit affords protection from heat. Among short regrowth,
the moths oviposit freely enough on single segments in the absence of
larger plants. However, as a rule they exhibit an aversion for very
young growth, whether of seedlings, regrowth or primary pear. The
eggsticks are invariably attached to the spines or fine spine hairs, and are
never fastened to the smooth surface of the plant.
Incubation Period.
The duration of the eggstage depends on temperature. The shortest
period on record is 18 days. In January and February, the normal time
varies between 23 and 28 days; most of the eggs deposited by the summer
generation moths in Queensland and northern districts of New South
Wales have hatched by the middle of March. In the Hunter Valley and
at higher elevations in northern New South Wales, hatching is protracted.
For example, at Scone the earliest eggs may hatch early in March, after
an incubation period as short as 23 days, but the general incubation
period for that month is 30 to 32 days; large numbers of eggs produce
larvae in April after 40 to 45 days, and hatching continues to the end
of May, when the incubation period has lengthened to 60 to 70 days.
After the winter, the earliest eggs hatch in approximately 50 days
in September-October. In southern Queensland the eggs of this genera-
tion produce larvae mainly in November after 28 to 30 days. At Scone,
hatching commences in late November and is complete by the end of
December, the incubation period meanwhile shortening from 32 to 28
days. In southern Queensland, eggs deposited by moths of the partial
generation in April and May may fail to produce larvae or may hatch
at any time between late May and the end of September, the incubation
period varying from 45 to 132 days.
The Larval Stage.
The newly-hatched larvae are greyish in colour, but become pale
yellow after the first moult. In the third instar the yellow colour is
deeper, and four black dots occur in a transverse row on each segment.
After the third moult the dots have enlarged considerably and the
general colour is orange-yellow or orange-red. In the fifth instar the
spots tend to coalesce, giving the appearance of black bands. The full-
grown larvae are translucent orange-red or orange, with the four spots


Locality.
Mean Temperature.
Mean T.arval Period.
Deg. F.
Days.
Sherwood . .
72
54
Gogango
77
44
Chinchilla . .
80
46
Scone
74
60
on each segment usually distinctly separated; they are approximately an
inch and a quarter in length.
There are six larval instars, which is to say that the larvae cast
their skins five times. In the summer generation, the duration of the first
four instars is approximately equal, averaging 5 to 8 days; the fifth
instar occupies longer, varying between 6 and 14 days; while the final
instar has a duration of from Bto 24 days. In the winter generation,
the first three instars are of comparatively short duration, the fourth
and fifth are somewhat longer, and the final instar occupies the greater
part of the larval stage. Thus, in the case of larvae which hatched in
early April and pupated at the end of August after a larval life of
143 days, the third ntoult was made at the end of 21 days, and the fifth
moult after a further 24 days; the final instar occupied 98 days or the
whole of the three winter months of June, July and August. Normally
the eggs of this generation .hatch during March, and the larvae have
entered the last instar by June. However, in the Hunter Valley and
other areas where hatching is often delayed until May, the earlier stages
develop more slowly and the larvae do not reach the final instar until
after the winter.
Length of Larval Life.
The length of the larval period is determined firstly by temperatures
and secondly by food conditions. At constant temperatures the most
rapid development occurred at 93-5 deg. F.; higher values increased the
larval life by causing periods of inactivity. The shortest duration of the
larval stage under atmospheric conditions has been 27 days with larvae
of the partial generation developing in February-March in central
Queensland. In the main summer generation the shortest larval period
of fully-fed examples has been 33 days in November-December. The
mean life of the summer generation larvae miay be considered as 50 days;
thus, the eggs hatch in November and the pupal stage is reached in
January. Experiments carried out during these months at existing
field temperatures gave results as follows-.
In the winter generation the average larval period is 180 days; the
eggs hatch in March and the larvae spin cocoons in September. But in
the case of eggs hatching in April and .May, development is accelerated
and pupation may eventuate within 120 to 130 days. On the other hand,
records have been made of the larval stage occupying 200 days in this
generation, and on the rare occasions when the insect reverts to a
one-year life-cycle the period must be considerably greater.
The rate of development is not uniform in the case of larvae hatching
on the same day and being subjected to apparently identical conditions
as regards temperature. Observations made at each field station during
the summer generation with 200 larvae, that hatched simultaneously


Sherwood . .
Duration of Larval Stage.
Days.
48 to 74
Variation.
Days.
26
Chinchilla . .
39 to 52
13
Goondiwindi
54 to 86
32
Scone
57 to 87
30
Gogango 1 . .
36 to 66
30
Gogango 2 . .
42 to 76
34
Normal Green Pear,
Yellow Pear.
Days.
Days.
Stunmer Generation . . 61 to 98
87 to 102
Winter Generation . . 158 to 180
170 to 200
and developed in a wire-gauze cage measuring 3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet
high, illustrate the unequal development:—
The difference in the time element must be due to the quantity and
quality of the food available to each individual. The succulence of
prickly-pear segments varies considerably, even in the contents of a
small cage. Young terminal cladodes possess a higher nutrient value
than second segments, and these values are progressively lower toward
the base of the plants. Larvae grow more rapidly in regrowth prickly-
pear than in older plants. The larval stage is always prolonged in
‘ ‘ yellow pear ’ ’ which is lacking in nitrogen, as is shoAvn by the following
data from concurrent rearing experiments at Scone; —
Hatching and Entering.
The eggs hatch at any time during the day, and even at night in
warm weather. Normally, all larvae from one eggstick appear within
three or four hours, but with out-of-season eggs in April to October the
time may be extended for two or three days. The larvae cluster near the
base of the eggstick, cover themselves with a fine silky web, and enter
the plant immediately, near but not at the areole. Less frequently they
move to another position on the same segment, or they may wander to
another segment before burrowing into the plant. The latter movement
is usually directed toward an upper segment and is particularly marked
either in yellow pear in which the terminal cladodes are more succulent,
or when the eggstick is attached to a basal stem or to a dead segment.
This migration occurs before an attempt has been made to penetrate the
plant. The point of entry may be anywhere on the surface or along the
margin of the segment or at the junction of two segments. The young
larvae from one eggstick remain in one colony, and make several entrance
holes within a radius of half an inch. Several to as many as 20 larvae,
formed in a circle with their heads at the centre, assist in chewing
through the cuticle to form the one entrance hole. This procedure, which
is maintained at later stages in their development, emphasises the truly
gregarious habit of the larvae.
Feeding and Development.
The first feeding takes place just beneath the cuticle, where the
young larvae are crowded together and are often visible through the
semi-transparent outer layer. As development proceeds, they tunnel
through the v segments, consuming the whole interior except the vascular
bundles, and leaving the uninjured cuticle as a parchment-like tissue.
L'sually, their activity gives rise to rot conditions. The assistance of
the various decay agencies causes more rapid destruction than when the
feeding is unaccompanied by wet rotting.


The pellets of excrement, yellow-brown or greenish-yellow globules,
are discharged in part through the original entrance holes or are packed
within the segments. Very little frass is pushed outside when the larvae
are growing rapidly, and conditions favourable to the development of
rot organisms are set up within the plant. In the winter the larvae tend
to maintain their tunnels in the basal segments quite clean and free
from excrement; periods of quiescence are marked by the absence of
fresh excrement beneath the plants, as on exposure to the atmosphere the
frass turns dark-brown and the separate pellets disintegrate.
When a segment has been consumed or has rotted severely, the
larvae make their exit, wander over the plant, and enter another pad.
They may, however, tunnel through the division into the next segment.
In the summer generation, development takes place in the upper or
outer portions of the plant; the basal parts are not attacked unless the
larvae are overcrowded or have destroyed the younger segments. In
the winter generation, the young larvae attack the upper growth, but
with the advent of cooler weather the well-grown larvae burrow down-
ward into the thicker stems; by maintaining communication channels
they return from time to time to feed in the upper segments during
warmer days. Very little feeding occurs during cold weather.
Apparently, the large larvae are able to survive in winter with a
minimum of nourishment; examples taken from the butts in early June
lived for a maximum period of 82 days without food. In late July or
in August, the last instar larvae return to the upper portions where they
feed actively for two to three weeks before pupating.
Late colonies, which are leas than half-grown at the end of May,
continue to live in the more terminal segments through the whole or part
of the winter. In the Hunter Valley, where many eggs hatch in April
and May, the larvae may develop slowly and may still be small at the
end of August when the rate of growth accelerates; this is especially
true in yellow pear in which the larval stage is passed completely in the
upper segments.
In the larval stage, C. cactorvm is truly diurnal. During the day,
the larvae vacate segments and wander over the plants, and almost
invariably re-enter before dark. Should night fall before the process of
burrowing into the plant is complete, they remain inactive until next
day. The full-grown individuals leave the plant during the warmer
hours of daytime in order to pupate. Feeding within the prickly-pear
occurs during the clay, although in warm weather nocturnal activity
may be practised.
Wandering Habits.
Larvae vacate the segments and wander over the plants and adjacent
objects under the following circumstances: —
(a) when the existing food supply has been eaten or has decom-
posed ;
(h) when the food supply is unsuitable, as in yellow pear, where
they change their quarters frequently;
(c) at the one-half to two-thirds grown stage, associated with the
division of the colonies.
Exit from the segments is made between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., mostly
between 1 p.m. and 3 p.m., on sunny days. When one individual leaves
a segment, the whole colony soon follows. The larvae wander for from
1 to 24 hours over the surface of the plant before selecting a new point


of attack. Normally, they enter before dark, but should the evening turn
cool, the whole or portion of the colony may suspend operations until
8 or 9 a.ra. next day. When the new entrance location has been decided
upon, from 1 to 4 hours elapses before the colony is again inside the
plant. Travel is roughly in single file, and the course of the wandering
is indicated by a thin trail of silk which furnishes a foothold on the
smooth surface of the prickly-pear.
If food is available, they rarely cross ground to another plant,
which means that there is little disposition to depart from the original
plant. Any movement across the ground is limited in distance. In the
case of rapid collapse of the prickly-pear from a concentrated attack,
the larvae wander aimlessly over the destroyed plants and over the
ground and other objects within a radius of not more than a few yards,
until they starve to death. Among large numbers of starving larvae, the
dead pear and adjacent butts of trees are covered with dense masses
of silk.
Until the fourth instar is reached, segments of normal succulent
prickly-pear are not vacated while they contain sound tissue. In the
nitrogen-deficient yellow pear, the larvae transfer freely from segments
that have suffered little damage, apparently in an endeavour to find a
more palatable food supply. The wandering of larvae in the fourth and
fifth instar, when they are about half-grown, is not the result of food
shortage or unsuitability, but appears to be for the purpose of breaking
up the original colony of from 50 to 100 larvae into smaller groups, thus
avoiding overcrowding in later stages. The colony divides into from two
to several smaller parties of varying numbers of individuals, and each
new segregate enters a different segment.
In midsummer, when shade temperatures exceed 90 deg. F., and
especially during heat wave conditions, the large larvae cluster in
inactive heaps or irregular balls on the under surface of the vacated
segments; they re-enter the segments as the temperature declines toward
evening. Readings taken when shade values were 102 and 103 deg. F.
revealed that the interior temperature of the segments varied between
116 and 122 deg. F. This habit, therefore, is an endeavour to escape
from the greater heat generated within the plant.
At pupation time, the full-grown larvae make their exit singly
during the warmest part of the day. The social nature is discarded.
Their movements are much more rapid than in their earlier wanderings
and they appear to half-run, half-fall to the base of the plants in their
aim to locate a suitable pupation site with a minimum of delay.
Adequate protection is often afforded by the debris around the plant,
or the selected position may be several yards distant. The rate of
progress over the ground has been determined at approximately 5 feet
a minute; as the distance travelled rarely exceeds 20 feet, a few minutes
suffice to find cover. The line of movement is erratic, without particular
direction, and most objects, sticks, grass tufts, etc., encountered in the
travel are rapidly investigated as potential pupation sites.
Host Attraction.
The larvae do not appear to be strongly attracted to the food
plant. Among several thousand newly-hatched larvae, very few located
prickly-pear segments placed at a greater distance than 8 inches; even
within this radius, the majority travelled away from the food supply.
Larvae of the fourth and fifth instar, which had been starved for 48
hours, were placed among prickly-pear plants cut about in order to


permit the escape of possible attractive odours. Within distances of
6 inches they travelled almost straight to their objective; beyond this
limit they wandered aimlessly, finding the plants by chance or not at all.
Gregariousness.
The social habit is highly developed throughout the larval life and
is not discarded until pupation time. The occurrence of a single larva
in a segment is exceptional, although small groups of three or four
individuals are not uncommon. Gregariousness is almost, but not quite,
essential to development. If newly-hatched larvae are put singly on
plants, they wander over the surface for two or three days. The
majority die without entering the prickly-pear; some will penetrate the
segments, but most of these will succumb later, and a very small
proportion will reach maturity.
Mortality in the Larval Stage.
Mortality among the larvae may be divided for convenience
arbitrarily into two classes, viz. from specific causes and from natural
causes. Starvation, disease, predators and direct weather influences
would be included in the first category. The natural, or general,
mortality would embrace deaths due to constitutional weakness, unsuit-
able nutrition, plant resistance and other factors of a non-specific type.
Disease would be a specific factor when it operates in epidemic form to
destroy an appreciable percentage of the larvae in a colony or of the
numbers in a given area. Quite possibly, however, diseases are of general
incidence and kill individuals among a relatively healthy population;
in this case the losses would not be obvious and would be included in
the natural mortality.
Under the most favourable circumstances, although all the larvae
hatch and enter the plant, 100 pupae never develop from 100 eggs.
The highest rearing record has been 76 per cent., from a cage in which
200 eggs returned 152 pupae in a summer generation. In the longer
winter generation the best return has been 70 per cent, cocoons from
400 eggs. In large scale rearing operations in cages, very good returns
have been secured on occasions. The original 2,750 eggs from the
Argentine produced 41 per cent, pupae in a winter generation. At
Chinchilla the 1926 winter generation yielded 51 per cent, cocoons from
34,320 eggs, and the following summer generation produced 68 per
cent, cocoons from 49,270 eggs. On growing plants in the field, 100,000
eggs of the summer generation gave 50 per cent, pupae at Gravesend
and 42 per cent, at Scone, while in the winter generation 45 per cent,
pupae were secured from the same number of eggs at Scone.
A survey of all available data indicates that the natural mortality
during larval development in normal succulent prickly-pear averages
40 to 50 per cent, in the summer generation and 50 to 60 per cent, in
the winter generation. The greatest losses occur in the early stages,
chiefly in the first and second instars, as a result of the reaction of the
plant to the attack. Sap pressure drowns many small larvae, and plant
resistance overcomes whole colonies. The death of all members of a
colony is more pronounced in yellow pear; in experiments carried out
during three consecutive generations at Scone, 33 per cent, of the
colonies in yellow pear died out, compared with 15 per cent, in succu-
lent green pear. After the second instar, very few colonies are lost,
mortality being restricted to individuals. On each occasion that the
larvae vacate the segments and re-enter at new points, there is a


tendency for individuals to stray from the main body and to disappear.
The frequent transfer of colonies in yellow pear assists in reducing the
number of survivors.
The Pupal Stage.
The time taken by the larva to complete the cocoon varies from
one to two days in midsummer to three to five days in September. The
pre-pupal stage may not occupy more than one day in summer; in
September the average period was three days, with a maximum of
seven days.
The fresh cocoon is pure white, but soon discolours yellow and
finally brown; at one end it is tipped with red, this colour being
discharged by the larva. It is formed of fine silk, comprising an outer
loose cover of irregular shape, and a narrowly-oval inner cocoon, slightly
flattened at the head end, of closely-woven firm texture; at the emergence
end the threads are loosely held to permit the exit of the moth. Where
the larva is able to spin in ample space, the outer covering may increase
the dimensions of the cocoon by two or three times, but generally its
loose texture is packed down by the weight of other cocoons or of the
surrounding material. Debris, sand and soil become attached to and
mixed in with the threads of the outer covering. The pupa lies free
and occupies most of the space of the inner cocoon.
Pupation Sites.
The larvae invariably seek some form of cover; hence, cocoons are
not found in exposed positions on the plant or elsewhere. Further-
more, pupation does not occur within the plant, except when dried out
broken segments have been selected by the wandering larvae. The
cocoons are found in a great variety of situations but are most numerous
among debris at the base of the plants and between destroyed collapsed
segments lying on the ground or among the damaged prickly-pear.
Other frequent sites are under logs and the bark of logs, under sticks
and stones, beneath the bark of tree trunks to a height of several feet,
in crevices of tree stems and logs, on the ground beneath prostrate pear
segments, just beneath the ground surface among debris, at the base
of grass tufts, and inside dead segments of prickly-pear.
Although the full-grown larva vacates the plant at pupation time
quite independent of other members of the same colony, several cocoons
are usually found together. Among a concentrated population, masses
of from 50 to 300 cocoons occur in especially favoured situations, as
between two dead segments or under loose bark. The choice of a
location by one larva appears to influence later searchers. Cocoons
have been stripped in hundreds from under the bark of one fallen log.
Duration.
The average length of the pupal period, including the pre-pupa, is
35 to 42 days in Septeraber-November and 21 to 28 days in December-
February. The minimum recorded duration has been 13 days in
January, and this figure has not been reduced in constant temperature
experiments. In these experiments the shortest period was obtained at
87-5 deg. F.; constant values above 90 deg. retarded development. In
the field, very high temperatures, with maximum shade readings exceed-
ing 100 deg. F., exercise a similar effect. The delaying influence of


Locality.
Mean Pupal Period.
Mean Temperature.
Absolute Maximum
During Pupal Period.
Days.
Deg. F.
Deg. F.
Sherwood
19
77
92
Gogango
22
81
102
Chinchilla
27
77
108
high temperatures is illustrated by the following summary of concurrent
observations: —
The highest temperature readings at Chinchilla coincided with
the longest pupal period. The greatest duration on record is the
exceptional time of 90 days, secured at Scone from a larva that was
forced by starvation to pupate in early August, two months prior to
the general spinning of cocoons in that district.
Mortality.
Specific causes of mortality among the pupae include natural
enemies, disease outbreaks, extreme temperatures, and starvation in the
larval stage. Less specific or more general factors are debility, injury
and undetermined other causes, and in addition, starvation, disease and
temperature effects where these agencies act upon individuals only and
are not outstanding amtong the general pupal population. The less
specific causes of mortality operate without marked fluctuation; they
vary to some extent but are fairly constant within certain limits.
Hence the term normal or natural mortality can be applied. When
the percentage of moth emergence shows a sharp downward departure
from the normal, it can be attributed to an increase in importance of
one or more specific causes of death, i.e., parasitism, disease in more or
less epidemic form, or high or low temperatures exercising a lethal
effect. The influence of parasitism will not be discussed until later in
this publication.
From data collected during ten years throughout the priekly-pear
territory, it has been deduced that the average pupal mortality from
all causes other than parasitism is approximately 25 per cent. The
records do not show great variation over this period from the different
districts, although they may vary materially from generation to genera-
tion. During the last six years, 1935 to 1940, pupal mortality has
tended to decrease; for example the average non-parasitic mortality in
western Queensland during the last six winter generations has been
21 per cent. The lower death rate is probably due to less overcrowding
among the now depleted Cactoblastis population, and to the younger
prickly-pear, which has replaced the former dense areas, producing
healthier larvae and, hence, pupae.
In 1934, summer temperatures were very favourable, and pupal
mortality was reduced, showing the particularly low figure of 13 per
cent, from western Queensland areas. On the other hand, in the hot
1932 summer the average mortality in south-west Queensland was 36
per cent. In the winter generations of 1930 and 1931, a combination
of disease agencies and lethal low temperatures caused abnormally high
losses, the mortality reaching 54 per cent, in western Queensland in
1930 and the same figure in south-west Queensland in 1931.
PROGRESS IN THE FIELD.
The story of the progress of C act oblast is is the history of the success
of the biological control experiment. Although the introduction of this


insect was expected to bring beneficial results, the most optimistic
scientific opinion could not have foreseen the extent and completeness
of the destruction. The spectacle of mile after mile of heavy pear growth
collapsing en masse and disappearing in the short space of a few years
did not appear to fall within the bounds of possibility.
The first experimental liberations were conducted in late February
and March 1926. Four months later, the larvae had seriously damaged
large clumps of 0. inermis at Chinchilla, western Queensland,
and Emerald, central Queensland. The first pear plant killed by this
insect in Australia was at Chinchilla; later, this district witnessed the
first extensive reclamation of dense pear country. By June 1927, in the
third generation after the release of the first eggs, many large clumps of
inermis at Chinchilla and Emerald, and of both inermis and stricta at
Gogango had been destroyed. The good results at Emerald were
particularly hopeful, as the liberation was on an almost timberless area
and a serious drought had prevailed during 1926. Several other of the
original liberations were now showing promise of early destruction.
Twelve months later, in June 1928, during the fifth field generation,
the insect had multiplied to very great numbers in several localities. At
Chinchilla, several hundred acres of dense prickly-pear had collapsed,
and larvae could be found for a distance of 10 miles. At Gogango, C.
cactorum had spread to 15 miles from the original site, around which
hundreds of acres of pear were 60 per cent, destroyed. At Emerald,
approximately 1,500 acres had collapsed. In western Queensland, there
were now about 1,500 acres of dead pear at Wandoan, 200 acres at
Warra and 400 acres at Wallumbilla. In New South Wales, several
hundred acres of heavy inermis were collapsing at Pallamallawa, near
Moree, while at Marambir in the same district, a December 1926
liberation, 250 acres of dense prickly-pear had been killed. The larvae
were so numerous at Emerald that, 2| years after the original liberation
of 81,000 eggs, 6,250,000 cocoons were collected in July-August 1928
without seriously depleting the population. At Chinchilla, Warra,
Marambir and Pallamallawa, the prickly-pear was of the succulent type
in brigalow and belar scrubs, a form already known to be favoured by
cochineal, Chelinidea and red spider. At Wallumbilla, Emerald and
Wandoan, the inermis was free-growing and succulent, but the country
was open with very few trees. The early liberations on the harder pear
in forest country had made comparatively little progress, except at
Chinchilla where this type of inermis had succumbed in company with
the scrub pear.
The following year, 1929, much greater progress was achieved, and
by June 1929 it was estimated that a total of 30,000 acres had been
destroyed. At each of the four localities, Chinchilla, Wandoan,
Wallumbilla and Emerald, not less than 4,000 acres of dead pear were
evident, while another fourteen of the early liberations revealed complete
collapse over areas varying from 200 to 1,200 acres. In the summer
generation, between October 1928 and the end of January 1929, the
area of dead pear increased from 400 to 4,000 acres at Wallumbilla and
from 40 to 800 acres at Dulacca, western Queensland. Good results
commenced to become apparent at Nindigully, south-west Queensland,
and at Goondoobluie, Mungindi and the Mungle Scrub, in north-west
New South Wales. Some liberations that had given poor establishment
at first suddenly moved ahead, but early releases at Blackall, central-
west Queensland, and in New South Wales at Pilliga and Gwabegar, and
Scone and Camden farther south, had as yet made no appreciable show-
ing. The results varied considerably on O. stricta in central Queensland;


excellent destruction was apparent in scrub lands, but in the more open
country the insect in most places had not increased materially, although
good work had occurred in some localities.
The year ending June 30th, 1930, witnessed the first really extensive
collapse of the pest, and the total area of destruction had increased in
twelve months from 30,000 acres to at least 500,000 acres. Virtually the
Avhole of the destroyed pear was still confined to the neighbourhood of
the 1926-27 liberations. The greatest damage had occurred along the
main western railway in Queensland; in the 140 mile distance between
Warra and Roma there were, by now, many square miles of dead pear
at several centres, and Cactoblastis had dispersed to the extent of a
general infestation throughout this section. Furthermore, the first
reclamation of former dense pear country commenced in the Chinchilla
district, where limited areas of belar scrub were cleared and were sown
to maize and Rhodes grass. Further west, 25 to 30 square miles of
devastation surrounded an early 1927 liberation at Mitchell. Along the
central railway from Rockhampton to Emerald, the insect was generally
distributed, and had brought about widespread destruction at Black-
water and Emerald. The dense strict ain large tracts of brigalow scrub
in the Gogango-Wowan sector had been brought to the ground. Less
progress was evident in the strict a belt of the Burnett River; effective
destruction had occurred at Mundubbera, but as a rule heavy concentra-
tions of the larvae were confined to the immediate vicinity of the
numerous liberation sites. Cactoblastis had made very good headway at
Blackall, and was thoroughly established and beginning to destroy the
inermis areas of the northern extremity of the prickly-pear territory
toward Nebo. In south-west Queensland, liberations at Goondiwindi,
Nindigully and St. George had caused some effective destruction, but
later distributions had not increased rapidly.
Thus, by this time, three and a-half years after the first release of
C. cactoruni, except along and adjacent to the central and western rail-
ways, the vast areas of prickly-pear in Queensland were still untouched,
except for, here and there, fairly extensive or quite limited patches of
dead pear indicating a heavy insect population. The great distribution
campaign of the two previous years had not yet exerted any particular
lessening of the pest’s hold, but future success was indicated by the
presence of the insect in scattered numbers along roadways and in
rapidly-increasing establishments at more or less frequent intervals.
In New South Wales, the season 1929-30 brought in its train a
marked advance in the control of prickly-pear. The Mungle Scrub, a
belt of belar country, now presented several miles of destruction lining
the Goondiwindi-Moree road. Around the township of Mungindi,
hundreds of acres of dense inermis had collapsed; equally good results
were evident at points between Mungindi and Collarenebri. Cacto-
hlastis was becoming generally established throughout the Morec-
Gravesend sector; extensive areas of destruction were present at four
separate points; the harder type of inermis of the poorer forest country
was being thinned out, while many small patches of dead pear fore-
casted wider destruction in the near future. The larval population had
multiplied very materially in the Pilliga district. In the Hunter Valley,
despite the distribution of many millions of eggs, colonies of larvae were
very scattered; however, the insect had increased and had caused
effective, if limited, damage, at three points.
The early history of the progress of Cactoblastis has been given in
some detail, in an endeavour to present a picture of the initial stages of


the remarkable results accomplished by the insect. Thenceforward, for
several years, the stage of operations became so vast and the scenery
changed so rapidly, from flourishing pear to dead pear, from hordes of
larvae to virtually none, from dead pear to crops and fodder grasses,
more frequently from destroyed primary pear to vigorous regrowth,
from heavy regrowth to complete control, that no brief description could
convey an adequate impression of the march of events in each district.
The effect of the general liberation programme became apparent in
the 1930-1931 summer. By June 1931, C. cactorum was so well
established throughout the whole length and breadth of the pear-infested
country that no further distribution was necessary, except for a few
special areas. By this time, in the sections more remote from the main
avenues of communication, every here and there patches of dead pear of
more or less wide acreage marked the sites of liberations. The celerity
with which the insect multiplied and spread from many release centres
is illustrated by the situation along the Moonie River, lying between the
main western and south-western railways in Queensland. In August
1930, for 150 miles along the river the pest was in its full vigour, its
continuity almost unbroken by cleared land; the pastoral properties had
been overrun and mainly deserted, former large holdings having become
mere names on a map; the Dalby-St. George stock route, that followed
the river, was a narrow lane bordered by a desolation of prickly-pear, a
lonely eerie road where one seldom encountered travellers or saw signs
of habitation. There was no destruction by Caotoblastis, whose infesta-
tion was so light that a further distribution campaign was seriously
considered. Yet, in August 1932, 90 per cent, of the pear had collapsed.
The change in exactly two years was extraordinary. Instead of
flourishing inermis, one saw mile after mile of collapsed rotting prickly-
pear unrelieved by the presence of secondary growth since the major
destruction had occurred in the preceding few months.
Vast numbers of larvae brought about the rapid extensive destruc-
tion in cases such as the one cited above. At least 2,000 larvae are
required to destroy, within a few months, a medium-sized pear plant,
feet high, weighing 112 pounds, and covering an area of rather less than
one square yard; there would be roughly 5,000 such plants to the acre,
with a total weight of 250 tons. The average height of dense pear was
3 feet; in the scrubs a general height of 5 feet was not uncommon. The
most vigorous growth weighed 800 tons to the acre. In any case, not less
than 10,000,000 larvae would have to be present to cause the decay of
one acre of moderately dense pear. Visualising hundreds of square
miles of inermis collapsing in the space of a year, one can gain an idea
of the incredible numbers of larvae effecting such sudden demolition of
the pest. One had to see these enormous concentrations of larvae to
realise the huge population.
So far, the destruction or collapse caused by the insect has dealt with
the original or primary pear, and has not referred to later secondary
growth, which will be treated separately. The words “destruction” and
“collapse” have not been intended to convey the impression of eradica-
tion or complete annihilation of the plants, but rather of the killing to
ground level or, in the case of resistant types of prickly-pear, of the
destroying of all growth except the tough butts. Certainly many plants
were exterminated by the first heavy attack by Cactoblastis, but more
often the initial collapse was followed by a wave of secondary growth,
springing up in varying degrees of density from the butts and roots.


During tlie years 1931 to 1931 the collapse of the main body of
priekly-pear continued in very much the same manner as that described
along the Moonie River. The last big tract of dense pear in Queensland,
lying north and north-west of Goondiwindi, succumbed to (Jactohlastis
in 1934. At this time, it was estimated that 90 per cent, of the primary
pear of the State had disappeared; the extensive belts of inermis and
strida had been broken down very thoroughly, and remaining areas of
primary pear comprised rather restricted patches of the more resistant
growth. In New South Wales, a similar position had been reached in
the Mungle Scrub, the Mungindi-Collarenebri sector, the Moree-
Gravesend district and the Pilliga country. However, in the hilly parts
of the Bingara-Inverell district, and in the Hunter Valley, where the
inermis was mainly of a poor quality resistant type, the insect had not
made the same favourable progress.
In the Hunter Valley, the great bulk of the prickly-pear infestation
grew on timbered hills and stony or gravelly ridges and was of the type
known as yellow pear. Areas of succulent pear were few and restricted,
since the better class valley lands had been maintained free of the pest.
Many millions of eggs had been distributed from 1926 to 1931, with
disappointing results in the earlier years. The insect became established
with difficulty. However, after 1931, slow but steady progress was
achieved. By 1933, there were many places where good destruction had
occurred over areas of from a few to several hundred acres, and where
larvae were concentrated in numbers. Thereafter, the rate of advance
accelerated until by 1939 the pear infestation of the district had been
reduced by fully 75 per cent.
Regrowth.
The segments of prickly-pear are readily destroyed by insect al-
chemical agency, but the plant itself is not easily exterminated. Detached
segments or even pieces of segments in contact with the soil soon take
root. Infestations, which appear quite dead as a result of insect attack
or of chemical action, quickly spring up from small portions of sound
tissue.
The collapse of the primary pear from the onslaught of Cadohlaslis
appeared to denote complete destruction. But the underground stems
and butts had not, as a rule, disintegrated. The sequence of recurring
growth, following the initial success of the insect, its persistence for
greater or less periods, and its later destruction were found to be a
natural condition in the wiping out of the pest. Actually, too. one or
more waves of regrowth were essentia] to bring about eradication. If,
as was usually the case, the initial destruction had not resulted in the
rotting of the woody stems and butts, which were unsuitable to the food
requirements of the larvae, the insect was unable to build up its popula-
tion until a prolific succulent growth had developed.
In the first two or three years after the advent of Gad oblast is,
regrowth was not a pronounced feature of the situation. The areas of
destroyed primary pear were relatively small, and any new growth was
soon attacked by the insect spreading from the large bodies of adjoining
virgin pear. But when, in 1931-33, great expanses of the original pear
were suddenly converted to decaying masses of pulp, the insect popula-
tion was decimated because the food supply had vanished in the space of
a few months or even weeks. Thus, the primary pear was replaced by
regrowth, which grew very rapidly and which appeared just as formid-
able as the original infestation, especially as the Gactoblasfis population
was now far too light to ensure control in a short period. To the


average person the situation was alarming; what was thought to be dead
pear had quickly reverted to flourishing densities, and the destructive
insect appeared to have disappeared or at least to he hopelessly unable
to check the revivified pest.
Regrowth in varying degrees of density, frequently as heavy as the
former primary infestation, took the place of the original pear in most
districts. For some unknown reason, central Queensland did not produce
a big secondary wave of prickly-pear; although heavy patches became
evident here and there, the destruction of the primary pear was usually
followed by nothing more serious than scattered new growth. Then
again, in the belar scrubs the first collapse of the plant meant virtual
eradication. But the brigalow scrubs and the more lightly timbered
forest country of the southern districts of Queensland and the north-
western parts of New South Wales were severely affected by the new
development.
The regrowth grew extremely rapidly. A field of apparently dead
pear at the end of the winter might be covered with green pear, 12 to
18 inches high, by the end of the next summer, and 3 feet high a year
later. It was, however, a forced growth of a very succulent type, which
did not possess the insect-resistant qualities of the'original plant. And
it proved most palatable to CactoMastis, which was able to increase at
a faster rate than in the original infestation. By 1934, it was obvious
that the insect had regained the ascendancy.
Two examples of the control of regrowth may be cited as typical of
the general course of events. The Wandoan-Taroom district in
southern Queensland had, by December 1932, reverted to a compact
mass about 50 miles square of vigorous secondary growth with an average
height of 2i feet; colonies of CactoMastis larvae were well distributed
throughout the district but were not causing appreciable damage.
Eighteen months later, in June 1934, 90 per cent, of the pear had been
destroyed. At Mungindi, north-west New South Wales, the original
pear, infesting belar scrubs and lightly timbered lands, collapsed in
1930-31. The destruction in the belar scrubs was final, but in the open
country a strong regrowth had attained in August 1933 a height and
density almost as great as that of the former infestation. The Cacto-
htastis population had become very light indeed, averaging less than one
colony of larvae to each 100 plants. Two years later the whole of this
extensive belt of pear had been utterly destroyed. The increase of the
insect must have been phenomenal to have accomplished this result in
the stated period.
Regrowth was under control by 1935. The destruction of the one
big wave of secondary pear brought about the eradication of the greater
proportion of the butts surviving after the collapse of the primary pear.
There have continued to be recurrences on a smaller scale. In some
instances the regrowth has persisted for several years before falling to
Cactohlastis attack; a certain amount, mostly very scattered, here and
there comparatively dense over limited areas, still survives.
It should be pointed out that re-distribution of the insect was not
attempted, even in those areas where its population had fallen to a very
low ebb. The capacity of C. cactorum to recover from setbacks and to
increase, under favourable conditions of climate and food supply, from
greatly reduced numbers to heavy concentrations in the course of a year
or two has been an outstanding feature of its success.


Resistant Types of Prickly-pear.
Two types of prickly-pear have been termed “resistant” forms,
inasmuch as they were not readily destroyed by Cactohlastis. One of
these forms, which varied considerably in its habit of growth, was
characterised by thick segments and an abnormally high mucilaginous
and starch content. The other main resistant type was the nitrogen-
deficient yellow pear.
The starchy plant occurred in many local areas, usually in open
brigalow country as distinct from brigalow scrubs, from central Queens-
land to north-west New South Wales, and was a tall, vigorous form of 0.
inermis. The larvae developed normally in the terminal cladodes, but
when these had been destroyed, were unable to survive in the thicker
starchy segments. The initial attack resulted in the destruction of the
terminal segments and the death of a very large proportion of the larvae.
The plant then produced a very prolific secondary growth; a damaged
plant of 50 segments has been known to put forth 150 new segments
during the summer. The new growth was suited to the needs of the
larvae. The next infestation by the insect destroyed the new growth,
and again resulted in the larvae dying in the starchy older segments.
After several repetitions of this process of the killing of the succulent
growth and the failure of the larvae to survive in the main segments, the
plant suddenly disintegrated as though it had expended its energy in
the annual production of an abnormal quantity of new growth.
Yellow inermis or poor quality prickly-pear of similar character
was found wherever the soil conditions were unsuitable. In Queensland
and in most parts of New South Wales, areas of yellow pear were
of limited extent and occurred among much larger bodies of generally
succulent growth. Hence, it did not constitute a problem, for its
destruction was brought about by the overflow population of C. cactorum
from the adjacent nutritious prickly-pear.
There were two districts in New South Wales, however, namely the
hilly Eucalyptus-covered section of the Inverell-Warialda-Bingara
country in the north of the State and the Hunter Valley farther south,
where yellow pear constituted the main infestation, and where succulent
inermis grew in relatively small quantity. Progress by Cactohlastis in
these districts was much slower in comparison with the effective work
in other sectors. Yellow pear is a slow-growing chlorotic plant with a
nitrogen content less than one-half that of normal green pear. To some
extent these two districts appear to be outside the most effective tempera-
ture range of the insect. Their mean annual temperature lies between
60 and 64 deg. P., compared with 66 to 69 deg. F. in the north-western
and western pear areas of New South Wales. The cooler conditions
retard development of the egg and larval stages in the winter genera-
tion. Thus the larvae are mainly small to less than one-half grown at
the end of May and they continue to develop during the winter months;
in more normal districts, the larvae are at least two-thirds grown at the
end of May and feed very little in June and July. The lateness of the
generations, however, does not appear to interfere with the well-being
of the species; for instance, the Hunter Valley egg average per female
over a period of years has been higher than that recorded from all
other sections of New South Wales and Queensland.
The slow progress has been very largely due to malnutrition. Large
scale field-rearing experiments were carried out during three Cacto-
hlastis generations at Scone, using the typical yellow pear of the district
and a succulent green type. The results proved that the insect could


Recurring growth in brigalow country. Chinchilla, Qld, November, 1930, The
remains of the original prickly-pear, destroyed by Cactoblastis, can he seen.
Heavy regrowth in open country, following the destruction of the original prickly-
pear by Cactoblastis; Chinchilla, Qld.. January, 1933.
E/'Va’c p<t<jc 14 2.


Destruction by Cactoblastis of dense Opuntia incrmis in belar scrub country,
Chinchilla, Qld.
(a) Upper view; taken in October, 1926, tie prickly-pear in its virgin state.
(b) Lower view; three years later, in October, 1929. Cochineal insects can by
seen on regrowth segments in the left foreground.


The same area as shown on opposite page.
(a) Upper view; taken in December, 1930, after the trees have been cut down
and burnt off.
(b) Lower view; in December, 1931, under a prolific growth of Rhodes grass.


Brigalow scrub land denied and burnt off, after tire dense pear had been destroyed
by Cactoblastis.
The same area twelve months later, under its first reheat crop.


Yellow Pear.
Green Pear.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Loss of whole colonies of young larvae . .
33
16
Total larval mortality
92
67
Adults reared from eggs
4
18
Proportion of female moths
45
51
Average fecundity per female
102 eggs..
136 eggs
increase on succulent pear as freely as in other areas but that it could
not multiply rapidly on yellow pear. In comparing the data from the
two sets of experiments it was learned that in yellow pear,
(a) the larval mortality was much greater, due in part to more
colonies of young larvae failing to develop, and in part to
fewer individuals reaching maturity in the remaining
colonies;
(b) the moths were smaller, the proportion of female moths
lower, and the females deposited fewer eggs.
The differences between the results from the two types of food
plants, averaged through three generations, are shown hereunder:—
Every 1,000 eggs placed on yellow pear yielded 19 female moths,
compared with 92 from the green pear. The eggs deposited by these
females showed a generation increase of 80 per cent, on yellow pear
and 1,210 per cent, on the green pear; that is to say, in each generation
the increase of stocks was 15 times as great on the succulent pear as on
the predominant yellow pear.
In another field experiment, plots of typical yellow pear were given
a moderate application of a nitrogenous fertiliser, sufficient to turn thp
plants green without stimulating growth. The larval survival rate was
9-5 per cent, in the yellow pear, compared with 26-1 per cent, in the
adjacent treated blocks. The generation increase was 221 per cent, in
yellow pear and 1,108 per cent, in the treated pear. The addition of
nitrogen to the food supply caused a 5-fold improvement in the
Cactoblastis population.
Applying these results, a simple remedy was found for the situa-
tion. In the competition for the available nitrogen in the soil, the trees
took the bulk of the supply. The destruction of the timber changed the
yellow pear to a normal green plant within two years, and the eradica-
tion of the pest was thereby greatly expedited by furnishing Cactoblastis
with nutritious food. In any case, the trees would have had to be
removed later to provide grazing for sheep and cattle. Thus the
advocated policy was a reversal of the usual practice of awaiting the
disappearance of the pear before proceeding with the destruction of
the timber. It was adopted by many landowners, especially in the
Inverell-Bingara district, and soon brought beneficial results on a
considerable scale. In addition to the accelerated eradication of the
prickly-pear on the timber-freed areas, the building up of the insect’s
numbers on the better type of prickly-pear caused a general increase in
neighbouring yellow pear country. Given a sufficiency of larvae, yellow
pear is capable of being destroyed by Cactoblastis. It is not as tenacious
of life as the more robust forms, and does not produce a great quantity
of regrowth. Furthermore, any new growth from damaged plants is
of a succulent green nature, permitting further larvae to survive. The
reduction of the quantity of the pest in the Hunter Valley in the last
ten years has, therefore, been a gradual process. Once the insect was
able to establish itself in the yellow pear, injury to the plants resulted
in more new growth, which provided a suitable food medium for larvae
of the following generation.


Seedling Pear.
The question of seedling pear involves the development of inermis
and stricta plants on improved pastures and on other country that did
not support a heavy infestation prior to 1925. The former rapid spread
and increase of the pest was due to the eating of the fruit by birds and
animals and to the consequent dispersal of the seeds. The lands fring-
ing the main belts of prickly-pear were kept relatively “clean” by the
yearly poisoning or digging out of the young plants. When Gactoblastis
commenced its onslaught it was found that the scattered plants were
attacked as readily as the dense masses. The moths travelled widely
over open country to deposit eggs on individual plants miles distant
from the main areas. The poisoning of seedling pear was rendered
unnecessary, and landowners were thereby saved a great deal of effort
and expenditure.
With the collapse of the great tracts of primary pear the situation
with regard to scattered pear of seedling origin again changed. The
tremendous decrease in the Gactoblastis population, and the fact that
the big bodies of prickly-pear were no longer available to furnish an
overflow of insects for the elimination of the young plants on the
improved country, brought seedling pear into greater prominence.
Furthermore, the reclamation of the former dense pear country by the
destruction of the standing timber and the opening up of the land has
given an impetus to seed germination. The control of scattered pear
on any area has, for the past several years, depended on the increase
of the insect on that particular area from small initial numbers coming
from an outside source. Often the plants have grown from seedlings
to clumps of considerable size bearing fruit, during the building-up of
the requisite larval population. Thus, actually, from the biological
control standpoint the problem, such as it is, of seedling pear is in the
same category as that of more or less outlying patches of primary pear
some years ago.
As prickly-pear seeds are viable for at least 15 years, possibly much
longer, scattered plants have continued to appear on otherwise pear-free
areas, and they will continue to spring up. In general the seedlings
have not assumed greater importance than that of a widely scattered
development, with, here and there, whole paddocks becoming subject to
invasion.. However, in parts of south-west Queensland and adjacent
sections of New South Wales, scattered pear has reached considerable
dimensions on many improved sheep properties that had formerly been
maintained free of the pest; there are various areas, each of from a
few to several hundred acres, of scattered or heavily scattered inermis ,
and for some time there has been more prickly-pear on the old improved
pastures than on the adjacent lands which were covered with dense
pear for many years. Destruction by Gactoblastis proceeds satisfactorily.
In many instances the infestations have been wiped out by the insect;
in other places the plants have persisted for several years with greater
or less injury by the larvae. Control in all cases is merely a matter of
time. Eradication by poisoning or mechanical methods has not been
and is not necessary, although some landowners have undertaken the
effort through lack of faith in biological control. Meanwhile, the
State authorities have continued to insist on the chemical treatment of
scattered plants that have appeared on country more or less remote
from the boundaries of the old pear areas.


Proportion op Eggsticks.
Series.
Inermis.
Stricta.
Streptacantha.
Typical
Tomentosa.
Spiny
Tomentosa.
A
24
36
37
3
Not used
B
17
52
28
Not used
3
CACTOBLASTIS AND THE LESS IMPORTANT PRICKLY-PEARS.
The whole discussion so far on the destruction by G. cactorum. has
dealt with the major pest pears, 0. inermis and stricta. It now remains
to state the effect of the insect on the less important tiger pear, 0.
aurantiaca, and the tree pears, 0. tomentosa and streptacantha.
The insect breeds very readily and most successfully in 0.
aurantiaca. Where tiger pear is growing in the field in association with
inermis, the moths oviposit just as freely on the former, and on occasions
have appeared to favour this food plant. The larvae destroy the narrow
segments rapidly, the attacked portions drying out without wet decom-
position setting in, but they do not penetrate into the underground
bulbs. Hence, although a vigorous plant of aurantiaca may become a
mass of dried brittle segments and may appear dead, it recovers quickly
by producing a great quantity of new growth from the undamaged
bulbs. The injury is in the nature of a temporary setback and is soon
nullified by the remarkable recuperative faculty of this plant. Small
plants are often killed completely, but on the whole Cactoblastis does
not exercise effective control of tiger pear.
Concerning 0. streptacantha, the moths deposit eggs freely on both
young and well-grown plants. The young plants are frequently
destroyed. In the large plants, the larvae develop successfully in the
young terminal segments, but very few reach full growth in segments
more than a year old on account of their woody nature. Thus, areas of
streptacantha in central Queensland serve as permanent breeding
grounds for the insect, although injury is limited to the destruction of
the younger growth.
Under cage conditions. 0. tomentosa has proved a suitable food
medium for the larvae, and the resultant moths have possessed a high
fecundity. Young plants in the field are readily destroyed when they
are growing among infestations of 0. inermis and stricta. For example
in 1931, scores of younger tree pears, up to ten feet in height, in the
Rolleston district of central Queensland were killed after the larvae had
caused the collapse of the underlying masses of inermis from which they
had crawled on to the taller species. Eggs are laid rather infrequently
on seedlings and young plants not more than six feet high, but are never
found on the older plants. Hence, except for the destruction of an
occasional small plant, 0. tomentosa is immune from the attentions of
the insect. Undoubtedly the female moth exhibits an aversion for this
tree pear. Series of oviposition experiments were carried out in small
cages, in each of which were placed segments of inermis, stricta, strepta-
eantha and tomentosa; normal non-spiny tomentosa was used in one lot
of cages and the less common spiny form of the plant in another set.
The results are given in the following table showing the percentage of
eggsticks deposited on each plant:—
The greater number of eggs placed on stricta and streptacantha
compared with inermis would be explained by the relative spinelessness


of the latter. The spiny form of iornentosa bears far more long spines
than stridta, while inermis carries odd spines only in addition to the
short fine spicules. It will be observed that spiny tomentosa was not
selected for oviposition more frequently than the semi-spineless form of
this plant. Possibly the fine velvety pubescence covering the fomentosa
segments acts to deter oviposition by C. cactomm.


IX. ENEMIES OF CACTOBLASTIS AND OTHER
CONTROL FACTORS.
Excluding the question of improper and inadequate nutrition, the
main controlling agencies of (Cactohlastis cactorum are;—
1. Certain extremes of temperature.
2. Diseases.
3. Various enemies, i.e. birds and ants.
4. Parasites.
TEMPERATURE.
Extremes of temperature causing appreciable mortality among the
Cactohlastis population have already been discussed in connection with
the life-cycle stages of the insect. However, for convenience the various
effects are now summarised and certain additional information given
briefly.
The Egg Stage.
Temperature variations throughout the priekly-pear territory cause
very little mortality among the eggs. Low temperatures, as experienced
in the winter months, may prevent the hatching of the occasional out-of-
season eggs deposited in April and May in southern Queensland and in
Xew South Wales. Higli temperatures, even heat wave values, have
little lethal effect, since the eggsticks are placed by the females in
protected situations on the plants. Here and there, an eggstick exposed
to the direct rays of the sun may be killed. In the Blackall district of
central Queensland, considerable mortality among the eggs has been
observed in a very hot summer on prickly-pear growing on open sand
ridges.
The Larval Stage.
There is very little mortality from high or low temperatures. During
extreme heat, full-grown larvae issuing from the pear segments at
pupation time have been seen to curl up and die immediately on coming
in contact with sandy soil. The habit of the large larvae of vacating
their tunnels and clustering on the underside of pear segments on very
hot days induces attack by ants; hence the mortality is indirectly due to
the high temperature.
The Pupal Stage.
Lethal low and high temperatures destroy many pupae in abnormal
seasons. In September and October, readings below 40 deg. F. cause a
definite mortality. Thus in September 1928, the thermometer dropped
below 40 deg. F. on six nights at Goondiwindi and ten nights at Chin-
chilla during the three weeks preceding the peak of moth emergence,
while day conditions were unusually warm and dry; large numbers of
pupae housed in cages at these two stations returned a degree of
mortality 30 to 35 per cent, higher than the normal. Again in
September-October 1931, when screen readings below 40 deg. F. were
registered on four nights during the main pupal period, the mortality
was 25 per cent, above the normal.
Unduly high temperatures in January have a marked lethal
influence, but the effect of the heat is minimised by the shelter afforded


Early Pupae.
Late Pupae.
Area.
Per Cent. Mortality.
Per Cent. Mortality.
1
55
17
2
50
26
3
42
28
4
36
9
by trees, grass, herbage, etc. Pupae on open country with the soil
denuded of a protective grass cover suffer most severely; under these
conditions a death rate as high as 80 per cent, has been recorded.
Temperatures at pupation sites vary very widely; for example, when the
screen temperature registered 96 deg. F., simultaneous readings taken
among cocoons in different situations ranged from 84 to 136 deg. F., a
variation of 52 deg. F.
The degree of mortality is influenced by the duration of the period
of exposure to the high temperature values. In one experiment, 1,000
pupae were removed daily for ten days from an area where the situation
temperature varied between maximum readings of 106 to 116 deg. P.
during this period; the extent of the mortality increased progressively
from 18 per cent, to 40 per cent, above the normal, according to the
length of the exposure to the adverse conditions.
Since heat waves, with screen readings exceeding 100 deg. F., do
not usually persist for more than a few days, some of the pupae in any
area escape the full rigours of the severe effects. Typical illustrations
are given of the mortality among the earlier and later pupae in a year
when heat wave conditions destroyed a greater proportion of the earlier
material.
The Adult Stage.
Screen temperatures falling below 50 deg. F. in September-
October, and rising above 100 deg. F. in January-February, shorten the
life of the moths and so reduce the egg production, since many of the
females die before they have deposited eggs. These adverse effects are
not experienced in average seasons but they may cause appreciable
mortality in abnormal years. The subject has been treated more fully
earlier in this publication. Another matter, already discussed, is the
influence of very high temperatures during the pupal stage on the
fecundity of the moths that emerge subsequently. A greater proportion
than normal of the females does not oviposit, and hence the output of
eggs for the generation is much lower than in years of moderate summer
temperatures.
DISEASE.
During the years 192!) to 1931, disease epidemics caused considerable
losses among the very heavy Cactoblasfis population attacking the
primary pear. The first outbreak, in July to September 1929, was wide-
spread and affected many districts in the southern half of Queensland
and the northern pear regions in New South Wales; the mortality among
the larvae was very great in some sections. In the 1930 and 1931 winters,
further epidemics brought about a high death rate in many places, but
the disease conditions were not as general as in 1929 and were more
restricted to certain districts or to localised areas. The following year
saw a further reduction in losses from pathogenic organisms. The final
outbreak was reported during July to September 1933, when heavy
concentrations of larvae in older iuermis regrowth suffered severely in
some parts of western Queensland. All epidemics were confined to the
winter generation of Cacfoblastis; the summer larvae were not affected.


In many cases disease suddenly appeared among the full-grown larvae in
July and August, but in other instances mortality commenced among
the .younger larvae in April and May and gradually intensified through
the cooler months.
Investigations showed that the associated organisms were various
bacteria and a Beauveria fungus. Xuseim or other protozoa, reported
attacking C. cactorum in South Africa, were not isolated from diseased
larvae. Of the many different forms of bacterial organisms found in
Ihe digestive tract of the larvae, at least seven were capable of causing
death when inoculated into the blood stream. However, two Coceo-
bacilli and one Streptococcus appeared to be responsible for the main
losses. Larvae infected by the Coccobacilli died in and on the outside
of the prickly-pear segments or after they had spun imperfect cocoons.
The Streptococcus, producing a condition similar to the Gattine disease
of silkworms, was found in all stages of (•'. cactorum from egg to adult;
infection occurred in the larval stage, but frequently death did not
supervene until the insect had reached the pupal or even the adult stage.
The Beauverin fungus destroyed individual larvae and whole
colonics; as many as 200 dead larvae infected with this organism were
counted in one prickly-pear segment. It was not reported in epidemic
form over large areas, except in one instance where its action appeared
to be the chief cause of a heavy death-rate among a concentrated popula-
tion over an area of several square miles. Beauveria could be transmitted
to healthy larvae by feeding them on prickly-pear contaminated by the
fungus spores, death taking place within seven days.
It has been established that two factors are essential before disease
organisms assume importance, firstly the larvae must be crowded, and
secondly the food supply must be unsuitable. These two conditions
operated in the years of bacterial and fungus outbreaks. An enormous
larval population was attacking the primary pear or the older regrowth.
Having eaten the more succulent segments the larvae were crowded in
the less nutrient lower growth. Actually the diseases were of secondary
incidence, for the unsuitable food supply alone would have brought
about a very big mortality. In many eases, the depletion of the popula-
tion operated to the advantage of the insect, since the surviving larvae
were able to complete development in the available quantity of prickH-
pear which would have proved inadequate for the original number.
Since 1933, no records of bacterial diseases, and one only of
Beauveria have been made. The fungus attack was reported in July
1938 among a heavy concentration of larvae in a small area of priekly-
pear ; the larvae in several segments were destroyed by this agency.
For several years now, the healthiness of the Cactoblastis larvae
has been very pronounced, even in areas where crowded numbers have
caused rapid destruction of prickly-pear. Undoubtedly, the replace-
ment of the old primary pear by succulent younger growth has improved
the quality of the food supply, and the more adequate nutrition has
given little opportunity for conditions predisposing the larvae to disease
ravages. It is possible that individuals have continued to die from
bacterial or fungus infection, but it is certain that the mortality from
disease attack has been quite unimportant during recent years.
VARIOUS ENEMIES.
For the greater part of the year, Cactoblastis cacfonnn is in the
larval stage living within the priekly-pear segments, where it is virtually


immune from the attention of ants and other predaceous insects. Thus,
predators, as distinguished from parasites, play a minor role in its
welfare. The only important enemy is the ant, Iridomyrmex detectus.
Bird and Animal Enemies.
The freedom of Cactohlastis from the attack of birds has been most
apparent. During the years when the dense belts of prickly-pear were
collapsing under the mass onslaught of the insect, it was a common
spectacle to see great numbers of starving larvae crawling over the
rotting debris and the adjacent ground. On these occasions, the
absence of insectivorous birds, which one might have anticipated to have
gathered to the feast in hundreds or even thousands, was a striking
circumstance. The bright orange or orange-red larvae must be unattrac-
tive, if not distasteful, to most Australian birds.
Many reports have been received of crows devouring the larvae,,
hut not one case has been substantiated. Circumstantial evidence
suggests that these birds do feed on the insect at certain times, although
not very frequently. The scrub turkey, Alectwra lathami, is a definite
offender, tearing open the pear segments to eat whole colonies of larvae.
This bird, which is a denizen of the denser brigalow and vine scrubs,
causes appreciable mortality occasionally in localised areas, but the sum
of its depredations is of little consequence. The white-browed babbler,
Pomatostomus superciliostts, probing with its slender beak under logs,
sticks, etc., sometimes finds the cocoons which are torn apart and the
pupae eaten.
Mice not uncommonly make holes in the cocoons to extract the
pupae. On one occasion, hundreds of cocoons in an area were destroyed
in this manner.
Insect Enemies.
In the case of new liberations, both ants and cockroaches have taken
a certain toll of the eggsticks placed in quills or glued on paper. The
naturally-laid eggsticks are attacked rarely by cockroaches, more
frequently by ants. Iridomyrmex ants have been observed to cut off
and carry away to their nests portions of eggsticks, but this happening
is unusual. Smaller ants, as C remast ogaster, may eat some of the eggs
in a stick.
Chrysopid (lacewing) larvae have been known to make incisions in
the eggs and extract the contents. In October 1939, it was estimated
that 25 per cent, of the eggs in one locality near Mungindi, north-west
Xew South Wales, had been destroyed by a predaceous mite, Micromaris
goannae. The mites were’ present in numbers for about four weeks and
then disappeared. The following generation, in February 1940, no
attacked eggsticks could be found on this area or in other places in the
general vicinity.
Within the pear segments the larvae are secure from predatory
insects, as the entrance and discharge holes are not kept open. They
become liable to attack when they vacate their tunnels and wander over
the plant before re-entering, when they emerge from the pear at pupation
time, and when they cluster inactively on the underside of the segments
in very hot weather.
At least two species of Reduviid bugs, Prisfhesancus papuensis and
JlavintJuis sp., kill individual larvae found wandering over the plants.
In experiments, newly-hatched Havinthus larvae fed on very young
Cactohlastis larvae, while the adult bugs readily destroyed larvae of all


sizes; one adult killed 150 larvae during its confined life of 127 days.
The attack by these insects is purely incidental.
Of the many kinds of ants frequenting the prickly-pear areas, two,
a small black Cremastogaster and the larger Iridomyrmex, are found
commonly on the plants. Cremastogaster can successfully attack smaller
larvae but is rarely able to kill larger individuals; furthermore, wander-
ing colonies of smaller larvae can protect themselves from small ants
by rapidly spinning a light web covering.
The meat or mound ant, Iridomyrmex defectus, is one of the most
abundant and widely distributed Australian species. It favours hard
yellow and red soils, and gravelly and stony ridges, and is rare on
black or other loamy soils. The large flatfish mounds contain thousands
of pugnacious workers, which forage for considerable distances and
attack in numbers any insects encountered in their wanderings. It is
rather localised in the major part of the prickly-pear belt, since general
soil conditions do not favour its requirements. However, it is very
prevalent on the ridgy country of the Hunter Valley district, where it
is a rather serious enemy of Cactoblastis, more especially during January
heat when the semi-torpid larvae congregate on the surface of the pear
segments. In one large rearing experiment at Scone in the Hunter
Valley during the summer generation, these ants destroyed all larvae
in 40 per cent, of the colonies, and approximately 50 per cent, of the
larvae in the remaining colonies, a total of 70 per cent, of the original
number. The ravages of Iridomyrmex increased the natural larval
mortality from an estimated 72 per cent, to 92 per cent., and reduced
the estimated egg production for the generation by 80 per cent. This is
probably an extreme ease, but it illustrates the serious effect of this
predator on the increase of Cactoblastis under conditions favourable to
the enemy. Yet, although the pugnacious ants take heavy toll of the
larvae when they forsake the feeding tunnels, many instances have been
recorded in which prickly-pear plants actually growing in heavily-
populated Iridomyrmex mounds have been completely destroyed by
C. cactorum.
PARASITES.
A great many insects are kept in control by parasites. In general,
each species of insect has its own particular natural enemies; often, one
species of parasite, or even several, is restricted to one specific host or
to a few closely related hosts. The acceptance of these principles has
been the guide in the biological control of insect pests which, accidentally
transferred from their native home to another country, have spread and
increased to serious proportions. Tn such cases scientific effort has
aimed at introducing the controlling parasites into the country affected
by the imported insect. There have been many outstanding successes
in this line of attack on insect pests.
The biological control of an imported weed pest is based on a
somewhat different principle, namely that of introducing the plant’s
natural enemies without their controlling parasitic agents. Foreign
insects, as a rule, remain immune from the attentions of local parasites
or are attacked to a minor degree. There does not appear to be one
case extant of the control of an introduced insect by native parasites.
Yet, on the other hand, one could not prophesy what role local enemies
might play in limiting the increase of the various imported prickly-pear
insects.
Although Cactoblastis cactorum was established in Australia free
from its South American insect enemies, it soon became subject to


attack by parasitic Hymenoptera already present in the country,
indigenous forms mainly but including two insects of world-wide
distribution. Up to the present time, twenty kinds of natural enemies
have been reared from the insect in Australia, mostly from the pupal
stage, with two from the egg stage and one from the larval stage. These
parasites are all Hymenoptera, belonging to the Ichneumonoidea and
Chalcidoidea. It should be noted that no Dipterous parasites have been
recorded in Australia, although the cactus Phycitids are freely attacked
by Tachinidae in America. Since the control of prickly-pear has
depended on the continued welfare of the all-important Caetohlastis,
particular attention has been given to the study of these native parasites
and to the extent of the mortality exercised by them from year to year.
Egg Parasites.
Two Trichogrammatids have been reared from the eggs. One
species, described as Australufens varicornis Girault, has been definitely
recorded on one occasion only, when it was reared from a few eggs at
Scone, N.S.W. in December 1934. The other form appears to be the
world-wide Trichogramma minutum; it was identified by A. A. Girault
as T. ausiralicum. Girault, bnt A. B. Gahan of the U.S. Bureau of
Entomology expressed his opinion that it could not be) distinguished from
T. minutum. In view of the prominence of T. minutum as an egg-parasite
of various Lepidoptera, its attack on C. cactonim deserves some attention.
Trichogramma has been reared from Caetohlastis eggs from many
districts from central Queensland to the Hunter Valley, but is merely an
incidental enemy. Every now and again a few parasitised eggs have
been found in one or several eggsticks. As the affected eggs soon became
dark in colour, contrasting with the yellow normal eggs, the occurrence
of this enemy is readily detected in the field. Usually from Ito 3 eggs
in a stick are attacked, but higher records have been made, viz;
24 attacked eggs in a stick of 75 eggs.
16 attacked eggs in a stick of 60 eggs.
13 attacked eggs in a stick of 68 eggs.
The average number of parasite adults reared from each egg is 3
or 4; the greatest number has been 7.
In rearing operations five successive generations were bred through
in Caetohlastis eggs. The life-cycle occupied 10 to 15 days between
November and March at Chinchilla, and 20 to 21 days in March at
Scone. Eggs from freshly laid to 5 days old were preferred but the
adults were able to oviposit in eggs up to 16 days old. It was possible
for two Trichogramma generations to be completed in one eggstick when
the Caetohlastis incubation period was 30 days. In these experiments a
high humidity was required for successful results. This circumstance
may explain the comparative rarity of the attack in the field.
Larval Parasites.
The only known parasite of the larvae in Australia is the Braconid,
Microhracon hehetor, a cosmopolitan enemy of larvae of the meal and
flour moths, Plodm and Ephestia, which, like Caetohlastis, belong to the
family Phycitidae. This insect on various occasions has attacked Melitara
larvae in cages at Uvalde, Texas. In Australia, it has parasitised
Caetohlastis and Melitara larvae in rearing cages at Sherwood and at
each of the field stations; full-grown larvae, which have vacated the
prickly-pear prior to spinning cocoons, have generally been selected by
the Braconid.


The important point is that cage material only has been affected.
Not one record has been made of larvae being attacked in the field.
Presumably the Microbracon adults frequent the neighbourhood of
dwellings, barns, etc., where the meal moth hosts are to be found, and
they parasitise Cactoblastis and Melitara larvae when these insects come
within the sphere of their activities.
M. hebdtor has the capacity to be a serious enemy of Cactoblastis,
were the parasite to become established in the field. In experimental
studies, a female parasite destroyed as many as 42 C. cactorum larvae.
Many generations are possible during the year; at Sherwood the shortest
life-cycle occupied 9 days in February, and the longest 36 days in August.
Nenteritis canescens, another enemy of the Flodia and Ephestm meal
moths, has been obtained a few times under circumstances that pointed to
Cactoblastis as the host, but the records have not been definite. Certainly,
this Ichneumon has often been found around rearing cages containing
larvae of the cactus Phycitids.
The Pupal Parasites.
The seventeen species of Australian Ilymenoptera reared from
Cactoblastis pupae are divided as follows: —
Family Ichneumonidae :
Lissopimpla semipunctata.
Echthromorpha intricatoria.
Family Eulophidae:
T etrastichus ; four species.
Family Chalcididae:
Brachymeria ruskini.
X enarretocera semi nig ripcs.
Stomatoceras; nine species.
Of these, two species of Stomatocerus are the major enemies. Lisso-
pimpla occasionally assumes some importance in localised areas. X'enar-
retocera and other species of Stomatoceras play a very minor role. It is
thought that the Tetrastichus, which have been recorded a few rimes
only, may be hyper-parasites of Stomatoceras.
Ichneumonid Parasites.
The two species, Echthromorpha intricatoria and Lissopimpla
semipunctata, are widely distributed common insects, which attack many
Australian Lepidoptera. Lissopimpla is particularly abundant and may
be seen in numbers flying over lawns and grass plots in search of cut-
worm, army-worm and allied Noetuid hosts.
Echthromorpha has been reared from Cactoblastis pupae from all
districts except central Queensland. The infrequency of its attack is
shown by the fact that 80 examples only have been secured among a total
of over 100,000 parasitic Ilymenoptera obtained from pupae collected
from the field during a period of 10 years, 1930 to 1940. 60 of these
80 individuals came from the Hunter Valley district. 70 were bred
from winter generation pupae (September-November) and 10 from
summer generation material (January-Mareh).
Lissopimpla has been recorded from all sections of the priekly-pear
territory. It very rarely attacks the pupae of the summer generation,
but is of rather sporadic frequency in the winter generation pupae in


Septeraber-November. As an enemy of Cactoblastis, it is least numerous
in central Queensland and most abundant in the Hunter Valley, N.S.
V ales. Over a period of ten years, its prevalence among all parasites
reared from field pupae of the winter generation has been less than 0-5
per cent, in central Queensland, about 2-0 per cent, in western Queens-
land. 3-0 per cent, in south-west Queensland and 5-0 per cent, in the
Hunter Valley'. The number of this parasite secured from winter
generation material fluctuates very markedly from .year to year, as the
following figures indicate; —
Hunter Valley.
1935, No Lissopimpla among 3,607 reared parasites.
1936, 709 Lissopimpla among 2,554 reared parasites.
1937, 321 Lissopimpla among 4,728 reared parasites.
1938, 14 Lissopimpla among 5,046 reared parasites.
Results from other districts show similar periodic increases and
decreases.
The greatest abundance of this insect was recorded in the Hunter
Valley in 1936, when its numbers represented 28 per cent, of the total
parasites; but 551 of the 709 Ichneumons were obtained from two of the
twelve areas from which pupae were collected. This is a typical example
indicating that the importance of Lissopimpki, as an enemy of C. cactonur.
is restricted to local areas in occasional seasons; under these circum-
stances, the Ichneumon may be the dominant parasite in one locality.
Other similar cases are as follows;
On In 1933, 184 Lissopimpla were obtained among a total of
3,828 parasites from 20 different localities in western Queens-
land, but 140 of the number were reared from one area and
none were bred from eleven of the localities.
< l>) In 1936, of 163 examples reared from 8 areas in south-west
Queensland, all but 5 came from two of the localities.
i'cl In 1938, among 200 Lissopimpla secured from 13 localities in
south-west Queensland, 95, or nearly one-half, emerged from
pupae from one locality'.
In view of the general distribution and abundance of this insect, its
selection of C act oblast is as a host must be considered of an incidental
nature. Experiments have determined that the eggs are laid in the
pupating larvae; the parasites did not attack either the pupae or larvae
of varying sizes.
Chalcid Parasites.
One species of the typical thick-legged (‘haloids of the genus Brachj-
meria has been reared from ('. cactonun. This insect, Brachymeria
rushini, has been secured from field pupae collected in areas ranging
from central Queensland to the Hunter Valley'. The first record of its
attack was made in 1930. Since that date, between 30 and 40 examples
have been bred. Hence) it is of no importance.
Xeiiarretocera seminigripes attacks the pupae in all districts, mainly
in the summer generation. Over a period of years the obtained numbers
have been relatively' ten times as frequent from summer generation pupae
as from September-Xovember material. In the summer generation
during the years 1930 to 1940, it has represented between 4 and 5 per
cent, of the total parasites secured from western and south-west Queens-
land, 1 per cent, from central Queensland and 0-5 per cent, from the


Hunter Valley. As in the case of Lissopimpla, most of the examples in
any generation have emerged from pupae from one or two local areas in
each district. In confinement the females readily attacked young < 'acto-
hlastis pupae. The life-cycle at Sherwood occupied 25 days for males
and 29 days for females in March, 29 days for males and 34 days for
females in April. One parasite developed in each pupa. Adult females
have survived in confinement for a maximum period of 177 days during
the winter months.
The genus Stomatoceras, medium-sized to rather large thick-legged
Chalcids, is a very big group in Australia. Many of the species are very
closely related and can be distinguished with difficulty. Nine species
have been bred from Cactoblastis pupae, including the two most
important enemies, Stomatoceras melitarae and S. stokesi. Pour other
forms have been obtained fairly regularly, if in very small numbers,
while the remaining four have been reared very occasionally.
One of the lesser Stomatoceras enemies is S. leai, but under this
name two very similar, somewhat variable species may be included. As
an enemy of Cactoblastis, it is most numerous in central Queensland
where a few are reared from field pupae each generation, the average
number over a 10-year period being 7 S. teai in every 1,000 parasites. In
southern districts of Queensland it appears in most seasons to the average
number of 5 in every 1,000 parasites. On the other hand, it is more
often absent in Hunter Valley material, where its prevalence does 2iot
exceed lin every 2,000 reared parasites. Examples have been bred from
Melitara prodenialis as well as from C. cactorvm. Like its congeners,
this species oviposits in the pupae and its life-cycle is little longer than
the pupal period of the host. At Chinchilla in November-Decembcr, the
average life-cycle of 41 males was 34 days, and of 55 females 36 days;
at Gogango the life-cycle between November and February varied from
17 to 25 days. In one experiment 7 females produced 209 progeny, an
average of 30 per female. Two unfertilised females vielded 124 male
progeny. The largest return from one female has been 78 adults.
Stomatoceras ghirlandajoni, as determined by A. A. Girault, occurs
periodically among parasites reared from field pupae of Cactoblastis. A
total'of 75 examples has been obtained since 1930, mostly from western
and south-west Queensland with a few from central Queensland and
from New South Wales districts as far south as the Hunter Valley. One
life-cycle note has been made, an adult male being bred from a Cacfo-
btastis pupa after a life-cycle of 20 days.
S. cactohlastidis Girault has been recorded from field cocoons from
central Queensland to north-west New South Wales, but not from the
Hunter Valley. Of the 50 individuals reared since 1930, nearly all were
from winter generation pupae. A few life history notes have been made
from experiments. As with other species, the eggs are deposited in the
pupae. The life-cycle of 7 males averaged 31 days at Chinchilla in
November; one female was bred at Sherwood in the same month after a
life-cycle of 33 days.
Another Stomatoceras, apparently unnamed, has emerged from field-
collected pupae of Cactoblastis from all districts from central Queensland
to the Hunter Valley. A total of 112 adults has been secured during
the last ten years. On one occasion 32 were reared from pupae from two
adjacent areas in the Hunter Valley. This insect is a common parasite
of the pupae of two Pyralid moths, Epipaschia nauplialis and HercuUa
albidalis, the larvae of which feed among dead leaves on the ground and
often occur freely in timbered prickly-pear areas. In confinement the


adults made no attempt to attack Cactohlastis pupae, except in the ease
of one unfertilised female which produced 6 male progeny with a life-
cycle of 21 days.
THE TWO MAJOR PARASITES.
Their Occurrence and Identity.
Stomatoceras melitarae was described by A. A. Girault from material
reared in Queensland in December 1923 from the prickly-pear Phycitid,
Olycella junclolineella, which had been introduced in 1921. Hence, the
first record of 8. melitarae was made within two years of the establish-
ment of 0. junctalinedla. In addition to this host, the parasite has
attacked freely other imported prickly-pear Phyeitids of the genera
CacAohlastis, MeUtara and Tucumania. It turned its attention to C.
cactorum as soon as the latter was established in all districts in Queens-
land and New South Wales; thus, it must have possessed a wide distribu-
tion in these States prior to the introduction of its prickly-pear-feeding
hosts.
The second major enemy of Cactohlastis was determined by Girault
as Stomatoceras fasciatipennis Bingham. There is cause for doubt as to
the correctness of this identification. In any case, this species is
considered to be identical with Stomatoceras (= Antrocephalus) stokesi
Crawford which is parasitic on the codling moth, Cydia pomoneUa, and
the oriental peach moth, Cydia molesta, in New South Wales and
Victoria. It is true that the Stomatoceras reared from Cydia are not
more than one-half the size of typical examples bred from C. cactoriins.
However, experimental work resulted in apparently conclusive proof
that the Cydia and Cactohlastis enemies are the same insect. The main
information from these experiments is summarised as follows:
(1) Adult Stomatoceras, reared from Cydia molesta, freely
attacked Cactohlastis pupae, and produced progeny consider-
ably larger than the parents.
(2) Adult Stomatoceras, reared from Cactohlastis, readily
attacked pupae of Cydia molesta, and produced progeny
considerably smaller than the parents.
i 3) Adults, bred from field-collected material of Cactohlastis and
Cydia molesta respectively, interbred freely, and produced
both male and female progeny.
Hence, the name Stomatoceras stokesi will be used in this publica-
tion. Incidentally it can be remarked that the pupae of Cactohlastis
are about four times as large as those of Cydia ponionella and C. molesta.
These two Tortricids are not indigenous insects. In Queensland, C.
molesta appears to be unknown, while C. ponionella occurs in one or two
districts, viz. Stanthorpe and possibly at higher elevations in North
Queensland, where apples are grown. Neither is found in any main
prickly-pear district, with the possible exception of the Hunter Valley,
New South Wales.
S. stokesi was attacking Cactohlastis in most districts by 1929; as
in the case of 8. melitarae it must have been widely distributed before
the cactus Phycitid was introduced. Since both 8. melitarae and S.
stokesi are distributed throughout the prickly-pear territory, the
inference is that they must have one or more native hosts in each
district. A great deal of attention has been given to the search for
native hosts by the collection from the field of pupae of various Lepidop-
fern. especially Pyraloid and other forms in which the pupa is enclosed


District.
S. melitarae &
All Other Pupal
S. slokesi.
Parasites.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Central Queensland
98-5
1-5
Western Queensland
96*8
3-2
South-West Queensland 96*0
40
Moree-Bingara, New
South Wales . .
97-5
2-5
Hunter Valley, New
South Wales . .
960
40
in a more or less definite cocoon. The results have been disappointing.
Various species of Stomatoceras have been obtained, sometimes quite
freely, from native Lepidoptera including, common Pyraloid forms. The
records of the two Cactoblastis parasites from native hosts are very
meagre, as follows:
.9. melitarae:
Two examples from pupae of an undetermined moth of the
family Galleriidae at Gogango.
One example from the Pyralid, Epipaschia nauplialis, at Scone.
Two examples from pupae of two unidentified Lepidoptera, of
which no adults were reared.
£. stokesi:
A few examples from the Tortricid, Argyrotoxa potnpica, at
Scone.
In confinement, adults of both insects, reared from Cactoblastis,
oviposited in certain other pupae, and the progeny were bred through to
the adult stage. These records were: —
<S'. melitarae:
Epipaschia nauplialis Pyralidae
Pyralis farinalis Pyralidae
Plodda inter pun della Phycitidae
Moerarchis australasiae Tineidae
•S', stokesi:
Epipaschia nauplialis Pyralidae
Herculia albidalis Pyralidae
Pyralis farinalis Pyralidae
Sceliodes cordalis Pyraustidae
Polldnisus sp .. .. Zygaenidae
In addition both species were reared from the introduced prickly-
pear insect, Mimorista flavidissimalis, family Pyraustidae. Thus, they
are able to attack and complete development in the pupae of various
Lepidoptera divided among several families. This ability might indicate
that there are many field hosts. However, the few records obtained
after much work with native Lepidoptera must imply that C. cactorum
has become their main host in the prickly-pear country.
Dominance of the Two Major Parasites.
Although several other pupal enemies are reared more or less
regularly each season, the preponderance of S. melitarae and S. stokesi
is outstanding. Of the many thousands of parasites obtained from field
collected material in each district since 1930, the importance of the
two main species is shown by the following averages:—


S. melitarae.
S. stoJeesi.
Days in January.
Days in March,
Male
17 Male
. . 20
Female
19 Female
. . 24
S. melifarcp.
S. stokesi.
Days.
Days.
Sherwood
January ■ February
23-25
24-29
Chinchilla
October-November . .
38-46
45-46
Scone
November-December
40-42
40-47
Life History and Habits.
The life history and habits of 8. melitarae and 8. stokesi are so
similar that the two species can be discussed together. Development
from egg to adu.lt takes place within the Cactoblastis pupa. Except on
very rare occasions, one Stomatoceras only emerges from each pupa. The
life-cycle is, in general, little longer than the pupal period of Cacto-
blastis. Hence, emergence of Stomatoceras adults in any generation
coincides with the Cactoblastis emergence and is completed shortly after
the last moths have appeared. The number of parasite generations
annually depends on the availability of host pupae. With Cactoblastis
as the host, there are rarely more than two generations of Stomatoceras
during the year. The great bulk of the parasite population is in the
adult stage during the egg and larval stages of C. cactorum. This
means that the adult Stomatoceras must remain alive, without having
deposited eggs, during the intervals between the occurrence of Cacto-
blastis pupae, a period of 10 to 12 weeks between October and January
and of 26 to 32 weeks between January and September. The adults are
able to survive for considerable periods and pass the winter in this stage.
Life-Cycle.
The shortest duration of the life-cycle in our records has been made
at Sherwood, viz.:—
In January and February development is completed in Queensland
generally in 20 to 30 days for both species. The period increases in the
early and late summer to a maximum of about 50 days. In the case of
autumn pupae of Cactoblastis or Melitara, the life-cycle may be extended
so that the adults emerge during or after the winter. The longest life-
cycles have been obtained at Scone, N.S.W., namely 116 days for 8.
melitarae between April and July, and 159 days for 8. stokesi from a
Melitara pupa attacked in April, the adult parasite emerging in late
September.
As a rule, development is a little faster for 8. melitarae. Typical
life-cycle averages from concurrent rearing work are:—
However, under certain conditions, 8. stokesi may develop more
rapidly. In constant temperature experiments, the life-cycle was
shorter at all temperatures above 85 deg. P. for 8. melitarae and at all
temperatures below 84 deg. P. for 8. stokesi; at mean temperatures, the
life-cycle of 8. melitarae was shorter at 86 deg. P. and that of 8. stokesi
shorter at 79 deg. F.
Investigations have proved that the life-cycle of both insects is
always greater than the pupal period of C. cactorum under similar
temperature ranges. A typical illustration from concurrent observa-
tions is as follows:
Cactoblastis pupal period . . =2l days.
Life-cycle S. melitarae . . = male 23 days ; female 25 days.
Life-cycle S. stokesi . . . . male 25 days ; female 29 days.


Under experimental conditions at Gogango, where a constant supply
of pupae of C. cactorum and Melitara prodenialis was available at the
time, nine generations of 8. melitarae were reared during a twelve
months’ period. In the field, there is usually one generation of parasites
during each Cactoblastis pupal period, making two generations a year.
A third generation can be completed in central Queensland, owing to the
occurrence of a partial third generation of Cactoblastis. Now and
again, the pupation of the host may be prolonged over many weeks in
the spring months, August to October; in this event it is possible for
the earlier Stomatoceras adults that emerge from the earlier pupae to
attack successfully the late pupae, and so produce a partial second
generation during one pupal period of the host.
General Notes on Life History and Habits.
The eggs are laid in the pupae until the formation of the abdominal
wall of the developing moth. Thus, when the Cactoblastis pupal period
occupied 20 days, the parasite could successfully deposit eggs up to the
16th day; again, when the pupal period was 43 days the attack could
take place for the first 30 to 33 days. However, pupae less than a week
old are preferred. Very rarely, eggs are laid in pupating larvae.
Each female places one egg in a pupa. As the insects do not
recognise or are indifferent to a prior act of oviposition, it often happens
that a pupa receives more than one egg; as many as 12 eggs have been
counted in one pupa. In all except very rare cases, one larva reaches
maturity. Where several eggs have been deposited, one larva develops
at the expense of the others. In one instance, the act of oviposition was
carried out, or at least the ovipositor was inserted, by 38 females in one
pupa; this host, when dissected two weeks later, contained one full-
grown living Sto-matoceras larva and one half-grown dead larva. The
inability of the females to recognise, or their indifference to, an earlier
attack must result in a considerable wastage of eggs.
The maximum reproduction probably does not exceed 100 eggs.
The greatest number of adult progeny obtained from one female has
been 87. From many records, the following are selected: —
10 female melitarae produced 196 adult progeny; maximum number 58.
10 female stole,esi produced 239 adult progeny; maximum number 65.
In another large series of experiments, the average number of
adult progeny per female parent was 45 for 8. melitarae and 50 for 8.
stokesi. In any case the potential rate of increase per generation of
these parasites is considerably less than that of their Cactoblastis host.
If host pupae are available, oviposition commences within two days
of emergence of the adult Stomatoceras; but if, as is usually the case,
pupae are not available, the act can be deferred for a considerable
period. Adults that emerge in January and February may not deposit
eggs until September. The duration of the egg-laying period varies
very greatly. A female that emerged on May 2nd deposited 53 eggs
between June 26th and September Bth, an interval of 74 days; but most
of the eggs were laid over a period of 14 days in August. Another
example that emerged on September 6th deposited 76 eggs from
September 6th to October 22nd, a period of 46 days, but more than 80
per cent, of the number were laid during the first 24 days.
Females that emerge in the late summer can oviposit at that time
and again in the spring. Three female melitarae, that emerged on
March 26th, deposited eggs freely on available pupae until April ]oth.


They lived throughout the winter, two dying on September 10th and the
third on September 80th. Of 45 pupae supplied between August 25th
and September Bth, 21 produced adult progeny, while the third female
successfully attacked a further 9 pupae. Oviposition was spread over 164
days, with an interval of 137 days between the April and August acts.
Although these females had not mated since late March, they were still
fertile in September, for the progeny represented both sexes. In this
connection it should be remarked that virgin females can reproduce
parthenogenetieally, but the progeny are males invariably.
The adults can emerge at any time of the year. In the case of
Cactoblastis pupae, emergence of the parasites commences a few days
later than that of the moths, and terminates from a few days to about
three weeks after the last moths have appeared. Since the life-cycle of
both species of Stomatoceras is longer than the Cactoblastis pupal period,
the peak of emergence of the adult parasites is usually a few days to
two -weeks later than the moth peak. This is not always the case.
Occasionally the parasite peak may precede the moth emergence crest,
which is explained by the circumstance that the earlier Cactoblastis
pupae are more likely to be attacked. In seasons when the pupation of
the host is drawn out over eight or more weeks, there has been a tendency
for the Stomatoceras emergence to reach two high points, the first in
advance of the moth peak, the second some weeks later and representing
a partial second generation developing in the later host pupae. Because
the life-cycle of S. stokesi is generally longer than that of S. melitarae,
the emergence peak of the former insect inclines to be somewhat later,
even two to three weeks later, than that of S. melitarae.
Longevity of Adults.
The adults are capable of surviving for considerable periods,
■especially during the cooler months. The maximum life in our records
has been as follows: —
A female S. melitarae, that emerged on Ist March, lived until 16th November
= 260 days.
A female S. stokesi, that emerged on Ist March, lived until 11th December
= 285 days.
These two insects were not supplied with host pupae and did not
deposit eggs. On many occasions adults in confinement have survived
from January to August and from March until September, and the
females successfully attacked Cactoblastis pupae in August and
September. The insects normally overwinter in the adult stage, shelter-
ing under bark, in crevices of trees, and among debris, and becoming
active on warmer days. They lay eggs as soon as pupae are available in
the spring, and then die within a short period.
The maximum adult life obtained in summer has been 166 days
for a female S. stokesi between October and March; this insect was not
given host pupae. At the same time females that deposited eggs did
not survive more than 80 days. Although no difficulty has been experi-
enced in keeping adults alive during the winter, very few have survived
in confinement for more than four weeks in midsummer. For example,
in one set of experiments the average life in October-November was 10
days for males and 12 days for females. Cages were set up in the open
at Chinchilla in October with 1,000 adults of the two species; a layer of
debris was added for shelter, and sweetened water was supplied for
nourishment; during November the mortality was very high, and by
December 21st two 8. stokesi only survived. They are very susceptible
to high temperatures, and have not lived in confinement for more than


Sound grazing country replaces former dense prickly-pear, as a result of the action of Cactoblastis cactorum; Chinchilla, Qld., July, 1933.
[Face 2 kkjg 160.


A dairy farmer's homo, milking sheds and storage dam; Chinchilla, Qld., May, 1932. The whole of this scene was dense prickly-pear
in brigalow country in 1927, and was reclaimed as a consequence of the destruction wrought by Cactoblastis.


A new settler builds his home; Milmerran, Qld., July, 1933. Remnants of the former dense prickly-pear destroyed by Cactoblastis
are visible in the foreground.


Cattle grazing on land reclaimed from prickly -pear by Cactobastis; Roma district, Qld., July, 1933.


■S'. melitarae.
S. siohesi.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Newly-emerged . .
25
0
3-4 weeks old
100
60
a few days when shade temperatures exceeded 95 deg. P. Under
conditions of close confinement, all adults died within 36 hours when the
maximum temperature reached 95 to 100 deg. F. daily. Furthermore,
adults that had emerged 3 to 4 weeks earlier were more affected by high
temperatures than newly-emerged material. In constant temperature
experiments the following mortality was obtained from insects subjected
to 114 deg. F. for one hour; —
Thus, heat waves in December and January would he very lethal to
S'tomatoceras that had emerged in October and November. This is proved
by the reduced degree of attack among Cactoblastis pupae in heat wave
years.
There is no doubt that the adults are better adapted to survive the-
long interval between the availability of Cactoblasiis pupae in February
and in September than to exist through the shorter summer interval
from November to January. Their intolerance to summer heat
furnishes the explanation for the circumstance that the percentage of
attack among Cactoblasiis pupae is higher after the winter, September
and October, than it is in midsummer, January and February.
It has already been indicated that these two parasites normally pass
the winter as adults. They shelter in crevices of trees, under bark and
among debris, but are active on warm sunny days. These overwintering
adults deposit their eggs as soon as host pupae become available in the
spring, and die soon afterwards. They feed on the honey of flowers and
on sap exudations from the new growth of plants. In confinement
sweetened water is imbibed freely. They are frequently seen flying
around tree-trunks, stumps and posts, apparently in search of pupae.
Probably their native hosts pupate under bark, since Cactoblastis pupae
under the bark of standing trees are much more subject to attack than
those in other situations. It has been found that CactoVlastis cocoons
in wire-gauze cages will attract the adults. In experiments with lures,
freshly injured pupae have proved very attractive; in fact when pupae
are crushed in one’s fingers, the Stomatoceras adults will follow the
person and readily alight on the hands.
Proportion of Sexes.
Females predominate, and the proportion of this sex is higher in
8. stokesi than in 8. melitarae. Field records from all districts over a
period of several years show the following averages:—
S. melitarae . . . . —57 per cent, females
S. stokesi . . . . —6O per cent, females
Sometimes females are more numerous than males by two or three
to one. Rearing experiments have given as high as 75 per cent, females
for 8. stokesi and 70 per cent, for the second species; the highest female
average from one district in any season has been 73 per cent, for 8.
stokesi and 71 per cent, for 8. melitarae. Now and again there is a
preponderance of males. The highest male figure in material reared
from field cocoons in a district in one generation has been 58 per cent,
for both species.
Mortality Among Developing Parasites.
As the eggs are laid within the host pupae, information on the
average mortality in the various stages of development has not been


S. melitarae.
S. stokeei.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Central Queensland
. 96-2
3-8
Western Queensland
. 80-8
19-2
South-west Queensland
66-1
33-9
Moree-Bingara, New
South Wales ..
. 59-5
40-5
Hunter Valley, New
South Wales ..
. 29-9
70-1
obtained. Examination of Cactoblastis pupae has indicated that in very
hot summers there is an appreciable mortality among the Stomatoceras
population; the death-rate is highest for unemerged adults, with dead
larvae following very closely; few appear to die in the pupal stage. For
example in the summer generation of 1940, a season of very high
temperatures during the Cactoblastis pupal period, 43 per cent, of the
parasites from western and south-west Queensland died before they
emerged; at the same time the mortality from non-parasitic factors
among the Cactoblastis pupae was 28 per cent., which would suggest that
the host was less affected than the Stomatoceras by the extreme condi-
tions. Material from individual localities showed as high as 72 per cent,
mortality among the parasites before they had emerged.
As Secondary Parasites.
These insects can assume the role of hyper-parasites. Several
instances have been recorded of a live pupa of Stomatoceras being found
within a dead pupa of the Ichneumon, Lissopimpla semipunctata, within
the Cactoblastis pupa.
The Relative Importance of S. melitarae and S. stokesi.
8. melitarae was attacking Cactoblastis in all districts at least as
early as 1929. 8. stokesi was not recognised until that year, but from
1930 onward it was recorded from each major section of the priekly-
pear territory, except central Queensland where it was not found until
late 1932. During the four Cactoblastis generations occurring between
August 1930 and March 1932, 4,554 examples of 8. melitarae and not
one of 8. stokesi were reared from field collected pupae of the host m
central Queensland.
•S', melitarae is the dominant parasite in central Queensland, while
the second species gradually becomes more important as one moves
south, until it assumes the major role in the Hunter Valley. The relative
position of the two species is indicated by the following figures, which
are an average of the results from year to year:—
In connection with the importance of the two species, two interesting
facts may he noted: —
(а) in the Hunter Valley, 8. stokesi has continued to increase and
8. melitarae to decrease from 1930 to 1939;
(б) in the other four districts, 8. stokesi increased very sharply
between 1930 to a peak in either 1934 or 1935, and then
decreased in importance at almost the same rate.
The preponderance of either species is shown by the accompanying
graph giving the proportion of 8. stokesi in each year in western
Queensland," south-west Queensland and the Hunter Valley.
The figures for central Queensland and the Moree-Bingara distinct
are incomplete, since records were not obtained in certain years. How-
ever, in central Queensland, 8. stokesi increased from zero in 1930 and


The proportion of Stomatoceras stokesi among all parasites bred from Cactoblastis pupae from 1930 to 1940. Observe its
continued rise in the Hunter Valley, and its increase and subsequent decline in Queensland.


S. mdUarae.
S. stokesi.
Deg. F. Hours
«. Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Newly-emerged parasites
r 100 for 7
70
20
i 115 for 2
90
20
3-4 weeks old parasites
> 114 for 1
100
60
23 for 3
100
nil
5. melitarae.
8. stolen.
10 females produced
196 progeny
239 progeny
= average adults per female
19-6 progeny
23-9 progeny
Average female adults per female
13-7 progeny
17-1 progeny
32 females produced
574 progeny
654 progeny
= average adults per female
17-9 progeny
20-4 progeny
Average female adults per female
10-0 progeny
10-7 progeny
1931 to 11 per cent, in 1934; no data are available for 1935 and 1936,
but the insect was absent in 1937, the last year when information was
secured. As regards western Queensland, 8. stokesi represented 7 per
cent, only of the 1930 parasites; in 1935 it had become five times as
abundant, viz. 35 per cent.; each year since 1935 it has become less
important until in 1940 its proportion had fallen to 3 per cent. In
south-west Queensland the position is very similar; 8. melitarae was ten
times as numerous as 8. stokesi in 1930 and again in 1940, but in its peak
year the latter represented 70 per cent, of the parasites and was thus
more than twice as numerous as 8. melitarae. In the Moree-Bingara
district, 8. stokesi increased from 16 per cent, in 1930 to 60 per cent, in
1934; by 1938, its importance had decreased to 39 per cent.; no records
were obtained in 1939 and 1940. In 1930, the two species were of equal
importance in the Hunter Valley; the next two years showed 8. melitarae
to be somewhat more prevalent; since 1932, 8. stokesi has been the
predominating parasite, and in 1938 and 1939 it was more than seven
times as frequent as the second insect.
It cannot he mere coincidence that in all districts except the Hunter
Valley 8. stokesi grew steadily in importance between 1930 and 1934-35
and then diminished at approximately the same rate. The reason for its
decline is not known. The evidence of all investigational work has
pointed to this insect being intrinsically superior to 8. melitarae. Hence, i
it was expected gradually to replace the latter species as the dominant;
enemy of Cactoblastis in all areas. The greater potentialities of 8.
stokesi are indicated by the following observations: —
(1) The adults are more tolerant than those of its ally of both
high and low temperatures. From constant temperature
experiments conducted simultaneously, the following
mortality figures are selected as typical:—
(2) The adults are longer lived. The maximum recorded
longevity has been 260 days for 8. melitarae and 285 days
for 8. stokesi. When both species have been kept in confine-
ment during the summer, the last survivors have been 8.
stokesi.
(3) The proportion of females, reared both from field collected
pupae and during experiments, has been greater in 8.
stokesi.
(4) In concurrent rearing experiments with the two species, 8.
stokesi produced more progeny per female, and more female
progeny per female, than 8. melitarae. Typical results are
quoted:—
In another set of experiments, each female produced
average adult progeny as follows: — 8. melitarae, 44.6; 8.
stokesi, 49-8.


(5) "When the two species are in competition for the available
hosts, S. stokesi is the more successful. Series of rearing
experiments were carried out on this question. When the
two species were reared separately at the ratio of one pair
of parasites to 10 Caetoblastis pupae per day for 12 days,
the proportion of hosts successfully attacked, based on the
adult parasites bred, was:—
Per Cent.
S. melitarae .. .. .. .. .. 25-0
S. stokesi .. .. .. . . 28-2
But when the two species were combined, at the ratio
of one pair of adults of both parasites to 10 pupae per day,
the proportion of hosts attacked, again based on the adult
Stomatoceras reared, was: —
Per Cent.
jS. melitarae .. .. .. .. = 14-6
<B. stokesi .. = 24-2
Thus in competition the degree of attack by S. stokesi
dropped slightly from 28.2 per cent, to 24.2 per cent., while
that of 8. melitarae fell sharply from 25.0 per cent, to 14.6
per cent.
EFFECT OF PARASITES ON CACTOBLASTIS.
Degree of Attack.
Since the first records of attack by indigenous Hym&noptera, it
has been recognised that the continued efficiency of Caetoblastis would
depend mainly on the extent of the control exercised by these native
parasites. Hence, particular attention has been given,
( а ) to the study of the habits, life history, and potentialities of
the two major enemies;
(б) to the gathering of information from year to year and genera-
tion to generation showing the extent of parasitic attack
in the field.
The field records have been obtained by collecting Caetoblastis
pupae from typical areas in each district and listing the percentages of
moth emergence, mortality from parasites, and mortality from other
factors. In order that the Stomatoceras would have had the opportunity
of attacking the pupae, all material has been secured after moth emerg-
ence has commenced. In addition, the data from these collections have
been cheeked by obtaining further lots of pupae from the field at the
conclusion of moth emergence. The various records have been based on
the examination of all pupae.
The aim has been to collect in each generation a total of between
20,000 and 40,000 pupae from 12 to 20 separate areas in each district.
The averages of moth emergence, parasitism, etc., secured in this way
are considered to furnish fairly reliable indexes of the fluctuations in
Caetoblastis emergence and in mortality from various agencies from year
to year, and of the general effect exercised by Stomatoceras and other
parasites. Allowing that such information is far from being exact, it
seems certain that any definite increase in the attack by parasites or in
the importance of any particular species of parasite would become
apparent.


Per Cent.
Central Queensland
10-7
Western Queensland
9-0
South-west Queensland
81
Moree-Bingara, New South Wales . .
. . 13-8
Hunter Valley, New South Wales ..
. . 221
Per Cent.
Central Queensland
14-4
Western Queensland
12-1
South-west Queensland
11-4
Moree-Bingara, New South Wales ..
19-4
Hunter Valley, New South Wales ..
.. 29-3
Central Queensland
September--November.
Per Cent.
11-4
January-March.
Per Cent.
10-1
Western Queensland
11-5
6-5
South-west Queensland
11-3
4-9
Moree-Bingara
17-6
100
Hunter Valley ..
290
16-3
The average degree of mortality since 1929 among the Cactohlastis
pupae brought about by all species of parasites has been; —
These percentages are based on examination figures, which include
all dead parasites in the pupae as well as those that emerged success-
fully. The records for actual parasite emergence are between 1 and 2
per cent. lower than those given above for each district. It will be noted
at once that parasitism is considerably higher in the Hunter Valley
than in any other section of the prickly-pear territory, a circumstance
that has been consistently true throughout the period.
These figures do not represent the real degree of control exercised
by parasite attack. There is always a definite, although variable, death
rate among the Cactohlastis pupae from other factors. The average
non-parasitie mortality over a period of years has been between 25 and
29 per cent, for each district. If it is assumed that all pupae attacked
by parasites would have produced moths and would not have succumbed
to other causes of death, the absolute maximum effect of parasitism on
the increase of Cactohlastis can be considered as follows:
Therefore, Stomatoceras and the minor parasitic enemies have had
a definite, but far from controlling, influence on the welfare of C.
cactorum.
One of the most interesting phases of the situation has been that the
degree of parasitism of the pupae is higher in the winter generation in
September-November than in the summer generation in January-March.
The mean mortality from parasitic attack since 1929 has been as
follows:
Except in central Queensland, where the difference is not great,
the figures are considerably higher for the winter generation. Allow-
ing for one or two discrepancies in central Queensland and the Moree-
Bingera district during a period when the degree of parasitism was
rising rather steeply, the percentage of attack in every summer genera-
tion has been lower than in the preceding or succeeding winter genera-
tion. This ebb and flow is illustrated by the accompanying graph of
records from the Hunter Valley from 1930 to 1939.
The faets are contrary to what might naturally be anticipated.
"With most insects the parasite population decreases during the winter
months and builds up during the summer; thus the percentage of attack
is lowest in the first generation after the winter and then.tends to
increase progressively for succeeding generations until the end of
summer. In the case of Cactohlastis and its Stomatoceras enemies, the


The percentage of parasitic attack on Cactoblastis pupae from 1930 to 1939. Note that parasitism is always higher in winter
generation In October-November than in summer generation in February-March.


adult parasites must survive for an average of 7 months after their
emergence in January-March before the host pupae become available in
September-November; on the other hand, the adults that emerge in
September-November need to live for not more than 34 months until
pupae can be attacked in January-February. Other factors being
equal, the survival rate of the adults should be higher for the shorter
period; consequently, the summer generation of Cactoblastis pupae
should receive the higher degree of attack. That the winter generation
pupae suffer to a greater extent indicates that the adult Stomatoceras
have a higher capacity to exist through the longer winter period than
the much shorter summer interval. As has been pointed out earlier, all
evidence suggests strongly that most of the parasites that emerge in
September-November do not live long and are unable to withstand the
high temperatures experienced in mid-summer before the host pupae
are obtainable in January. The small amount of divergence between
winter and summer generation parasitism in central Queensland may be
explained by the circumstance that midsummer temperatures in that
section rarely reach the extremes common to the other districts.
Is Parasitism Increasing?
The answer to this question is of paramount importance since it
concerns the continued control of prickly-pear by Cactoblastis, more
particularly since 1934 when the population of that insect has decreased
enormously as a consequence of the great reduction in the quantity of
its food supply. Examination of figures of mortality from parasitism
from year to year since 1929 discloses the following position: —
(1) In the Hunter Valley, where the degree of attack is consider-
ably higher than in any other section, parasitism has not
increased. It has fluctuated but has shown no tendency to
rise. Actually the last available figures, for the 1939
summer generation, are the lowest on record, a fact that is
attributed to extreme midsummer heat in that year.
(2) In south-west Queensland, parasitism rose very sharply in
1933; very low figures of under 2 per cent, in the 1930 and
1931 summer generations are probably explained by heat
wave conditions. The 1933 rise was followed by two years
of decreases, and then another sudden rise to the maximum
in 1936. Another drop in 1937 was succeeded by a sharp
rise in 1938, and a fall in 1939. The figures for the 1939
and 1940 summer generations are the lowest since 1931; in
each of these seasons heat waves occurred in midsummer.
(3) In western Queensland, as in the preceding district, there
was a sudden increase in 1933, but no further increase has
occurred since. In the past three years, parasitism would
seem to have decreased; the mean figure for the three winter
generations of 1937-39 is 8-8 per cent, parasitism, compared
with an average of 16.8 per cent, for the four winter genera-
tions of 1933-36.
(4) In central Queensland, parasitism increased sharply in
1931-32. The records are incomplete, but no higher figures
have been obtained than those of 1932.
(5) In the Moree-Bingara district, parasitism was moderately
high in 1929, and from that year to 1937 tended to rise
gradually, the 1937 figure of 21.8 per cent, being about twice
„ as high as in 1929-30. No records have been made since 1937.


Graphs are given on page 170 showing the rise and fall in the
degree of parasitic attack in the winter generation for western Queens-
land, south-west Queensland and the Hunter Valley. The winter
generation has been selected for illustration, because it suffers more from
the attentions of parasites, and because there are no breaks in the year
to year records. Figures for central Queensland and the Moree-Bingara
district are not sufficiently complete to be shown graphically.
Although, on account of the comparatively short period, acceptance
of the records of 10 to 12 years for estimating future happenings may
be somewhat rash, an analysis would suggest that the attack on C.
■cactorum by Australian parasitic Hymenoptera has reached a stage
which is more or less stable. At least there is no reason to expect that
parasitism will increase to a point where the efficiency of the host will
be seriously impaired. One might anticipate that the degree of attack
will waver backward and forward within the limits already attained,
rising in years of mild temperatures and falling in seasons of abnormally
hot summers or unusually severe winters.
Actually, Cactoblastis is not the ideal host for Stomatoceras. The
cactus Phycitid passes through two generations a year, and has a long
interval between its two pupal periods. The parasite adults, emerging
from the host pupae concurrently with the host, are ready to oviposit
at once, hut, as a rule, fresh pupae of Cactoblastis are not available for
many weeks at least. In the interim a considerable proportion of the
adults must die, and it should be remembered that these adults have
not had the opportunity to reproduce. To reach their maximum
efficiency, Stomatoceras require hosts with several generations a year or
with irregular generations furnishing pupae throughout the year. The
results of the life history, temperature and other studies all point to the
improbability of Stomatoceras becoming controlling enemies. Some of
these conclusions may be set down:—
(a) The survival rate of C. cactorum is greater than that of
Stomatoceras. For most of the year, the former insect is
a larva within the prickly-pear plant, where it is little
affected by enemies or by climate. On the other hand, for
the greater part of the year, Stomatoceras is an adult that
has not reproduced, and is subject to attack by birds, insects,
etc., and to lethal temperatures.
( b) Cactoblastis pupae are more tolerant of both high and low
temperatures than the developing parasites. It has been
found that both below and above certain limits there is a
range of temperatures where the host pupae develop success-
fully while the Stomatoceras die as larvae, pupae or
unemerged adults.
(c) Stomatoceras adults are very susceptible to high tempera-
tures, much more so than any stage in the life-cycle of Cacto-
blastis. In heat wave years the reduction in the parasite
population is much greater than in the host population.
(d) The potential rate of increase in Cactoblastis is considerably
higher than in the parasites.
(e) A certain proportion only of Cactoblastis pupae are acces-
sible to the adult parasites, either because of the situation
in which the pupae occur or of the bulkiness of the cocoons.


The percentage of parasitic attack on Cactoblastis pupæ of the winter generation from 1930 to 1939. Note parasitism has
not increased in the Hunter Valley; in Queensland it rose sharply in 1933, but has not continued to progress markedly.


Host Immunity and Accessibility.
The discussion of the two major parasites will be concluded with
certain information on this question. Experimental work has proved
that there is no inherent immunity among the Cactoblastis pupae.
Stomatoceras females accepted for attack all pupae, provided they were
accessible or had not reached an age when oviposition could not be
accomplished. Immunity was a matter of cocoon mechanism or of
selected pupation sites. The average length of the ovipositor is 3.7
mm. for 8. melitarae and 3.9 mm. for 8. stokesi. The average thickness
of the Cactoblastis cocoon is 2.0 mm., while the air space between the
cocoon wall and the pupa averages 1.0 mm. This means that the average
pupa is within the reach of the female parasite. However, quite often
the bulkiness of the cocoon, especially when it is situated in an open
space and is not packed down by surrounding objects, gives a wall thick-
ness considerably greater than 2 mm.; hence, the pupa is rendered
immune from attack.
The cocoons are safe from the attentions of Stomatoceras when
covered by an inch of loose rubbish, soil, or other similar matter. One-
half inch covering renders them almost immune from attack. In the
field many pupae must be completely protected by being hidden under
debris. Where the soil is loose, especially in the absence of other shelter
around the pear plants, the insects may pupate beneath the surface and
so become inaccessible. For example, a count made of cocoons in all
situations in one locality during a summer generation revealed that 35
per cent, were beneath the soil surface; of this proportion probably about
one-half was sufficiently covered to be safe from Stomatoceras.
Parasitism and Pupal Sites.
Field studies have indicated that there are wide discrepancies in
the extent of attack by the parasites according to the situations in which
the cocoons occur. Cactoblastis selects many sites in which to pupate.
The most frequent choice is among rubbish or debris at the base of the
attacked plants. Where the prickly-pear is being destroyed or partially
destroyed, a favoured situation, particularly in September-November,
is in between dead pear segments or inside dried and broken segments.
In midsummer, January-Pebruary, the cocoons are more liable to be
found in quantity among the decayed pear or other rubbish surrounding
the clumps, which situations afford greater protection from heat. In
timbered country, especially in brigalow scrubs where dead standing
trees and fallen branches and logs occur, cocoons are plentiful under
the looser bark or under logs and branches in contact with the soil.
A great deal of information has been gathered concerning the
degree of parasitism in the different situations. It has been learned
that pupae among debris are attacked much less freely than those
between dead segments in the clumps. Since the latter are more acces-
sible to the Stomatoceras adults, this result might be expected. How-
ever, cocoons under the loose bark of standing trees produce many more
parasites than those in any other locations, even than material under
the loose bark of fallen trees. As the pupae under any loose bark,
whether of upright or of fallen trees, should be equally accessible to
the parasites, the one obvious explanation of the preference of Stomato-
ceras for the standing trees seems to be that the native hosts of these
parasites pupate l under the bark of the trees on which their larvae have
been feeding. The habit of the adult Stomatoceras of flying around


PuRal Situation.
Number of
Pupae.
Parasites
Beared.
Degree of
Attack.
Under fallen logs
5,358
142
Per Cent.
2-7
Among debris
5,246
74
1-4
Between dead pear pads
8,256
628
7-6
Under bark of fallen trees ..
6,342
226
3-6
Under bark of standing trees
5,500
1,649
29-8
Area.
Among Debris.
Between Dead Pads.
Per Cent. Attack
Per Cent. Attack.
No. 1
2-1
8-7
No. 2 .
1-0
6-5
No. 3 .,
3-2
12-7
Number
Among Debris.
Between Dead Fads.
of Pupae.
Per Cent. Attack.
Per Cent. Attack.
5,600 . .
.. 11-7
16-7
3,900 ..
7-5
19-4
tree trunks and upright posts lends force to this probability. In order
to illustrate the differences in attack according to the situation of the
pupae, typical records from various localities are furnished.
1. (a) Gogango, central Queensland, in September-October ■ all
cocoons gathered in one local area: —
(6) Chinchilla, western Queensland, in Janpary-February:—
Per Cent. Attack.
Among debris . . .. . . . . 0-5
Between dead pear pads .. .. .. 7-6
Under bark of fallen trees .. .. 6-0
Under bark of standing trees 14-0
1 (c) Gravesend, north-west New South Wales, in February -
March: —
Per Cent. Attack.
Among debris .. .. .. .. 3-5
Between dead pear pads .. .. .. 6-4
Under bark of fallen trees .. .. 4-7
Under bark of standing trees .. .. 19-1
(d) Gravesend, north-west New South Wales, in January-March,
a total of 40,000 cocoons was collected from eight areas. 59
per cent, of the cocoons were among debris, 31 per cent, were
between dead pear pads, 5 per cent, were under bark of
fallen trees, and 5 per cent, were under bark of standing
trees; —
Per Cent. Attack.
Among debris .. .. .. .. 4*4
Between dead pear pads .. .. .. 7-3
Under bark of fallen trees .. .. . . 5-3
Under bark of standing trees . . .. 20-5
The average parasitism was 6.2 per cent., but pupae
under bark of standing trees showed a degree of attack more
than three times as high as the average.
2. (a) Gogango, central Queensland, in January. Cactoblastis
pupated in two situations in about equal numbers, viz.
among debris and between dead pear pads.
(h) Goondiwindi, south-west Queensland, in October-
November:—


September-October.
January-February.
Per Cent. Attack.
Per Cent. Attack.
Among debris
6-7
4-3
Between dead pads
9-5
6-9
Below soil surface
2-3
nil
(c) Chinchilla, western Queensland. All cocoons were collected
from among and around 12 pear plants:—


APPENDIX.
THE PERSONNEL OF THE BOARD AND ITS STAFF.
THE BOARD.
The personnel of the Commonwealth Prickly Pear Board has altered
periodically in accordance with administrative changes in Common-
wealth and State Government bodies. The various members, who have
been responsible for the policies of the Board, have been as follows;
(a) Commonwealth Government representatives:
Sir George Knibbs, 1921-25, Director of the Institute of
Science and Industry.
G. Lightfoot, 1920-21, 1925-40, Secretary of the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research.
(Z>) New South Wales representatives;
G. Valder, 1920-25, Under Secretary, Department of Agricul-
ture.
G. D. Ross, 1925-39, Under Secretary, Department of Agricul-
ture.
(c) Queensland representatives:
W. G. Graham, 1920, Under Secretary, Department of Public
Lands.
G. L. Board, 1920-21, Under Secretary, Department of Public
Lands.
A. G. Melville, 1922-26, Under Secretary, Department of Public
Lands.
P. D. Power, 1926-30, Deputy Chairman, Prickly Pear Land
Commission.
W. L. Payne, 1930-38, Chairman, Land Administration Board.
A. G. Melville, 1938-40, Chairman, Land Administration Board.
( d) Scientific representatives:
E. J. Goddard, 1926-40, Professor of Biology, University of
Queensland.
T. H. Johnston, 1920-23, was an associate member, in addition
to holding the position of Scientific Controller.
The Secretary of the Board from 1920 to 1940 has been P. Murrell
of the Queensland Department of Public Lands.
THE SCIENTIFIC STAFF.
The staff of the Board has undergone many changes from time
to time through new appointments, resignations, promotions, and
transfers. The following list furnishes the names and positions held
by scientific officers who have had more than two years’ service with
the Board:—
T. H. Johnston. —Scientific Controller, 1920-23.
J. C. Hamlix. — Biologist in charge of work in the United States, 1920-22; Offieer-
in-Charge of all Investigations, 1923-24.
W. B. Alexander. —Biologist, Investigations in the Argentine, 1920-21, in Australia,
1921-23; Acting Offieer-in-Charge of Investigations in Australia, 1923-24;
Officer-in-Charge of all Investigations, 1924-25.


A. P. Dodd. —Assistant Entomologist at Sherwood, 1921-23; Officer-in-Charge of
Westwood and, later, Chinchilla Field Stations, 1923-24; Senior Entomolo-
gist in the United States, Argentine and Uruguay, 1924-25; Officer-in-Charge
of all Investigations, 1925-39.
L. F. Hitchcock. —Microbiologist at Sherwood, 1921-25; In charge of work in the
United States, and visited Mexico, the West Indies and Venezuela, 1926-28;
Returned to Australia and resigned from service, 1929; Re-appointed as
Research Entomologist at Sherwood, 1931-35; In charge of Xanthium work
in the United States, 1935-39.
R. C. Mundell. —Offlcer-in-Charge of Gogango Field Station, 1925-28; In charge of
work in the United States and Mexico, 1928-31; In charge of work in
Argentine and visited Brazil, Paraguay, Chile, Peru, and Ecuador,
1931-37; Engaged on Xanthium investigations in India, 1938-39.
F. H. S. Roberts. —Officer-in-Charge of Biniguy Field Station, 1923-25, of Sherwood
Laboratory, 1926-27, and of Gooudiwindi Field Station, 1927-28; Research
Entomologist stationed at Gogango, 1928-30.
H. K. Lewcock. —Mycologist in the United States, 1925-29, and in Australia,
1929-31.
E. Mortensen. —Assistant Entomologist in the United States, and visited Mexico,
Central America, and Brazil, 1921-29.
G. W. Barnette.— Assistant in the United States, 1927-31.
J. Mann. —Field Assistant at Biniguy Field Station, 1923-24, and at Sherwood
Laboratory, 1924-27; Officer-in-Charge of Sherwood Laboratory, 1927-29;
Research Entomologist at Chinchilla, 1929-34, and at Sherwood, 1934-39.
A. R. Taylor. —Field Assistant at Sherwood Laboratory, 1923, and at Chinchilla
Field Station, 1923-25; Officer-in-Charge at Chinchilla, 1926-31; Conducted
investigations in the United States and Mexico, 1931-38; Entomologist at
Sherwood Laboratory, 1938-39.
H. T. Nicholas. —Officer-in-Charge of Gravesend Field Station, 1926-30, and of
Scone Field Station, 1930-39.
D. S. Middleton. —Officer-in-Charge of Goondiwindi Field Station, 1928-39.
T. A. Cole. —Field Assistant at Chinchilla, 1924-27, and at Gogango, 1927-29;
Officer-in-Charge at Gogango, 1929-35, and at Sherwood Laboratory,
1935-39.
A. N. Burns. —Officer-in-Charge at Biniguy, 1923, and at Westwood, 1923-25.
G. R. BassinOthwaighte. —Field Assistant at Chinchilla, 1926-27, and at Goondi-
windi, 1927-29; Officer-in-Charge at Sherwood, 1929-31; Assistant
Entomologist in the Argentine, 1931-35; Officer-in-Charge at Gogango,
1935-36.
A. E. Bullock. —Field Assistant at Chinchilla, 1927-28, and at Goondiwindi,
1929-33; Officer-in-Charge at Chinchilla, 1934-36, and at Gogango, 1936-39.
B. A. V. Smith. —Field Assistant at. Sherwood Laboratory, 1926-33; Research
Assistant at Chinchilla, 1934-36.
S. K. Bassingthwaighte. —Field Assistant at Gravesend, 1928-31, and at
Goondiwindi, 1931-39.
S. H. Byron. —Field Assistant at Gogango, 1926-39.
E. C. Blake. —Field Assistant at Chinchilla, 1927-30, at Gravesend, 1930-31, and
at Sherwood, 1931-38.
V. C. Retford. — Field Assistant at Scone, 1935-39.
R. P. Chadwick.— Field Assistant at Gravesend, 1926-29, and at Chinchilla,
1929-33.
D. J. Porter. —Field Assistant at Gravesend, 1927-28, at Sherwood, 1928-31, and
at Scone, 1931-34.
V. Manuell. —Field Assistant at Gravesend, 1924-27, and at Chinchilla, 1927-31.
G. Touitt. —Field Assistant at Gogango, 1924-31.
H. Frazer. —Field Assistant at Gogango, 1927-30.


LITERATURE.
The following list of bulletins and articles is not intended to be
a complete bibliography of the subject. Its aim has been to cite the
more important publications relating to the biological control of
priekly-pear in Australia and at the same time to give some of the
more interesting references dealing with the same problem in other
countries: —
Alexander, W. B. .. .. The Prickly Pear in Australia.—Comm. Adv.
Com. Science and Industry, Bull. 12 .. 1919
Natural Enemies of Prickly Pear and their
Introduction into Australia—Comm.
Instit. Science and Industry, Bull. 29 . . 1925
The Prickly Pears Acclimatised in Australia
—Comm. Prickly Pear Board Bull. .. 1925
Britton, N. L. and Rose, The Cactaceae, vols. 1-4 —Carnegie Instit. of
J. N. Washington .. .. .. .. 1919-23
Cockerell, T. D. A. .. Biological Control of Prickly Pear —Science,
vol. 69, No. 1786 1929
Db Cary, R. .. .. La Destruction des Cactus par une
Cochinille a Madagascar—Ann. Soc.
Linn. Lyon, France, vol. 75 .. . . 1930
Dbshpande, V. G. .. .. Eradication of Prickly Pear by Cochineal
Insects in the Bombay Presidency—
Agrie. and Live Stock, India, vol. 5, pt. 1 1935
Dodd, A. P. .. .. The Campaign against Prickly Pear in
Australia—Nature, vol. 117, No. 2948 1926
Biological Control of Prickly Pear—Aust.
Forestry Journ., vol. 10 . . .. 1926
The Biological Control of Prickly Pear—
Journ. Comm. Coun. Scient. and Indust.
Res., vol. 1 .. .. .. .. 1927
The Biological Control of Prickly Pear in
Australia—Comm. Coun. Scient. and
Indust. Res., Bull. 34 . . .. 1927
The Progress of Biological Control of Prickly
Pear in Australia —Comm. Prickly Pear
Bd., Bull. .. .. .. .. 1929
The Present Position and Future Prospects
in Relation to the Biological Control of
Prickly Pear—Journ. Comm. Coun.
Scient. and Indust. Research, vol. 6 .. 1933
The Control and Eradication of Prickly Pear
in Australia —Bull. Ent. Res., vol. 27 1936
The Biological Control of Prickly Pear in
Australia—lmp. Bur. Past, and Forage
Crops, Herb. Pub. Ser., Bull. 27.. .. 1940
Hauun, J. C. .. .. Seasonal Adaptation of a Northern
Hemisphere Insect to the Southern
Hemisphere—Journ. Econ. Ent., vol. 16 1923
Biological Control of Prickly Pear in
Australia, Contributing Efforts in North
America—Jour. Econ. Ent., vol. 17 .. 1924
An Inquiry into the Stability and Restric-
tions of Feeding Habits of Certain
Cactus Insects—Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 25 1932
Heinrich, C. .. .. The Cactus-Feeding Phycitinse: A
Contribution toward a Revision of the
American Pyraloid Moths of the Family
Phycitidse—Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus.,
Washington, vol. 86 .. .. .. 1939


Hunter, W. D., Pratt, F. C., The Principle Cactus Insects of the United
and Mitchell, J. D. States —U.S. Dept. Agric. Bur. Ent.,
Bull. 113 1912
Jacques, C. .. .. Le Cactoblastis cactorum —Rev. Agr.
Nouvelle Caledonie, Noumea . . . . 1933
Jepson, F. P. .. .. Present Position in regard to the Control of
Prickly Pear Opuntia diUenii Haw. in
Ceylon by the introduced Cochineal
Insect D. tomentosus Lam. —Trop.
Agric., Peradeniya, Ceylon, vol. 75 . . 1930
Johnston, T. H. .. .. The Australian Prickly Pear Problem —
Aust. Ass. for Advanc. of Science, vol. 16 1923
The Relation of Climate to the Spread of
Prickly Pear —Trans. Royal Soc. Sth.
Aust., vol. 48 .. .. . . . . 1924
Remarks on the Propriety of Introducing
Insects to Control Pear in Australia—
Trans. Royal Soc. Sth. Aust., vol. 30 . . 1926
Johnston, T. H. and Rept. Qld. Prickly Pear Trav. Comm.,
Tbyon, H. Brisbane . . .. . . . . . . 1914
Pettey, F. W. .. .. Cactoblastis cactorum : Government Policy
with regard to Distribution of the
Insect —Farming in South Africa,
Reprint 37 . . .. . . . . 1934
Pettey, F. W. and dd Toit Biological Control of Jointed Cactus —
E. Farming in South Africa, Reprint 107.. 1939
■Qld., Prickly Pear Land Brisbane, Annual Reports—l92s to . . 1939
Commission
Cuddling H. C. .. .. Reclaiming Prickly Pear Lands —Qld.
Agric. Joum., vol. 24 .. .. .. 1930
Ramakrishna Ayyab, T. V. The Coccidae of the Pnckly Pear in India
and their Economic Importance—Agric.
and Live Stock, India, vol. 1 .. .. 1931
Scott, R. C. .. .. .. Prickly Pear Eradication—Jour. Agric.,
Sth. Aust., vol. 40 .. . . .. 1936
Tough, W. A. .. .. Biological Control of Prickly Pear—Sth.
Aust. Nat., Adelaide, vol. 19 .. .. 1938
"Whitb-Hanby J. .. .. Rept. Prickly Pear Exp. Stat. Dulacca,
Qld 1914 1915 1916
A. H. Tucker, Government Printer, Brisbane.
8


MAP SHOWING
MAIN PRICKLY PEAR AREAS OF
QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH WALES
