

Jonh Ferguson


THE ECONOMIC VALUE
OF THE GOSPEL
BY
JOHN FERGUSON
MINISTER OF ST. STEPHEN’S, SYDNEY
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
89-95 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1910


This Address was delivered by the Right Reverend
the Moderator of the General Assembly of the
Rresbyterinn Church of Australia in the Assembly
Hall, Melbourne, on September 22, 1909.


THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF THE GOSPEL
Throughout the course of my ministry I have often
been painfully impressed by the persistence of that wide-
spread misconception which supposes the chief end of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ to be the providing of a better estate
in another world for those who confess Him here; and
which assumes, to the utter preverting of the truth, that the
gospel has no specific gift for the immediate needs of men
■ —that it affords them no practical advantage in the struggle
for existence —that it adds, at any rate, but little to the
means whereby they hope to attain success (that is, money,
fame, position, power)—that, in short, it may be left out of
consideration in estimating the forces which make for the
prosperity of a people.
This misconception not only involves a very superficial
appreciation of the gospel, but implies also intensely selfish
notions about wealth and well-being. The true conception
is clear, if men will but look for it.
We—and here I mean the Church in its comprehensive
sense, that is, all who sincerely confess and follow Jesus
Christ as Lord and Saviour—to whom the Gospel has been
committed as a sacred trust, know full well that the gospel
call is a call to manhood, that the gospel power is the
power of God unto manhood, and that the gospel ideal
of manhood is Jesus Christ.
We affirm that the gospel is the mightiest of all
factors essential to the true and lasting prosperity of both
individuals and nations; and, consequently, that it is of
the highest economic value.
Can we justify this assertion? Most certainly.
I.
We, who have received the gospel as an intimate
personal message from Jesus Christ—who believe it, and
rejoice in its truth, sweetness and power!—find a passionate


interest in speaking of Jesus Christ as wholly our Saviour.
We put Him in the forefront. His personality is saving
truth in its sublimest form. With utmost earnestness we
exert ourselves to build up the young in the knowledge of
Him; we would draw all men unto Him, so that they, being
enlightened by the knowledge of Him and possessed by His
Spirit, shall be changed, into His likeness. Jesus Christ
is the type of true manhood, the ideal man. This we
joyously and vehemently declare; and we ask the child,
the man, the patriarch, of every estate to listen to us with
open ears and open hearts because we are speaking of the
most fruitful reality one can have for this present world’s
present use.
Upon much that is of infinite value in the full presenta-
tion of the gospel I cannot here touch; but upon this part of
it I want to lay weighty and loving emphasis —that we in-
vite men to find in Jesus Christ the perfect response of
human being to divine manifestation: reverence for
authority; open, unalloyed trust; prompt and eager
obedience; the sympathy of love; the courage and
strength of a pure conscience; harmony of will; com-
munion of spirit, and unity of purpose with the
Divine. We ask men, further, to observe how Jesus
Christ in His daily open intercourse with men exhibits,
in sharply defined relief against the heartless selfishness
of the world, His love of mankind, His love of mercy
and of truth, His sympathy with man, His patience and
tenderness, His sense of responsibility for brother and
neighbour, His unwearied longing for their release from the
bondage of sin, His faithful warnings and affectionate
entreaties that they become men meet for fellowship with
Himself, children of God in this world. He would have
men united to Himself by faith and love, and all those
personal forces which are active in the full surrender of
being to being.
Thus to apprehend Jesus Christ is part of the urgent
call of the gospel. By word and example we seek to en-
force it; and we wrestle with God in prayer that His king-
dom may come —a kingdom of men full of the grace and


truth of Jesus Christ, of men who have put on Him as the
very character of their being and their life.
Putting on Jesus Christ is adding to manhood’s power.
The more closely we approach Him in spirit, in temper, in
virtue, in walk and conversation, the more abundantly
we add to the fulness of our manhood. The ideal qualities
of our manhood are all in Jesus Christ. He is the Son of
Man; He is the peerless example of our humanity at its
best. The spiritual qualities which we discern in Him are
essential to true manhood; we must possess them if we are
to be men in the highest sense.
Upon the spiritual resourses of our manhood depend
our moral capacity and our usefulness in the responsible
relationships of life. In ideal manhood there is also an
ideal adaptation of our personal service to the calls of
obligation. The test of manhood comes when we realise
that each one of us is a trustee of the common good; that
we have duties into the discharge of which we must put
our most generous endeavours; that, as citizens and neigh-
bours, as masters and servants, as toilers in the several
spheres of industry, we must be faithful to ourselves, and
also to the just claims of others; that we have grave
responsibilities in the sanctity of the home, in the bonds of
friendship, in the activities of the Church; responsibilities
grave indeed, but also of noblest kind, which we must seek
to fulfil with sustained earnestness. There must be no
doubt and no hesitation about this. The fitness of a man
for the duties of citizenship, and for the special labours
of his wonted vocation—his meetness also for the closer
personal relationships of life—depend upon the qualities,
physical, intellectual and spiritual, which are characteristic
of his manhood.
By spiritual manhood we mean that manhood in which
the love of man, the love of righteousness, honour and truth,
the love of patience and forbearance, the love of all that is
beautiful and pure, the love of burden-bearing and service,
is the inspiration of life, the ruling passion strong for
battle and fearless of death. Such is our ideal as men
who know the gospel and love it. Our devotion to Jesus


Christ constrains us and enables us to build ourselves up
in His likeness, and also to draw others into fellowship
with Him—a fellowship whose consummation is that holy
and eternal brotherhood, the kingdom of God.
II.
The economic value of the gospel now looks us full in
the face. It is the salvation of manhood for the wholesome
life of to-day. We are sadly familiar with the pernicious
action of base aims and vicious habits upon the nature and
faculties of man. Experience is a painful, but honest
teacher. It is the fool that does not give heed. We all
know men of physical vigour, high mental development and
practical capacity, in whom low conceptions of honour,
selfish passions, and mean ways impoverish their powers,
and prejudice the service which they do render, as well as
make impossible the work which, with such excellent endow-
ment, they might have done for mankind. Not the strength
of a giant, nor the intellect of the loftiest genius, can hold
out against moral instability, against the desolating sweep
of physical lust or the debasing tyranny of greed, malice,
envy, and hatred.
On the other hand, it stands beyond the risk of
challenge that spiritual qualities increase the practical
value of man’s physical and intellectual gifts. In spiritual
manhood we have not only the conservation of power; we
have also the enrichment and application of power. Take
a man of normal health and average mental equipment; fill
out his life with the commonplace motives and manners
of selfishness; it needs not a prophet to tell the further
story of his life. Take another man of like natural gifts,
and complete his manhood with the aspirations of the
spiritual ideal: his life will prove him to be a man who
does honest work and wins respect. He is a man of worth
and honour. His manhood is not dominated by lusts and
desires, that poison and pillage the resources of nature and
opportunity. It is inspired and strengthened by the foster-
ing authority of a holy obligation to the God of His being.


The end of the gospel is more than salvation from the
corruption that is in the world by lust. It is the edification
of the whole man in the truth and life which Jesus Christ
has unfolded. “Tea, and for this very cause, adding on
your part all diligence, in your faith supply virtue, and in
virtue knowledge, and in knowledge self-control, and in
self-control patience, and in patience godliness, and in godli-
ness love of the brethren, and in love of the brethren love. ’ ’
Here, in homely words, we have the workaday garb and
features of spiritual manhood. Is there unwholesome
limitation here? Is there impoverishment? Is there aught
but the buoyant assurance of comfort and power for the
good of the individual and the community? The economic
value of the gospel is in Christian manhood; and by the
economic worth of Christian manhood must the Church
justify her existence.
III.
Manhood is the gospel ideal of wealth, personal and
national. The man sound in body, vigorous in mind, pure
in heart, generous in purpose, loving in thought, active in
labour, hopeful in spirit—that man is the standard unit in
estimating the wealth of a people. Manhood is the Supreme
value; it is wealth of bodily health, wealth of intellect,
wealth of love, wealth of diversity in gifts, wealth of
adaptation, wealth of power to turn nature’s treasures into
a ready ministry of human progress. Manhood is the joy
of the home, the strength of the State, the basis and sub-
stance of imperial power. The men who love righteousness
and hate iniquity, who speak the truth and scorn falsehood,
who live in charity and good-will, abhorring malice and
evil-speaking, who think not merely of their own things,
but also of the things of others, who find exhilaration in in-
dustry, who wrest from the physical world secrets which
lighten human burdens and sweeten human conditions, who
count not their lives dear to them if by sacrifice the sorrow
of the world shall be turned into joy—such men are wealth
in the noblest sense. The secret of wealth is not in the
mine, or in the factory; not in the fruitful field, or in the


counting-house; not in the laboratory, or in applied science;
but in the pure and enlightened conscience—that is, in
Christian manhood.
We are familiar with the notion that material posses-
sions constitute wealth; and no doubt we are too often
called upon to deplore the destruction or the wasteful use
of the material resources of wealth. Sheep and cattle
perish in droughts, or by floods; wheat-fields are bereft
of crops; the pastures are burnt up; mines are wastefully
worked, or let lie idle in the cruel grip of speculation—
businesses are badly managed, or hurled into bankruptcy by
the mysterious surprises of the money market; enterprises
that promised well are brought to ruin by the sheer per-
versity of man; and when such disasters come nigh us and
touch us with the stinging friction of personal interest, we
promptly and with sympathetic vigour cry ‘ ‘ Loss! loss!
huge loss! And we have sorrowful apprehension of the
misery, perchance widespread misery, which lies behind it
all. This is natural, and distinctly human.
But we should have as prompt and as sympathetic an
apprehension of the huger disasters which, as a people, we
are suffering through the chronic waste of manhood. Of
late years, it is true, we have advanced far in the better
appreciation of the national importance of sane and capable
human life. Child-life not only receives our pity, but has
also safeguarding legislation and the protection of public
sentiment. We are more intelligently and jealously care-
ful about the health conditions of labour. Moreover, when
we hear of catastrophes involving loss of life on land or
sea. we are not slow in the expression of our desolation of
feeling. We count as heroes those who risk their lives to
save the life of others. All honour to the brave; and so be
it for ever. But we have a long way to go yet before we
shall have reached a just appreciation of the true value of
human life, either from the strictly personal or the national
standpoint; we are yet far from an intelligent and passion-
ate recognition of the unmeasured waste of wealth whose
tragedy moves with such painful eloquence under our eyes,
in almost every moment of our working existence. Our


reformatories, our prisons, our aslyums, ah! what painful
lessons they mournfully teach us. What man of vital
sensibility can regard without emotion the degradation and
corruption of manhood through ignorance and vice, through
evil environment, bad laws and bad customs, through wilful
indulgence in selfish pleasure and other kinds of sin?
Physical strength and bodily comfort, intellectual power
and imaginative resource, moral sanity and spiritual
beauty, all that constitutes the glory of man and provides
joy in work, peace of home, fulness of inspiration, subtilty
of invention, mutual confidence and brotherhood—all are
lost to the national wealth through the degradation and
depravity of manhood. What a portentious study! The
gospel ideal bends over it —yes, broods over it, as the
Saviour over Jerusalem, weepingly, but not without hope.
For the gospel is the power of God unto salvation. Its
grand objective is man. Its divine purpose is to build him
up into strong and virtuous being.
IV.
The gospel, therefore, is in vehement antagonism to
every tyranny and to every custom, to every ordinance, and
every practice, which harass or injure man, which hinder
self-development through the exercise of that freedom
whereby he has the opportunity of approving himself as a
son of God. It opposes its full strength to ignorance and
vice; it counts him an enemy to God and to his kind who
consciously encourages, in knowledge of its baleful effects,
anything which weakens or destroys the distinctive
capacities of man.
It is against the octopus of the liquor traffic, whose
debasing and death-dealing influences are a scandal to
conscience and to common-sense, as well as a cruel burden
to the human heart. We who love the gospel, and recreate
our lives in the strength and refreshment of its truth, are
under the most solemn and imperious obligation to use
every honourable and instant means in order to deliver
our fellow-beings from the curse of drunkenness and from


the contributory causes; from a system of trading which
encourages the vilest greed and sweeps into prison, asylum
and cemetery a bigger wreckage of woe and ruin than any
other destructive force known to us. Thank ’God, the
gospel is for man, and against everything that hurts him.
It is against every system of money-making which
robs the labourer of the just reward of his toil, which sets
against his wasted body, his dwarfed mind, his shortened
life, payment according to the iron law of wages. Where
there are men living in the spirit of the gospel there can be
no iron law of wages. We who follow Jesus Christ should
be first —indeed, we must be firstl—to proclaim our detesta-
tion of any system which, glorying in itself as an effective
and economical money-making machine, counts the health
of manhood, the health of homehood, the health of nation-
hood, of less importance than solid dividends.
The gospel is against despotism of every kind; it is
against the despotism of the unreasoning crowd which sets
at nought law and order, and is cruel in its wrath; it is
against anarchy, which sets on fire all the worst passions
of man, which has never been and never will be the road-
maker to peace and prosperity.
The gospel is against all those who take rent for un-
healthy dwellings and for places where the worst vices are
sheltered. AVhat man who knows and loves the gospel
could have a moment’s peace, were his conscience testifying
and saying, “You get your living out of houses where
disease and sin are the paying tenants?” Nor should we
who uphold the gospel as the supreme means of social
salvation give a moment’s respite to those who flout the
gospel and live by the pollutions of their fellows. The
gospel is against all who despise the sanctity of the person;
and against every condition which makes birth into this
world a curse and growth a futility.
V.
On the other hand, the gospel welcomes and en-
courages science, philosophy, poetry, art, commerce; every


thinker, every worker, every institution, every system,
every thing which makes the body healthier, which in-
vigorates and enriches the mind, which quickens and
purifies the imagination, which enlarges and strengthens
faith, hope, and love, adds zest, interest, and variety to
life, and brings the sunshine of heaven into the bosoms
and homes of all who live on earth.
Especially the gospel encourages education. Bring
out of man all the power for good that is in him; declare
how fearfully and wonderfully he is made; turn all his
faculties to beneficent uses; increase the values of his
nature; vindicate his right to call sun, moon, and stars
his ministering servants; fit him to be master of every
secret from the South Pole to the North Pole, from the
central fire to the rounded seas. Thus the gospel speaks
rejoicingly. For it is man, who has such wealth in his
being, that the gospel would endue with the best of all
knowledge—how to be lord of himself, and how to love
his neighbour as a brother. It is because we love men
and God’s message to men that we rejoice so unfeignedly
in modern paidology, and in the great advance which the
science of teaching has made in our day. We mark with
satisfaction the advantages which our children have in
elementary and superior schools, which our young men
and our young women have in our colleges and univer-
sities. Because we believe, with the gospel, that man-
hood is truest wealth, we hopefully anticipate the day
when our people and our legislators will be so deeply
convinced of the essential importance of educated man-
hood to the prosperity of the nation that the schools,
colleges, and universities shall be made open and free to
every young soul, from the A B C to the highest academic
distinction. We look forward to that bright, good day,
when the highway of knowledge will be as open and free
as the beaten track which runs from the furthest home-
steadi to the capital of the Commonwealth.


VI.
All this I have said by way of illustrating and empha-
sising the gospel conception of manhood as the wealth of
our people. Manhood, not money, is the standard; dis-
tinctly not money. Just for the moment, think how
gross the popular conception of wealth is. “This man
has money, houses, lands, and other possessions. He is
wealthy. Ah! would not Australia be a grand country
if every man in it had such potency of wealth? If we
were all rich we should all be happy.” So many are
foolish enough to talk in this fashion. They do not think,
they do not realise, what a reeking desolation Australia
would be if their dreams of riches could materialise. The
money lust is a chief curse, if not the chief curse, of our
time. The madness of a nightmare befouls the waking
hours of the day. This money lust is a cruel demon. To
it we rightly attribute the heartless abuses of the com-
petitive system of commerce —abuses which grind the
human being till he sweats blood. “Commerce is war,”
says one. “Business is robbery,” says another. “I am
after dividends all the time,” says a third. Thus and
thus men in their selfish madness speak. Business is
business; and religion is outside of it; philanthropy is
outside of it. But why stop here? Why not add, man-
hood is outside of it?
One of the most evident outgrowths of the money
lust is seen in the depraved sensuality of the over-rich.
Through the apotheosis of wealth, corruptions of the
basest sort eat the soul of good out of man. The sore-
tried powers of invention fail in the quest of fresh
pleasures and beguiling excitement, but the ponderous
staleness of wealth remains—a woeful object. A marble
mausoleum does not redeem an unprofitable life.
To the money lust we attribute the vile dishonesty
which infests so many mines, factories, and business estab-
lishments. There you have inspectors, detectives, and
searchers, check upon check, precaution upon precaution,
watch upon watch, all to prevent the leakage caused by the


borings of this canker-worm. Where money rules, dis-
honesty has a marketable value. And the cynic chuckles
over the ancient insult to human integrity, that every
man has his price.
It is the money-lust that gives vitality to the huge
insanity of gambling, a vice which knows every nook and
cranny of deceit, laughs at law, and defies the strictest
scrutiny of the police.
It is the money-lust that makes home-life bankrupt,
thus destroying a sacred institution which has in it the
assured promise of the best and most abundant blessings
for mankind.
And yet there are those who exalt silver and gold to
the loftiest position as the standard of civilised prosperity
—lucre and not manhood. But the Gospel of Jesus
Christ resolutely stands by manhood.
Even if we consider material products as the main
substance of national wealth, the perfecting of man’s
moral integrity would assure not less wealth, but more.
The time and material now wasted through idleness, care-
lessness, inefficiency, and ignorance would be saved.
Through equitable dealing the products of skill and
labour, of expert knowledge and business facilities, would
be more generously distributed. The comforts obtainable
by money, instead of being crowded round the few in
superfluity and dissipated in criminal wastefulness, would
be shared by the many. Common-sense cannot fail to see
that if those who handle capital, and those who are wage-
earners or sharers in profit, were alike animated by the
spirit of the gospel, the present demoralising agitations
and conflicts must cease; the excess of riches here, and
of poverty there, the gluttony of self-indulgence in high
places, disease, bitterness of soul, and despair in obscure
places, must come to an end.
VII.
Never was there more instant need for proclaiming the
economic Amine of the gospel. Democracy is the power
of to-day. It will be the greater power of to-morrow.


And democracy is in deadly antagonism to privilege of
birth and to privilege of wealth. The iron tongue of the
warning bell is vibrant. This is the message we hear:
“Democracy seeks economic salvation—that first. The
relations between capital and labour are wholly unsatis-
factory. The burden of guiltiness lies on the men who
control capital. Capitalism is a bad machine, and out of
date. It is worked by those whose common interest is
but lust of profit; and this has made them unscrupulous.
Meanwhile the masses pay, in sweat and blood, in ill-
health and domestic misery, for the pride and grandeur
and over-abundant wealth of the few. The balance is
hard down on the side of those who engineer capital. It
must be righted. Pair play is bonny play. Therefore,
economic salvation is first, and everything else must take
a lower place.”
Very good; we understand this surge of angry pro-
test. But what we utterly fail to understand is economic
salvation without moral integrity. Legislation may
create machinery; it cannot new-ereate men. The gospel
can. Hence its value. New machinery, seemingly
efficient, may be secured, but what about the men behind
the machinery? An ideal system in the hands of incom-
petent men may be an even greater misfortune than a
defective system in the! hands of those who work primarily
for their own interests. Given the ideal machinery, will
it put an end to envy and strife, heart-burning and
jealousy? Will it quench the fires of hatred, and turn
the hot hearts of men into fountains of the living water
of kindly brotherhood? If selfish gain is still to be the
dominant motive, alas for the machinery, and alas for
everybody! Unless uprightness and truth, loving kind-
ness and good-will, permeate industrial and business life,
not the best conceivable machinery can stay the inevitable
doom. The law of righteousness is as imperious as the
law of gravitation. Both laws are in the one God. Hence
the earnest vehemency with which we urge manhood as
the prime essential of economic salvation—the manhood
which honours uprightness in thought, word, and deed.


which bears the brother’s burden, and loves out of the
pure heart fervently. Hence it is that we insist upon
the economic value of the gospel, which is the power of
God.
VIII.
Now, it may be quite justly remarked that all I have
said is trite and commonplace. I certainly did not mean
to say anything else; it is the commonplace that is of
chief importance, and as a rule gets the least intensive
regard. But I can imagine a ready protest of this sort:
“We know well all you have told us; we have thought
it out as closely as you, and with a more painful interest.
Only the blind fail to see that moral integrity is indis-
pensable to prosperous economic life. But we can attain
moral integrity without the gospel.”
This is not news; all the same, it would be interesting
to learn how. You will tell usi that, if bad conditions are
rectified, men will come to themselves; that, if they are
trusted, they will respond to the sympathetic pressure
of responsibility. Be it so. We are as hopeful as you,
but something more is needed. You will tell us of ex-
cellent men who, as friends, neighbours, and citizens, lead
exemplary lives, who are faithful also in their domestic
relationships, who order their conduct simply by the
rational principles of morality, and confess not the
authority of Jesus Christ, save as the example of lofty
ethical being. We all know such men, or have heard of
them. We reckon them a good asset in the substantial
wealth of the community. Your rational morality, born
and bred in the world of hard experience—your sublime
ethical principles, so lustrously beautiful in the few in-
stances of rare endowment, of such priceless worth to our
race—we accept at full value. But it is not enough. You
will tell us of the great value of enlightened education,
of the powers of assimilation evoked by sympathetic or
magnetic teachers, of the treasures of wisdom and the
vital inspiration which are to be found in our choicest
literature, of the refining influence of music and other


forms of art; yon will, perhaps, add something about the
discipline of sport, and of social fellowship, and of public
affairs. These, you say, are factors in building up man-
hood. No doubt they are, and valuable, too. But are
they sufficient? We say, “No.” It is beyond their
power to reach the height of Christian manhood. Do not
forget that the finest ethical principles you set before us
are deftly cut from the vesture of our Lord Jesus Christ.
You take a bit of the raiment and leave the Lord. We
would be clothed with the Spirit; we would put on Christ
Jesus and be found in His likeness. We stand for the full
gospel, for the gospel life, and for the gospel power. What
Jesus Christ teaches He teaches to men whom He would
draw to Himself, and whom He would fill with the spirit
of power, that they may live in the beauty and strength
of His doctrine. We stand for spiritual manhood, which
is moral manhood plus something much higher and much
stronger.
IX.
Now comes the question—How are we to> give demon-
stration of the power of the gospel to build up manhood
as I have described? A present-day demonstration is
demanded—proof before the eyes of living men. We are
called upon to show that the gospel is indeed the power
of God. It must be shown through us. From this our
faith does not shrink.
Shall we then address ourselves to the perfecting of
the organisation of our Church, so that the ministration
of the gospel and the outspreading of population shall
advance with equal step ? Without doubt we must stead-
fastly aim at this, and send the glad tidings farther than
the railway goes, and as far as the swift post carries the
mail and spreads the news of the world.
It is essential that we insist upon an evangelical
pulpit, laying it upon our ministers with loving insistence
to set forth Jesus Christ, the Seeker and the Saviour of
sinners, in full tenderness., in all the sweetness of the
gospel spirit, and in all the simplicity of the gospel man


ner. The Word is for all men, but in a peculiar sense it
is God’s message to the stricken and the lonely and the
hopeless. Such are eager for it, in the day of their visi-
tation. Of this we had refreshing testimony in the ever-
memorable mission of the brave and godly men who came
to us from America to fulfil for a season in our land the
call of their Master. The enthusiasm of the multitudes
was an inspiration. And the spiritual results were not
without rich encouragement to all of us, but especially to
those preachers whose hearts, through stress of labour,
had lost something of the old-time fire, and to others, too,
in whom the breath of worldliness had blighted their
once-hopeful energies.
Shall -we prosecute with zeal and judicious expedition
the enterprise to which we have already put our hands —
the union of the Churches —in order to save a sinful waste
of time and money, of brain and spiritual energy, and to
constitute one mighty army, arrayed against the forces
of evil? This work is of God. The gospel calls for it.
We must not deny its voice.
Shall we give more earnest heed to the careful train-
ing of our ministers? There is but one answer. We want
men of learning, cultured men of the best university
quality, if we can get them; but always men of sense as
well as of learning—men with enthusiasm for Christ and
their work; men who are men, and who love men; whose
personal character is one with their zeal and their mes-
sage; who are themselves in large part the message; who
know men and the wiles o£r human nature, as well as its
better possibilities; who can unseal the human heart, and
read what is written therein.
Shall we devote more attention to our Sabbath Schools
and kindred institutions? The're is toothing nearer to
our hearts than that our youth shall be built up in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, their Lord and their Saviour.
Christian parents have a field here almost entirely their
own. If they could be made to realise with more vivid
feeling that the spiritual quality of home life is a mighty
power in the making of Christian manhood, we should


have a new spirit in the school, in the Bible class, in the
congregation, and in the nation.
Shall we show our faith in the gospel truth that the
world belongs to Jesus Christ by our generous devotion
to Foreign Missions? God knows we do believe that the
day is coming when every man shall bow to our Redeemer,
and every tongue confess Him to the glory of God the
Father. Let us show our faith by our works.
All these and many other things we must honestly
strive to do, in order that the gospel be everywhere known
in the fulness of its meaning, that men may judge of it,
and God work through it. The full stature of Jesus
Christ is our standard of manhood, the Spirit of God our
power. We proclaim this; we believe it.
X.
There is yet more for ns to do —the most important
thing- of all: we must ourselves be the demonstration of
our doctrine that the gospel makes the best manhood.
Here is the cross. We cannot escape it; nor would we.
It is almost in vain that we appeal to the authority of the
Word of God, or to the authority of the Church, or to
the example of saints, or to the testimony of history. The
world is. impatient with us. The proof must be of to-day.
Ami it must be in ourselves. This responsibility Jesus
Christ has also put upon us. It is a burden and a glory.
In our contact with men we have the divine opportunity.
We know whom we have believed. We know that by
faith Christ dwells in us. This means a new life, and a
renewed manhood. Where is the life? Where is the
manhood ? Men must feel the life; must see the manhood
—and in us. We do not shrink from the challenge. Our
hope is in God. We trust in the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Head of redeemed humanity. He will
enable us. humbly we say it, to build up in ourselves a
noble and worthy manhood, in whose evident qualities
the claim of the gospel to be of the highest economic
value shall be completely justified—-a manhood whose


physical, intellectual, moral, and spiritual endowments
shall make it the foundation and the ever-increasing sub-
stance and strength of the prosperity of our Common-
wealth.
The treasuries of wisdom and knowledge contain no
richer deposit than the gospel. We are eager to prove it.
Therefore do we plead with those who call for present-
day demonstration of the virtue of the gospel to give
more diligent heed to the message of Jesus Christ, to put
Him to the test, by taking Him whole-heartedly into their
inmost life; to prove the gospel by the practice of it.
Then should we have their generous help in creating upon
the continent of Australia a Christian civilisation, that
kingdom which is righteousness, peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost. If we are loyal to the gospel, we shall exalt
our nation in righteousness. If we build up our people
in righteousness, we shall secure economic salvation; not
otherwise.
W. O. Penfold & 00., Printers, 183 Pitt Street, Sydney.
