

tftW
X/c.. x H iX? tA;
* THE DUTY OF THE CHURCH
AT THE PRESENT TIME,
IN THE PRESENT STATE OF PRESBYTERIANISM IN THE COLONY:
A SERMON,
PREACHED IN ST. ANDREWS’ CHURCH, SYDNEY, AT THE OPENING OF THE
ANNUAL SESSION OF THE SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA,
NOVEMBER 2nd, 1864,
THE REV. JOHN MoGIBBON, 8.A.,
MINISTER OF THE
WOOLLOOMOOLOO PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, PALMER STREET.
Trice Sixpence,
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY FREDERICK WHITE, 84, WILLIAM STREETS


EIDERS, DEACONS, AND MEMBERS
'OOLLOOMOOLOO PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, PALMER STREET, SYD:
THIS DISCOURSE,
PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OP SOME OE THEM, AND PREACHED
THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING- OF THE ANNUAL SESSION
OF THE SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA,
NOVEMBER 2nl*>, 1864,
IS VERY RESPECTFULLY AND AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED
\
BY THEIR PASTOR,
AUTHOR.


i v v-n
fttybip
” And tlie Cliildren of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the
times, to know what Israel ought to do.”—l Ciikon. xii, 82.
Fathers and Brethren, —
In the words of the text the sacred historian pronounces a very
high encomium upon the tribe of Issachar for their public spirit, for
their knowledge of the times, and for their willingness, as a body, to
co-operate with their leaders, in carrying into effect what the times re-
quired. The nation of Israel was in difficulties. The affairs of the king-
dom had come to a crisis. King Saul and his sons had been slain by
the Philistines in the disastrous battle which had been fought at Mount
"Gilboa; the Israelites had fled from before the victorious and advancing
armies of the Philistines; and many of the people had even forsaken their
cities, escaping with only their lives, and leaving their stuff and their
cities as a spoil to their enemies. It was, therefore, an important crisis.
The broken and retreating columns of Israel gathered together at Hebron.
Although they were in trouble they were not utterly dismayed. Although
they had been defeated they were not destitute of hope. And although
they had seen that Saul and his sons, their natural leaders, had died
together, yet to one they were looking, as the successor to the throne, who
was their own bone and flesh, and of whom this prophecy had gone
before, “ Thou shalt feed my people Israel; thou shalt be ruler over my
people Israeland, with this one at their head, they were willing and
ready to go out again to war with the Philistines. It was not a time for
delay. It was not a time for divided or distracting counsels. In view
of the common danger the people forgot the strife which had divided
them before during Saul’s reign. There had been friends of Saul and
friends of David, and the former had pursued the latter, eager for their
destruction; but now these party strifes were laid aside and forgotten.
It was enough that the uncircumcised were victorious in the field, that
the armies of Israel were fleeing before them, that the nation w T as brought
into imminent peril. The hosts of Israel assembled at Hebron; and there,
by the unanimous voice of the elders of the people, and the holy
anointing of the prophet Samuel, according to the word of the Lord,
David was proclaimed and accepted as king.
In the chapter before us an account is given us of the several tribes,
as to their weight and influence in this important work of re-establishing
and consolidating the kingdom. Some were greater and others were less,


NOVEMBER 2n6, 1864,
IS VERY RESPECTFULLY AND AEEECTIONATELY INSCRIBED
BY THEIR PASTOR,
THE AUTHOR


IV W nl
fnfbip
« And the Children of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the
times, to know what Israel ought to do.” —I Oheox. xii, 32.
Fathers and Brethren, —
In the words of the text the sacred historian pronounces a very
high encomium upon the tribe of Issachar for their public spirit, for
their knowledge of the times, and for their willingness, as a body, to
co-operate with their leaders, in carrying into effect what the limes re-
quired. The nation of Israel was in difficulties. The affairs of the king-
dom had come to a crisis. King Saul and his sons had been slain by
the Philistines in the disastrous battle which had been fought at Mount
Gilboa; the Israelites had fled from before the victorious and advancing
armies of the Philistines; and many of the people had even forsaken their
cities, escaping with only their lives, and leaving their stuff and their
cities as a spoil to their enemies. It was, therefore, an important crisis.
The broken and retreating columns of Israel gathered together at Hebron.
Although they were in trouble they were not utterly dismayed. Although
they had been defeated they were not destitute of hope. And although
they had seen that Saul and his sons, their natural leaders, had died
together, yet to one they were looking, as the successor to the throne, who
was their own bone and flesh, and of whom this prophecy had gone
before, “ Thou shalt feed my people Israel; thou shall be ruler over my
people Israelj” and, with this one at their head, they were willing and
ready to go out again to war with the Philistines. It was not a time for
delay. It was not a time for divided or distracting counsels. In view
of the common danger the people forgot the strife which had divided
them before during Saul’s reign. There had been friends of Saul and
friends of David, and the former had pursued the latter, eager for their
destruction; but now these party strifes were laid aside and forgotten.
It was enough that the uncircumcised were victorious in the field, that
the armies of Israel were fleeing before them, that the nation was brought
into imminent peril. The hosts of Israel assembled at Hebron; and there,
by the unanimous voice of the elders of the people, and the holy
anointing of the prophet Samuel, according to the word of the Lord,
David was proclaimed and accepted as king.
In the chapter before us an account is given us of the several tribes,
as to their weight and influence in this important work of re-establishing
and consolidating the kingdom. Some were greater and others were less,


in point, of numbers. Some had the reputation from time immemorial of
being expert in the use of the shield and the spear. Others were known
to be mighty men of valour. Others are described as being quick in
their movements, and in attending to orders. And others, as being able
to “ keep well in their ranks.” All indeed are described as being of a
perfect heart —not one is mentioned as being double in heart ; even the
tribe of Benjamin, who were of the kindred of Saul, and who had always
kept ward in the house of Saul, were hearty and unanimous in David’s
cause. On every tribe David could depend as equally sincere in their
acclamations that he should be king; but yet the tribe of Issachar is marked
out from the rest, as if of special weight in the transactions of that day.
Their weight, however, was not in respect of their number and arms; they
seem to have been small; and they answered also, in their habits and
character, to the prophetic words of the dying patriarch; “ Issachar is a
strong ass, couching down between two burdens that is, they were
fonder of the toils of the peaceful arts than of the blood, and glory, and
excitement of war. Their weight was that of a clear intelligence, and
a respect for law —“ they were men who observed and understood the
times, and knew what Israel ought to do.” And, doubtless, in these, as
much as in all the sacramental hosts of the other tribes, David found the
strength of his kingdom and the security of his throne; for while, as
they had proved before, in action and danger, that they were nothing
inferior to their brethren in personal bravery, they seem to have excelled
the other tribes in the display of their patriotism, as examples and coun-
sellors.
I will not —fathers and brethren—pursue this interesting history
farther. My aim at present is to lay before you some of the things which
concern our own times, which concern our own branch of the Christian
Church, which concern the interests of Israel in this land; and in dealing
with which, understanding and prudence, courage and faithfulness,
patriotism and principle, are especially required at our hands. May the
wisdom from above, which is first pure, and then peaceable, be abundantly
given us! May the promised Spirit—the Spirit of truth and peace—teach
us what we ought to do ! And even now, may the times of refreshing,
reviving, prosperity come from the presence of the Lord and from the
glory of his power !
If we look—fathers and brethren—at the spiritual state of this our
adopted land—that many districts are entirely destitute of the means of
grace—that other districts are only partially served —that our Scottish
people are scattered as sheep without a shepherd—that the young are
growing up, who ought to be the glory and strength of our church, not
only strangers to us, but even aliens from us—and that, in the meantime,
from protracted neglect, the spirit of attachment to our time-honoured
communion, is fast dying out, both in the aged and in the young: If we
look, too, at the utter inadequacy of the means within our power, as an
ecclesiastical body, to remedy this deplorably destitute state—that our
funds, as derived from a public source, arc incapable of increase, and yearly
liable to partial extinction; and, as derived from private sources, arc all
required for the localities in which they are raised—that our churches are


all struggling with their local difficulties and little able to give assistance
to others—that the chief number of our ministers are now in the sear and
yellow leaf, having patiently and nobly borne the heat and burden of the
day—and that there are obvious and increasing obstacles to the arrival
of suitable supplies from the mother-land : If we look, I say, fathers and
brethren, at all these things, and forecast with an intelligent mini, what
will be the inevitable results in a very few years, we cannot, I think,
but perceive that the times in which our lot is cast are important times
—that a crisis in the history of our church has come—and that it behoves
us now, as intelligent men, as Christian men, understanding the times, to
apply ourselves diligently and with earnest prayer, to know and to counsel
what we ought to do.
It is true, we are able to trace the working of extraneous causes,
so that, perhaps, we are not wholly responsible for this state of things.
The migratoriness of the people, the great distance separating districts,
the sparseness of the population, and the sudden occupation of so much
of the land—rendering all attempts $t regular organization comparatively
in vain j then, the extreme prevalence of a secular spirit, as if residence
here were only a sojourn, until wealth should be gathered to be enjoyed
elsewhere; then a worldly wise and anti-religious policy in the govern-
ment of the country, as if the science of politics achieved its triumphs
in the divorcement of religion from the concerns of the state, and in the
leaving of the people to take care of themselves on the commercial prin-
ciple of supply and demand. All these things have doubtless contributed
to cripple the small resources of our church—to render the colony unin-
viting as a field of ministerial work to those to whom we have had to look
at home—and, to this extent, to have hastened, at least, the present desti-
tution which exists without, and the comparative helplessness of which
we are conscious within. But, whatever the causes—and, indeed, I have
only hinted at some —let us not turn away from the patent fact. It is
obvious that such a state of things exists. Let us honestly realize it.
Let us feel the reality of our connexion with it. And let us rise to a
full view of our duty in regard to it. For, unless we bestir ourselves
to “ understand ” the times—to know what Israel ought to do—to gather
up our energies—to focalize our influences—and to throw our weight into
the proper scale, for the permanent growth and extension of our church,
we must expect, as a body, to fall helplessly behind, to live for a while a
lingering life, and then, as one after another of us passes away, ingloriously
to die and to be forgotten !
In the first place, the times are significant to us on the question of
union. The union spirit is abroad over all the earth. While in places
far distant it has awakened, as yet, only discussion and desire, in some
of the colonies, just at our door, it has persuaded, and welded, and brought
forth abounding and delightful fruits. It has come here too—it lias fallen
upon ministers and people alike—it has brought separated brethren more
together—and it has shown us, at least, what it is possible for us to do j
and, as a spirit come down from above, the spirit of our holy religion,
and the partial fulfilment of the Redeemer’s prayer, we are all, I think,
both ready and willing to give it the first place, and a right hearty


welcome. But in nothing so much is “ understanding ” required as in
dealing with this question. It is easy to dilate on the blessings of union,
and to picture the greatness and grandeur of our force, were all the
scattered fragments of our common name gathered into one. It is easy to
declaim on the vague generality that brethren should be agreed, and that,
when they arc agreed, they will be more influential and powerful for good.
And the subject being popular, and the desire for union being lawful and
right, such empty declamation and superficial views, may easily find favour
with unthinking people. But this, instead of facilitating union, in reality,
is embarrassing to it. It proceeds on the assumption that the separations
which exist have no reasons for their existence. It attempts the blending
together of separated brethren on the common principle that they have
no principles at all. For the benefits of union are universally allowed ;
the duty of uniting is also universally allowed; but this in no respect
removes the difficulties which are found in the way, and which ought also
he allowed. It is vain, therefore, to conceal that there are difficulties in
the way. Whether the difficulties be such as can honourably be removed
must be patiently considered, and in the spirit of love. For points may
bo magnified, which, on calm consideration, may be found to be nothing.
Things which have long been held to be principles may, after prayerful
negotiation, be found to be prejudices. And obstacles which have long
appeared to be insurmountable may, on a nearer approach to them, be
found to be “as the morning cloud and the early dew, quickly passing
away.” But this will be the result, not of rash interference, not of general
declamation, not of a blind grasping at the end without regard to the
means; but of the exercise of a patience which bears long and kindly,
for the sake of the work, and of the exercise of intelligent and unselfish
thought. He, therefore, I maintain, is the true union man who, viewing
the position and feelings of others with an intelligent eye, making candid
allowance for the scruples of others, dealing charitably with even the
prejudices and foibles of others, seeks out the parties to whom he is nearest
in sympathy and aim, and with whom there is the prospect of a union in
heart, and seeks a basis, or platform, of common principles, on which, on
equal terms, both he and they can work together without a shadow of
misgiving and with harmonious zeal in the common cause. And, although
a charge of illiberality and exclusiveness may be raised against such a man,
he can easily afford to lie under the charge. Union is not a sacrifice
of principle ; union is not a compromise of principle; duty does not require
such a sacrifice or compromise Much less is union a mere agglomeration
of distinct individuals. But it is the formal agreement of those who are
already agreed —who are one in principle and one in heart—who have the
common conviction that they are brethren in Christ—who have confidence
in each other that they will stand shoulder to shoulder and side by side,
under the common leadership of their great Captain and King, faithful
in the battle against iniquity and sin
I need not here —fathers and brethren—do more than refer to what
our Synod has alreddy done in the matter of union. And I make this
reference with gladness of heart and some degree of conscious satisfaction.
For you know we have sometimes been accused of standing in the way,


and thwarting the wishes of the people for union. But what is the fact?
Why, the proposals for union, in every case in which these have been made,
have emanated from this Synod. There have been three attempts to
accomplish a union, and these have all been originated by the brethren
of this ?Synod; but each attempt has hitherto been in vain, through
the unyielding, exacting, and I will also say, unreasonable procedure of
other brethren. We are entitled to say before the face of the colony
that we have been wishing for union and working for union for many
years past. We are entitled to say before the face of the colony that we
have given substantial proofs of the earnestness of our desires. In all
the negotiations, hut especially throughout the last, we have shown a read-
iness to meet the views, to respect the scruples of other brethren, and to
hasten, as much as possible, the grand consummation, which ought to
secure for us their respect and confidence ) for we have been willing to do
everything which honour and principle will permit us to do ; and there
is only one thing which honour and principle will not permit us to do—
which neither duty nor conscience requires us to do, namely, to degrade
the church to which we belong, and to humiliate the venerable Establish-
ment from which most of us have sprung. And what is it now ? What
is the position in which we stand now ? Now that conferences have been
held —now that a basis has been agreed to—now that resolutions have been
amended, and amended again, and finally settled—now that thanksgivings
have been offered for the unanimity of view to which the parties negotiating
have come. What is it now ? Are we regreting our labours —conjuring
up new difficulties —or shrinking from the step which is to sever the
relations by which we are now bound, and to form the new ones of a colo-
nial church ? We emphatically answer, No ! On the contrarv, we are
ready for union—we are waiting for union—our Synod is unanimous in its
desire to consummate, without a moment’s delay, a union on the basis to
which we have agreed. We feel ourselves bound to the basis. We feel
ourselves bound to the parties who have agreed along with us. A sense of
honour and of honesty binds us. Our word has been given, and we stand
by our word Indeed, we conceive that the work of union is virtually
done for nothing prevented, a year ago, the grand consummation, but
the unimportant preliminary of the property settlement; and we are firm
in our expectations that the parties along with us, in the preliminary
work, will promptly and honestly redeem their pledge. Nor do any of
us doubt the position in which we stand. The basis is one, which in its
essential matters, and in its scriptural principles, cannot be surpassed. It
is one which has met with approval far and near. It is fair and equal in
all its terms and to all the parties. And we are conscious of this, that
into a union on such terms, and between the parties who have agreed to
the terms, we could enter, with self-respect, and with respect for them—
with the comfortable prospect of harmony in our work—with the honest
expectation of blessing from on high—and with the firm conviction that
we were laying the foundation of a glorious church, destined yet to cover
and bless the land !
It remains for us, then—fathers and brethren —at the present junc-
ture, to prove, in our dealings with this important question, that we


tl are men of understanding.” The footing which we have is both hon-
ourable and secure. The Christian people will appreciate our maintaining
it. Let us be united among ourselves —one in heart and one in hand—
that the attempts which may be made to divide our counsels, or to destroy
our footing, may utterly fail. Listening attentively to the calls of duty—
rightly interpreting the necessities of the times—and submitting ourselves
implicitly to the will of Christ, while we take as our common principle
of action, “ Present basis and present parties ” —let us still be ready, for
the sake of the noble object we have in view, and so far as this righteous
principle will allow us—make every concession and every sacrifice, that
speedily we and our brethren may be one, and our united church made
a praise and a beneficial power in the land !
In the second place, the times show us — fathers and brethren — the
necessity for some speedy and practical action with a view to the creation
of a native ministry. It will easily be admitted that a church whose min-
istry is unconnected with the families of the land in which it is placed
will always be regarded more as a foreign body—a foreign mission—
rather than as a home and settled institution. And in proportion as the
people regard it thus they will withhold from it that attachment and
counsel and love which are essential to the healthy working and extension
of a church. While in the case of a church whose ministers and students
are the sons of the soil, drawn from the families which form the strength
and majority of the church, it has a grip on the hearts and sympathies of
the people which nothing will sever j for the ministers will have the fire
of patriotism, in addition to the holier fire of piety, to animate their
zeal and sustain their efforts—and the people will have the attachment
of fathers, and relatives, and friends, in attachment to the holier
attachment of “ lovers of truth,” to cement and purify the membership
of the church, and give the bone and the sinew for the success of its
schemes. This is amply illustrated in the history of the churches in our
fatherland. The churches in Scotland have a hold upon their people—
the churches in Ireland have a hold upon their people—not only because
the people believe the principles of the churches in these two countries
respectively, and love their scriptural and simple worship ; but because
in national feelings—and in family connexions—they are thoroughly
identified with the history, and struggles, and existence of the churches.
And all this requires to be created here if we would ever be more than
a foreign mission—if we would ever take rank as a colonial institution,
and as our children's church ; and, plainly, the time has at length arrived
when, to neglect this longer, to keep longer our church in leading strings
and swaddling bands,will be ruin to our cause.
Our present circumstances speak loudly of the necessity of a native
ministry. What has hitherto baffled all our efforts at union—what has
given rise to so many sections and divisions of our communion in this
land—what has so much estranged the brethren of the different sections
—what has made possible the suspicion and distrust which we see dis-
played—what has made possible the narrow bigotry which only the other
day was publicly avowed, namely, that an exchange of pulpits between us
and our brethren is to be reckoned a crime ! What—but the importation


into this free and unfettered country of all the religious feuds and
sectarian bitternesses, which have been reared and nourished in the hot-
beds of strife for hundreds of years! And is this mischievous importation
to go for ever on ? Is that to be Australia’s glory which is Scotland’s
shame ? Is that to be Australia’s strength which is Scotland’s weakness ?
While the walls of prejudice and division are even there being thrown
down, are we here to distinguish ourselves in building them up ? While
the tide of ministerial friendship is there on the flow, rolling in on the
barren shore with a white-crested wave, are we here to experience and
evince that that tide is on the ebb? In a word, are our children,
and our children’s children, to be for ever feasted on the miserable husks
of foreign disputes—separated from each other as if they had sprung from
different blood ) instead of being led by pastors and teachers, chosen out
from among themselves, who shall unite them all in a common fold, and
feed them all on the verdant pastures of spiritual truth, and guide them
forth into the fields of usefulness—to make great, and glorious, and happy
their land ? The effectual way to end such importations is to begin the
rearing of a ministry on the spot.
We know, too, how difficult it is to bring ministers from home.
There is first, great expense—there is then considerable risk —there is
then the possibility of the people being dissatisfied with the minister’s
gifts, or the minister being disappointed with the character of the people—
there is, further, the chance of the minister being totally disqualified for
the peculiarities of the country—and further than this, there is the seri-
ous difficulty of opening up and organising districts, making them ready
for the reception and support of a minister. All these are direct and
intelligible arguments for a native ministry. For, what can we now do
for the opening up of new districts ? What can we now do to occupy
the important suburbs and inland towns which are fast springing up
near the great centres of the population ? There are seven or eight
such suburbs of this city, where not one of our ministers can ever set
foot. And, doubtless, the same is the case near the inland towns. We
are fully occupied with our particular spheres. We cannot find time
for the localities beyond. And, meantime, our people who have settled
in those places beyond, become either negligent of the ordinances of the
church, or they are speedily absorbed, especially the young, by other
bodies which have various agencies. But, how different the result if our
several Presbyteries had under their care a few pious young men en-
gaged in their studies for the ministry of the church. While prose-
cuting their studies they might be exercising their gifts. Preaching
stations might then be opened and regularly supplied. Regular minis-
ters might take their turn. The nucleus of churches might then be
formed. And, meanwhile, while the people and their children who are
properly our own, might be kept firm in their attachments, until their
numbers had increased as to become a fixed and settled charge, the candi-
dates should be enjoying the very best opportunity for the practical
exercise of the life for which they were being trained. And, in this
case, while the students would be both doing and getting good, a work
would be done for the church which can never otherwise be done—the


pioneering of the way—the laying of the foundations—the breaking up
of the fallow ground—for that aggressive movement, and that metho-
dical work—which are the sure guarantees and pledges of success.
And, look now at the facilities which the times have given us for
the creation of such a ministry. A Presbyterian college, fully equipped,
with its professors and tutors, with its stately halls, its academic orna-
ments, and its noble library, appealing powerfully to the generous am-
bition of our native youth—will, doubtless, in due time come; but,
meantime, we can begin the essential work without it. We have gram-
mar schools, where a superior education can be begun from the beginning.
We have a splendid university, where the higher sciences and the liberal
arts are efficiently taught, and where the undercourse of the student
can be finished. And surely, in each of our presbyteries there aro
brethren to be found, qualified by their theological learning and sacred
knowledge, to conduct a class of students, with efficiency and success,
through their theological course ? And here, therefore, there is a
training apparatus far more complete than any which the early Ameri-
can churches had, but which produced such great and glorious results.
Here we have a training apparatus precisely similar to that of the Dis-
senting churches in Scotland, which, with their unfettered access to
the learning of the universities, and with their separate and indepen-
dent Theological Halls, have reared scholars and ministers second
to none in their talents and worth—the burning and shining lights of their
respective churches, and the glory of their country. But I know there
is another point which requires to be noticed, on which the worth of
this reasoning hinges. You may have your apparatus, but where is your
material ? You may have your teachers, but where are your students ?
And, since the prospects of life, in the walks of business and commerce,
are so far superior to those in the church, what hope can you have that
any of our youth will offer to submit to the hardships and privations
of the church ? lam fully aware of the difficulties here; but yet I
think they are only formidable when looked at in the lump; and sure it
is that they will rather increase, while no apparatus is set up for deal-
ing with them. In a community like this it is quite possible that for
a very long time there will be a great disproportion between the temporal
prospects in the world and in the church. But the former extravagant
disproportion has for ever passed away. And then, what will sooner
equalize these prospects—for these temporal prospects are not to be
overlooked as essentially affecting the prosperity of a church—what will
sooner have a tendency to render the position of the minister com-
fortable and respectable, even in a worldly and social point of view,
than the personal interest which the people will have in the sufficiency
of the provision, when their own sons and relations are the students
and ministers ? For, does it not stand to reason, and that without any
great disparagement of a people’s love to Gospel ordinances, that their
interest will increase in all that pertains to the successful working of
the affairs of a church, and that, along with this interest, they will
increase in their zeal and liberality in the cause, according as they are
identified with the existence of their church, and its highest offices and


honours arc belonging to their own? Then, a matter like this will re-
quire cultivation. Only few at first can be expected to offer; but in the
order of things, the teachers are first and the students are second —the
apparatus has first to be set up, and then the material will be discovered )
and if, while the apparatus is destitute of external circumstance, the
material be scarce, it will, in successive years, become more plentiful,
as the actual results become known and appreciated, and the liberality
of the church establishes a college, with the outward 4cldt, and visible
grandeur, which makO an impression on the general public.
But, moreover, and especially, the families of our churches must
bo directly appealed to. And here —fathers and brethren—you will
allow me to say that I believe, in this respect, we have utterly failed
of our duty. We have failed in two points : first, we have failed to
appeal —and second, we have failed in example. In respect of appeal-
ing to the families of our churches, I fully admit that it is wrong in
parents, and wrong in ministers to give them their countenance —in
thrusting by force their sons into the ministry. I fully believe in the
necessity and efficacy of the inward call, and of the voluntary choice
which the young men should make. But, lam also persuaded that
while the Spirit works by'appointed means, accepting early dedications
and answering prayers, the voluntary choice of the sons may soon be
made clear, through the proper biasing and kindly promptings of parents
praying and watching for the result. And who will say that we must
not appeal to our people to make use of these means ? Who will say
that he has done his duty in the ministry of the Word, in the in-
structions of the Gospel, and yet has failed in such appeals? And
who will say that if these appeals were made, supported by the high and
holy considerations which patriotism and piety will immediately suggest,
the susceptible hearts of loving mothers, the manly hearts of thoughtful
fathers, would hear them in vain, and reject them for the base considera-
tions of better prospects and more easy circumstances in the business
of the world ? No—l am certain of this, that notwithstanding the
greed and secularism which prevail, there is in our Scottish people such.a
deep-seated love and reverence for the high offices of the church, that
were earnest appeals on this subject made, and were parents assured
of the existence of the means, of the proper organization, to give qualifi-
cation and success, such a response would be given as would not only
surprise us, but impart new life and hope to the church.
But—fathers and brethren—if failure is evident on the score of
appeals, how much more lamentable the failure on the score of example ?
The appeals I have been speaking of it is our duty to make—the sacri-
fices and hardships involved in responding to the appeals it is our duty
to urge our people to bear, in view of the high object which is sought
to be attained; but, if so, wffiat more necessary than that ministers
themselves should show an example of disinterested zeal ? Who more
reasonably than they should be expected to stand in the van, and take
the lead, in the working out of this important work. But where are the
sons of our ministers in the ministry ? Upon them the church has special
claims. Upon them the Gospel has special claims. Our church has existed


for upwards of twenty years—many of the ministers arc the fathers of
sons —and yet in not one case has the sacred office descended in the line !
Not one John has arisen, “ consecrated from the womb !” Not one Samuel
has arisen, “ asked of the Lord,” and then “ lent to Him for ever !”
Every son that has arisen has been sent into the world, and some have
even, and while yet in their youth, been so placed in positions as that
practically they have departed from the church of their fathers! Oh,
surely this is not as it ought to be ! This is a grievous wrong and weakness
existing in the church. And surely the plea cannot be that the hardships
and privations of the fathers ought not to be given over as an inheritance
to the sons ?—or that fathers are bound to do their best for the comfort
and prospects of their children in the world ? For if this be the plea for
the sparing of our own, how shall we be able to prevail with others ?
if the privations be too great for our own children to bear, how shall we
ask other parents to make the sacrifice ?—or how shall we be able to invite
stranger ministers from a far distant shore ? And as to the comfort and
prospect of our sons in the world, will not every minister, after all, admit
that, notwithstanding the cares and discouragements of his work, —not-
withstanding the poverty and privations which he has often to endure,
still the noblest profession, the most exalted and enviable, the one in which
there are the sweetest comforts, the fewest temptations, and the least
corrupting cares, is the holy profession of a minister of Christ ? And
if we thus “ magnify our office,” and think with joy and hope, of the
faithful minister’s heavenly rewards —shall-wc shrink from the duty and
privilege of teaching our sons to seek those rewards, and to despise the
toils and sufferings which such seeking may imply ? Rather ought we
not, as the aged Paul with his spiritual son Timothy, having secured
the mother’s and grandmother’s teaching in early years, encourage them
when they come to man’s estate, to be “good soldiers of Jesus Christ”—
“to endure hardness ” —to seek along with us, in the ministry of the
Word—in spending andbeing spent for the good Master, Christ —that
doubly glorious crown which shall be given in righteousness to every work-
man who has finished his work ? I say, therefore, as one who fully
understands what the sacrifice is of consecrating children to the public
service of the church—and I say it to ministers and people alike—that
our church, in her present crisis, while in need of our personal efforts, our
liberality, and our zeal, is loudly and emphatically calling for the gift
of our sons!
In the third place, the times speak to us—fathers and brethren —very
plainly of what we ought to do with the very young people of our church.
The pastoral work is not only “to feed the sheep,” but to " carry the
lambs.” The young are the hope of the church. In these we see what the
future church in this land is to be. And just as the gardener who wishes
his trees and bushes to be shapely, and well developed, and fruitful in
their kind, when they have come to maturity, takes care of the seedlings
and tender plants, so the rulers of a church, “ who are men of under-
standing,” will be watchful of the distinctive training of the young, from
whom their future ministers and membership are to come. I say, distinc-
tive training. Of course our first care should be to make the young


Christians. The young are a part of the church—they are within the
church —they have been admitted to initial membership by the door of
baptism 3 and, therefore, it is the special duty of the church to see that the
young are being, according to solemn and parental vows, “ trained up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.” For unless they are taught
the fear of God —the love which is due to Jesus Christ—and the charity
which, they should exercise towards one another—they cannot be anything
but a dishonour to the church, neither can they be useful members of
society at large. But, while to make Christians of the young should be
our first object, our next object should be to make them stanch and
intelligent Presbyterian Christians, attached to the polity and discipline
of our church on the ground of principle. I hope we are not ashamed
of such a position as this. I hope we have not come to think that our
distinctive principles, as a Presbyterian church, may be cast into the shade.
I hope we have not forgotten the costly price at which this inheritance
was purchased for us. If, therefore, while not exalting our principles
“ above measure ” —while not substituting them for the grander prin-
ciples of saving truth—we still hold and cherish them as “ scriptural
principles,” and best fitted for the work of extending the Gospel—shall
we not fail of an important duty to the young—shall we not positively
wrong them—if we should leave them in ignorance of those scriptural
principles—if we should transmit to them our inheritance, received from
our ancestry, doubtful and impaired ? It is the fashion now, in this most
liberal and enlightened age, to speak slightingly of the zeal and struggles
of our forefathers in the faith. It is possible, indeed, that in their peculiar
circumstances, they dwelt too much on their distinctive principles. But
what is the result of the other extreme, which is acted on now ? Why,
there is hardly a member of our church who is not a Presbyterian only in
name —hardly one who is able to tell what his principles are—hardly one
who can give a better reason for the name which he bears than that it is
the name of the party into which he was born 3 and then, meanwhile,
the young are left in absolute ignorance of our distinctive principles,
as if these were the janglings which minister strife j and then, when
the young have grown up, having nothing to settle them—nothing to
attach them to a particular church stronger than the tie of accidental
circumstances—they wander about from church to church as fancy leads
them, or attraction draws them—so that much of the pastoral work is ren-
dered nugatory and vain, and the very preaching of the Gospel is shorn of
one half of its instructing and sanctifying effects. Is it not lamentable to
see men on the platform, men in the Legislature, men in the higher
walks of life, who, from their position and leisure, as well as from their
origin, might be expected to know, at least, the rudiments of Presbyterian
principles, evincing a total unacquaintance with the very genius of
Presbyterianism ? And is it not more lamentable still that men in such
positions should, by their sayings and example, give a practical form to
their ecclesiastical ignorance, as if one polity of a church were as good
as another, and as if the distinctive principles of their own particular one,
were not worthy of a thought? The natural tendency of such indifference
to what is special is to breed indifference to what is general, lie who


loves no church in particular is a very likely man, in course of tirn6>
to love no church at all. He who is anything in matters so important
as the distinctive forms and principles of a church, is the most likely man
at length to he nothing. And he who has never laboured to think out
anything—who has no convictions as to what are the teachings of Scripture
on the “ government, worship, discipline, and duties of a church ”
will most likely be the man who is least informed as to what are
the “ Scripture doctrines,” the saving doctrines, which a church should
maintain 3 and most likely he will be the man, who, by his casual hearing
and his imperfect doing, will render void Christ’s most wise and holy
ordinance —the pastoral office. If the plan, therefore, of ignoring, or
neglecting, our distinctive principles tends thus to the weakening of
attachments, and to practical ungodliness, how much does it behove us, as
men who are “ watching the signs of the times,” to be careful as to the
early training of the young? We cannot attach too much importance to
this. Other bodies know the value of this. The ungodly world knows the
value of this. The proverb is that “ early impressions are not easily ef-
faced.” Let us see, then—fathers and brethren —that our growing young,
while learning the essential doctrines of the Gospel of Christ, learn also
why they are Protestants and not Romanists, why they are Presbyterians
and not connected with other sects —let them know the Scripture testi-
mony on the point —let them know the reasons and principles on which
they should rest, that, as they begin to feel a personal interest, as they
begin to feel the attachments of conviction and choice—they may give our
church an intelligent support—they may “ walk about Zion, and go round
about her, and tell the towers thereof, mark well her bulwarks, and consider
her palaces, and tell it to the generation following.”
Nor ought we —fathers and brethren —in thus dealing with the young,
to neglect the power which lies in our hands. We have Bible-classes,
and day and Sabbath schools. We have considerable funds and material
at the disposal of our Synod. We have several thousands of children
coming daily and weekly under the influence of our teaching agencies.
We have thus the means, already in existence, for the most perfect
propagation of our distinctive principles. These means have hitherto been
greatly neglected, and the neglect has borne its legitimate fruits 3 but now
they should be wisely turned to the most useful account. Every one of
our schools should be essentially Presbyterian—every book in our schools
should bear the name of our Synod —every teacher in our schools should
be a member of our church, not as a matter of convenience, but in train-
ing and principle—and the whole arrangement of our schools, and the
whole efforts of our teachers, should be so clearly in the interest of our
own denomination as that, while other children may share in our advan-
tages, without any unfair attempt at proselytisra, their admission should
not be an injury to our own in depriving them of what specially belongs
to them as the children of our church. In a word, I long for the time —
and I hope it is drawing near—when our schools—both day and Sabbath
schools shall do, in some fair degree, for our children in this land what
the parochial schools did for so long for the children of Scotland, in the
humbler walks of life. I hope they shall yet be the means, under the


wise direction of devoted teachers—and under the watchful interest of
our governing church courts, —of making the mass of our children
throughout the land respected neighbours, intelligent citizens, enlightened
Presbyterians, and consistent Christians.
In the last place, I shall now merely add, as another particular which
the present times are pressing upon our view, the necessity for a large
infusion into Our church of “ the missionary spirit.” The New Testament
church was designed to he the t( missionary society ” for the world. Its
grand commission, received from Christ, is the proof of this. And the
many societies which have recently sprung up —whose deeds and victories
are the unquestionable seal and testimony of the approbation of God—
are the consequences of the church forgetting her mission as the ambas-
sador of Christ to a perishing world. If the church forget—if the church
be unfaithful—if her conscience be asleep—as to the great purpose for
which she is set and maintained in the world—nevertheless, where piety
really exists, there these “ breakings forth ” will everywhere appear, of
that missionary spirit, which is to carry the Gospel to every shore, and
cover the earth with the knowledge of the Lord even as the waters cover
the face of the deep. And so, in years gone by, because of indifference
in the church to the heathen abroad and the heathen at home, her peculiar
functions, as the instructor of the nations, and the messenger of mercy
to the helpless and miserable, has been exercised by associated Christians,
outside her walls and without even her countenance. God has wondrously
prospered—and abundantly blessed —the missionary efforts of these associ-
ated Christiana. But have we not been witnesses that in later years, and
just as the church has awakened to her work, and felt the claims of the
heathen abroad, and set herself to answer the Macedonian cry, the blessing
has come down upon the church herself —vital godliness has prospered in
her midst—her resources have been developed—and her numbers have in-
creased —and she has realised the faithfulness of the promise of her Lord :
“Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world!” We
find the fact just what we might expect it to be. A sleeping church is
never a missionary church. An awakened church is always a missionary
church. Life and missionary effort are in proportion to each other.
If the church is not doing her work, she is denied the blessing ; but if
she is apostolic in her spirit as well as in her creed, then, “ walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost,” God will
give her a measure of the apostolic success. It is time —fathers and
brethren —that we think of this, and counsel accordingly “ what we ought
to do.” If we have hitherto been reaping little, we ought to consider
whether the reason is not that we have not been working and waiting for
much. If our spiritual life and comfort have been small, we ought to
consider whether the reason is not that, thinking only of ourselves, and
neglecting others, God has sent upon our vineyard the mildew, and the
blight, and given us the reward of our spiritual selfishness : “ There is
that withholdcth more than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty ” ! Fathers
and brethren—how ample, and easy of access, the fields which invite us
to missionary effort! We have heathen in our cities —heathen in our
bush—pagan strangers dwelling in our midst—and islands, yet sunk in


the darkness and cruelties of idolatry, lying at our door. We arc thus
brought near them, in the good providence of God. Opportunities arc
thus brought within our reach for noble, generous, Christian enterprise.
We are urged by the calls of Christian duty and Christian benevolence;
we are urged by the example and promises of Christ. We are able for
nothing if we look to ourselves; we are able for all things if we look to
Christ. His grace is sufficient for us —His strength is made perfect in
our weakness —His blood can cleanse away our sin—His Spirit can give
flesh and sinews and life to the dry bones! Let us not distrust or limit
the Holy One of Israel. Let us not fear or faint because we are a little
flock. The little one may become a thousand and the small one a strong
nation. Only let us do according to the might which is offered us in
Christ —let us be anointed anew with the holy oil, as entirely consecrated
to the service of Christ—let us be of one heart and one mind in our object
and aim—let us feel, that as an organized body, a tribe of the living
Israel of God, a dispensation of the Gospel has been committed unto us
—let us be earnest and liberal in counselling what Israel ought to do;
and then, assuredly, the people under us will hold up our hands and
encourage our hearts —God will open the heavenly windows, and pour out
His blessings until there shall not be room to receive—the garden of
the Lord He will make fruitful and beautiful —the Beloved will come
into His garden, and eat his pleasant fruits—and, as the careless and
the thoughtless, the ignorant and the perishing, the pagan Chinese, the
aboriginal Black, and the savage Islander of these southern seas —are
brought by our efforts under the influence of the truth—the wilderness
and the solitary place shall be glad for us, and the deserts shall rejoice
and blossom as the rose ! Amen !
