

THE
NATIONAL
LIBRARY


NATIONAL LIBRARY
(A project of the National Capital Development Commission)
The National Library of Australia is under the control of the
National Library Council which was set up as a statutory authority
under the National Library Act of 1960. This Act separated the
functions of the National Library from those of the Parliamentary
Library.
The Library has been located until now in several widely
separated buildings in Canberra.
In the meanwhile it has built up substantial collections and
services and has established the basis for a great national
reference library.
By 1964 its book collection comprised 760,000 volumes and was
growing at the rate of 65,000 volumes a year.
The Library also held 15,000 bound volumes of newspapers;
1,250,000 feet of microfilm; 40,000 historical pictures; 1,000 shelf
feet of manuscript: 11 million feet of moving picture film; 25,000
movie stills; 112,000 maps; 400,000 aerial photographs and a
collection of sound recordings.
DESIGN
The National Capital Development Commission took the first
steps towards housing this rapidly growing collection under one
roof when it appointed Running and Madden and T. E. O’Mahony
of Sydney as architects in association forthe new library building.
It engaged Dr. Keyes Metcalf, the distinguished Librarian of
Harvard, as consultant.
The adopted design has been evolved to fulfil two distinct
purposes; firstly, to grace the Parliamentary Triangle with a hand-
some and monumental building, and, secondly, to provide a
functional library based on the most up-to-date ideas in library
planning.
The plan is based on locating the general bookstack for the
completed scheme on two levels covering an ultimate area 640
feet by 530 feet. Superimposed on this podium will be three
important sections comprising a massive Central Block and two
flanking blocks linked together to form a harmonious and com-
plementary group overlooking Lake Burley Griffin.
The first stage is the Central Block, at present under construc-
tion, which will be 340 feet long by 149 feet wide. It will be sur-
rounded by a colonnade 70 feet high, sheathed in white marble,
the main walls being faced with travertine and the podium with
trachite; the rugged fortresslike quality of this material will
harmonise with the lawn and landscape setting and the colonnade
will be mirrored in the Lake.
This stage will accommodate all working departments of the
Library and, at the outset, about 1* million volumes.
Initially the main bookstacks will be on the third and fourth
floors adjacent to lifts and stairs which give access to the receipt
and despatch area on the lowest floor.
As the Library's collections expand another million volumes
can be accommodated with the later completion of the two base-
ment floors.
More stack space can be provided by expanding the basement
levels horizontally as the podium is developed.
Horizontal conveyors in the lower floors under the podium will
in the future, carry books from outlying stack areas to the centrally
located vertical book conveyor which will be installed in the first
stage.
The Library, many years hence, could house 11 million
volumes.
Six columns in the spacious entrance foyer will run through
two floors to support a mezzanine gallery which can be used for
exhibitions.
More exhibition space will be provided on each side of the
foyer and a theatrette will be located beneath it.
The General Reference Room will be of noble proportions:
168 feet long by 38 feet wide. Recessed on one side of it will be
seven reading areas overlooking the lake.
Wall panels of Australian timber have been designed to
absorb sound and carpets will help maintain a quiet environment.
Other rooms to have fine interior treatment will be the Aus-
tralian Reading Room, the Rare Book and Manuscript Reading
Room and Oriental Studies Room.
Special attention will be given to both the exterior of the
Library and the decor of its interior to ensure that this first great
lakeside building in the Parliamentary Triangle will be truly worthy
of Australia’s National Capital.
