

"THE AKABARBARIAN"
H.M.S. "MINERVA."
Printed at The Nile Mission Press, 37 Sham Manakb, Cairo.


AT GAZETTE WL
The Celebrated DREDGER BAND plays daily in the offing
THE OLD FIRM
BROMLEY and SUCH
ADVANCES from a penny stamp to 605 on
note of hand aione. No securities required.
Never forgotten at the end of the month.
This is not intended for minors.


I
1
.
■
-
itfc.
V"
I


~ '''" '


"THE AKABARBARIAN"
H.M.S. "MINERVA."
CHRISTMAS
1915-
EDITORIAL.
We make no apology for placing
before our numerous readers the Christmas
number of The Akabarbarian. Our
Magazine is already so well known that
no previous advertisement of this epoch-
making number was needed, and we will
only say now that it is the production of
the leading literary lights of H.M.S.
"Minerva ," a really great work, and now,
like other people mentioned by the Poet,
you have greatness thrust upon you —and
all for one shilling. Not many people
have such an opportunity. Be like
"Towser " —seize it.
By pursuing the contributors round
the ship morning noon and night we
have lost much of our well known popular-
ity, but we have produced the Akabar-
barian. Well! Great men are never
popular.
Now that darkness enfolds us so early
in its purple robe the perusal of the
Akabarbarian will take the place of
cricket during the dog watches. A flat
denial of the adage "Misfortunes never
come singly."
Talking about cricket the " Minerva"
should be able to put quite a decent team
in the field when opportunity offers. The
batting might perhaps leave something to
be desired but the bowling would quite
make up for that—it would astonish our
adversaries. One sportsman in particular
reminds me of those well known words
of Shakespeare. "I knew he was a
bowler for he wore a bowler hat."
We have now got a concert party
going and hope to be able to delight our
patrons from time to time if the Turks
don't come and spoil it all.
Sometime about the New Year the
Wardroom Officers hope to enter the
dramatic arena in a most amusing farce
called "The Private Secretary."
The results of the various matches
we have played during our time on this
station are given elsewhere in our pages,
and are very satisfactory ; the win against
the "Ocean" at " Soccer " being a specially
creditable performance.
Although we have heard from time
to time a little grumbling on the subject
of leave, yet the Officers and men in the
"Minerva " may congratulate themselves
on having seen more actual fighting in
the world war than ninety per cent of the
ships in the Navy. In spite of odd bits
of leave we rather sympathise with the
fellows in the North Sea.
Since the outbreak of hostilities the
"Minerva " has steamed nearly fifty
thousand miles, and been in five seas.
Not a bad performance for so old a ship.
The Editor's thanks are due to
Lientenant Victor Trumper R.N.R. for
his able article on the places which we
have visited round the coasts of Egypt,
the Canal, and the Red Sea, and also to
Chief Writer Whurr for his tireless
energy in typing out our matter for the
Press.
The Editor does not hold himself
responsible for the opinions expressed
by correspondents.


A MERRY CHRISTMAS.
Nobody who does not go down to
the sea in ships or have their business in
great waters can possibly understand
the joy which a Sailor feels when his
ship goes into Dry Dock. It is only on
these occassions and during the few
spells of leave that he can walk ashore,
and imagine for a few days that he "is
as other men are." To be able to walk
over "the brow" as the gangway from
the ship to the dock's side is called, at
any hour of the day or night is to the
sailor what a latch key is to other people,
and he feels a freedom from restraint
which passeth the landsman's unders-
tanding. No longer is he haunted by
the horrible night-mare of a long trip in
a picket boat before, drenched and utterly
miserable, he gets aboard his ship. No
longer does he come down Flagstaff
Steps, out of breath and with barked
shins after a hurdle race over the
innumerable scraps which lie about a
dockyard, and find his watch is thirty
five seconds slow and the boat has
pushed off, leaving him to wait in the
rain and wind for a couple of hours till
the next boat, in a place where of course
he is not allowed to smoke; and to
occupy his mind during this period
the knowledge that he will be in the
Commander's Report next morning for
being "Adrift" —absent from leave two
hours. No longer does he —well no
longer does he do any of these sort
of things. He just walks aboard, feeling
"the master of his fate" and I really can't
resist continuing the quotation —"the
Captain of his Soul." So it happened
that there was joy alike in the Officers'
quarters on the "Half-deck" and For'ard
on the Mess-deck, when orders came
through that "H.M.S. Pericles" would have
a month's refit part of which time would
be spent in dry dock. The date given
for the docking was towards the end of
December and this meant of course that
we would be in Dry Dock over the
Christmas Holidays, a bit of good luck
which every man in the ship thoroughly
appreciated. The ship whose turn came
just before ours was rather longer in
being finished than was expected, and
it was December 23rd before we steamed
slowly up the harbour to No. 3 Dry dock.
Tugs puffed busily; whistles blew,
capstans rattled and groaned; steel
hawsers tautened; flags waved; dock-
yard officials shouted and dockyard
"maties" paddled about on rafts inside
the dock "shoring up" ; but at last the
Pericles was safely inside and the great
hulk lay propped upright in an empty
dock. By one o'clock the brows were
over the side one forward for the men
and one aft for "Officers Only" ; and the
working parties were already falling in
on the dock wall to finish "tidying up a
bit", all that remained to be done. As it
was so near the holidays, the work was
not going to be put in hand until after
Christmas, and so next day, the morning's
work being done, the Commander gave
the "Hands" a "Make and Mend" to
decorate their messes for the following
Day.
This is a yearly function on which
the men really spread themselves. The
usually bare and somewhat gloomy mess-
deck is brightened up by a lavish
display of holly and evergreens, when
they can be procured, and with yards of
coloured tissue paper. On the great day
a special feast is prepared and the mess
tables decorated with trophies out of
ditty-boxes and photographs of the
"Switchers" as the men call their
sweethearts, who happen to hold their
hearts at the time. All this is in prepa-
ration for the Officers Rounds after
Morning Service. Headed by the Skipper
all the Officers 011 board make a pilgri-
mage round the Mess-deck, wearing a
fixed grin on their faces, and in the
intervals of wishing promiscuous Happy
Christmasses, receiving, with every ap-
pearance of delight lumps of cake, nuts,
cigars, oranges and mixed sweets from
the men who stand to welcome them at
the end of each mess.
H.M.S. PERICLES was "a happy
ship" for Commander Bullock really did
his best for the ship's company, and they
set to work on their decorations with a
will. By tea time every thing was finished
and the Commander gave leave ashore
to a watch and half a watch, only keeping
on board the men who couldn't possibly
be spared.
Among the men who went ashore
was an Able Seaman called Albert Scott
the biggest fly in the Commander's


ointment, for he was always in
trouble through drink, and at the same
time an amusing practical joker, utterly
reckless of any consequences. The only
Officer in the ship for whom he appeared
to have the least fear or respect was
Lieutenant Paelton, the Officer of his
Division. The secret of this lay in the
fact that Paelton, who was heavy weight
Champion of the Navy, never put him
in the Commander's Report but when he
was more than usually dirty, or annoying,
quite unofficially of course, gave him an
with a pair of childrens' reins covered
with bells ; in his hand he carried a boy's
sixpenny whip, with which from time to
time he tried quite ineffectually to hit
the duck, demanding the while with the
most profound gravity, that someone
should ''bring him flesh and bring him
wine" though of the latter in the form of
"'alf an 'alf" he had obviously already
drunk deep. I met him at the top of the
gangway, preserving my gravity with a
great effort, and as it was Christmas Eve
and for Albert Scott he was not too
Albert SCOTT * BA»TTC»CD Bowcea t**T THAT HAD <-Osr ITS BRtfn :r««vifvG A QUA<X» t-i C x>v<K .
invitation,which there was no refusing,"to
put on the gloves" and a good thrashing
to follow. That night I was on duty,
and was strolling up and down the
Quarterdeck, when my reveries were
broken into by the good old Christmas
Carol "Good King Wenceslas" being
sung in a very beer sodden voice which
gradually got louder as the singer
approached : going to the side to see who
it was I saw one of the most ridiculous
sights imaginable. There was Albert
Scott wearing a battered old bowler hat,
that had lost its brim, and driving a
quacking and terrified duck harnessed
drunk, I told him to go quietly below,
and retired to the empty Wardroom —for
all the Officers were ashore —to enjoy
my laugh.
It was about ten minutes later, I
suppose ; I had just settled down to read
a ghost story in the Christmas Strand
when I heard "Good King Wenceslas"
accompanied by the jingle bells and
loud quack-quacks approaching the
half-deck. A moment or two later
the sentry outside the wardroom door
raised his voice in protest —"Ere, I say,
what do you want ere ?" "Ello, bluenose,"
replied the singer "A Merry Christmas,"


"Bluenose" took no notice of the
season's greetings but angrily demanded,
"what d'yer want ere? Now you get for'ard
to the mess-deck, or I'll run you in." "Its all
right, Bluenose dear," said Albert Scott,
for of course it was he —"I've only got a
little present for Lieutenant Paelton."
Here I thought it was about time I
took a hand in the game and going to
the Wardroom door, I saw Scott still
driving his duck and holding in his hand
no longer the toy whip, but an enormous
engine-room set-spanner, apparently
Paelton's Christmas present, standing
before the sentry with an insinuating
smile on his idiotic face.
As soon as he saw me he dropped
the reins and fled leaving behind that
infernal duck. The sentry made a grab
at it but it escaped his grasp and with
neck outstretched and wings flapping it
fled squorking about the half deck. By
the time we captured it —in the Com-
mander's cabin —it had already broken
two photos frames, upset a bottle of ink
over the Night Order Book and also a
bottle of his hair oil. Of course this was
beyond a joke and I sent for the Master
at Arms and told him to find Scott and
put him below under Sentries charge.
A quarter of an hour elapsed and no report
had been to me, so rather annoyed I
rang the bell, and sending once more for
that official, demanded to know the
reason of his omitting to let me know
what had happened. "We haven't found
him yet, Sir," —he replied "we've searched
all over the ship once, and we're starting
round a second time now. I can't imagine
where he can have got to."
"Perhaps he's got away into the
Dockyard" I said and went on deck to
enquire. The Quarter Master, however,
declared that nobody had passed over
the brow, and I was just turning away
when I thought I noticed a slight move-
ment in the painted canvas flap, covering
one of the "ammick nettings." "Look in
there, Master At Arms" I ordered,
pointing to the place, "he can hardly
have got in, but just look."
Scott's face decorated with an idiotic
grin appeared under the flap, "Alright.
Jaunty" he cried "I saw you first. Ave
yer enjoyed yer little 'unt ?" "Hawl him
out and take him below ; if the idiot gives
you any trouble put him in irons, and of
course into the Commander's Report" I
said half laughing, half cursing at the
fool; and Scott was lead away endeavour-
ing to embrace an angry and heated
Master At Arms, and begging not to be
separated from his duckie, saying, with
very truth, that he only had one —for
which praise be to Heaven —and couldn't
bear the parting.
Next day after morning Prayer, in
accordance with immemorial Service
custom, the Officers mustered in the
Wardroom and invited the Warrant
Officers "The seven W.O.'s" as we called
them, to have some "Bubbly" before
they all went round the Mess deck
together. At last they were "Primed"
for the rounds and, preceded by a rag
band, they started off, the "Skipper"
leading the way. Scott, who had been
liberated in honour of the Day and whose
case was "standing over" was waiting at
the head of his mess, and annoyed the
Commander beyond words by pressing
some cheap and sticky dates upon him
for acceptance. Of course, it is not etiquette
to refuse any offering on this occasion,
and the unhappy Commander whose
hands were already full had nowhere to
put the glutinous gift except his cap
a new one for the occasion, by the way.
But Scott's "piece de resistance" came
when Paelton came along. Suddenly
producing that adjectival duck from the
depths of his "jumper", amidst a yell of
laughter, before the unfortunate Paelton
knew where he was, he had placed the
jingling reins into his hand and the
edifying sight of a hot and embarassed
Lieutenant of His Majesty's Navy holding
a set of children's reins, to which was
attached a quacking duck, sent Officers
and men into such ecstacies of delight
that, except for the one unfortunate
victim of the joke, the rounds were a
colossal success, and the men went to
dinner in the best of tempers.
But the Day's festivities were not
over even then as far as Albert Scott
was concerned. A Chief Petty Officer
passing one of the unused case-mates
happened to look through the small flap
in the iron door and there saw Scott and
a few Spirits if not worse than himself —
as that was hardly possible, —at least
of the same drunken habits, —quietly
enjoying a bottle of whisky which had


-- A\
V A
1
Ak y':W
Al A -4
"A£A "c^
nr
"THE P.M.0."


.
.
■
»«
;y
■ *
-
: . -
' "'"v
*
'
|i :••• . ,
>i ' • • -


been smuggled on board, (as we after
wards discovered) under the shelter of
the laughter caused by the arrival of
Scott and his duck the night before. It
was his duty of course to report this
flagrant breach of discipline and he woke
the "Jaunty" who was having an after-
noon "Caulk" and told him what was
going on. The Master At Arms was
not best pleased at being wakened up,
but the chance of paying back Scott
some old scores soon restored his good
humour. Going along to the case mate,
he suddenly flung open the door and
before Scott had time to throw the bottle
through the port walked into the midst
of the revellers.
"What are you doing with that
bottle of whisky, Scott" he said, "fall
in on the Quarter Deck." ''Let's off this
time, Master-At-Arms" begged the cul-
prit "Its Christmas Day, say nothing
about it, but come in and 'ave a drop
yerself."
"Fall in on the Quarter Deck"
repeated the Jauuty, heedless of the
invitation. "Don't be a fool but come
inside and have a drink" once more
invited Scott. "FALL in on the Quarter
Deck" repeated the Master-At-Arms,
more loudly, advancing at the same time
towards the half drunk seaman.
"Which is it to be, Jaunty, a drink
for you and the bottle out of the port,
or me on the Quarter Deck"
"Fall in on the Quarter Deck"
roared the M.A A. thoroughly exaspe-
rated. "All right yer fool, take that!"
and Scott catching the unfortunate man
completely unawares, gave him such a
blow that he dropped senseless.
"Phew ! whistled Scott's "cronies"
you be done it this time. What the 'ell
are yer goin' to do."
Scott looked in stupefaction for a
moment or two at the Jaunty's unconscious
form, but his love of a practical joke
conquered his inclination to make a
bolt for it out of the ship, and he quickly
made up his mind. Sprinkling the
whisky that remained liberally over
the senseless man (to the horrified
consternation and regret of his own
thirsty pals) he proceeded to break off
the neck of the empty bottle. Having
done this he shouldered the M, A.A, and
taking the broken bottle in his hand
marched along to the Quarter Deck, and
laying his burden down demanded to
see the Officer of the Watch. "What's
the meaning of this, Scott" demanded
Paelton —for it happened to be his turn,
when he arrived on the seen. " I've
brought the Master-At-Arms along to
the Quarter Deck to show you what 'e
is like. Sir 'e's so drunk that 'e can't
walk and I' ad to carry 'im, and 'eres, the
circumstantial evidence," added Scott
producing the broken bottle.
Paelton bent over the prostrate form
and smelt the strong fumes of whisky.
"Disgraceful" he said, "Quarter Master,
tell the Sergeant Major to bring two
Marines and take this drunken hog down
to the cells. I'll report to the Commander
what I've done," and Scott had the
satisfaction of seeing the tables turned
for once and his ancient enemy taking
the part he usually played himself.
Of course by the time the Commander
went his "rounds" that night "the Jaunty",
though still rather dazed, had recovered
sufficiently to state what had actually
occurred as far as he could remember,
and he and Scott promptly changed
places.
Next morning as the events of the
day before were gradually brought to
light by the various witnesses at
"Captain Defaulters", The Master At
Arms grew more and more purple with
indignation. If looks could kill, Scott
would certainly have expired under the
furious glances of the Jaunty —made all
the more furious by the maddening
grin the shameless prisoner insisted
on wearing during Paelton's evidence
as to the scene on the Quarter Deck,
and the incriminating bottle which was
produced. His uniform still smelt vilely
of stale whisky and I'm told he's never
touched a drop of Ihe "crater" since,
but he got some satisfaction when the
"Skipper", hiding his smiles as well as
he could, ordered an application for a
court-martial, with the result that Scott
got 90 days in Detention Barracks, and
so disappeared for the time being from
the public eye.
A. C. PARSON,


THIiNGS WE WANT TO KNOW.
The name of the Naval Officer who
for some extraordinary reason was so
sorry to leave Port-Said early in Novem-
ber, and if it is true that "Page Keen and
Page " are a trifle richer in consequence.
The nature of the accident which
caused Lieutenant Garstin R.I.M. to run
so fast for the back entrance of Simon
Arzt shortly after landing one evening
in Port-Said.
If the "Submarine Detector" fails,
why not try a "Time fuze Torpedo ".
How is it Mr. Harris and Mr. Liddle
never catch their breakfasts before mid-
night.
Is it true that we are to be treated to
a lecture on " Women's Suffrage and
Frightfulness " on Christmas day ; if so,
who is the sportsman, and will Mr. Leep-
man-Shaw be present.
How a certain Naval Lieutenant had
the pluck to present a bundle of dead
roses tied up in a bootlace to a new but
fair acquaintance of his, sitting in the
seat behind him at the Charity Concert.
Is it a fact that the Interpreter was
surprised when half a dry primer was
fired over the side in the Great Bitter
Lake and did he really turn as white as a
sheet.
Who was the innocent young Midshi-
pman who tried so hard to walk between
a chair at the Eastern Exchange Hotel
after dinner a few nights ago.
If the Young Naval Officer, who pro-
fessess to be misogynist, was not a trifle
alarmed when he felt a programme alight
on his head, at the charity concert given
in Port Said, and what steps he took
when he discovered the culprit in the box
above.
The names of the two Wardroom
Officers who have been " told off " by the
Chaplain to love two Gunroom Officers
and if they are likely to agree with this
sudden change of routine.
Where was Mr. Short when the lights
went out ?
If all ships passing through the Canal
apply to "The Sand-bag King" for
protection.
Why our Assistant Navigator went
to Church on shore, a few Sundays ago,
and arrived half an hour before the
service began, and if he got his "mixed
double " on the following day after his
trouble.
If the sweet young member of the
"fair sex" who " rang up" the ship at
10.0 p.m. the other night, enjoyed the sub-
sequent Tete aTete as much as her friend
in the Chart House, and if it would not
be a little more convenient to fit silent
cabins where Ship's Telephones are fitted
to prevent outsiders intruding.
Whether P.O. S-wy-R has been
asked to sing at the Queen's Hall or if
this is only a " buzz ".
If the Gunnery Lieutenant gave a
prize to the man who nearly hit the fore-
stay with a prodge out of the fo'castle
six inch.
If any one has taken a snapshot yet
of Sergeant H —mphr—s paddling on
Saturday morning about the half deck.
If not might some photographic ex-
pert from the Gan-room bribe the Censor
to pass a snap and send it to the Daily
Mirror as " One of Britain's Bold Defen-
ders."
How many six inch shells can one
Camel at Akaba account for, and what
bearing this ha§ en the ee§t of the war.
If there will be a bar for the Great
Battle of Bantry.
Who was the signalman who re-
ported the " Konigsberg " at Jeddah, and
if he was gifted with second sight.
What the Chief Censor said when
somebody tried to send home a six inch
projectile for a penny stamp.
Whether the Chaplain's musical soul
revels in the mandoline performance
given nightly from four-thirty to ten in
the Warrant Officers' Pantry.


THE BELL.
It was a night such as can only be
found in the Levant. In the deep purple
sky, unlit by any moon, the stars blazed
forth in their glory, dimly illuminating
the land off which we were anchored. Far
to the north and south a sharp crackle of
rifle-fire was faintly audible, as Turk and
infidel battled for the possession of the
strip of land which held the key to a
victory such as the world has never
yet known. An occasional star-rocket
flared above the hills, and a fierce glow,
some miles inland, showed where a
battleship had been bombarding during
the day.
The Chief Boatswain and I were on
watch on the fore-bridge, looking at the
distant signs of battle, and sleepily
wondering what was happening out there
in the darkness. The arrival on the
bridge of some cocoa made us feel more
awake, and the Boatswain, after filling
his pipe, unthinkingly struck a match.
Instantly there was the sharp crack of a
sniper's rifle from the shore, and a bullet
whizzed past us, striking the steel conning
tower, and glancing off on to the ship's
bell, which gave out a hollow, gong-like
note, quivering through the still air for
some seconds before it died away. The
Boatswain gave an exclamation of terror,
and shuddered. I looked at him in ama-
zement ; why should a man who had been
through the Boxer rising and the South
African War, and who could place those
coveted letters "V.C. " after his name,
tremble at the sound of a bullet ? Even I,
whg had only been off the Peninsula for
two weeks, was now quite accustomed to
their song as they flew over us. He saw
my look of astonishment and said.
" It's not the bullet I'm afraid of, but
that bell "
" What's the matter with it said T
"It can't hurt you ".
<4 I'm not so sure of that he replied.
"I could tell you of one particular bell that
could do worse".
" Out with your yarn" said I, and
this is the tale he told me :
"It was in the summer of 18 —that I
was Boatswain of the old " INTERMIN-
ABLE". She was considered the last
word in shipbuilding in those days, and
you may imagine how proud I was of
my position in her. We were second in
command of the Mediterranean Fleet at
that time, accompanied by our sister ship
the " INDIGESTABLE After a week
at Smyrna, we were steaming on a course
for Salonika, when, about 50 miles from
Mitylene, the "INDIGESTABLE" sighted
a dark object, which proved to be a
schooner of about 200 tons, without
lights. We examined her with our search-
lights; she was flying Greek colours,
with the name " DAPHNE " of Mudros
on her stern. No living thing was to be
seen on board, and no answer was given
to our hails. A boat was manned and
sent over to her ; to our surprise she was
entirely deserted, except for the cock-
roaches and other usual inhabitants of
Greek schooners.
A crew of 12 men were sent over to
her, with myself in command, with orders
to sail to Mudros, where the whole Medi-
terranean Fleet would meet for their Fleet
Regatta in a week's time. Provisions were
sent over to us, and we set sail at once.
When morning broke we found ourselves
in a flat calm, with no ships or land in
sight, and not a breath of wind to stir
our canvas. After breakfast and a bathe
over the side I started to look round the
ship for any traces of her crew. All their
gear was left in the foes' le ; the Cap-
tain's also was untouched, even his watch
was lying on the cabin table. It was most
mysterious, this sudden exodus of a crew
from a perfectly seaworthy ship, and we
could find no clues to account for it. We
then proceeded to examine the holds, the
after one of which was empty and open,
while the fore hatch cover was securely
fastened down by ropes to rings in the
deck. While these were being cut one
of the men came over to me and said
"What do you make-of this here, Sir ? " I
looked where he was pointing; on the deck,
radiating from one cornet of the hold
were several faint luminous lines of pale
green, which stretched away in different
directions until, emerging from the sha-
dow of the foresail, they were lost in the
sunlight on the deck. I tried to rub them
out with my finger but could not do so,
the only result being that it also began
to glow green and luminous where it had
touched the lines. The men had now
taken off the lashings, and heaved up the
hatch cover, which was made of solid


oak planks, bolted together with iron.
As it was raised a vast puff of thick
greenish vapour rushed out of the hold
up into the air where it hung motionless
in an enormous smoke-ring, until it slowly
dissolved into the air. Fearing poisonous
gases, I lowered a lamp into the hold, but
seeing that it burnt brightly I sent a hand
down to search. He slid down a rope
and landed in a few inches ot thick pale
green liquid, which covered the bottom
of the hold. But for this the hold was
empty; he scooped up a handful to bring
up to me and started to climb the rope,
using one hand. Suddenly when near the
top he dropped the stuff with a cry of
pain; his whole hand had disappeared
leaving the raw stump of his wrist!
Paralysed by the shock he slid back
down the rope, faster and faster, until
he landed on his back in green slime.
Before we could move to help him, with
a horrible yell, he dissolved in it, as a
lump of ice dissolves in boiling water;
into the green liquid, which was certain-
ly not more than three inches deep, he
had disappeared as completely as a stone
dropped in deep water! The others
promptly dropped the cover of the hold,
as if it had been red hot iron, and scamp-
ered aft where they huddled together
like frightened sheep in the cabin ; men
who had fearlessly faced the dangers of
sea and violence of the enemy were as
terrified children in the face of ' this new
and awful peril. They refused to return
toward the forehold and I had not the
heart 1:6 make them do so. My finger,
which I had not noticed before in the
excitement, was now causing me ex-
cruciating pain, the flesh at the tip hav-
ing been removed as if with a blunt
knife, though not a drop of blood was
escaping from the wound.
We lay becalmed all day, and all
hands turned in after supper (for which we
had not much appetite), with the excep-
tion of one man whom I placed on watch.
I did not place a helmsman as we were
not moving at all through the water. I
was unable to get a wink of sleep owing
to the pain in my finger. About mid-
night the man on watch suddenly walked
past me where I lay on the cabin roof;
wondering what was the cause I raised
myself on my elbow to see what he did.
He went to the port side light which had
gone out, and lit it and as he closed the
lamp the other one went out. I called to
him to light it also, whereat he started to
walk across the deck before the hold, but
while passing the foremast, he bumped
his head violently against the ship's bell
which hung there, causing it to give out
a hollow note, not a proper metallic
ring, but a soft sound like a gong. Instant-
ly, before he could even open his mouth
to express his feelings, I heard a sharp
whizz like a bullet; the man was suddenly
bathed in a greenish light and jerked
violently backwards on to the hatch-
cover, through which he passed as if it
had been thin air! The next instant I
heard a shriek and a thud as he struck the
bottom of the hold, and then utter silence.
The whole tragedy had not taken five
seconds. I roused the other men and
together we rushed forward to the hold.
The cover was absolutely intact with not
a single mark or stain upon it, onlv there
was a brightly glowing green trail on the
deck below the bell. I heard a man who
was on the far side of the hold, and who
could not see this, say to his companion
"I believes as 'ow the Boatswain' as
been known to see snakes and red rats
sometimes". Suddenly though no one
was within ten feet of the bell, it rang
out again, the speaker was covered with
a bright green glow, and was whisked
towards the hatch as though in the grip
of some giant hand. His comrade clutch-
ed at his collar as he went; the light
instantly encircled them both, and they
were hurled noiselessly through the stout
oak boards. A thud, a double wail of
intolerable agony from the bottom of the
hold, and once more silence. Por a mo-
ment we were all too terrified to move ;
then a wild stampede aft, led, I must
confess, by myself. We clustered round
the tiller as far aft as possible, staring
forward and waiting for we knew not
what. In those days of piping peace I
had not thought of taking any arms, but
having seen a large stick in the cabin I
went and fetched it, not so much for self
defence —for who could hit a green glow
in the air—as to give myself courage. I
suppose we waited two hours at least
gazing forward with the nameless terror
clutching at our hearts, when a faint
green streamer of light began to emerge
from a corner of the fore hatch, creeping


'
v ' 'i
\ •. \ '
V'"'*
"THE PADRE."




spirally upwards until it reached the bell
on the foremast, which began to toll at
regular intervals, as though struck by
something soft. The green column began
to thicken and spread out like a giant
hand and then horror of horrors !
slowly to creep aft through the air above
our heads, where it hung poised like a
hawk above its terrified prey. The toll-
ing of the bell became faster and faster
until it quivered through the air in an
endless stream of sound. Fascinated and
powerless, as birds before a snake, we
gazed up at the awful phenomenon above
our heads. Then suddenly we saw that it
wai sldwly and surely descending upon
us ; a yell of terror broke from a man
standing beside me and he pitched for-
ward in a dead faint. Even before he had
reached the ground a tentacle of light
shot downwards from the glow above,
carried him upwards and then forwards
towards the hold with incredible speed,
and as he hurtled through the air I saw
his face begin to disappear! It was a sight
I shall never forget, and his screams will
ring in my ears until my dying day. We
cowered on the deck in a huddled mass,
hardly daring to breathe while the bell
still continued its devilish noise. The
green glow began to increase in brilliance
until it shone like a searchlight above us;
then, with a noise like the screaming of
shrapnel bullets, half-a-dozen streamers
of light descended one by one on their
helpless victims bearing them shrieking
through the darkness to the green slime
of the forehold, leaving the light above
us once more a faint glow. There now
only remained one man beside myself:
tlie liglit was again gradually becoming
more and more intense, when another,
whiter glare leaped out from the gloom
astern, illuminating the whole ship. The
green terror above us abruptly vanished,
and the bell ceased its throbbing note,
as the vast black bulk of a battleship
loomed up in the darkness. I knew no
more until I found myself in a comfortable
bunk on board H.M.S. INDISPENSABLE "
who, on her way to Mudros, had sighted
our diabolical flare and had taken it for
a distress signal, —as indeed it was. The
other poor fellow who was with me had
been rescued alive, but had died from the
shock before he had been on board an hour.
No sooner had the " INDISPENSABLE'S"
men taken us off than flames broke out
from every part of the schooner, and in
less then two minutes she was blown to
pieces by a titanic explosion in the region
of her fore-hold, accompanied by vast
masses of green smoke and flame. You
may form your own opinion as to what
was on board that ship, but the memory
of those 30 hours in her is still enough to
make me shudder when 1 hear a bell rung
in that way, and I think you can hardly
blame me for it.
" Blame him ! I wonder what would
have happened had I been in his place,
besieged by unknown forces which were
not of this world ? I should probably have
died of fright like that other poor man
who was left in the schooner, or at least
would have lost my reason." The Boats-
wain was evidently thinking of it also, for
after a few minutes he spoke again. ''lf I
was a superstitious man" he said slowly, "I
might consider that an omen —the whizz of
that bullet and then the half rung
bell —but thank Heaven I am not, or I
should not sleep in peace for a long
time." We spoke no more after this, but
silently watched the crimson dawn creep
into the eastern sky, and at last the sun
rose clear of the land, bathing us in its
golden rays. "I wonder if that blighter
is still there " said I; " Now is his time for
a shot as the sun is right in our eyes and
he can. . . ." Even as I spoke the
rifle cracked again. The Boatswain fell
forward without a sound and as I ran
to his side I heard the Corporal of the
Watch strike the Ship's bell.
TITUS.


WARDROOM PIANOS
AND WAR.
WANTED a good second handiPiano. Cheap.
Apply Wardroom Officers H.M.S.
"MORNING TALE" ADVT:
To the Editor of Morning Tale.
Sir,
May I trespass on your valuable space to
voice as a taxpayer a protest with reference to the
above advertisement.
A Piano forsooth. One is constantly hearing
and reading the phrase " the English People do not
realise that they are at War." What then can be
said when such advertisements are allowed to ap-
pear in our daily newspapers ? Do the Wardroom
Officers of H. M. S imagine that the Great
British Public will be able to take the advice of a
noble Lord and " sleep quietly in their beds" with
the knowledge that the latest Comic Opera or
Ragtime tune is the order of the day or night on
certain ships of our great Navy. Perhaps this may
account for the deplorable raids on our North East
Coasts last winter, also the loss of certain battle-
ships.
Your readers' views on this subject should
be interesting.
Yours etc:
Cornhill DISGUSTED.
I November 1915.
My correspondent " Disgusted " whose letter
on Wardroom Pianos and War I published yester-
day has brought down a shoal of letters on my
editorial head, so following my usual custom of
giving both sides of the question to my readers, I
publish a few of the letters received below.
The Editor Morning Tale.
2nd November 1915.
To the Editor of Morning Tale.
Sir,
I am not sure whether it is not more sorrow
than anger which I feel after reading " Disgusted's "
remarkable letter of protest against the harmless
advertisement of the Wardroom Officers of
H.M.S for a Piano, —Sorrow that such a
letter should be allowed to spoil a loyal citizen's
breakfast by appearing in his morning paper, or
anger that such people as " Disgusted " should be
able to air, in print, their liverish growls against
our Ist Line of Defence. And what a grievance it
is, in very truth ! That some of our brave lads in
blue should wish to while away the time of waiting
and watching for the Huns to appear by having a
little music.
I wonder if " Disgusted " has ever heard of
Drake
Yours etc:
FAIR PLAY.
Tooting Nov. 2nd 1915.
To the Editor of Morning Tale.
Sir,
Pianos in Wardrooms are a Curse (and cost
a puckle o'baubees).
Yours etc
STAFF SURGEON R.N.
Southsea. Nov. 2nd 1915.
Dear Mr. Editor.
I have never written to the paper before, but
I do hope that you will allow me through the
medium of your popular little paper, to express
how much 1 hope that the Officers of H.M.S
will get a nice Piano.
Poor dears! how they must miss all the joys
of homeland Music halls, whilst out on the lonely
deep, watching over us.
I think that "Disgusted" must be one of
those unfortunate creatures, who hath no music in
his soul.
Yours etc :
A MOTHER
Kensington W. Nov. 3rd 1915.
Mr. Editor of Morning Tale.
'Aving been a Wardroom Servant, man and
boy, for close on 15 years, I think I may say that
what I don't know about Pianers inWardrooms aint
worth knowing.
Of course when this war began most ships left
their Pianers behind 'em on shore, in case they
might be after getting a shell, made in Germany, in
their innerds and spoiling their tune. 'Owsoever as
the blooming 'Uns don't seem to be coming out of
their snug 'arbours, I don't think there's any 'arm in
the Orficers 'aving their little bit of music, when
orf Duty, and it do liven them up, take it from me.
I am thinking that bloke " Disgusted " must 'ave a
musical family living near 'im.
Your etc:
JOE.
Eastney, Nov. 4th 1913.
H.L.S.


CAST THY BREAD UPON
THE WATERS.
"No", said Harry Stenning," I'm not
coming with the gang to-night. Indeed
I 'm not coming any more."
" Why whatever is the matter, old
man," I asked, really surprised, for before
the war Stenning had been the recog-
nised leader of a band of rather wild
young fellows, who had'made it a prac-
tise to have at least one "rag" in the
week somewhere in Town. Dinners,
Binges ", little theatrical supper parties
~"311 the usual routine of a young man
about town so long as it was "clean" —
had been to Harry the cream of life, and
here he was refusing to have anything
more to do with it. The change was so
abrupt that I didn't quite know what to
make of it, and, receiving no answer to
my first question, I asked another*" I sup-
pose there's a girl in the case, old chap,
isn't there ?" —for that seemed to me the
only possible explanation.
"Yes there's a girl in the case", an-
swered Harry slowly, " but hardly in the
way that you mean, I fancy."
Of course I was all agog with cur-
iosity and in answer to my request for
further information Harry Stenning mo-
tioned me to one of the comfortable club
armchairs and, drawing another up for
himself, began to speak.
" You rather pride yourself upon
being a bit of a sceptic, I know, but
because I think that is only a pose, and
that you 'll understand in spite of it, I'm
going to tell you why I'm not going on
any more of our night jaunts again. It's
rafbgF I long story, so you had better
have a drink and get your pipe going."
There was a short silence while we waited
the arrival of the drinks Stenning had
ordered, and then, settling himself com-
fortably in his chair, he continued.
"You've often stayed with me at
my home up in Cumberland, and so you
know what a splendid chap the old
"Governor" is, and the sort of way the
house is run. Among other rules which
he lays down for all of us, servants in-
cluded, is that no beggar must ever be
turned away from the Rectory door with-
out getting something to eat at least, and
in cases of need some old but warm
clothing to wear. You can guess that this
is pretty well known among the tramping
fraternity, and indeed there are several
criptic signs on the wall at the bottom of
the drive, which I imagine mean that,
from their point of view, it is a good
house. This being so we of course get
any number of beggars, but the old chap
never minds a bit and to this day the rule
of generosity holds good. One Christmas
when I was about ten I was returning, I
remember, from a long morning's skating
on the village pond, and at the drive
gates I met a beggar woman and a little
boy just coming out, each carrying a
large hunk of bread and jam which they
had been given. Something in the wo-
man's brown dreamy eyes struck me
even then, boy though I was, and, telling
them to wait a minute, I ran up to the house
and brought back some cake and oranges
which I gave to the chubby-faced little
chap hanging on to his mother's hand,
telling him it was for a Christmas feast.
The woman was most awfully grateful and
promised, as beggars so often do, that
she would pray for me, adding in such a
solemn voice that I was a bit frightened
that one day I should be desperately in
need of her prayer but that she would be
there in time."
" The old Scotch cook we had then
was frightfully indignant at such waste,
and told my "Governor" all about it,
adding that I had taken the things with-
out permission. The old chap, so far
from siding with her, was absolutely
delighted at what he called me ' my
thoughtful action" and next morning
gave me an extra quid " to pay for the
little chap's Christmas feast" as he said.
Well, a quid is a regular fortune when
you 're only ten and I daresay that is
what fixed the incident so firmly in my
mind."
"At any rate I never forgot it, and
somehow the memory of the beggar's
face as she promised me her prayers, and
the delight of the little boy as he grabbed
what I gave him, remained with me all
my school days and is less likely than
ever to leave me now. As a mere financial
bargain I don't think I made much out of
that quid for I've never refused a beggar
since however obvious a fraud."
u After leaving school I went, as you
know, to do a full course of motor engi-
neering and during my spare time I


managed to take my Pilot's Certificate at
Hendon, for flying had always appealed
to me and I meant to make it my life's
work. I was doing pretty well, having
just in fact got a job with one of the
aeroplane companies to test their ma-
chines, when the war so suddenly broke
out. Of course it was my chance, and I
volunteered at once for the Air Service.
My past experience stood me in good
stead and I got a Commission in the
Naval branch as a Flight Sub-Lieuten-
ant. I knew a good deal more about it
from a practical point of view than any
of the others of my batch, so I soon got
my second stripe and was sent up north
to join the coast patrol."
"Our job was spotting submarines
endeavouring to find the Battle Fleet and
catch it unawares, and each of us did a
daily flight over a specified area. It was
fairly strenuous work, but not very excit-
ing, for the chance of seeing anything
was rather remote and the Zeppelin raids
had not started then, so I was jolly glad
when I was ordered to report myself at the
Admiralty, ready for a longish journey."
"On arrival there I learnt that the
Turkish army was mustering for a big-
attack on the Suez Canal and that
Aircraft were required there for recon-
naisance work. When they offered to
send me in charge of four machines you
can bet I fairly jumped at the chance. I
had never been in Egypt before and
naturally I was anxious to go, but besides
that the work promised to be much more
interesting and exciting than that in
which I had been engaged till then."
" My passage was soon arranged and
I had the Planes stowed safely a good
hour before the boat was due to sail. We
dropped quietly down the Thames that
night and by the next evening were clear
of the Channel and the Destroyers, which
had convoyed us so far in view of a pos-
sible submarine attack, left us and turned
up Channel. We had a topping voyage
through the Mediterranean and I tho-
roughly enjoyed myself. Indeed I was
quite sorry when in due course we got to
Port Said. Here I had to say good-bye
to several really charming people with
whom I had grown quite "pally ", and go
up to report myself to the Naval Autho-
rities at Admiralty House. I found all
arrangements made for the landing of
my sea-planes and the sheds in which
they were to lie already up, so I had little
to do at first except keep my mechanics
up to the scratch. When I got settled
down I did one or two short flights daily
into the desert, starting from the harbour
or further south from the canal. I often
saw bodies of the enemy during these
flights but never in very large numbers,
from which we guessed of course that
the main attack was coming from the
southern routes."
" About a month after my arrival on
the station the Admiral sent for me and
gave me some new orders. I was to take
one of the machines down to the Suez
end of the Canal and embark it there on
a ship which had been given orders to
expect me. The idea was that we should
go a little way down the Red Sea, and,
when I found a suitable place, I should
get my sea-plane into the water and start
off to do a reconnaisance of the southern
routes through Lima and Zor. I was very
pleased with the idea, for it meant, that I
could start my flight fairly near the
places which it was necessary to visit,
and get a good long way into the desert
without the risk of running short of pet-
rol or putting too great strain upon the
engine."
"Next day I started off with one of my
mechanics and, after a successful flight,
arrived safely at Suez. I found a small
cruiser, " H.M.S.Pleiades," waiting for
me there and went straight aboard. The
Commander had already "rigged up " a
place for the sea-plane, and we soon had
her on board and trimly fixed in position.
We waited an hour or two longer for
some stores the Paymaster was expect-
ing and, when they came, got up the
anchor and sailed about four that after-
noon."
"Next morning we were near enough
to make an easy ffight over the hills at
Zor and up the Wadi to Lima quite
possible, so the " skipper " stopped the
engines and I got the sea-plane launched.
It was a beautiful day, the sea just calm
enough to get a good start, and the air
so clear as to be perfect for reconnais-
ance work, so, after testing the motor and
finding everything apparently all right
off we went. As I knew that I should
need complete freedom to use my glasses
and make rough notes and sketches of


what I saw, I told the mechanic to drive
while I sat in the observer's seat behind,
with my glasses and notebook on my
knee. Up and up we spiralled in the
clear morning air, and, when we were at
a sufficient altitude to clear the hills,
started off in the direction of Zor. Here
we found quite a number of Turkish
horsemen and a few mountain guns and
we were shot at several times. The shells
they fired didn't come anywhere near
and we heard the crash of the explosion
several hundred feet below and behind
us, but some of the rifle bullets came
unpleasantly close and one actually went
0110 of the wings an inch or two
from my head. However we soon got
away out of range without any material
damage and starred up the Wadi to Lima.
We saw several bands of Turks on the
way but all their shots fell behind us
and we made a most successful recon-
naisance of the enemy's main camf)."
" When we turned round to come
home we had the wind behind us and were
travelling at a terrific pace. We were
flying very high and all went well until
we were about twenty miles from the
ship, and I was just reckoning that
another fourteen minutes would see us
safely back when without the slightest
warning the engine missed fire and after
a few uncertain revolutions failed alto-
gether."
" Can you imagine what I felt like at
that height? I had absolutely nothing
to do but sit and wait for the crash for
as I said, the mechanic was driving. I
shouted to him to bring her up into the
wind and he certainly behaved splendid-
ly. He must liave had an iron nerve for he
did everything that was possible with the
utmost coolness, but it was only a matter
of seconds before, in spite of all his
efforts, the smash must come. My
feelings then could never be described
but 1 know it made me quite sick and
dizzy to look down and see the earth
rushing up to meet us at that terrific pace.
1 couldn't bear any longer the appalling
sensation of watching death —swift and
sure —rushing upon us, two tiny helpless
atoms in an empty sky, and I closed my
eyes to wait for the few seconds which
remained before we crashed to earth and
were hurled, battered and bleeding, into
Eternity."
Stenning paused a few moments and
then slowly continued : "It was then that
I saw, as clearly as I see you, the beggar
woman and her little boy. But how
wonderfully different was this picture of
perfect Motherhood to the woman who
had promised me her prayers on that
Christmas Eve years ago. Only the
glorious brown eyes and sweet oval face
remained the same. Yet I knew her at
once. Even as I watched I saw her
stretch out her hands in supplication for
my life, and before my eyes the boy grew
visibly into the form of a splendidly
perfect man. The woman pointed toward
me and I saw the new-grown man nod
and smile as, turning, he stretched out
his great arms and seemed to bear me up
in some mysterious way, which even now
I can't pretend to understand."
" Then the Vision faded —and we
struck the ground with a shattering
crash- Remember our machine was
fitted with floats, for "landing" on the
water, and had no wheels for land work
at all- There is a pretty considerable
jerk even in the best "landing" with these
great floats —I daresay you have seen
yourself how they churn up the water
into a white foaming track —but can
you imagine what it was like when we
hit the hard dry sand, travelling at a
rate of well over fifty three miles an hour?
I saw the pilot thrown clear out and land
with a dull thud on the sand. Somehow
I was caught in the machine and as she
turned two complete somersaults before
she broke her back I thought every bone
in my body must be broken. I know 1
fainted away with the shock and the pain
and was quite surprised when 1 came to, a
few minutes later, to find myself still
alive, but firmly pinned in the sand under
the heavy engine. I called aloud to the
mechanic, but there was no answer and
I thought he must be dead- There
seemed little chance for me in that case,
for I couldn't move a muscle with that
weight upon me, and the prospect of
dying of thirst out there in the desert
wasn't a very pleasant one I can assure
you. I was trying to move, in spite of
the pain the attempt caused me, when, to
my great joy and relief, I heard a feeble
cry from the pilot and a few minutes
later he had recovered sufficiently to
crawl to the machine and drag me out."


" It was a miraculous escape wasn't
it ? But we weren't in a very pleasant
position even now. We were at least
twenty miles from the ship —and those
twenty miles were over hot sandy desert
infested with bands of Turks and
wandering Arabs. I was so badly shaken
and bruised that it was painful for me to
move and the pilot could only walk
about a hundred yards at a time. To put
a finishing touch on our misfortunes
we had no food and only the water we
carried in our small service water-bottles.
However, it was no good staying where
we were and we began our long journey
to the coast."
" How can I ever make you understand
the horror of that long dusty tramp
under the desert sun for two bruised and
shaken men ? Our progress was so
terribly slow and all the time we had to
be on the look out for the enemy. Once
we were fired at and only escaped by
shamming dead. Another time we hid
in a gully while a Turkish patrol passed
so close that we could hear them talking.
And so the hot stifling hours of the
weary day went by. Besides dragging
myself along I had to half-carry the
pilot a good part of the way. By half
past four in the afternoon neither of us
could go another step, and we lay down
and straightway fell asleep. We woke
again after midnight and started off once
more, feeling a little better for our rest. At
about ten next morning we arrived at the
hills skirting the beach, having done those
twenty miles in just under twenty four
hours. Imagine our feelings then, when we
stood there foodless and without a drop of
water left, only to find the ship had gone.
I thought I should have gone mad with
the bitter disappointment of it. To lose
just at the end, after that extraordinary
escape and all the painful efforts we had
set our teeth, to make ! All during the
hot scorching hours of that day we lay
out under the pitiless sun and the agonies
of thirst we suffered are beyond me to
describe. As night came on the falling
dew brought some slight relief to our
cracked lips and we tried to get a little
sleep. I suppose I must have dozed off,
for I woke up with a sudden start and
there I saw —Oh the mad joy of it! —the
"Pleiades" searchlight playing along the
beach. I woke the sleeping pilot and, in
half-crazed fear, lest we should be too
late and the ship again leave us, we ran
down to the shore. Hope lent wings to
our feet as we ran. We shouted ourselves
hoarse and at last heard an answering
hail and within a quarter of an hour were
in the boat being pulled back to the ship."
"The doctor took charge of us at
once and gave us some soup and a little
drink before he packed us off to bed,
absolutely forbidding any talking that
night. Indeed I was only too glad to
escape the necessity of telling it all over
again that night —the actual experience
was enough for the one day—and I could
never make you understand the thrill
that passed through my bruised and
tired body as I crept between the cool
clean sheets. They told me next morning
that they had quite given us up and were
steaming for Suez, when the "skipper"
without any apparent reason suddenly
ordered "about ship", saying at the same
time that he was quite sure that he would
find us if he went back. Rather strange
that too —wasn't it ? Perhaps you'll
understand it better when I come to
the end."
Well? as you can imagine, I wasn't
likely to be much good at flying for some
months after that shock, and the Admiral,
fully recognising this, gave me long
leave and sent me home- On the way
I went to look up an old artist friend
of the " Governor" in Paris and on
the second day of my visit he proposed
that we should spend the morning in
the Louvre Galleries. I was only too
glad to have the opportunity of going
with a man who knew what to see and
who so thoroughly loved and understood
pictures.
"Here, Stenning," he said, "I want
you to look at this one particularly.
Its a great favourite of mine—Raphael's
"Holy Family,"
I turned to look at the picture at
which he was pointing and then —
I'm afraid I made a bit of an ass of
myself —fainted where I stood. But do
you know what I was looking at ? Two
faces which I had seen twice before, once
at the bottom of the Rectory drive, and
once in mid-air as I crashed down to
earth in my broken sea-plane —the faces
of The Beggar Woman and Her Chubby
Little Boy. , , P, AUDREY,


A " SNOTTY'S " DAY.
, — '
-' J ) . M Or STt />l <*
3C > ' " — —j
I . li
T" A iA///V4 T«f T>rt<tx\
'' ' '-cr ~—~ "' w


"THE NAVIGATOR"
The "Pilot's" a man of remarkable skill
And his knowledge of Maths is profound
He can steer his good ship anywhere on the sea
But only once run her aground.
You would think from his "tally" the Pilot's a man
Weather beaten by wind and by foam.
You'll be rather surprised when I say he prefers
To be safe in harbour at home.
And so if he's sent to some "crock" Depot-ship
To be Navigating N.O.
He remarks to his friends, on receiving the news,
Thank the Lord, her old engines won't go.
Its a strenuous life for a Pilot, he knows,
But surely its better by far
Than going to sea, he can still do his job
And navigate over the "bar".
But even in harbour you'll find that his time
In laborious vigil is spent,
For at least once a week in a parcel from Town
Corrections to Charts will be sent.
Then he summons his "Tanky" and curses the while
At the parcels of Charts like a Hun :
"O Walker, I say please, just alter these Charts
And report to me when it is done".
With these words he dismisses the work of the week
Until next Corrections appear
And feeling quite ill, with the strain of it all,
Tells the steward to bring him some beer.
But to all of us sooner or later there comes
A job we can't possibly shirk
And I really must say when his ship is at sea
The Pilot has jolly hard work.
He Pilots the ship through fair weather and foul
With never a blunder or slip
He's the specialist then and, though often quite
' Most responsible man in the ship. [young,
But all Pilots at Grenwich have been through course
And among other things that he knows
Is "The Song of the Pilot" —a touching refrain —
I remember the chorus —It goes
"Oh, I long to be a Pilot
And draw my Pilot's pay,
Then I'll navigate a Dockyard
At eighteen bob a day".
SHAKESPEARE.


" THE PILOT. '


I '


PLACES WE HAVE VISITED.
(Egypt).
There is no ancient mention of Aka-
bah under that name, but it is believed
to be identical with, or at any rate near to
the place called Ezion-geber in the Bible,
It is first mentioned as one of the stopping
places of the Israelites previous to their
entry into Palestine. The next time it
comes on the scene is as the navaPand
commercial port of King Solomon who
fitted out a fleet to trade to Ophir: as
the Israelites were not a seafaring
people, Phoenician sailors were employed
Is tkey wSFg always reckoned the best
seamen of ancient times. There are
various surmises as to where Ophir was,
Southern Arabia and India being men-
tioned as possible identifications, but
the latter place is the more probable.
For one reason the round voyage took
three years, and also special mention is
made of algum trees to be used as
pillars for the temple. Now Southern
Arabia does not produce any timber
trees, whereas, they grow in abundance
in India and Ceylon.
The next mention of Ezion-geber is
in II Kings XXII 48. when king Jeho-
shaphat attempted to emulate his pre-
decessor Solomon and "made ships of
Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold: but
they went not; for the ships were broken
at Ezion-geber". As we dont read in
this instance of Phoenician sailors, it
is probably another instance of shore
folks meddling in seafaring matters —
and coming to grief. It may be mentioned
in passing that the expression "ships of
I arshish" was used of any long voyage
stilß ancl clid net necessarily mean that
the ship was going to Tarshish ; just
a few yfcars ago the term ' Indiaman"
did not necessarily mean that the ship
was going to India.
The Gulf of Akabah is simply an
extension of thatextraordinary depression
in the earth's surface occupied by the
Dead Sea which latter is 1300 ft.
below the surface of the Mediterranean.
If we may look into the future it is pro-
bable that this route will be the highway
to the East. Isa XI 15 says "The Lord
shall utterly destroy the tongue of the
Egyptian sea". In Zech XIV we read
that there will be a waterway through
Jerusalem connecting the Mediterranean
and Dead Seas and probably the same
earthquake which opens up this waterway,
will close the "tongue of the Egyptian
sea" i.e. the Gulf of Suez.
Tor is not mentioned in Biblical
history, and its present importance is due
to the large quarantine station there
erected by the Egyptian Government to
regulate the returning pilgrims from the
Mecca pilgrimage and prevent them carry-
ing disease to other parts of the world.
The great cholera epidemic of 1865 was
started by returning pilgrims, and ac-
counting for 60,000 deaths in Egypt alone,
spread to all parts of the world, and was
not really stamped out for 10 years. Tor
is also the nearest port to Mount Sinai
and so it is the easiest route to the
monastery of Santa Katerina: in this
monastery was found by Dr. Tischendorf
the famous Codex Sinaiticus one of the
most ancient Biblical manuscripts extant.
The ignorant monks had begun to use
this priceless treasure to light fires with,
before it was rescued: it is now in the
museum at Petrograd.
On the East side of Suez Bay is an
oasis now known as "Moses' Wells"
which according to the identification of
the Sinai Survey (in which "Lieutenant"
Kitchener took part) is the same as Marah
the first named place reached by the
Israelites after they had crossed the Red
Sea. It is more than probable that in
ancient times the Gulf of Suez extended
as far north as the Bitter Lakes and
possibly up to Lake Timsah.
Probably the place where the Israel-
ites crossed the Sea was a little north of
Kabret station, and Baal Zephon near
which they encamped was probably the
small sharp pointed peak near Faied
Station and visible on the west side of
the Great Bitter Lake, This would have
been a good place for them to encamp as
they were protected on the west side by
the very broken hilly country which
would make it impossible for Pharaoh's
Expeditionary Force of 600 chariots to
attack them from that quarter.
It is interesting to note that at Sera-
peum where the Turks made their last
attempt to conquer Egypt, there was a
monument erected by Darius, in Persian
and Egyptian characters, to commemorate
his conquest of Egypt. The remains of


this monument are now at Ismailia. In
the gardens there are several interesting
statues taken from Pithom the store city
which the Israelites built for the Pharaohs,
and the remains of which are only about
12 miles west of Ismailia.
Kantarah, which is the Arabic word
for bridge, is on one of the most ancient
highways in the world. It was the route
by which Abraham and Jacob went into
Egypt, and the Pharaohs sent their armies
into Palestine. Napoleon also came this
way when he tried to realize his dream of
an Eastern empire, and who knows but
that it may shortly be the scene of further
bloodshed.
Three or four years ago an ancient
stone sarcophagus was discovered there,
and the title of the occupant was given as
"Lord of the Two Ports" which indicates
that there was a canal joining the two
seas in ancient days.
About 1500 years ago the whole of
the salt water lagoon on the west side of
the Canal now called Lake Menzaleh
was a most fertile district dotted with
towns and villages. There are the remains
of one on the Island of Tennis about
6 miles S.W. of Port Said.
It is probably the same as Hanes a
town mentioned in Isa XXX 4 as the port
of Zoan, an important town furtherinland.
The Tanitic branch of the Nile ran past
both places and emptied itself into the
sea about 10 miles west of Port Said at
Omm Fareg.
Port Said is quite a modern place and
did not exist before the Canal was cut,
though a few years ago there were some
Roman tombs 011 the shores of the lake
behind.
VICTOR L. TRUMPER
Lieut.-Gom. R.N.R. Ret.
PLACES WE HAVE VISITED.
(THE AEGEAN).
ALEXANDRIA was built by the
order of Alexander the Great, and is his
burial place. It became the capital of the
dynasty of the Ptolemies and was one of
the centres of learning in the ancient
world. The earliest known lighthouse
was built .on Pharos Island in B.C. 283.
The town was taken by Caesar and the
finest library of the old world was
destroyed in B.C. 48. It was the scene .
of the long feuds between Athanasiws
and the Arians, which were only '
ended by the adoption of the Nicene
Creed. It was also the home of Euclid.
The city has been captured in turn by
the Persians, Arabs, Greeks, Crusaders,
Turks, Napoleon and finally by the
British. Close to Alexandria is Rosetta
where, in 1799, the famous Rosetta stone,
which has enabled scholars to read
Egyptian hieroglyphics, was found by
a French officer called Boussard.
ATHENS is the most eminent city of
ancient Greece. The earliest settlements
were near the Acropolis, the old citadel
originally called Cecropia after Cecrops
the mythical founder of the tribe. This
fortress which acted as the royal
residence was destroyed in the Persian
wars and restored by Cimon in 479 B.C.
The ruins still remain. The most famous
buildings in the city are the Parthanon
the temple of Palas Athene who is
generally identified as Minerva, Erech-
theum, Propylaea. The long walls to
Pireaus were built by the advice of
Thermistocles 478 B.C. to guard against
the danger of Athens being cut off from
the sea b} r the Spartan invader. The 5
city has in turn been captured by the
Romans, Goths, Venetians, and Turks.
In the Bay of Salamis the Persian fleet
was defeated by the Athenians in the
greatest naval battle of ancient days,
450. B.C.
CHIOS. This island was originally
colonised by thelonians, a Greek people,
from whom it was taken in 494 B.C. by
the Persians. Later the Chians were
members of the league of Delos, and the
second Athenian League, revolting from
Athens in 357 B.C. It was conquered by
the Republic of Venice in 1124 A.D., and


by the Crusaders in 1204. Later it passed
under the sway of Genoa and finally of
Turkey in 1566. In the year 1821 most
of the inhabitants were massacred by
the Turks. This island is mentioned in
the account of St Paul's travels.
LEMNOS. According to an ancient
legend it was on this island that Vulcan,
the god of fire, dropped after being
thrown out of heaven by Zeus, the Father
ot the Gods. As a result of his fall,
which lasted seven days Vulcan limped
ever afterwards. In the realm of actual
history it was behind this island that the
vl!? » eet ufider the command of
Menelaus and Agamemnon, anchored
prior to the attack on Troy in the famous
Trojan war. This war —which was caused
by Paris the Crown Prince of Troy
running off with Menelaus'beautiful wife
Helen, —lasted ten years, and has been
made immortal by Homer in his two
great poems"The Iliad"and "The Oddys-
sey". The ancient site of Troy is close
to the southern entrance of the Darda-
, nelles, and much of the fighting in those
1 olden days took place in the scenes of
the present operations. The idea of the
"River Clyde" was in all probability
suggested by the tactics of the ancient
Greeks who finally got into Troy by
hiding some of their bravest warriors in
the belly of the Famous "Wooden Horse
of Iroy". This was pulled into the city
by the Trojans, partly for superstitious
reasons, partly because they wished
to keep it as a trophy. The soldiers
| inside the horse were thus enabled to
open the gates of the town at dawn to
their friends, who had returned during
the night from their hiding place Tenedos,
whither they had gone in pretended
; retreat. In addition to the two already
' mentioned other famous heroes of classi-
I cal days who fought in the Trojan war
were Hector, Achilles, Oddysseus, Ajax,
Aeneas.
MILO was captured by the Athenians
f from the Dorians in B.C. 416, and
: remained under her sway until the break-
up of Second Athenian League. The
I famous "Venus of Milo", which is
[ considered by experts to be the perfect
female form and is now in the Louvre,
: was found here in 1820.
MITYLENE. In ancient days this ma]
island belonged to Athens and after fine
revolting in B.C. 428 was compelled to
join the Second Athenian League. Later
it passed under Roman sway. Near it
the Greeks defeated the Turkish Fleet in
1824. The town was occupied by the
great Powers to enforce the fulfillment
of the Turkish Government's promise to
institute reforms into Macedonia. The
island was visited by St Paul. There is
an ancient monastery on the summit of
Mt. Ordymnos and an old Turkish fort
at Port Sigri.
MALTA was originally held by the
Phoenicians, from whom it was taken by
the Romans in the third century B.C. It
was the scene of St. Paul's shipwreck in
A.D. 62. In 1530 the island was given
by Charles the Fifth to the Knights of
St. John, whose Cathedral still stands
near the main square. The Knights suc-
cesfully defended it against the Turks in
1551 and again in the great seige of 1568.
It was taken by Napoleon on his way to
his Egyptian campaign, and his sedan
chair is still in the Knights' Museum.
Lord Byron on his visit there gave it as
his opinion that the island was now
chiefly noted for "Bells yells and smells.
RHODES. This island was inhabit-
ed by a cultured people in very early
times, being governed in turn by the
Athenians and the Spartans. In B.C. 340
it was conquered by the Persians and later
by Alexander the Great. On his death it
became a free state, and its navy helped
Pompey against Caesar. In 1309 the island
was taken over by the Knights Hospital-
ers of St. John of Jerusalem, who fortified
the present harbour of Tershaneh and
cleared the neighbouring seas of the
Turkish pirates who infested them. The
Knights defended this bulwark of Chri-
stianity against the Mohammedan
invasion in spite of repeated attacks,
until in 1552 after a most heroic resistance
they were compelled to surrender to the
Sultan of Turkey and retired to Malta.
The Collosus, a gigantic statue striding
the northern harbour, was one of the
seven wonders of the ancient world, but
was destroyed by an earthquake in
B.C. 224. There are in the island the ruins
of a once famous temple of Minerva, and
the old fortifications built by the Knights
may still oe seen. In recent times many
specimens of Rhodian pottery,


decorated with pictures representing the
Trojan war, have been discovered.
SMYRNA is the most important
trading centre of Asia Minor and has
been so from very ancient times. It was
ruled by the Greeks till B.C. 600, when it
was conquered by theLydians. Later it
passed under Roman sway and in A.D. 26
a magnificent temple was built to
Tiberius, the reigning emperor being
always deified. It was an early centre of
Christianity and is one of the Seven
Churches addressed by St. John in the
second chapter of The Book of Revela-
tions. In A.D. 155 Polycarp its bishop,
suffered martyrdom by being burnt alive
—his ashes being thrown into a stream in
mockery of the Christian doctrine of the
Resurrection. The city became rather
less important after Constantinople sup-
planted Rome as capital of the Empire,
In 1084 it was captured by the Turks,
who were in turn driven out by the
Knights of St. John. It was the last
Christian outpost in Asia Minor against
the Turkish invasion and has been the
scene of many massacres. It fell into the
hands of the Mohammedans about 1493
and has been under their control ever
since. On account of the number of
Europeans residing there it is still known
among the Turks as "Infidel Smyrna".
Pergamos a town a few miles distance
was a great health resort under the
Roman Empire and there are still visible
the ruins of a great temple toAesculapius,
the God of healing. This city with
Ephesus which is also quite close are
both mentioned in the list of the seven
churches and were the scenes of the
labours of both St. Paul and St. John.
THE CHAPLAIN.
With Apologies to Somebody (Poet)
and " The Bloke."
It was a summer evening
And dozing in the sun
Sat Commander A.B. Johnson
Ex two-ringed Number One.
Before him gambolled, full of joy,
The quartermaster and sideboy
The Side-boy with a gleeful shout
Spied something on the hatch
Unwashed and full of dust and grime
And in the seat a patch.
" What is it lying here this time "
Said three-ringed punisher of crime.
Now fully wakened from his doze,
And seeing what they'd gpt,
He set off through cross gangways
At quite a nimble trot.
The midshipmen gave hearty cheers
For Johnson had n't run for years.
" It is those stokers " then he cried —
"A glass of port I'll bet.
With old night clothing and sweat rags
No peace I ever get.
Oh ! take those trousers right away
And give then to the M.A.A. "
" Ive punished them ; they've done ten A.
I've cursed till I was blue,
But still their clothes they leave about;
I dont know what to do.
But when I stop their leave " said he,
"I'll win a famous victory."
THE RAIDERS AUG. 7 1915.


"THE BLOKE."


• v i ,


-
7r v.«
I VI
' ri £■ -B »
THE LITTLE BIRD
The Little Bird, who whispers so many
of our most cherished secrets in the ears
of enemy and friend alike, was perched
on the topmost twig of a gnarled and
weather-beaten oak. The tree stood on
a small grassy hillock in the middle of
a dense wood. A few yards away a
brook meandered by.
Years of experience had taught the
little bird that here was the place to
await his quarry. People of all classes,
ranks, creeds, and denominations sought
the solitude of the wood to unburden
their hearts to one another, and he had
heard many a tale that was not intended
for his ears. On this occasion business
was slack, and, although he had scanned
the horizon d&WIlj he had not seen
a single soul except old Edward Lomas,
haymaking in the valley, 1 his village
worthy was seldom known to speak, but
when he did, it was always to the effect
that the weather was so bad that the
crops were in a " fearful state.'
It was a hot drowsy day, and tired of
his ceaseless vigilance, the little bird was
dropping off to sleep when the sound of
footsteps attracted his attention. His
black beady eyes twinkled maliciously
and he " chirrupped " his welcome to the
strangers.
Two men were picking their way
slowly through the forest and soon they
came to a halt under the very tree on
which he was perched. They were
dressed in flannels and they both ap-
peared to have come some distance. They
were evidently exhausted for, by common
consent, they stretched themselves out on
the grass without speaking.
A few minutes elapsed.
"By gum its hot!" Thus spake Inky';
so-called on account of a personal
attribute of upsetting red ink on His
Majesty's Charts when correcting them.
He was a tall fair haired man with blue
eyes, and, as he spoke, he wiped the
perspiration from his brow with a
handkerchief of pale grey hue. His
companion, a smaller man with dark
hair and brown eyes, was lying on his
back, rapidly "falling into the arms of
Morpheus." Professionally he was a
Lieutenant "G", Royal Navy, and like
all good Officers of that worthy branch
he was referred to as 'Guns.' At the
moment of speaking a large blue-bottle
had settled on the end of his nose and
his sole comment was " m'yes. 99 By and
by ' Inky,' finding himself alone with
Nature, became poetic and chanted the
following little djtty, doubtless of his
own composition :
"I wish I'd had the wisdom of a
Seer
And brought with me a good sized
jug of beer;
My throat is parched, my lips are dry
I really must or else I'll die,"
and suiting the action to the words he
deftly removed a bottle of the translucent
liquid from the pocket of his slumbering
friend. Having drained it he rose
cautiously and proceeded to the brook
where he refilled the bottle with what he
described as "a more healthy and thirst-
quenching beverage. " He then replaced
it whence it came and was about to seek
a little repose when the sleeper murmured
dramatically " I love her. " ♦
4 lnky' turned abruptly, exclaiming as
he did so, "Oh the deuce you do ! " The
Little Bird fluttered to the ground and
assumed an attitude of keen attention.
As nothing further transpired ' Inky'
soliloquised :
"I wonder who he is dreaming of;
would it be Clara, Maud, Dorothy, Olive
or Violet ? " The problem was an intri-
cate one, but there appeared to be no
possibility of 'Guns' affections having


strayed beyond the selected five. 'lnky '
continued, talking to himself : " I don't
think its Clara ; he's not the sort of fellow
to go after barmaids and she flirts with
everybody. It might be Maud, but I
hear she's engaged and he's far too
practical to waste his love on anything
beyond his reach.lt couldn't beDorothy or
Olive, they're both as yellow as Guinea-
Pigs and one's got a face like a sack
of ' spuds ' and the other's like yesterday's
milk. It must be Violet.
He ejaculated this as if he had
suddenly grasped the full meaning of an
overwhelming catastrophe and the
remark was so loud that' Guns' awoke
with a start and murmured "What d'you
say ?"
"Only that the flies are trouble-
some, " replied the truthful 'lnky.'
"P'raps there's something in that "
said 'Guns ' vainly endeavouring to catch
the aforementioned blue-bottle. "Bet
you a glass of port I get him next time. "
" Done, " said ' Inky.'
Guns' brought his hand down with
a resounding crash just as the bluebottle
flew away, buzzing merrily.
Any more going as cheap as that ? "
No, two to one against, next time "
Oh, by the way, 'Guns,' I'm told
you're in love. "
" Who told you ! "
" A little bird "
The Little Bird hearing his name
thus taken in vain resolved to exact
speedy retribution. Hovering round
' Guns ' head he whispered :
He drank your beer. I saw him do
it. He bottle up with water"
Whereupon 'Guns' remarked casually
" Are you thirsty ? "
"Dry as an unused piece of blotting
paper."
" Well, drink this while I take a turn
at the stream. "
'lnky ' took the bottle and drank the
contents, much as one takes a dose of
castor oil, smacking his lips at intervals
and saying, "By jove that's good" and
any other appropriate remarks he could
think of.
" Glad you like it. I prefer pure
water to a weak mixture of that sort.
" Still, every man to his own taste. "
'lnky' felt squashed.
"To revert to the former subject,"
he said " Are you in love " ?
"Time was" said 'Guns' with
gravity, "when cartridges and projectiles,
breech blocks and B. M. Levers meant
more than anything else in the wide wide
world to me. But now its different. The
war is over and there is nothing better
than a Battle Practice to look forward to. "
"You mean that having bestowed
your heart on an unworthy subject, you
are now seeking a more responsive
object. "
"I suppose that's about what it
comes to. "
"How pleased the young lady would
be to hear it put that way. "
"Oh she wouldn't mind —she won't
look at me. What would you do if you
were in my place ?"
Purchase an Azimuth Mirror. "
"What for?"
"Well, if she won't look at you there
are only two courses open. Either you
must bring her eyes down to yours or
else you must bring your eyes up to hers.
La Voila, as they say in France! "
" Ha Ha, Don't be so beastly funny. "
"The only other thing lean suggest
is to take a full charge, shoot your bolt,
and trust to luck. "
"I suppose the possibility of making
love has never occurred to you."
"Not in your case though I confess
I have heard of it. "
" Please don't be humorous ; its most
serious. "
"Who is the lucky lady?"
" Violet Nicholson."
"By Gad it is serious, muttered 'lnky'."
Now it might quite rightly be argued
that 'Guns ' chances were no better than
' Inky's ' and that 'lnky's ' were in no way
superior to 'Guns.' Unfortunately for
the latter the Little Bird had the casting
vote.
For many years it had been the chief
delight of the village school children to
shoot at him with air guns and he had
sworn a solemn oath to wreak his ven-
geance on all who dealt with such like
engines of destruction. Big guns and
little guns, long range guns and short
range guns ; they were all the same to
him. He could not differentiate between
them and since they were guns, all those


who made them, fired them, or in any
way promoted their welfare came under
the same dreadful curse. For this reason
he registered a mental vow that, as long
as he was alive,' Guns ' should never wed
the fair Violet. Harbouring these
malevolent sentiments in his breast, he
left the wood and flew to the demesne of
this charming damsel.
Miss Violet Nicholson was a lady of
considerable beauty and wealth. She
was possessed of many virtues and few
\ ices and was consequently admirably
suilecl to loSBBfflo the wife of an ambitious.
Naval Officer.
She was seated in the garden, osten-
tatiously reading a book, but, in reality,
meditating on the prospects of a happy
marriage. In fact a certain Gunnery
Lieutenant (who had but recently staked
a glass of port on his capacity for killing
blue-bottles) was uppermost in her
thoughts. On the arrival of the Little
Bird all this was changed. He invented
the most iniquitous stories and whispered
them in her ear. He told of prisoners
murdered in cold blood, of wanton de-
struction of life and property afloat, of
cruelty to subordinates, and finally of a
moonlight flirtation with a female German
Spy. He induced her to believe that she
had been grossly deceived and she was
just considering the propriety of weeping
over the shameful way in which she had
been treated when the fallen idol himself
appeared. As he turned the corner he
knocked the ashes out of his pipe and
placed it, together with his pouch, on top
(, ♦ ( i, „ n .. 1 5 ~ ** > 1
of the Garden wall.
He said "good afternoon" to her, at
the same time murmuring to himself,
"grasping it firmly at the lower band" as
if trying to recall a forgotten incident of
the past. He then inquired after her
parents and was more than sorry to hear
that by a strange coincidence he had
chosen a time when they were out.
"Well, you'll stay and have some tea,
won't youf'said Violet.
'Guns' vowed that he had never in-
tended to stay, but since she pressed—
well he simply couldn't refuse. Only a
tew minutes before he had reviewed all
the things he meant to say to her when
they met, but now words failed him. At
length he stammered : "I suppose you're
delighted that the war's over."
"Yes", she said, "my last conva-
lescent leaves the hospital tomorrow."?
"How long have you been nursing",
he ventured.
"Ever since the war began"
"The wounded must have got well
awfully quickly in your ward"
"Its considered more complimentary
when they stay a long time", she remarked
acidly.
'Guns' felt he had put his foot in it,
and hadn't the courage to ask whether
the same applied to his visit.
"What did you do in the war", she
asked, recalling what the Little Bird had
told her.
"Oh, we convoyed some troops, shel-
led a few places, and that sort of thing"
"What was the armament of your
ship —I believe that's the correct expres-
sion isn't it ?"
'Guns'was in raptures. Here was a
gem of a girl leading him on to a subject
he really could discuss.
"Eleven six inch 8.L., Mark VII, guns,
mounted on PHI mountings"
"Is that all ? " she said vaguely.
"And eight 12-pounder 12-cwt, 2
maxims, several rifles, a cutlass or two
and a few dress swords" he said eagerly.
"And I forgot" he continued breathlessly
"my cherished 12-pounder 8-cwt mounted
as an Anti-aircraft gun".
He looked at her to see if she was
impressed. She looked bored. He felt
that he alone was responsible for this and
he was sorry. Suddenly his pent up
feelings found utterance and he exclaim-
ed : "Violet " but what he said is no
business of yours or mine.
It was some days later. 'lnky' poked
his head above the after hatch and
exclaimed: "Morning 'Guns', having a
look round your toys ?"
"Yes. Isn't it great to get back to
them again ?"
"Well, how did you get on the other
day?", asked 'lnky'
"0...h... —the other day —she refused
me!"
"Thank Heavens", said 'lnky' cheer-
fully", I was half afraid shed accepted us
both".


Prisoners of War from Tor,
In time the story got round the Mess
Deck. The Chief Quartermaster waxed
eloquent and averred that the undoubted
superiority of the Navigation over the
Gunnery Branch was once again placed
beyond question. He further emphasis-
ed the fact that as the judge was in this
case a woman it must be final.
The Senior Gunner's Mate, on the
other hand, asserted that the young lady
was not nearly good enough to be united
with a member of such an exclusive and
SOME THOUGHTS
To those who do not follow the sea
there is no apparent difference between
two ships of the same class, but any one
who has led the roving life the service
renders necessary, will tell you quite a
different story.
As an individual, one of the units,
officer or man, becomes indentified with
the particular ship he is serving in, he
will understand and if you can reach
below the reserve that coders as with a
good humoured veneer every seafarer, he
will tell you every ship has a character
and personality of its own; such and
such a ship for example has always been
a happy ship, her opposite number has
suffered from tactless officers or a sea
lawyer crew, yet another has always been
successful, her contemporary through no
apparent fault has been always under a
cloud. Seamen believe this and I know
that deep down their officers have a trace,
possibly a small trace of the same feeling.
How far this may be the result of
centuries of old naval superstition and
tradition it is impossible to say, but the
fact is there, and remains a standing-
feature of our own service, with many
strange coincidences which could be
produced as a proof of the belief of this
idea.
My own experience (Neptune absolve
me if I am wrong) is that what I have
said above is perfectly true; after many
years at sea I find ships and ships
companies obtain reputations which the
ship herself apparently bears out, and
what is more, the ship carries on the
reputation she has gained, I believe
myself that a ship's career starts with
the first Captain and ship's company and
select bod}'' of men as the Gunnery Staff,
and contented himself by remarking that,
"Ad the Gunnery Lootenant h'expressed
h'any matrimonial h'intentions, 'ee and
the H'armourer would'ave carried 'er orf
by night and placed 'ei hintirely at the
disposal of'is Lord 'an master".
The Little Bird alone knew the whys
and wherefores of the case and in this
instance he held his peace- Consequently
the question is still undecided.
ADAMS KNOTTY.
A SHIP IN BEING.
what follows afterwards is probably a
result of previous tradition. Some
clear headed philosopher may give some
other reason, and yet if I remember
rightly the Greeks vested their triremes
with personal attributes, at the time
ages ago when they discovered that sea
power was their great asset. The Vikings
later did the same, and the Chinaman of
the present era gives his Junk eyes.
I often wonder if they, —those old
worshippers of beauty and form, were
right, when they gave everything a soul.
Does our Modern Cruiser possess one ?
Have you ever looked at our present
home from a distance at sunrise or sunset,
when, outlined against the skyline, and
thought is it a sensate thing ? If you have
not, especially here, do so and think.
ECLIPSE.


18
r"'
"GUNS."


'
.
'
I
*


Extraordinary Behaviour of the Gunnery Dept. Nov. Ist. 19(4
THE ''OWNER. "
Now the captain of one of His Majesty's ships
Is the essence of dignified might
Who sits at his desk in his cabin all day
Signing papers from morning to night.
Day in and day out with quivering knees
I o beard the great man in his den
I he various Heads of Departments await
A stroke of his Swan Fountain Pen.
Each night at his prayers, by his cox'un I'm told,
I hat he may be humble enough
He takes off his jacket for fear he should see
W ho he is by the rings on his cuff,
m word is the law of the Persians and Medes
° Dcmmander doctors and Lieuts,
• nd ( aptain's Defaulters" feel faint at his frown,
* Miake in their toe-capless boots.
Aml snaK.tr .u >f
At Sunday Divisions this Monaich appears
And majestic'ly goes round his ship
]•(, scc that no man has much hair 011 his head
And even still less on his lip.
And if on the deck he should deign to appear
In his galley to go to the beach
The Bo'sun, whose cheeks nearly burst with
the strain,
Pipes him off with a horrible screech.
But now things have altered aboard the old ship
And the days of the desk are no more
I-or Theory has flown, and its Practice has come
For the " Owner " —Old England's at war.
Still the Captain of one of His Majesty's ships
Is the essence of dignified might,
Holding Lives in his hand, so he's found on the
bridge
All the day and for most of the night.
SHAKESPEARE.
THE P. M. O.
Mac Havers, a typical Scotch P.M.O.
Alike by absorption and birth
In fact, from observing, I'd say he's more Scotch
Than anyone else on the earth.
He rises at eight, has a shave and a bath,
So at breakfast he's geperally last.
His working routine for the day starts at nine
And ends about five minutes past.
He goes to the sickbay each day in his life
And earns in five minutes his pay;
Its a miserable pittance, a mere thirty bob
But ne's backed by the great B.M.A.
Still further to blight his laborious life
By a slave-driving D. G. he's bound
With his chief-steward's aid to report on the health
Of the ship, as each quarter comes round.
How he talks of that journal and grumbles and moans
As he tells us he must make a start
But of procrastination the Old Doc has made
A remarkable Medical art.
But he's horribly touchy about the prestige
Of the doctors, and so any day
If you want to annoy the old P.M.0., speak
Of Trade Unions, and see what he'll say.
But he's not a bad fellow, the old P.M.O.
So his Scotch and his moans we don't mind
For we all o£ us know, when it comes to "The Day"
He'll be able and tender and kind.


FROM
ERMYNTRUDE
TO MABEL.
5 November 1915.
all started off together and collected quite a lot
of money and, just a secret Mabel, I believe the
naughty Lieutenant has lots of money for he
bought up all my flags. In the evening we were
going to dance at the Casino so Gerty and I
determined to look our very best and we donned
our new frocks. I was dressed in a pure white
Crepe-de-Chine skirt gathered in at the waist, and
a Madonna blue sash with a green Bebe blouse
with a rounded Decolletage, and just the sweetest
Paquin outre hat. The naughty one said I looked
a perfect peach. Gertrude was dressed in a
Sapphire blue skirt suggestive of the Moyen age
period and a light pink blouse, Over this a Barri
Zenana wrapper finished with a Fichu touched
parchment net. The petticoats in evidence were
just too sweet for words. At the Casino we had
a delightful time and my boy told me I was the
only women he had ever loved except his Grand-
mother, while the one with the French name told
Gerty that when he had time to get over his last
disappointment he would try to love her. Three
of the dear little Midshipmen came and we gave
them all dances. I danced the Turky Trot with a
delightful fair boy with an artistic name, the bunny
hug with a tall fresh complexion boy, and the
double shuffle with the Lieutenant R.I.M. who was
chaperoning the mites. I do think he has such
spiritual eyes. The day after our two boys turned
up and played games and they both said such
things. Well dearest one does not like to put them
all on paper and do you know Mabel I was standing
under a branch of Misteltoe when that naughty
impatient boy of mine tried to kiss me, and in doing
so broke a beautiful George V window. Well
dearest at last they have all gone and left us again
suffering from broken dreams and broken hearts.
I hope they wonj make us suffer the additional
agony of broken promises.
DEAREST MABEL,
I wrote and toid you in my letter that the
' Minerva " had arrived here for a short stay. We
saw a good deal of some of the Officers and I
think they were quite the dinkiest lot who had
been here this year. Of course you know Gertrude
and I have been attending lectures on the duty of
women during the war so we were determined to
go off this season, and a new opportunity presented
itself when the " Minerva" arrived. I told Gertrude
that it is always a good plan to secure either the
Captain or the Commander, but the former gave
us no chance at all and though the latter did
encourage us a little we were told that besides
being a widower twice he was now again married;
so of course we dropped him. Then came a
Lieutenant better know by some Latin or French
name which I have forgotten or to tell the truth
dear it is so long that I cannot spell it. He, 1
finally determined, should belong to Gertrude. He
was inclined to be dark with innocent eyes and
just the sweetest smile I have ever seen. There
was also a Lieutenant with a letter after his name
which I believe stands for naughty, who is just
the dearest perfect chubby little man I have known,
fair hair blue eyes and a nose which was neither
Roman or Retrousse ; in fact his whole expression
was that of an angel who had been unfairly evicted
from heaven. I afterwards made up my mind I
should have him. After this we met a Lieutenant
R.I.M. and as he told me that R.I.M. stood forßoyal
Incompetent Mariners, we decided his matrimonial
prospects were not quite so good as we wanted.
There were also two Lieutenants R.N.R. This
I believe stands for Royal Naval Repentance and
as they were both married we put them out of our
minds at once. The P.M.O., —this means Post
Mortem Officer holds inquests on the killed after
an action. We thought it was rather a gruesome billet
but he was such a dear old chap that we did n't
mind that. However eventually we had to let
him slip. And I must tell you about the young
doctor, he has such a lovely head of hair, but we
were told that he had taken a prominent part—you
would never think it to look at him —in the
Phoenix Park murders iso we shunned him. Gerty
had designs on the Chaplain. He was such a dinky
little man who reminded you of cupid but he was,
alas, a strong believer of Celibacy. We were
dreadfully disappointed over another Officer. He
was such a charming man but somebody had met
him first. It was a great pity because he had such
a lucrative post. There were also seven of the
dearest little mites of Midshipmen, and one lanky
one who, when I made advances, would keep
declaring that he was a mysoginist, but I think he
really meant polygamist as he would flirt disgrace-
fully with the flappers. Well dearest as you will
see from my description there were only two
really eligible ones so I decided to have one of
them and Gertrude the other, and we commenced
spreading the net. An excellent opportunity
presented itself on Red Cross Day, so we asked
dear boys to come and collect with us, We
Ever yours
ERMYNTRUDE.
TH SILVER ROAD.
The Moon is building a Silver Road
O'er hill and valley and sea,
That over it borne on the wings of Love
My thoughts may travel to Thee.
Here at this end of the Silver Road
Midst the crash and glare of the fight
Our lads are dying by land and sea
For War is reigning to-night.
To the other end of the Silver Road
My Royal Messenger flies
And bears my thoughts in Sleep's dear dreams
To my Queen of the Hazel Eyes.
W.E,G. J,
Pardanellies, 1915.


THE CHAPLAIN
OF THE FLEET.
A journey down to Greenwich in
The train or on your feet
Must be taken if you wish to be
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
Speaking thus he will admit you to
The clerical " elite"
You 're proud to think you have become
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
You must be very careful
And your costume must be neat
IT you have asked to interview
The Chaplain of the Fleet.
But this very quickly alters and
You soon desire to meet
The man who counselled you to be
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
1 his lordly man with outstretched hand
And winning smile will greet
His victim, who is going to be
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
You've little work and little pay
At sea not much to eat.
You long to be ashore and not
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
He will speak of rosy prospects
And his words are honey sweet
He s really quite a diplomat,
Tne Mliß 8f the Fleet.
The mournful lot of policemen
Mu§t be really quite a treat
Compared to all the sorrows of
A Chaplain of the Fleet.
" You 'll see the wonders of the world,
The life is hard to beat,
And the work has such attractions "
Says the Chaplain of the Fleet.
So you very quickly learn the
Only place to have your seat,
Is The Royal Naval College as
The Chaplain of the Fleet.
" The pay is really excellent
You've fallen on your feet
1 'm not surprised you want to be
A Chaplain of the Fleet."
SHAKESPEARE
SPORTS.
Record of Football Matches played.
GOALS. For. Agst.
Minerva v. Natives at Aden
v. Greek Tearn at Suez
October 15 th Result Lost 2 0
December 3rd „ Win 4 0
sth „ „ 4—l
February 15 th „ „ 7 0
16th „ „ 4—l
v.
v. H.M.S Ocean,, „
v. " Dufferin" „ „
v. Dufferm „ „ „ 16th „ „ 4 I
v. 7th Ghurkas „ „ „ 18th „ Draw I— I
v. H.M.S. Proserpine Port Said March sth „ Win I— 0
v. Post Office „ „ „ 7th „ „ 2—l
m v. A.M.M. Brigade „ „ October 27th „ Lost 4—l
5) v. French Cruiser " Desaix" „ „ „ 29th „ Win 5 I
m v. Aux.Ship " kaven" „ „ November Ist „ Lost I— 0
t9 v. H.M.S. Proserpine ~ „ „ 3rd „ Win 3 0
v. R.H. Artillery „ „ „ sth „ „ 7 2
„ v. A.M.M.Ship 4 'Tifels " „ „ „ 18th „ „ 2— l
„ v H.M.S. Implacable „ „ „ 20th „ Draw 2-2
Polo Matches
Minerva v. H.M.S. Proserpine August 13th Port Said Result Lost 4 2
„ v. „ » >' 14th „ „ „ 3 0
v. „ „ October 30th „ „ Draw o 0
„ v. ,
v. ,
3ISt „ „ „ 2-2
Novomber Ist , „ Win 2—• I
y i ~ IN U VUIIIUCI j, ~ Will &- — JL
v. „ Implacable „ 2nd „ „ Lost I— 0
v. „ „ „ 18th „ „ 3 I
Boat Pulling Races
Minerva v. H.M.S. Proserpine 2 Miles course Lost August 14th.
v. „ Implacable „ „ Win November 19th
~ O.S. v. „ Implacable O.S. „ „ Win November 23rd
Tug of War
Minerva v. H.M.S. Proserpine Won by 2 pulls to none November stlr
s4
Swimming Team Race,
Minerva v. H.M.S. Proserpine Won by 25 yds. 8 a side November 2nd


Rough Diary of the Minerva's
Movements During the First
Year of the War.
AUGUST 1914.
On the 4th August "MINERV A" left Ports-
mouth for Queenstown, war being declared that
night. Leaving Queenstown early on August 6th we
took up our patrol off the coast of Ireland. Owing
to a breakdown in the one engine, we put in to
Berehaven for repairs arriving on the 7th. That
evening we cleared for action as the forts opened
fire on an unseen object which proved to be a
trawler disobeying the order to stop. Leaving
Berehaven next day we returned to our patrol. On
the 13th we assisted in covering the transports going
to France and on the 18th we returned to Queen-
stown to coal, dock, provision and effect repairs.
Leaving Queenstown on the 20th we proceeded to
Cape Finisterre where the "CHALLENGER"
ordered us to Bilbao. Having investigated some
suspicious yarns about the German shipping there,
we patrolled off Finisterre, paying visits to Arosa
Bay and Vigo on the 28th and 29th respectively.
SEPTEMBER 1914-
Leaving our patrol on the Ist we met the
transport "EDINBURGH CASTLE" and shaped
course for Plymouth. That afternoon the Austrian
cargo ship "BATHORI" Iwas sighted, chased,
stopped and boarded; then having taken off the
crew we sunk her with 13 rounds and a gun cotton
charge. Proceeding on our course we arrived at
Plymouth on the 3rd. Leaving again on the nth
we picked up a convoy of 12 ships outside and with
"OCEAN" escorted them to Gibraltar arriving on
the 17th. Taking on the convoy alone we proceeded
east, meeting the "WEYMOUTH" with another
convoy on the 27th. We changed convoys and
proceeded with our new one to Marseilles, putting
in at Malta on the 23rd to coal—arrived at
Marseilles on the 26th leaving the same day and
returning to Malta where we were at once ordered
off to Port Said.
OCTOBER 1914.
We arrived at Port Said on the 3rd and leaving
two days later we passed through the Canal and
proceeded South stopping at Jeddah on the 9th,
clearing for action as we thought we sighted the
"KONIGSBERG". Left Jeddah that night and con-
tinued south arriving at Aden 011 the I2th, stayed
there for 5 days then proceeded east, turning round
and joining up with the "SWIFTSURE'S" convoy
of 34 ships on the 20th. Off Aden the "SWIFT-
SURE" left us, her place being taken by the
"NORTHBROOK". We arrived at Suez with the
fastest of our convoy on the 30th, the "NORTH-
BROOK" arriving later with the slower. We left
Suez the next day and proceeded down the Gulf of
Suez.
NOVEMBER 1914°
We were then ordered to Akabah where we
arrived at 4.0 p.m. on the Ist—fired 5 rounds and
demolished old fort and barracks. Next day the
Commander landing with the Flag of Truce, found
no one in the town, so having fired a few more
rounds we sent ashore our landing party to make a
complete search of the town. A few cases of cart-
ridges were captured and all important huts destroy-
ed. On the 3rd the same landing party went ashore
to locate the enemy, its position being discovered
when considerable rifle fire was opened upon our
men from the hills behind the town. Our party
retired for strategical purposes suffering no casual-
ties. The 4th and sth were occupied by parties
going ashore to extinguish the fires started by the
bombardment and "seining" parties. A systematic
search of the town was carried out on the 6th,and we
then left Akabah for Suez and proceeding through
the Canal arrived at Port Said on the 9th. We
were Senior Naval Officer here until the I/th when
we were relieved by the "SWIFTSURE". We
then proceeded toSuez where we picked up a convoy
of 8 ships and escorted them to the south "end of the
Red Sea where the "MINTO" took them on and we
returned to Suez arriving on the 26th.
Ordered to Akabah again on the 27th and left
Suez the next day, proceeding south. We passed the
"SYDNEY" on her way north that
arrived at Akabah on tne 29th and landed the
Marines—nothing suspicious found, only some
houses rebuilt, so returned toSuez.
DECEMBER 1914.
Arrived at Suez on the Ist, took French sea-
plane on board on the 7th than sailed for Akabah
arriving on the 9th. For two days seaplane made
unsuccessful flights so we returned to Suez changed
seaplanes and arrived at Akabah again on the 14th.
On the night of the 16th the ship was fired upon by
rifles without any damage being done—seaplane
made one successful flight—returned to Suez on
the 18th leaving on 22nd with the Ist seaplane for
Akabah. Early on the morning of the 24th at least
3 small guns opened fire on us with shrapnel, but
without hitting-we replied and silenced them. On
Christmas day we visited Tor and arrived at Suez
on Boxing day, the Ship's Company giving a concert
that night. Revisited the Gulf of Akabah on the
28th, catching a shark on the way. We anchored
off Akabah 011 the 30th. On the 31st the r aptain
of Marines and 4 privates were fired on by a party
of 40 Turks hidden in rifle pits—Private Ward was
killed almost at once and the Captain of Marines
seriously wounded. The other Marines held out
until the remainder of the detachment was
landed, and they with the help of Ship's guns, put
the Turks to flight. Meanwhile the seaplane had
gone on a reconnaissance and had not returned by
the evening. We then weighed and buried Private
Ward, returning to Akabah at 10.0 p.m. where we
were delighted to find Captain Stirling, the obser-
ver. We took him on board and he explained that
the machine had come down 15 miles inland. The
pilot was slightly hurt and could not walk fast, so
Captain Stirling had gone on ahead to get help from
the ship. Passing several Turks on the way,_ he
had managed to arrive arrived at Akabah in time
to see us steaming away and had been much reliev-
ed when we returned during the night.
JANUARY, 1915.
On the Ist the large landing party went inland
to look for the pilot, but he was not found. How-
ever at 1.0 a.m. on the 2nd a hail was heard from
the beach and the pilot was seen waving to us. He
was taken on board at once and he told us that he
had been asleep in the hills all day and had been
wakened up later by our firing. We then returned to
Suez leaving for Akabah again on the 9th. We


} %
"PAY."


" - ' ,l X
.
!
.
■■ vv- . >/:V . ' &i
'
'
S is
-; : i ■ :'"v •'' ||
11; llS - s \|f : ' *fT** . . H S * ' *
i.


cruised the Gulf for 10 days until ordered to Tor
on the 19th to protect the place from an expected
attack by Turks and Arabs. On the 20th we fired
at some of the enemy, but as they showed no signs
of attacking we paid another visit to Akabah on
the 25th and then returned to Suez. On the 27th we
took up our position in the Canal for the long
expected attack.
FEBRUARY, 1915.
The attack took place some way north of us
and as we were heading south we were unable to
render assistance. On the 3rd we shifted billet to
Port Tewfik remaining thereuntil the I Oth when
we embarked a battalion of Ghurkas for a raid on
Tor. The Troops were successfully landed at Tor
on the following night and at daylight delivered
a surprise attack on the enemy, capturing 109
prisoners, killing or routing the remainder. We
embarked the troops and prisoners during the after-
noon and returnd to Suez, Ghurkas and prisoners
being then sent ashore. On the 22nd we took 200
Punjabbis to Abu Zemma where several Arab raids
had taken place; however everything was quiet
there so returned to Suez.Here we were ordered up
to the Dardanelles, arriving at Tenedos on the 28th.
MARCH, 1915.
On the 2nd we left Tenedos for Port Said with
some Army Officers, arriving on the sth. We
returned to Tenedos arriving on the nth. On the
13th we went to the Gulf of Xeros joining up with
the " DARTMOUTH ". Next day she fired at the
forts which did not reply. On the 15th we destroyed
by gun fire some Turkish boats and cruised about
the Gulf. We returned on the 16th hoisting the
Flag of Vice Admiral Garden the next day, and
proceeding to Malta we arrived on the 19th and
the Vice Admiral went ashore. Leaving Malta on
the 22nd we arrived at Lemnos on the 24th and
were ordered to Piraeus —visited Piraeus on the
25th and Dedeagatch on the 26th, then returned to
Port Mudros.
APRIL, 1915.
On the Ist we went to the Gulf of Adramyti
with the " SWIFTSURE", " MAJESTIC 2 des-
troyers, mine sweepers and a seaplane scouting -
nothing happened so we returned to Tenedos. We
paid another visit to the Gulf of Xeros on the sth
and on being relieved by the " ASKOLD" we went
to Mudros. On the 10th we went to the Gulf
of Smyrna with a seaplane on board and with the
assistance of two destroyers blockaded the port.
We put in at Sigri to coal on the 16th and had just
started coaling when we received an S.O.S. message
from a transport saying she was being attacked by
a Turkish Torpedo Boat. We at once stopped
coaling and went out at full speed. Destroyers
then reported the enemy steering to the southward
of Khios,so the "MINERVA" and another destroy-
er successfully cut her off and forced her to beach
herself, the crew escaping inland and being interned.
We then continued our blockade of Smyrna until
relieved on the 21st; we returned to Mudros. On
the 23rd we went to Tenedos and the next day
bombarded Turkish gun positions at Gapa Tepe, a
kite balloon spotting for us. We were fired at
several times by invisible guns, but not hit. On the
25th the landing of the troops on the Gallipoli
Peninsular took place, the " MINERVA " taking up
her position to the southward of Anzac and firing
throughout the day at Achi Baba and other gun
positions. In the evening we proceeded to repel a
counter attack made on the Marine Divison who
were being hard pressed. The next day we were
stationed off Anzac, several rifle bullets coming on
board and shrapnel bursting near the ship. We
were stationed off Gaba Tepe until the 30th when
we went up to the Gulf of Xeros for the night.
MAY, 1915.
Up to the 16th we were stationed off the Penin-
sula,firstly off GabaTepe, later off Chana Ovasi and
now and then further south to protect the left flank.
We fired when the Military asked us, and the
enemy occasionally fired at us but never hit. On
the 16th we went to Mudros to coal and ammuni-
tion, then returned to our position off the Chana
Ovasi until ordered on the 2lst to the Gulf of
Smyrna with a seaplane, on the 24th we went to
Port lero for 3 days, then returned to Mudros. On
the 31st we started on the Aegean Patrol, first
patrolling the Gulf of Athens.
JUNE, 1915.
The routine for this month was alternately 4
days in harbour at Mudros and 4 days patrolling in
the Aegean during which time we stopped and
searched all neutral steamers and caiques. On the
13th we were in Mudros when a hostile aeroplane
came over and dropped bombs on the camp. We
fired but the aeroplane escaped uninjured. On the
26th we were ordered to look out for a certain ship
that had on board a German Red Cross Nurse
suspected of espionage. We stopped the ship a
little later, found the German nurse and took her
on board then proceeded at once for Mudros where
the alleged spy was turned over to the authorities.
JULY, and AUGUST, 1915.
Owing to ill health Captain Warleigh, to our
great regret, left us on the 2nd for Malta Hospital.
On the 14th we picked up the Monitor "ROBERTS"
and cruiser "ENDYMION" and escorted them to
Mudros. On the way we were attacked by an
enemy submarine but managed to keep her off by
gun fire and zig-zagging. The submarine apparen-
tly fired one torpedo, which did not hit. We
returned to Mudros after our last 4 days of patrol
work on the 27th when Captain Jackson took over
command of the ship.


19
August
I9I-4-
-24 Jan. 1915.
28
Jan.
1915-
- 5 Nov. „
2
August
I9I4-
-27 Aug. 1915.
2
5 J
V ~~
-still serving.
8
Nov.
1915-
-14 Dec. 1915.
2
Aug. ;
1914-
-19 Nov. 1915.
20
Nov.
1915-
-still serving.
2
Aug,
1914-
- 3 Jan. 1915.
9
Jan.
1915-
-21 May ■; „ .
OFFICERS WHO HAVE BEEN APPOINTED TO "MINERVA"
Captain P. H. Warleigh
F. H. M. Jackson
Commander W. B. Macdonald
Lieutenant V, B. Cardwell
B. A. Fraser (G)
G. P. Earwaker
B. C. Porter (N)
R. I. M. R. H. Garstin
R.N.R. P. N. Fletcher
H. B. Northcote
W. G. Wood
H. R. Leepman-Shaw
L. D. Mc Kirdy
Engr. Comdr. E. C. Smith
Engr. Lt Cdr. F. F. May
Captain R.M.L. I. J. W. Snepp
H. de L. Willis
Lieut. R. M. L. I. A. G. Stacey
Captain R.M.L.I. G. H. H. Prynne
Chaplain Re v. W.E.G. Jackson
Staff Surgeon A. T. Gailleton
Surgeon G. P. O'Donnell
Paymaster B. A. S. Bromley
Acting Mate M. M. Bright
Asst. Paym.R.N.R. H.V. Such
Chief Gunner Alexander Duguid
Ch. Art. Engr. James Liddle
Gunner J. Balcombe
Gunner (T.) J. Short
Act. Gunners W. Jessey
A. F. Jackson
G. C. Angell
Art. Engr. W. H. Ellison
„ J.H. Dickson
Warrant Engr. R.N.R. E. Fawcett
Carpr. T. A. Harris
Sig. Bosn. W. J. Scutt
Midshipmen T. M. Taylor
H. S. P. Shaw
W. Morley
L. M. Robinson
P. E. F. Walker
R.R. Mulcahy-Morgan
D. F. Painter
M. J. Parkes-Buchanan
Assist. Clerk H. B. Johns
1 August 1914 2 July 1915.
8 July 1915 —still serving,
2 August 1914 9 Jan. 1915.
2 „ „ still/serving.
( Acting Commander Since 10 Jan. 1915)
2 August 1914— still serving.
2 „ „ 8 Aug. 1914.
25 Jan. 1915 —still serving.
13 Oct. 1915
6 June „ 4 Oct.
13 Nov. 1915—still serving.
(Capt. I Sept. 191 5).
20 Dec. 1914— still serving.
2 Aug. „ „
30 Jan. 1915
2 Aug. 1914 4:
2 j)
2 Dec. 1914.
2
2
still serving
2 „
2
2
—l5 April 1915 e
2 JJ J5 5 JJ
2 „ „ —l4 Sept.
2 „ „ —l6 May „
17 April 1915— still serving.
17 » „ ~18 ' July 1915.
2 Aug. 1914 —still serving.
2 „ —l5 April 1915.
—still serving.
—l9 April 1915,
15 Oct 1915 — 9 Dec. 1915.
ATTACHED TO H. M. S. "MINERVA".
Sub-Lieut R.N.VJL C.N. Luker
"Memphis*
still serving
)}


it it
it it tt
it tt it
it tt tt
it it tt
tt tt tt
a tt tt
a tt tt
a it tt
20 Feb. 1915
it it tt
3/4 Mch. „
15 „
15 „
17/19 „
21/24 „
it tt tt
17/19 „
28 „
>1 H II
tt it it
it It it
I! I HI ■ 11 HI 11
OFFICERS etc. WHO HAVE TAKEN PASSAGE etc.
IN "MINERVA".
Captain R.N. C. P. Metcalfe D.S.O. 8/17 Sept. 1914 ] For "WEAR"
Lieut. Comdr. R.N.R. H. Calder. „ „ n '
Captain Barlow Egyptian Army 3/8 Nov. „ \ Reconnaissance
Colonel A. C. Parker „ „ 28/30 „ „ J
Midshipman
Lieut de Vaisseau
Captain
Lieut, de Vaisseau
Captain
1 .ieutenant
Le Pere
Lieutenant R.N.R.
Colonel
Captain
2nd Lieut.
Captain
Brig Major
Colonel
Messieurs
Captajn
Captain R.N.
Colonel
Lieut. R.N.V.R.
Vice Admiral
Captain R.M.N.I.
Rev.
Rev.
Vice Admiral
Commodore
Flag Lieut.
Lt. Com.
Captain R.M.A.
Flight Lieut.
Captain R.N.
Lieut. R.N.R.
Lieut. R.M.N.I.
Commandant
Lieutenant
Interpreter
General
Colonel
Colonel
M. Fahmy „ Gst-grd Srv. 28 „ „ 24
H. Ibadi
M. Destrem French Navy 8/13 Dec.
W.F. Stirling D.S.O. R. Dub. Fus. 23 Dec. 14-3 Jan. 15
M. Cintre French Navy
A J. Ross Egyptian Army
D. R. Tweedie „ Cst-Grds
A. Jaussen French Professor
H. J. Wheatman
C. S. Haldane 7th Ghurka Rifles
H. Exham ~
N.M. Wilson
C. Macdonald
A. R. Speirs-Alexander
A. W. F. Mills I.A.R.
R. H. Bharucha I.M.S.
Dickinson 51st Sikhs
A. C. Parker Egyptian Army
A. Smith Manager
A. Westmacott Secretary
H. Bamford
McKenna Head Qrs. Staff
F. H. Mitchell
de Lotbiniere Royal Engineers
H. C. Lukach Govt. Secretary
S. H. Carden
F. B. Lawrie
W. H. Price Chaplain R.N.
W. Westmore ~
J. M. de Robeck
R. J. B. Keyes
H. S. Bowlby
C.G. Brodie R.N.
E. H. Ward
N. S. Douglas
R. H. Kershaw
W. H. D. Boyle
W. T. Clifford
C.E. Binns R.N.Div.
Roumieu
Avezous
J. A. Young Egyptn. MinistryFinan. 16/20 „ „
Zaki E. Fahmy 4 Sept. „
Birdwood 2/4 Mch. „
Skeene Hd.-Qrs. Staff „ „ „
M. Catoni Consl. at Alexandretta. „ „
ivx. v/aiviii V>UIK>I. at rucAauuicua. „ „ y ,
Doughty-WylieV.C, 24/26 „ „
Feb. 1915.
4 Dec. 1914.
with Seaplanes
Akaba
14/18 Dec. 1914
14/17
7 Jan. 1915
9/26 „
Interpreter
Suez B. O.
8/10 Feb.
11/13 »
TOR
| Sinai Mining Co
I Abu Zenima
N. T. O.
Cyprus to Mudros
"TRIUMPH"
9/22 Apl. 1915 ]
22/25 May „ -Seaplanes Smyrna
22/29 „ „ J
24/25 Mch. „ Navl. Att. ROME
21 May—2 June 1915 Marine Prz. Crews
6/7 Aug. 1915 Foreign Legion
Solium
still serving
Piraeus-Dedeagatch


y " '■ ■•" "■ i£ - 'j;
' - ;' l!
'' I
. - -' 1
" i '■ » v -- • '
;., ... . •. '
I ' ' : 'v ■ j
... : 1
i
JgN
■ -if
I
I
I
STOP PRESS.
London. —Dredgers' Reply to Pianos
last Note regarded as menacing—com-
plications feared.
Roam—The Cockers losses in the
recent straffing were only comparatively
high and in remarkable contrast to
Gallipolean results, being only 99
Peiro— u Berliner Scratcherblatt"
commenting on the announcement that
■" time, being of value to : the enemy has
been declared contraband" states that
Germany will probably have little use
for this commodity shortly.
Malta— Turkish Cup Result (so far)
Submarine first, Aeroplane second*
Rumour third. MINERVA aud LIZZIE
also ran.
New Tork —America looks with great
disfavour on the sinking of" Differences":
this last crime must bring the whole
nation to immediate action (as usual).
Umteen Americans on board.
■Parigrad— Hunoplane landed within
our lines—enemy again on the Loos.
London —Stock Exchange. Spurt in
War Loan continues. Rubber Shares
closed easier. (The softer ones generally
do). Principal Censor who was recently
elevated to the peerage has assumed the
title Baron De Lete of Nearly Court, N.
Dorset.
There is no truth in the Rumour that
Horatio, Bottomley has been appointed
G, O. C. Dardanelles.
. New York— lt is reported freely here
that Charlie Chaplin has been appointed
Bace Delegate. Meanwhile the Crown
Peace will fulfil his engagements.
London— Later. The offer of the
King to abdicate in favour of Lord
Northcliffe has not been accepted by the
Goyerntuent, - 1 . .Ab


LADIES!! GIVE US A TRIAL
The
Balcomhe and Harris
Stores.
FOR
The latest line in Stays, Backbones, Braces, Curatines, Sashes,
Thimbles, Needles and YARNS etc.
Our Celebrated IS/- MERCURY STAYS worse than any others sold at 2/6
DO NOT MISS
BOOK NOW
FOR
THE MINERVA VARIETY PERFORMANCE
Including'
THE TURKEY TROT
by The celebrated Akaba Troupe
WILLIE DICK
our Local Charlie Chaplin
THE OLD COMPANIONS
Back-Ghat Comedians
AND
THE SOLLOUM PATROL
The Ward-room Piano
Popular Prices from 4D. to a bar of soap.


.
V
'
.
I
.
■
'
'
*
*
.
