

This matter is not copy-
righted. Our readers
are welcome to copy
from it, and without
giving us credit.
The National Cash Register Company.
Nationals Will Stop the Leaks in Your Profits.
Endorsed by Thousands of Progressive Australian Merchants.
What National Cash Registers are doing for others they will do for you.


THE NCR
THE NCR
What Some Progressive Australian Merchants Say About Their National Cash Registers
J. W. Small & Co., Cameras, Adelaide. Using No. 452.
Gives Definite Detail of Business.
“We have used one of your Cash Registers for the past
three years, and have always found it to work satisfact-
orily, giving us a more definite detail of our business than
previously.”—J. W. Small & Co.
Australia Hotel, Sydney. Using No. 527-2-EL and Class 300’s.
Uses Seven Nationals; Always Reliable.
“We have been using seven National Cash Registers for
some years past, and have found them very reliable and
satisfactory.”—Australia Hotel.
The Dental Cash Order Co., Sydney. Using No. 592-6-E.
Saves Cost of Big Staff.
“I purchased one of your six-drawer Class 500 registers,
and Ido not regret.the outlay. I have been running 3,500
accounts on the system with the aid of a girl. It has saved
the cost of a big staff.”—The Dental Cash Order Company.
Barbeler Bros., Bakers, Maryborough, Queensland. Using N 0.452.
Adopted “Get a Receipt” Plan.
“We have used one of your registers for fifteen years.
When wo had the ‘Get a Receipt’ plan shown to us by your
Mr. Sanders and investigated it, we at once adopted it.”—
Barbeler Bros.
W. M. Jewkes, Chemist, Essendon, Victoria. Using No. 452.
Can’t Understand Why He Hesitated.
“The register I purchased from you has now been run-
ning most satisfactorily for over eighteen months. I could
not do without one now, and cannot understand why I
hesitated at all in buying.”—W. M. Jewkes.
J. Walch & Sons, Stationers, Hobart, Tasmania. Using No. 597-6.
Gets Daily Statement in Few Minutes.
“Apart from the fact that we are enabled to get a daily
statement within a few moments, the machine has proved
itself invaluable in deciphering errors and in checking the
various cash amounts.”—J. Walch & Sons, Ltd.
Ralph E. B. Burgess, Chemist, Mosman, N. S. W. Using No. 547.
Business System Incomplete Without a National.
“I have used three different machines, displacing each
for one of greater use, and I consider that the system of
any business is incomplete without a National Cash Reg-
ister.”—Ralph E. B. Burgess.
Federal Laundry Co., Sydney. Using No. 547-E.
Regrets Being So Long Without It.
“We are pleased to inform you of the effectiveness of
our register. We find it an excellent machine in every
way, and greatly facilitates business. Our only regret is
being so long without it.”—Federal Laundry Co.
Office of
SYDNEY
THE NATIONAL CASH REGISTER
of Australasia Ltd
119 BATHURST STREET,
Telephone 4057.
m South'
February, 1915.
H. CARR, Managing Director,
TO THE MERCHANTS AND BUSINESS MEN OP AUSTRALIA:
We have thousands of users of Rational Cash Registers in
Australia and ALL OF THEM will testify to the many benefits de-
rived from their use.
We have several hundred letters on file, similar to those
printed on this page, written without solicitation.
Mrs. Hansen, Fruits, Ipswich, Queensland. Using No. 587-4-E.
Leeming’s, Boot Stores, Melbourne. Using No. 452,
E. P. Smith, Grocer, South Yarra, Victoria. Using No. 452-4.
Griffiths Bros., Tea Merchants, Melbourne. Using No. 597-6-E.
Ernest Howes, Tailor, Sydney. Using No. 442.
South Burnett Importing Co., Kingary, Queensland.
Records 2,000 Transactions a Day.
Best System for Retail Store.
Would Not Start Business Without One.
Dissects Salesmen’s Takings.
Stops Forgetting to Credit Money Received.
“Get a Receipt” System a Good Investment.
The pictures show acme of the different businesses where our
registers are used in large stores, in small stores, in'the cities
and in the provinces.
“I am more than pleased to state that the No. 587
4-drawer electric register has proved such a help. I re-
gret now at not getting a six or eight drawer. We can
record from 1,000 to 2,000 transactions a day without the
slightest confusion.”—Mrs. Hansen.
“I am very pleased with the work it does for me, as well
as to the accuracy with which it enables mfc to carry on
my business. I am quite sure that I would not start an-
other business without one of your machines;”—E. P. Smith,
“The records kept are a splendid check on all trans-
actions, and I consider the cash register absolutely the best
system for a retail store. If the many advantages of cash
registers were known, there would be very few shops
without one.”—Leeming’s Boot Stores.
“Our register, which we purchased from you recently,
is giving every satisfaction. The dissection of salesmen’s
takings is very helpful, and we consider it a splendid idea.”
—Griffiths Bros.
“An assistant sometimes rings up money received on
account and then neglects to enter the customer’s name
and payment. These errors are easily rectified by refer-
ence to the amounts printed on the cash slip. This to me
is worth the price of the machine.”—Ernest Howes.
“Anyone investigating your ‘Get a Receipt’ system must
come to the conclusion that he is after ‘a good thing’ and
one of the best investments possible. I used one of your
registers for nine years, and left it in as good condition as
when purchased.”—The South Burnett Importing Co., Ltd.
Wherever cash is handled or records are kept, a National Gash
Register is a business necessity. No matter where you are or in
what lin'e of business you are engaged, we have a register and system
which Mil meet the requirements of your particular business*.
It will pay you to investigate for yourself and learn how YOUR
business can be benefited. If you will sign ar;d return the enclosed
card, we will know that you are interested. We can then send you
further information which you should have.
Yours truly,
THE NATIONAL
REGISTER COMPANY
Tudor Mason, Ltd., Boots and Shoes, Sydney. Using No. 465.
Uses Register for Keeping Stock.
Long’s Hotel, South Brisbane. Using Nos. 95-6 and 577-4.
H. Clarkson, Chemist, Brunswick, Victoria. Using No. 452.
Die. GHC-AEH
Allan’s, Ltd., Music Shop, Adelaide. Using No. 598-6.
American Bag Store, Sydney. Using No. 452-6’s.
Furnish Guiding Information.
One of “Savage” Stores, Grocers, Sydney. Uses No. 547-E’s.
Gives Information About Sales.
Recommends Multiple-Drawer Registers.
System Is Simple and Saves Time.
Most Satisfactory System for Business.
“There is no doubt but that the numerical device attached
to the register facilitates stock keeping. The old system
of dockets is entirely eliminated, which item in itself is a
big factor towards smart service in a smart shoe salon.”
—Tudor Mason, Ltd.
Luna Park, Esplanade, St. Kilda, Victoria.
Uses Eighteen Registers; Best Check on Receipts.
“The cash registers recently purchased from you have
proved satisfactory. I should like to add that we now have
eighteen of your machines in use here on the grounds, and
we consider them the best and most economical check on
receipts.”—Luna Park, Ltd.
The Royal Arms Hotel, Port Adelaide, S. A. Using No. 542-4-E. Potters, Ltd., Dalby, Queensland. Using two No. 577-4’s. Sir Charles Hotham Hotel, Melbourne.
Has Control of Cash Receipts. Says Storekeepers Do Not Realize Advantages. Registers Are Fast, Sure, and Serviceable.
“My four-drawer, electrically operated register gives me “The results have been so good that we are sorry we did “The two Class 500, 4-drawer, electrically operated reg-
control of my cash receipts at all times. It is faster and not give the order the first time your agent approached us. isters have given every satisfaction. I feared they would
more accurate than the ordinary register. I would not If storekeepers only realized the benefits of having a reg- be too slow to cope with the rushes here, but I find them
revert to the old way, even if I had to replace my present ister, it would not be necessary to call on them. They fast, sure, and serviceable. The ‘Get a Receipt’ system is
register every few years. The Royal Arms Hotel. would be calling on you.”—Potters, Ltd. a boon for any business man.”—Sir Charles Hotham Hotel.
No matter what your business is, if you handle money or keep records, you need
“In the Grey Street bar, we have a No. 577 4-drawer, and
without any trouble each night we are able to tell how
much each barman has taken. We can thoroughly recom-
mend these multiple-drawer registers to anyone employing
more than one assistant.”—Long Bros.
J. J. Webster, Hardware, Elsternwick, Victoria. Using No. 452-4.
Has Already Saved Its Cost.
“In answer to your inquiry as to the register system,
I desire to state that the machine has given me every satis-
faction, and am certain that I have already saved the cost
of it. In my opinion no shopkeeper should be without
one.”—J. J. Webster.
“I have had one of your machines over twelve months;
it has given me every satisfaction. I find your system
simple and a great time saver. It has proven a good thing
for my business.”—H. Clarkson.
Cox Bros., Mercers, Fitzroy, Victoria. Using No. 577-4-G.
Always Has Correct Balance at Night.
“We never leave our shop at night without a balance
(an impossibility under our old method). With the Auto-
graphic Attachment our bookkeeping is always up to date,
no matter how busy we may be. Consequently, we always
know where we stand.”—Cox Bros. Propty., Ltd.
H. Hearne, Butcher, Melbourne. Using three No. 346’5.
Cash Registers Absolutely Essential.
“I have very great pleasure in testifying to the useful-
ness of the four cash registers I received from you about
four years ago. I would not be without them now for’
anything. I think they are absolutely essential to run a
business on proper lines.”—H. Hearne.
United Service Hotel, Paddington, N. S. W. Using No. 527-2-EL.
Invaluable for Checking Stock.
“The National Cash Register is eminently suited to the
hotel trade. For stock checking purposes it is invaluable.
The electric 2-drawer National has given every satisfaction
and I can recommend it to one and all in the trade.”—
Latimer’s United Service Hotel.
a National Cash Register.
“We have pleasure in notifying you that the two im-
proved Class 500 registers you sold us about two years ago
are giving us every satisfaction. We find them a great
help in giving us the required information about sales.”
—The “Savage” Stores.
Perdriau Rubber Co., Sydney. Using No. S9B-E.
Registers Never Went Wrong in 20 Years’ Use.
“We have been using your cash registers for twenty
years, replacing with latest models as busirtess increased.
In the rush trade our register is kept working continuously,
recording every transaction accurately. We have never
had a register go wrong yet.”—Perdriau Rubber Co.. Ltd.
A. S. Cruse & Co., Drapers, Marrickville, N.S.W. Using No. 577-4. W. A. Grubb & Co., Butchers, Sydney. Using Nos. 587-4-E and 442. Powell’s Ice Cream Factory, Balmain, N.S.W. Using No. 577-4-EL. I. Hetherington & Sons, Ltd., Maryborough. Using No. 547-R&S,
Provides Quick Service. Safeguards Both Employer and Employee. All It Is Represented to Be. Endorses “Get a Receipt” Plan.
“We found the register especially useful Christmas Eve, “We have had one of your Class 500 4-drawer registers “I have been using one of your new cash registers for “When we were shown the weaknesses in our system,
when we served no less than 200 customers more than the in use for twelve months. It is entirely satisfactory in twelve months. It is all that you represent it to be. Any- and had your ‘Get a Receipt’ plan explained, we had no
previous Christmas Eve, due to our being able to despatch handling all our cash transactions. Being able to locate one who requires a cash register should get a reliable ma- hesitation in purchasing one of your Class 500 machines,
customers quicker. Our shop being small, this meant a errors, it is an absolute safeguard to both employer and chine, and save a lot of work, when they buy a National.”— I don’t think any business can be run satisfactorily with-
great deal to us.”—A. S. Cruse & Co. employee.”—W. A. Grubb & Co. Powell’s Registered (Ice Manufacturers). out a National.”—l. Hetherington & Sons.
Ask any user what he thinks of his National System. Then investigate a suitable one for your business.
W. P. Linehan, Book Store, Melbourne. Using No. 462-4.
Regrets Not Purchasing Up-to-Date Register.
“I have been using one of your registers for the last
three or four years, during which time it has kept in per-
fect working order, and gives every satisfaction. My only
regret is that I had not seen the latest machine before
purchasing the one I have.”—W. P. Linehan.
“The docket printing feature, together with totals of
cash, charge, money received on account, and paid out
transactions, and individual totals of cash, makes the sys-
tem a most satisfactory one for our business.”—Allan’s,
Ltd.
S. G. Baker, Butcher, Manly, N. S. W. Using No. 562-E.
Registers Are a Blessing to Trade.
“I have bought Nationals time and again, wherever I
could find use for them. They are indeed a blessing to
trade. I would say that covering a period of twenty years
I have always found the National people cleanly and nice
in their dealings.”—S. G. Baker.
“We have had eleven of your latest improved National
Cash Registers in our stores, both in Sydney and Mel-
bourne, for several years. They give us detailed informa-
tion which would cost much time and money if obtained
by any other method.”—The American Bag Stores.
Nippon Kaisha, Japanese Goods, Sydney. Using No. 597-6-E.
Has Paid for Itself in the Saving of Work.
“We had no idea it could be of such assistance. We
consider that it has easily paid for itself in the saving of
labour. It is particularly useful in dissecting the assist-
ants’ sales. We consider ourselves fortunate in being in-
duced to install it.”—-Nippon Kaisha.


THE NCR
They Save Time, Work, Worry, and Money
For Every Kind and Size of Business.
National Cash Registers pay for themselves in a short time out of part of the money
they save. They insure increased profits for a business lifetime.
Total Adder. Made in three sizes. Prints on
detail sales-strip.
Total Adder. Made in three sizes. Prints record
of each transaction.
The value of National Cash Registers is proved by their world-
wide use. More than a million and a half have been sold. They
are made in more than 500 different styles and sizes.
Total Adder. Drawer operated. With sales-
strip and autographic attachment. Fifty styles of
this type of register are made.
Total Adder. Made in two sizes. Prints sales-
strip or receipt. Handsome nickel-plated cabinet.
Best material and workmanship.
Up-to-date Nationals make accurate, unchangeable records of
shop transactions. They show the amount of cash sales, credit
sales, money received on account, and money paid out.
Total Adder. Prints receipt and sales-strip.
Electrically operated. Illuminated indication.
Furnishes complete business system for both cash
and credit business.
Total Adder. Prints receipt and sales-strip.
Has cash drawer for each of two assistants.
Enables proprietor to fix responsibility for errors.
Made in three sizes.
Multiple-Counter Register. Prints sales-strip
and either receipt or sales-docket. Separate totals
for cash, credit, received-on-account, and paid-out
transactions.
Total-Adding, Multiple-Counter Register. Prints
wide receipt, or prints twice on sales - docket.
Also prints on sales-strip. Has self-totaling count-
ers for assistants or divisions of business.
An up-to-date National Cash Register will enable you to give a printed receipt which helps you get all
your money. It will stop mistakes, stop losses, remove temptation, increase trade, and increase profits.
Cash and Credit Register. Total Adder. Prints Double Register. Total Adder. Prints receipt
receipt or on sales-docket and sales-strip. Fur- and sales-strip. Keeps two employees’ sales sepa-
nishes complete cash and charge records. Four rate. Electrically operated. With illuminated
separate totals. sign. Adapted for use in hotels and cafes.
Total Adder. Prints record of each transaction.
Has Autographic Attachment.
Total Adder. Prints sales-strip and on sales-
docket. Records cash, charge, received-on-account,
and paid-out transactions. Made in three sizes.
Office Register. Certifies original entry and
classifies as many as nine departments of business.
Prints twice on letter, invoice, or other inserted
docket. Also prints on sales-strip.
Total Adder. Has cash drawer for each of two
assistants. Prints on detail-sales strip.
Department Store Total Adder. Prints on
original and duplicate sales-docket.
They fit the needs of every business. They are used in 296
different kinds of business. They save money for the little boot-
black stand as well as for the big department store.
ZLr AMOUNT'
, Purchased
Total Adder. Prints receipt and sales-strip. Total Adder. Prints receipt and sales-strip.
Special number printer prints stock numbers or The “Get a Receipt” plan can be used with this
other numbers on receipt and sales-strip. register.
They simplify bookkeeping, certify and classify accounts, and
show what business each assistant does. They enable you to
locate errors, stop disputes, and give quick service to customers.
1 vfSfW This is the highest type of cash register made.
■H(PMBbbm This register is electrically operated, with an
: ajar jJißp electric sign. Can be built to operate by hand.
Each assistant’s sales are added on separate
self-totaling counters. Each assistant has a sepa-
rate cash drawer. The register tells you who
makes mistakes, who makes the most sales, and
how many customers each has waited on.
Prints on a wide detail-record strip valuable in-
formation about each sale. Prints these same
records on both parts of a wide stub-receipt. The
receipt is perforated, one part being given to the
customer and the other retained in the shop.
Gives you more protection and information
_ , about your business than any other business sys-
Pour complete cash registers m one. Keeps tern. There are other sizes of this type of regis-
four assistants’ sales separate and gives totals of ter. Registers of this type are made with from
cash receipts, credit sales, money received on ac- two to nine separate adding counters and cash
count and paid out. Prints receipt and sales-strip. drawers, according to the number of employees.
Sign and mail the enclosed card, and we will furnish more information about the register adapted to your needs .
Branches: Branches;
Adelaide, 117 a Bundle Street. The National Cash Register Company of Australasia, Ltd. Melbourne, 48-50 Bourke Street
Brisbane, 343 Queen Street. oqi
Hobart, 80 Collins Street. Head Office: 119 Bathurst Street, Sydney, N. S. W. Newcastle Bolto/Street
Printed in' U. S. A-
