

o)i i
9, Victoria Street,
253^
The Fauna
Mt of
New South Wales.




THE
FAUNA OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
At the present time, mammals are represented in Aus-
tralia by the Monotremes, the Marsupials, a dog, and
many rats and bats, as well as by the marine aquatic
animals—whales, seals, and the dugong.
Mammals.
The Monotremes, which are confined to Australia, Tasmania, and
New Guinea, comprise the duck-billed platypus (Ornithorhynchus
anatinus ) and the native porcupines (Echidna and Proechidna). The
platypus—the “ mallangong ” and “tambrit” of the aboriginals—
inhabits Australia and Tasmania, and is one of the most interesting
animals known. The male is much larger than the female, and may bo
distinguished by the horny spur on the hind foot being of very large-
size. The total length of the male is 24 inches, while the female seldom
exceeds 19 inches. In colour, the platypus is of a deep brown above*
and of a greyish or yellowish white below, the fur being close and
velvety. The muzzle is produced into a broad, flattened beak, which is
covered during life with a delicate and sensitive skin ; the tail is well
developed, broad and flattened; and the feet are modified into swimming
organs, the five toes being extensively webbed; while the teeth, which
are unlike those of any other existing mammal, are shed early in life,
their place being taken by a series of horny plates. As a mammal, the-
platypus is chiefly interesting because of the fact that it lays eggs.
These are white in appearance; usually two in number, although three
and even four are sometimes laid at one time; and in texture they are
similar to the eggs produced by reptiles. When batched, the naked and
helpless young are nourished on their mother’s milk, as in the case of
all mammals. The nest of the platypus is formed at the end of a burrow,
which is reached by two openings—one above and the other below the
surface of the water.
The Echidnas are also egg-laying, but differ from the platypus in that
the females carry their two eggs in a pouch, where they are hatched by
the warmth of the body. The common echidna (JE. aculeata) is
characterised by having the fur thickly mingled with spines, which
sometimes conceal the hair beneath. The muzzle is produced into a
long cylindrical beak, which during no period is known to possess teeth;
* 587C5


it is admirably adapted to protect and assist the worm-like extensile
tongue. The feet are stout, unwebbed, and furnished with five powerful
claws. The tail is short and conical. Several species have been
described, but modern zoologists are inclined to consider them as
geographical varieties. Regarded thus, the echidna ranges from south-
eastern New Guinea, throughout Australia, to Tasmania. Those echidnas
which are generic-ally named Proechidna are distinguished by possessing
only three toes on each foot, and by having a much curved beak of
great length. Two species are known, both of which are confined to
New Guinea.
The marsupials, to which class belong the great majority of Australian
mammals, are distinguished by the young being produced in an extremely
imperfect state of development, and nurtured frequently in an abdomi-
nal pouch for a lengthy period. In bush districts it is a common belief
that the young are produced on the teat; this, however, is quite
erroneous, for they are born in the usual manner and afterwards applied
to the teat by the mother. Australia is the great home of the mar su-
pials, but they also occur in Tasmania and New Guinea, and have over-
flown into neighbouring islands. In America marsupials are also found,
but there they are represented by a single family—the Dideljjhyidce.
The habits and conditions assumed by the marsupials are very varied.
They are divided into seven families, namely, the Macropodidce, Phalan-
geridce, and Phascolomyidce, constituting the sub-order of Diprotodonts,
so named from the fact that the animals included possess only two front
teeth in the lower jaw ; and the Peramelidce , JDasyuridce, Notoryctidce ,
and Didelphyidce, constituting the sub-order of Polyprotodonts, distin-
guished by having six or more such teeth.
1. Macropodidce. —This family includes the kangaroos, wallabys, tree
kangaroos, and rat kangaroos. The kangaroos are so well known that
they do not require more than a passing notice. They vary in size from
the great grey kangaroo ( Macropus giganteus), as large as a man, to the
little musk kangaroo {Hypsiprymnodon moschatus ), which can easily be
concealed in the pocket. Their hind limbs are very long, and progres-
sion is chiefly effected by hopping, the long tail meanwhile acting as a
balancer. The tree kangaroos of Queensland and New Guinea are
among the most notable of the family, climbing tall trees, even to the
most slender branches. Less frequently observed upon the ground than
the others, their limbs are more equal in length.
2. Phalangeridce. —Under this name are included the Australian
opossums, the flying opossums, the flying mouse (one of the smallest
marsupials), and the clumsy native bear—all tolerably well-known forms.
3. Phascolomyidce. —The wombats, of which there are three species,
are heavily-made, short-limbed animals. They excavate huge burrows
in the ground, and feed upon grass and other herbage. They inhabit
Australia and Tasmania.


4. Peramelidee. —The bandicoots, found in Australia and New G uinea,
are assigned to three genera— Peragale , Ferameles , and Cheer opus.
Members of the first-named are known as rabbit bandicoots, or beilbys ;
while the second genus includes the true bandicoots, whose form and
habits are sufficiently well known. The pig-footed bandicoot (Cheer opus
castanotis) is generically separated on account of the unique and peculiar
structure of the feet, which have a striking resemblance to those of
the pig.
5. Dasyuridce. —The animals included in this family are the marsu-
pial carnivora, so to speak, and are familiar as native cats ( Dasyurus)
and pouched mice ( Phascologale and Sminthopsis). These forms occur
in Tasmania, New Guinea, and adjacent islands, as well as in Australia.
The most formidable of the group are the Tasmanian tiger or wolf
(Thylacinus cynocephalus) and the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus ursinus),
which are confined at the present day to the colony indicated.
6. Notary ctidcE. —The recent finding of a mole-like animal in Australia
is one of the most interesting discoveries of the day. The marsupial
mole is in no way connected with the European mole, but nevertheless
has acquired many similar habits—affording a valuable lesson in
parallelism in development. It is known only from central South
Australia.
7. JJidelphyideE. —These are the true opossums, and being confined to
America, need not be further mentioned here.
Dogs and seals form the carnivora of Australia. The dog family
(Canidce) is represented by the dingo, or native dog (Cauis dingo),
called by the aboriginals “worregal”; dingo being only the aboriginal
name for the domestic dog introduced by Europeans. The native dog
is found in all parts of the Australian mainland, and will inbreed with
the domestic dog, crosses being common throughout the settlements. It
is questionable whether the dingo is indigenous, or whether it has been
introduced from abroad. It was undoubtedly acclimatised before the
arrival of the first white settlers. The dingo does not bark, its temper
is intractable, and it works great havoc among the flocks of the settlers.
The Fodentia find representatives in many species of native rats, the
more typical ones of which belong to the genus Mus , and the Jerboa-like
forms to the genus Conilurus. The familiar water rat is known as
Hydromys chrysogaster.
The 6 hiroptera are well in evidence, and include the flying-foxes and
many insectivorous bats. The common flying-fox (P ter opus poliocephalus)
is met with in the brush lands, but it haunts the neighbourhood of
towns during the fruit season, making great depredations among the
orchards and gardens.
Of seals ( Pinnipedia ), the species found off the coast of New South
ales are the Australian sea bear or eared seal ( Otaria Forsteri ), and
the sea leopard (Ogmorhinus leptonyx), the former being a sociable and
the latter a solitary species.


Among other mammals belonging to New South Wales, or found
contiguous to its coasts, are representatives of the orders Cetacea and
Sirenia, the first comprising whales, porpoises, and dolphins; and the
second, manatees and dugongs. Whales have always haunted the
coasts of the colony, and formerly a brisk trade was carried on in oil and
whalebone, Twofold Bay, about 208 miles south of Sydney, being the
chief seat of the industry. Among the whalebone-whales wdiich inhabit
our waters maybe mentioned the Southern right whale (Balcena australis ),
the pigmy whale ( Neohaloena marginata), and the Sulphur-bottom
(Balcenoptera Huttoni); while of sperm whales there are the gigantic
Physeter macrocephalus, Mesoplodon Layardi, and Kogia breviceps. The
dolphin of our waters, commonly called “ porpoise,” is not distinguish-
able from the common and cosmopolitan form, Delphinus delphis. The
order Sirenia is represented by the dugong ( Halicore dugong ), but it is
now seldom seen south of Moreton Bay. Its flesh is highly valued by
the natives, and its oil is a good substitute for cod-liver oil.
Besides those already mentioned, geological research has brought to
light the remains of numerous extinct species of gigantic mammalia.
The largest fossil marsupial, the Diprotodon australis , an herbivorous
monster, was as large as the rhinoceros, and related to the native bear
or the wombat. Its bones have been found distributed generally
throughout eastern and southern Australia. Fossil remains of another
large marsupial, the Nototherium , named by the late W. S. Macleay the
Zygomaturus , have also been found, as well as of a member of the family
of the Phascolomyidce, or wombats, and of a marsupial rodent-like animal,
named the Sceparnodon. In the bone-breccia of the Wellington Valley
Caves were found the bones of gigantic kangaroos ( Macropus titan), which
have been placed in the genera Palorchestes, Procoptodon, Protemnodon ,
and Sthenurus; besides those of the Thylacoleo carnifex and the true
Thylacinus. The Wellington Valley Caves have also yielded fossil
remains of a “porcupine” ( Echidna) and a platypus ( Ornithorhynchus ),
belonging to the order Monotremata.
First among the reptiles may be mentioned the snakes.
Reptiles and , Although there are very many species of both veno-
_ . ... mous and harmless snakes, yet there are only about
■Batracilians. five W J I^ C J I are ac t U ally harmful. The deadly snakes of
the colony are as follow :
1. The black snake —Pseudechis porphyriacus.
2. The brown snake —Diemenia textilis.
3. The tiger or brown-banded snake— Notechis scutatus.
4. The superb or copper-headed snake — Denisonia superha
5. The death adder— Acanthophis antarctica.
To these should be added several sea snakes not infrequently found
on the coast. Nearly all of these are highly venomous.


The largest of the harmless species are true - pythons, known as the
diamond and carpet snakes {Python spilotes), Of tree snakes the com-
monest is Dendrophis punctulatus.
Lizards may be said to swarm. The goanas, of which the Varanus
varius attains a length of 6 feet or more, are the largest kind. Other
familiar forms are the blue-tongued lizards {Tiliqua scincoides and
T. niyro-lutea), the Jew-lizard {Amphiholurus harhatns ), the water lizard
(P kysignathus Lesueurii ), and the spiny lizard (Pyemia Cunninyhami).
The best-known gecko is the rock gecko ( Gymnodactylus platurus), a
harmless, though curious, little creature, much feared by those ignorant
of its nature.
The tortoises are semi-aquatic, and belong to the genera Chelodina
and Emydura. Although two species of crocodile frequent the rivers
of Queensland, they are fortunately absent on the New South Wales
side of the border.
Of Batrachians, there are neither newts nor salamanders on the
continent, but of frogs there is an immense choice, the tree frogs (Phyla)
and the swamp frogs (Limnodynastes) being the most familiar forms.
Few countries can boast of a greater variety of
Birds. beautiful birds than New South Wales, all the more
- - 11nportant orders and families of the class Aves being
represented in the fauna of the colony. In the
Australian continent and the adjacent islands no less than 770 species
of birds have been discovered, some of which are especially interesting,
and among these may be mentioned the lyre-bird ( Menura superha ), the
satin bower-bird (Ptilonorhynchus violaceus ), the fawn-breasted bower-
bird (Chlamydodera cerviniventris), and the tooth-billed bower-builder
(-Scenopceus dentirostris) ; the mound-building malleefowl (Lipoa ocellata ),
the mound-building brush-fowl (Taleyallus Lathami ), and the collared
plain-wanderer (Pedionomus torquatus ). Many of the Australian birds,
besides being beautifully plumaged, are no mean songsters, and others
again are possessed of remarkable powers of mimicry and ventriloquism.
The order Accipitres is well represented in New South Wales, twenty-
six out of the twenty-eight species inhabiting Australia being found in
the colony. The largest of all our birds of prey is the wedge-tailed eagle
(Aquila audax). In many parts of the colony this fine bird is included
in the list of noxious animals and birds, in consequence of the destruction
which it causes amongst lambs, but in the dingo and rabbit infested
districts it is protected by land-owners on account of the effectual service
which it renders in keeping these pests in check. Another useful bird
is the black-breasted kite ((Vypoictinia melanosternon ), frequenting the
inland districts. As many as thirty rabbit skulls have been found under
a nest of a pair of these birds containing young. The white-bellied sea
eagle (Halicetus leucogaster ) and the white-headed osprey (Pandion


leucocephalus ) frequent -the bays and inlets of our coast, while several
species of hawks, eagles, harriers, kites, and a kestrel are found inland.
The sub-order Striges, or nocturnal birds of prey, is represented by eight
species. Chief among these are the great owl of the brushes ( Athene
strenua ) and the sooty owl ( Strix tenebricosa), found in the coastal
districts.
The order Psittaci is especially numerous, and includes many beautiful
species of cockatoos, parrots, parrakeets, and lorikeets. Among the
larger species are the white and black cockatoos, yellow and pink
crested ; and the grey pink-crested gallah. The parrot family is also
especially strong, some of the most notable members being the love-birds
( Melopsittacus undulatus ), the green parrot, and many kinds of lories,
all gorgeously plumaged.
The order Picarise, which embraces swifts, kingfishers, cuckoos, etc.,
includes one very remarkable specimen, viz., the great kingfisher, goburra,
or laughing-jackass, so called from its extraordinary mocking laugh. It
is one of the most valuable of birds, being the determined enemy and
persistent destroyer of small reptiles. The mopoke, or boobook owl
( Podargus strigoides), is also a characteristic member of this order,
which includes the owlet night-jar, the dollar bird, and several species
of kingfishers.
The order Passeres comprises swallows, crows, rifle-birds, honey-eaters,
finches, pittas, etc. This is the largest order of birds in Australia ;
and the finest, if not the most beautiful, family is the Menuridce. New
South Wales possesses a handsome species of this remarkable Australian
bird, called from the shape of its tail the lyre-bird ( Menura superha). It
is to be found chiefly in the fern gullies and brush-forests of the colony.
To the order Passeres belong also the crow-shrikes of the genera Cracticus
and Gymnorhina , the beautifully-plumaged regent birds ( Sericulus
melinus ), whip-birds ( Psophodes crepitans ), swallows, martins, diamond
birds, fly-catchers, fan-tails, wedge-bills, thick-heads, robins red-capped,
red-breasted, and yellow ; “ superb warblers, ” emu-wrens, meadow
pipits, bristle-birds, grass, crimson, and painted finches ; pittas, ground-
thrushes, bower-builders, cat-birds, rock-warblers, and honey-eaters
( Meliphagidce ). Worthy of special notice in this large order of birds
are the bower-builders. Three species of these extraordinary and
interesting birds are found in the colony. The brilliantly-plumaged
regent-bird ( Sericulus melinus ), which forms the most primitive bower
or playing-place, frequents the dense coastal brushes of the northern
rivers \ the satin bower-bird ( Ptilonorhynchus violnceus), is found in
the scrubs and mountain-ranges of eastern New South Wales ; and the
spotted bower-bird ( Ghlamydodera macidata ), inhabits the grassy plains
and lightly-timbered country inland. Scattered about the entrances to
the bowers of the last two species are pieces of bleached bone, land
shells, bright feathers, bits of looking-glass, coins, or any bright object
which the birds may pick up in the bush.


The order Columbte is largely represented in the colony, especially in
the great primaeval forests of the coast districts. In the cedar brushes
of the Liverpool Range white-headed fruit pigeons are very numerous ;
and in the brush-forests of the Clarence, the Richmond, the Macleay,
and Illawarra, the top-knot and large-tailed pigeons, and the wonga-
wonga ( Leucosarcia picatd), so prized for its large size and the white-
ness and delicacy of its flesh, are very plentiful. The bronze-winged
pigeon ( Pimps chalcoptera), is common to almost all parts of the colony.
Several species of these birds are remarkable for their beautiful
plumage, their size, and the excellence of their flesh. One of the finest
species, the partridge bronze-winged pigeon (Geophaps scripta), is found
almost exclusively in the plains of the interior. Doves are also numerous,
and most of the species are extremely delicate and beautiful The little
turtle-dove of the inland districts ( Geopelia cuneata ) is the prettiest
specimen of this family.
The game birds found in the colony belong to the orders Gallinje
and Hemipodii. The former is represented by the wattled talegallus
(Talegallus Lathami ), found in the northern coastal scrubs and contiguous
mountain ranges, and the mallee fowl ( Lipoa ocellata ), inhabiting the
inland districts. Both of these birds belong to the family Megapodiidce ;
they are mound-raising birds, and deposit their eggs in a scraped-up
heap of leaves, decaying vegetable matter, and sand. To this order also
belong the stubble quail ( Goturnix pectoralis ), the swamp quail ( Synoicus
australis ), and the king quail ( Excalfatoria lineata ), the last-named
species being probably the smallest game bird in the world. The order
Hemipodii, which by some authorities is included in the Gallinje, is
represented by four species of turnix, commonly known as quail, and
the remarkable collared plain wanderer ( Fedionomus torquatus).
The order Grallatores includes many genera, and to it belongs the
Australian bustard, commonly known as the Plain turkey ( Eupodotis
australis ), as well as the waders, such as stilts, water-crakes, ibises,
dotterels, gallinules, spoon-bills, herons, bitterns, and many others.
Among water-birds, Hatatores, are enormous numbers of wild-fowl of
all descriptions, ducks, geese, grebes, as well as black swans. The
latter is essentially an Australian bird, and may be met with in all
parts of the continent. The order embraces, also, the large and very
varied species of sea-birds frequenting the coast, such, for instance, as
albatrosses, gulls, petrels, and cormorants.
The order Struthiones, or running birds, is represented by the emu
(Dromaius novce-hollandioe), the largest bird in this part of the globe,
and one, unfortunately, rapidly being exterminated.
Besides the birds mentioned above, there are others of perhaps
less note, but numerous, and frequently very beautiful. They are
all admirably described and depicted in the celebrated work of Mr.
Gould, which occupies a high rank amongst the scientific publications of
the century.


According to the late He\ r . J. E. Tenison-Woods, S.J.,
no less than sixty different families of fishes, comprising
Fishes.
348 species, frequent the waters of New South Wales
These are enumerated
in the subjoined
table
No. of
species.
No. of
species.
Kame of family.
Name of family.
Percidae
Ophiocephalidae
Trachypteridae
Pomaecentridae
Labridae
1
1
Squamipinnes
Nandidae
4
o
Mullidae
Sparidse
Gadopsidae
Gadidae....
Cirrhitidaa
Scorpaenidas
Teuthididas
Berycidae ...
Pleuronectidae
Siluriidae
Scopelidaj’
Salmonidae
Galaxiidag.
Kurtidae
i
G
Polynemidac
Sciasnida? ....
Scombresocidas
Clupeidae
Xiphiidae
Trichiuridae
Acronuridas
Carangidse
Cyttidae ...
Chirocentridae.
Symbrachidae .
Muraenidae
1
1
Syngnathidae
Sclerodermi..
Gymnodontes
Carcharidae ..
Lamnidae .. ..
Coryphaenidae
Scombridae ..
Trachinidae ~
Batrachidae ..
Pediculati ..
Scyllidae
3
o
4
7
Oottidae
Cestraciontidae
Spinacidae
1
1
1
Cataphracti
Gobiidac ...
Bhinidae
Pristiophoridae
Ehinobatidae .
Trygonidae
Blenniidae...,
Sphyraenidao
Atberinidae ,
Mugilidae ...,
o
3
Torpedinidac
Baiidae
1
1
Fistularidae
8


The seas that wash the shores of New South Wales abound with
fish, but this source of wealth to the colony has been greatly neglected.
Splendid fishing-grounds extend along the whole length of the coast,
wffiich presents many natural features peculiarly favourable to the
existence of a very large supply of the best food fishes. In the quiet
waters of its numerous bays and estuaries, and in the vast lakes and
lagoons communicating with the sea, are found shelter and sustenance,
as well as excellent breeding-grounds. The principal fishes found on
the coast are not migratory, and as a consequence may nearly always
be procured in the market. But with an unlimited supply in the
sea, the fishing industry has long been in an unsatisfactory condition,
and fresh fish is, with few exceptions, scarce and high-priced ; while
there is an import of preserved fish, for consumption in the colony,
which amounted to <£132,414 in 1899.
At the present time, the control of the fisheries of the colony is placed
in the hands of a body of five unpaid Commissioners, who are appointed
for a term of five years, and who, through their inspectors and other
officers, supervise the fishing industry of the colony, and see that the
regulations which they have issued in regard to the dimensions of nets,
the closing of tidal waters to net-fishing, and other matters, are observed.
The marine fisheries embrace three divisions—the Northern, extend-
ing from the Tweed River southerly to Port Stephens; the Home
division, from Port Stephens to St. George’s Basin ; and the Southern
division, from St. George’s Basin to Cape Howe. Each of these divi-
sions comprises many important grounds. The inland fisheries are not
very important, including chiefly the rivers Murray, Murrumbidgee,
Lachlan, and Darling; and Lake George. The class of boat used for
fishing purposes in New South Wales is poor, and very little improve-
ment is likely to result to the industry if the present fishermen are left
unaided with their primitive appliances, and others of a better class,
provided with capital, are not induced to take up the industry. The
bulk of the fish brought into Sydney comes from the stations in the
Home division, as the fishermen cannot venture far away.
The edible fishes comprise 105 different species; amongst the best
known may be mentioned :
The schnapper (Pagrus unicolor ), the most valuable of all Australian
fishes, is found along the whole* extent of the coast, and is very abun-
dant. It is a deep-water fish, found generally near rocky points or
reefs running out into the sea. The schnappers “ school,” as it is
termed, during the summer months, and are then most plentiful. The
young fish; known as red bream, frequents the harbouj-s and estuaries
of the coast, but is never found in shallow water. The schnapper is
caught by the hook, which it takes freely, as it will attack almost any
bait. It sometimes attains a very large size, weighing as much as 30 lb.
The fish cures well, and is said to be equal to the finest cod, and is in
every respect superior to ling.


The nannigai is a deep-water fish, caught with the hook, and ranks
high in public estimation as an edible fish. The supply is not large, as
the fish is not specially sought after, being chiefly obtained by fishermen
in search of schnapper. The nannigai is scientifically interesting as one
of the oldest forms of bony-fishes now surviving.
The black rock-cod is considered one of the best of Australian fish,
and is also a deep-water fish, never captured by the net. It grows to
a great size, specimens from 35 lb. to 40 3b. being not uncommon, whilst
fish weighing over 100 lb. are met with in the markets. It is found
more abundantly in the warmer waters of the north of the colony,
where, as a rule, it attains larger proportions than to the southward of
Sydney. In the vicinity of the islands lying off the New South Wales
coast—the Seal Rocks, Solitaries, Elizabeth Reef, and Lord Howe
Island—the black rock-cod may be taken in almost any quantity, and
of the largest size.
A fish of great size and beauty, known in Australia as the salmon, is
found off the coast in prodigious quantities. It has no affinity whatever
to the true salmon, and is inferior as an article of food.
The flat-head, a fine fish, of which there are several varieties, is
captured both by the hook and net. It is of excellent quality, and ranks
high amongst New South Wales fishes.
o o
There are four species of whiting found in these waters. The common
sand-whiting and the trumpeter-whiting are both very abundant, but
the other two species are more rare. The sand-whiting is perhaps the
fish most in demand in the metropolitan markets, where it is to be
obtained all the year round.
The jew-fish is the largest edible fish found on the New South Wales
coast, attaining sometimes a length of 5 feet. It is found at all seasons,
but most frequently during summer. The teraglin is of the same family
as the jew-fish, though it does not reach an equal size. The air bladder
is large and of excellent quality, being of great value for the making of
isinglass.
The mackerel is obtained in enormous quantities off the coast, and
sometimes even in the harbours. It is a good fish when eaten fresh, but
it decomposes rapidly.
The family of Mugilidse, or mullets, is well represented in Australian
waters. The sea mullet is a large fish, often attaining a length of 2 feet,
and a weight of 8 lb. It is regarded by some authorities as unsurpassed
in richness and delicacy of flavour by any fish in the world ; and it
visits these shores in countless numbers in the season when it is in the
best condition. When young the fish keeps entirely to the creeks and
lakes, where it increases in size very rapidly, but when full-grown it
seeks the open waters.
There are four species of gar-fish found on the New South Wales
coast. The Sydney gar-fish is very abundant, especially towards the end


of summer, making its appearance in shoals, sometimes of enormous
size. The river gar-fish is even of better quality than the last mentioned,
hut it is not so plentiful as formerly. The other species are seldom met
with. There are numerous other varieties of fishes found in the waters
of New South Wales, many of which are very valuable as articles of
food, but for the most part they are neither so numerous nor so easily
obtained as those referred to.
Destructive fishes are by no means rare, the shark family being
largely represented, not only in the deep sea, off the coast, but even in
the harbours. The shark is not, however, absolutely valueless. The
fins find a ready sale in the Chinese markets ; the skin also has some
commercial value ; while from the liver is extracted a large quantity of
valuable oil, equal in every respect to cod-liver oil.
Several varieties of fishes which have long disappeared from other
parts of the world are still represented in New South Wales. Amongst
these is the cestracion, or Port Jackson shark, whose teeth resemble
those of the fossil acrodis found in the mesozoic deposits.
During the season the Australian waters teem with herrings, the
season of immigration being the last six months of the year. There are
four species, but two only are of commercial importance, though a more
accurate knowledge of the composition of the shoals might lead to the
discovery of other valuable species. The most valuable of this family
of fishes is the pilchard. The Australian pilchard in a fresh state is
equal in excellence to the Atlantic pilchard, and there is every reason
to suppose that it can be obtained in quantities sufficient to enable
competition to be entered into with the bloater and sardine of Europe.
The maray also pass northward at the same time as the pilchard, and in
like prodigious numbers, but both species keep well away from the
shore.
The rivers of the colony produce some most excellent specimens of
fresh-water fish. The Murray, Murrumbidgee, Lachlan, and Darling
are the most plentifully stocked, the Murray cod {Oligorus Mitchelli ),
being perhaps the most highly esteemed of their fishes. Another fish
of the same species is the Oligorus Macquariensis, which is to be met
with in the upper branches of the Clarence. Specimens of both these
varieties of fresh-water cod have been found weighing as much as
100 lb. The silver perch, and several kinds of the Percidre family, so
highly prized for their delicacy, are plentiful in the rivers. In the
Richmond River the cat-fish (Copidoglanis tandanus) is very common,
whilst herrings and mullet are caught in almost all the eastern rivers
of the colony.
Little systematic attempt has yet been made to acclimatise European
varieties of edible fishes, although success would most probably attend
any efforts in this direction, every difficulty having been overcome in
Victoria, New Zealand, and Tasmania. Large quantities of trout ova
have been distributed in various localities, including the Prospect
Reservoir.


The first of local shell-fish in economic interest is the
oyster. Two kinds occur on the coast of New South
Wales—a large one, considered to be a form of the
English oyster (Ostrea edulis), and popularly known as
Mollnsca.
•the mud oyster ; and a smaller sort, the rock oyster (0. glomerata).
The mud oyster reaches in Sydney the northern limit of its range,
and fails to attain here to the luxuriant growth which it exhibits in
cooler climates. The prolific beds of Stewart’s Island, New Zealand,
furnish a large proportion of the supply of mud oysters for the Aus-
tralian markets. This oyster prefers deep and muddy places, where it
may attain a length of 8 inches. Nowhere is it now abundant, and,
indeed, it seems to be approaching extinction. The blacks formerly
feasted upon it, but connoisseurs of the superior race disparage it as
large and coarse.
Unlike the mud oyster, the rock oyster is well suited to cultivation.
In Southern Queensland, favoured alike by more congenial climate,
extensive tracts of shoal and sheltered water, and appropriate legislation,
the cultivation of this species has been most successful. The beds in
Moreton Bay supply not only the local demand, but also the require-
ments of the southern capitals. Though falling short of the perfection
reached by the cultivation of the Bay of Biscay and the New Ycrk
coast, the management of the Queensland oyster-beds excels that of any
other Australian fishery. When accurate details of the mode of breeding
of the rock oyster shall have been found by exact scientific inquiry,
a further impetus will be given to this flourishing industry. At present
all that is known is that in its habits the Australian rock oyster differs
altogether from the English and American kinds. Incidentally, it may
be remarked that the English oyster cannot be consumed in May, June,
July, and August, but the Pacific oyster is in season all the year round.
Large quantities of oysters are imported into the colony every year,
and it is evident, therefore, that the local market will afford ample
support to the cultivators of the bays and deltas of northern New South
Wales. The obstacles to success are floods and shifting sandbanks, and
the depredations of boring worms and whelks ; while among the advan-
tages of this lucrative occupation are the quickness of returns and the
smallness of capital required.
Quantities of spat are thrown off at various times, but especially
heavy falls occur in the spring, after which the rocks between tide-marks
may be literally plastered with young shells of the size of a shilling.
The great majority of these perish ; those surviving reach maturity in
about twelve months, and probably increase in size for two or three
years. When adult, their length is about 3 inches. Typically, they
have sharply-waved, black-purple edges. Form and colour, however,
are so altered by environment that specimens from different situations
have been given different names. That they are really one kind is,
however, proved by taking a young purple and crumple-edged shell
from a position on rocks washed by waves, and placing it on a zostera


flat in calm water. Here it develops a thin, white, smooth and
large shell; so that one shell may show one form at one end and
another at the other, the line of junction marking the period of trans-
ference.
For the purpose of oyster culture, the Crown grants leases of the fore-
shores of tidal waters, which may be defined as between the mean high
and mean low water mark. The rental is 20s. per annum for every 100
linear yards. The maximum length for which a lease may be obtained
is 2,000 yards ; but as the same person may take out more than one
lease, the portion of shore which may be acquired is practically un-
restricted by the Oyster Fisheries Act. The lease may be taken for a
term of ten years. Leases of deepwater or natural oyster beds are also
granted for an area not exceeding 25 acres, at a rental which must not
be less than £2 per acre. During the year 1898, 163 applications for
leases of areas of from 100 to 1,000 yards, representing a total area of
48,154 yards, were made; while at the end of the year the existing
leases numbered 630, and the length of foreshore held was 190,014 yards.
Jn addition, there were in existence deep-sea leases to the extent of
5 acres. The deposits paid with the applications for leases amounted
to £491, while the rentals received from leased areas came to £2,029
during the year.
Owing to bad management, the oyster-beds of Port Jackson, Port
Stephens, the Hawkesbury, and the Shoalhaven were greatly injured, so
that the markets of Sydney have to depend upon the beds of the
Manning, the Richmond, and other northern rivers, as well as places
beyond the colony, for their supply of oysters. The appointment of
the Fisheries Commission in 1880 probably prevented the entire extinc-
tion of the oyster industry in New South Wales, though the operations
of the Commission have been much impeded through lack of sufficient
legislation to enable them to check the improvidence of the lessees, who,
with few exceptions, strip the oyster-beds without regard to future
supply. There is but little doubt that the establishment of “ pares ”
like those which may be seen along the coasts of France and Belgium,
where oyster culture is conducted on scientific principles, would be
remunerative, as the demand for this delicacy is great, and continually
increasing. During the year 1898, 16,269 bags of oysters were obtained
from the tidal waters of the colony, being a satisfactory increase on the
takes of previous years ; while in addition to this supply, 7,110 bags of
oysters were imported from other colonies, their value being set down
at £0,322. A bag of oysters contains 3 bushels, and at the end of 1899
the price per bag of good oysters in Sydney ranged from 30s. to 455.,
according to quality.
No shell-fish other than oysters are regularly consumed in New South
Males, the Australian inheriting and accentuating the British distaste
ior such small game. Occasionally, however, there are exposed for sale
at the Sydney fish market the whelk (Potnmides ebeninum ) and the
cockle {Area trapezia), the former being cooked, and the latter eaten


either cooked or raw. Both the whelk and the cockle are used as bait,
but neither is at all like its English namesake. Probably their use as
food is restricted to the Greek and Italian element of the Sydney
population. The mutton fish, or “ abalone ”of Californian markets
[Haliolis naevosa), is consumed by the Chinese, who, it is said, also
collect it for export; but the ordinary citizen is unacquainted with it.
The “ ugarie,” commonly miscalled by Sydney anglers by the Maori
name of “ pipi ” ( Donax deltoides ), is frequently used for bait, rarely
for food. As an article of diet, various squid [Sepia cultrata, S. mestus,
&c.) are left to the foreign and coloured of the local sea-faring population,
but as bait their good qualities are better appreciated. The beaches of
New South Wales are not rich in ornamental shells, but the exquisite
and rare “ king-cockle” (Trigonia Lamarckii ) from Sydney Harbour is a
valued gem, and, as a brooch, may often be seen worn.
Of pests in this division of natural history, the local species of ship-
worm, the “ cobra ” ( Teredo Saulii), has wrought great damage amongst
shipping, wharves, and piers. It is a far larger and more destructive
species than any occurring in European waters. In gardens, the
common European snail, the “limagon” dear to the French epicure ( Helix
aspersa ), has now obtained a firm footing, and ravages flowers and
vegetables alike.
The crustacean fauna of New South Wales is ex-
tremely rich in species, but only about twelve kinds are
used as an article of diet. Of these, six are fairly common
and highly esteemed as food, and are as follow :
Crustacea.
Common Swimming Crab {Neptunus pelagicus, Linn.). —This is the
commonest crab offered for sale in Sydney. It often attains a weight
of 2 or 3 lb., and is always in great demand, finding a ready sale at
prices varying from 3d. to 9d. each. The principal supplies are obtained
in Sydney Harbour, and from Botany Bay. The shell or carapace of
this species is very broad, and ornamented on the front edge with
twenty-four spines. Six of these are situated between the eyes, and
nine on each side, the last being much larger than the others.
Swimming Crab ( Goniosoma crucifera , Fabr.). —This species is not
common, although it may be seen exposed for sale in large numbers
during some months of the year. It attains to a size slightly exceeding
the preceding species. The claws are shorter, stouter, and the spines on
the arms large, compressed, and tooth-like. The front edge of the shell
is armed with twenty spines—six on each side and eight between the
eyes. The colour is “ reddish, with yellowish spots and bands, of which
the middle one represents a cross.”
Mangrove Crab (Scylla serrata, Forsk.). —This is the largest and most
valuable crab obtained on our coast. Unfortunately, it is not common;
still, a fairly large number have been exposed for sale during the last
few years. The price ranges from Is. to 2s. 6d. each. The main
supplies are obtained from Botany Bay. In this species the claws are


very large ; the front edge of the shell is armed with twenty-four nearly
equal spines ; and the back of the shell is convex and smooth. The
colour of the mangrove crab when alive is olive-brown. It inhabits
deep holes in the mud, and comes out at low tide to feed.
Sydney Craw-fish ( Palinurus Hiigelii, Heller). —The craw-fish, or
lobster (as it is usually called), is very abundant along the whole coast-
line, but the chief supplies are obtained at Port Stephens. It is by far
the largest and most valuable of all the crustaceans of New South
Wales, often attaining to Bor 10 lb. in weight. Between four and five
thousand dozen are sold annually in the wholesale markets at prices
varying from Is. to 20s. per dozen.
A second species is often seen offered for sale—the “ Southern Craw-
fish” ( Palinurus Lelandii), which is equal to the Sydney craw-fish as an
article of food, although usually much smaller. It may readily be
distinguished by the highly-sculptured segments of the abdomen, and
by the numerous hairs surrounding the bases of the spines.
Piver Cray-fish ( Astacopsis serratus, Shaw). —The cray-fish is seldom
offered for sale in Sydney, but it is much used as food along the banks
of the inland rivers. These crustaceans often attain to a foot or more
in length, and are highly prized in the winter season, when they are in
their best condition.
Common or Sand Prawn (. Penaeus canaliculatus, Olivier). —The
common prawn is obtained in large quantities during the greater part
of the year, but in midwinter there is at times a falling-ofi in the supply,
and prices rise accordingly. In addition to the demand for consumption
as food, this prawn is much used as bait, and frequently fetches very
high prices in times of scarcity. Large specimens often reach 8 or 9
inches in length. The principal supplies are obtained from Sydney
Harbour, Botany, ai\d Cape Hawke. The species may be recognised by
the deep grooves which extend along each side of the beak or rostrum
to the hinder margin of the carapace, and by the rostrum, which is
armed above with ten or twelve spines and with one below.
Tiger Prawn (Penaeus monodon, Pabr.). —The tiger prawn is a species
which appears to frequent the coast at irregular intervals. Occasionally
it is captured in abundance in Sydney Harbour and at Botany. This
species may be readily identified by the numerous dark-coloured cross-
bands on the body and by the rostrum or beak, which has six or eight
teeth above and three or four below.
Biver Prawn (Penaeus Macleayi , Haswell). —The river prawn is not
so large as the two preceding species, seldom exceeding 4 or 5 inches in
length. It is, however, very abundant, and appears to be obtainable
during the whole of the year. The rostrum of this species has five or
six teeth above, but none below—a characteristic which enables it to be
easily distinguished from other forms.
15


Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—l9oo.


rjii
II r'l
00075425
1508


Sydney
W. A. Guluck, Government Printef
1900
1508
00234557
