

•
•
•




PUBLISHED
ON BOARD
THE “SALDANHA”
ON HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO MORETON BAY,
1861-62.
AUT AUT NULLUS.
Commander —G. DAWSON,
First Officer—W. JACK,
Surgeon —W. S. SMITH.
Second Officer —H. APPLETON,
QUEENSLAND:
PRINTED AT THE “ COURIER” GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE
]862.


NOTICE TO HOME READERS.
[There was another Journal published on board, called th e-JSaldanha Gazette , to which some of the
Leading Articles, refer.— Ed. AT.]


No. 1.
TO OUR READERS.
AUT CiESAR, AUT NULLUS.
NOVEMBER 6, 1861.
Gratis.
It has been long felt, by all the sensible portion of our community
as a burning shame, that we should have been so long without that
great Paladium of liberty— A Newspaper.
We must confess, that a slight attempt has been made to supply the
want, in the issuing of a journal, bearing the name of the “Saldanha
Gazette.” We will not be invidious and make remarks, or attempt
to criticise the production, but we cannot help giving our opinion,
(without the risk of being met with the charge of egotism) that a
more wretched failure than the first number issued, has never
happened in the annals of the public press.
The main object of a paper on board ship, is, we presume, to
provide a medium for expressing our wishes, sentiments, and require-
ments; also, of whiling away the tedium of a long voyage ; and we
leave it to our readers if such has been hitherto produced. Wrought
up at last to a pitch of patriotic indignation at such a state of things
—in default of better qualified individuals stepping forward—we
commence the onerous undertaking, and present the first number of
the “ Saldanha MerolTry.” All we can say is, we will do our
best, throwing ourselves on the kind indulgence of our fellow
passengers. We here state our intention of carefully eschewing in
our paper everything commonly called personal, and though at, times
we may make playful allusions to individuals, we pledge ourselves to
this, that they shall not be of the above nature. Our Journal is
intended to be the organ pf all classes. It will embrace the politics,
social welfare, and general views of our little world, and it shall be
the medium for any appropriate Original Poetry, Letters, &c., that
may be kindly sent us.
In conclusion, we must ask the kind indulgence of our readers '.o
excuse any sins of commission or omission that will naturally occur
in this our difficult undertaking; and that they will make some
allowance for the smallness of our offices and the many interruptions
that will of necessity take place, whilst our editorial brain is in the
throes of composition, viz., in the shape of noises proceeding from
the howling of children, accordeons, horns, fiddles, &c., together with
loud cries of “ Steward” from all sides of the cabin. Adieu.
Note. —Since the above was in type, a second number of the
“ Gazette” has appeared, and we feel bound to acknowledge that it
bears the impress of more brain and careful study than its pre-
decessor. — Ed. S. M,
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
We must ask our friends to curtail, as much as possible, their communi-
cations, having very little paper to spare, as well as giving all a chance
of being heard We must apologise to our contributors “ A.8.C.”
“ Colonist,’’ 14 A.H.D.,” “ H.A.H.,” &c., for not inserting their clever and
interesting notes, but, as they will perceive, want of space prevents us.
They shall have early publication — Ed. M.
Correspondence.
—♦ —
To the Editor of the Mercury,
Sir, —May I be permitted (through the medium of your powerful Press)
to lay before your readers the following notes relating to the new proposed
Company for putting the greater part of the neighbourhood of Brisbane,
Queensland, in instant and perfect cultivation. The originator and pro-
moter of the scheme has given so many bushels of arguments only
requiring substantiation, and assertions only requiring belief, that hard-
hearted indeed must be the hearer who does not at once admit his
philanthrophy and perfect abnegation. He requires no capital, but
proposes lo purchase land himself, and put on it a Washing Machine for
the benefit of the members, who, in return, are to work the land for him
and to have certain wages hooked to them, recollect hooked —not paid in
hard cash and the hooks, are, of course, to he kept by the promoter.
Talk of African slavery. And as to calling it a Mutual Benefit
S ciety, it is very much like the lawyer and the oyster, the fish for the
lawyer and the shell for the client. Associations like the above will
never succeed ; the very principle of it puts so much power in the hands
of one individual, that the notion seems repugnant to us. Emigrants may
well benefit each other in various ways, by helping each other. A good
day’s labor lor a good clay’s wage ; and s ch is the only Association that
will succeed in any colony where an honest heart and strong right arm
are the only capital at the disposal of the worker. Common sense must
guide men in their actions, for once lose sight of that, and he led away by
such illusory visions as the one above referred to, prosperity runs a most
dangerous risk of never being arrived at. Apologising for so lengthy a
letter, I am, &c.,
Ph. D.
Original Poetry.
—♦ —
Oh ! do please send Mercury up to £Ke skies,
With a message to Venus, as the ship flies;
I said flies, but 1 really meant to sa} 7 sails,
To allow us her love, but without any gales.
Kind Goddess of Love look down on us here,
How disgusted you’d be with our bottled beer
It’s the vintage of Burgundy, Champagne, and Hock
That you like, we have little or none of that stock ;
Send our compliments please, to your friend Boreas,
To ask him to let us the Line quickly pass;
To Neptune also, a small note you might write,
As we soon may expect him in nautical sight,
Tell him please not shave us, by day or by night,
As our jolly good Captain will see all things right.
44 ’Tis the sunshine of life lends us mystical lore,”
And “ Coming events cast their shadows before.’’
ASSEMBLY.
Pope.
On the evening of Tuesday week last, a grand ball took place on the
Quarter-deck, when all the rank and beauty of the ship met to do honor
to Terpsichore. By the kind permission of the Captain, the decks were
cleared for action, and lanterns suspended in the most available places for
shedding lustre on the gay scene. As we viewed the deck from a high
position in the mizen rigging, it wanted but a highly imaginative mind to
remind one either of Oremorne or the Jardin Mabile.
We cannot give a detailed account of the various dances, as we unfor-
tunately have lost our engagement card. As a slight interlude (and to
give the energetic devotees time to procure the necessary inflation for
active exercise) 14 The Cure’’ appeared in the most extraordinary costume
of the period, to dance that well-known and apparently fashionable dance.
From the able manner with which he performed his superhuman and
perspiring evolutions, we should imagine the gentleman must have had
fuivate lessons at Weston’s previous to embarcation. In a jig which
bllowed, a nondescript appeared vis-a-vis to a lady (whose strength of
limb and endurance have been the admiration of all lovers of physical
force) and were much applauded. Dance followed dance in quick suc-
cession, all appearing delighted with the entertainment. Before separating
three cheers were given for our worthy Captain, which, as may he
imagined, were joined in with the utmost amount of lungs from all
hands.


A PEW HINTS TO THE PASSENGERS FOR PROMOTING THE
GENERAL HEALTH AND COMFORT OF EVERYONE.
Above all things cleanliness both in body and clothes. The beds and
bedding ought to be exposed once a week, or ottener, on the deck, the sun
and wind both being great purifiers. The cabins or berths to be washed
occasionally with soap and water, and great care taken that no soiled
clothes be left in corners or under beds, as they generate an atmosphere
most prejudicial to health. The attention of the Captain or Doctor should
be drawn to persons who, by their neglect of the above simple rules,
endanger the health of others.
The Weather.— Up to the present time we may congratulate ourselves
on the pleasant weather experienced. The winds certainly have not been
favourable for a rapid run to the line. Squalls we have occasionally
had, but they principally have been confined to the squalls made by the
younger members of our family.
Smoking. — We have been requested by several parties to draw the
attention of smokers to the danger of allowing sparks to fly from their
pipes during this warm weather.
Sporting News.
The British public are all more or less imbued with the love of sport in
all shapes. It was therefore no matter of surprise to us one morning to
find a few lovers of the manly art of self-defence amusing themselves
with a little harmless sparring. In the language of “ Fistiana,” there
were more “bellows to mend” than “clarets tapped, ’’ Others following
out their taste for speculation, have been doing a little on various events.
We are happy to state, that up to the present time there have been no
defaulters.
The betting principally has been on the run the Saldanha will make,
the odds ranging from evens on 90 days, to 3 to 1 on 120 days.
No. 2.
THE MERCURY,
NIL NISI BONUM.
In offering our second number to our kind readers, we cannot allow
the event to pass without congratulating ourselves, and at the same
time thanking them, for the hearty welcome bestowed on our first-
born. Our contemporary—the Gazette —has done us the honor to
notice us in a somewhat poetical and elaborate leading article, and
although we are not so obtuse as nAt to discover (through the redun-
dancy of verbiage) some spice of banter, we take this opportunity of
thanking him for so far granting us his share of praise by saying
“ this (referring to the advent of the ‘ Mercury’) was by far the most
important event of the week, and an event that gives us much satis-
faction.” After a compliment so refined, it would be unworthy of us
to say further; but we cannot allow the latter part of that most
elegant article to pass unnoticed, where he refers to “ the launching of
the 1 Mercury’ after the difficulties of editorial navigation had been
tested, and the dangers removed, by the clipper ship Saldanha Gazette,"
In nautical language we say, “ tell that to the Marines.” •
To follow up his simile, the Gazette, on her first trip, most decidedly
struck on the rock of Public Opinion, with every chance of foundering;
the Captain and crew despairing of getting her afloat. The news that
another ship was to he launched in the same trade, excited them to re-
newed efforts, and, after some difficulty, she was again got afloat, hut we
are afraid not without damage, as she still shows some signs of her once
perilous position.
Opposition is the great mover of all trade and all reforms, and we
are glad to say (taking the right hand of our contemporary so fairly
offered; that it has done him an infinity of good. When, however, he
shows signs of copying the general style and arrangement of the
“ Mercury” (vide last copy), in common fairness he ought to hold his
peace about Columbus, &c., &c.
Apologising fur the length of the above remarks, we re-echo our
first address to the public. Ours is a Liberal Paper with Liberal
Principles, “ The greatest good for the greatest number,” and we
think ihcse are the best to maintain on board ship, where the principal
differences between our positions, are the hoards that divide us and the
few pounds sterling paid extra for passage money by either class.
We have all one common lot, viz., the safety of the ship and welfare
of ourselves—not class against class -but all striving, by bearing and
forbearing, to pass the few months we are on board in the happiest
manner possible.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
The Lady with thk Red Hair —Will see the Gentleman at the time
and place mentioned.
Netti. — We will do our best to obtain what you wish the first time the
b jrhrv operates.
Arthur.— A.B.C. —Received with thanks.
Miraculous Draught of Fish.— One of the principal officers of the
ship, whose medical functions do not interfere with his piscatorial propen-
sities, added another specimen to the genus—Fish, as will be seen from
reading the following account by an eye witness: —On Friday last great
excitement was caused by a report that something “ very like a whale”
was at the end of the Doctor’s fishing lire, which had been towing astern
for some days. Of course, the owner rushed to the taffrail with an energy
that would have gladdened the eye of gentle Izaak Walton, and with the
assistance of a friend proceeded to pull np the line, when alas! it was
discovered that a horrid joke had been perpetrated, for the fish which had
caused the commotion, was found to be made of tcood !
BIRTHS.
Three have taken place since the Saldanha sailed. All well.
DEATHS.
On their passage from England to M«reton Bay, Two Fowls, through
falling overboard. They were well stricken in years, and much regretted
by the Captain and saloon passengers.
LOS F, a Gilt Leather Needlecase. Wh. ever will bring the same to
Mrs. JONES, Ist Cabin, will receive fid. reward.
Advertisements.
WANTED, a Few Quires of Ruled Foolscap Paper. Apply to the
EDITOR, 2, Portland Place, 2nd Cabin,
MATRIMONY. —Wanted, a Young Lady of preposessing appearance,
docile temper, and not over 30 years of age; none need apply who
Go not possess £5OO per annum. Address “ THE CURE,” Bachelor’s
Hall.
NOVEMBER
13, 1861.
Gratis.
Correspondence.
CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND QUEENSLAND.
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, —My attention has been drawn to this subject by a letter in your
paper, which although in some of its details it has the appearance of a
joke, I am aware, from other sources, that such a scheme has been pro-
jected. A few words therefore may not be unacceptable to some of your
readers as to how far the same is practicable in Queensland under the
existing state of the law as far as that is known.
Co-operative Societies f>r the Cultivation of Land. lam aware of only
one attempt of the kind, and that was the unfortunate one of the late
Feargus O’Connor. Land Societies are a far different thing, being con-
fined to the acquisition of land or houses. Whilst there is everything to
be urged in favour of mutual co-operation and assistance, it is open to
grave objections when it assumes the form of a Co-Operative Society, and
is moreover fettered by the lestrictions imposed by the laws on such asso-
ciations. I am afraid that the class that would readily join in such a
scheme have all of them left their native shores in the expectation of
earning for themselves an independence, and too many under the erroneous
impression they would receive a grant of 18 acres of land on landing.
For the present purpose we will suppose they do ; they would then be
required to surrender their land to the Society, and subject themselves to
the control of a Manager and Committee ; in fact to become labourers on
their own lands without any means of improving them to their own
advancement, earning merely a bare subsistence, the profits being sure to
be eaten up in expenses of management for the sole benefit of a few
officials, Tue law, besides, has placed some serious impediments in the
way. Ist. The Land Order cannot be assigned till the expiration of six
months from its grant, thus preventing anyone purchasing the lands of
several in his own name within that period. 2nd. The purchaser must,
within six months, occupy and commence to cultivate his land, or the
deed of grant will not be issued, and the land will be forfeited, and until
the grant was obtained and the land conveyed to the society, it would be
unable to commence operations. Such a society is, in short, nothing more
than a partnership, with the land for stock, the labour of its members
forming the greater part of the capital; and as it would rarely comprise
less than seven members, the Joint Stock Company’s Acts would apply
and require it to be enrolled, and their cumbrous machinery brought into
play. This would entail a large preliminary outlay, with a permanent
staff, the cost of which would more than counter balance any advantage
the working man could hope to obtain. The holder of an 18 acre land
order, if unable to work his land, had far better dispose of the same when
the law allows, and wait patiently until the fruits of industry enable him
to become both a purchaser and cultivator.—l am, &c., H.
To the Editor oj the Mercury.
Sir—l regret to make known through your columns, that owing to
severe squalls and light winds experienced, our progress has been consider-
ably retarded. — I am, &c., G. DAWSON, Commander.
>■' ' v 'iU
* <*.


Ship’s Company
. ,
57
1st. Cabin Passengers . ,
.. 13
2nd Cabin Passengers
.. 58
Intermediate Passengers
.. 51
Upper Steerage ..
.. 98
Married Couples (Lower Deck)..
.. 188
Single Men
.. 41
Single Women
.. 44
Total
550
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, —Novelty on board a ship at sea being a desideratum most
devoutly to be wished, I hasten to lay the following interesting case
before you :—On this ship (famed already for its curiosities of the animal
kind) lives, or rather exists, an Animal new to the zoologist and interesting
to all. It is of the feline order, and though carnivorous, is small in size
and gentle in disposition. It is known to the learned by the name of the
Tigris McNamaraensis. Its color is liver and white, and its coat is smooth
and silky. By nature it is predatory, and even in its comparatively do-
mesticated state its shrill and unearthly wail is sometimes heard above the
creaking of the ship. Although securely tied up, alarm might be created
had not use (our second nature) gradually accustomed those living in the
neighbourhood to its mournful cries.
The animal may be viewed daily, by sending card and address to the
spirited proprietor of No. 1, Paradise-place, Upper-deck, Immediate
advantage should bo taken of the above opportunity, as the Doctor and
other officials have directed its removal, for fear of accidents to the
passengers. 1 am, sir, &c., SPECTATOR.
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sin, —Thinking it will interest many of your readers to know the number
of souls on board, I beg to hand you particulars.
I am, &c., C. W. SHAW, Purser.
In the above calculation two children arc reckoned as one adult.
Advertisements.
FOUND, a Pocket Book. The owner can have it on giving the descrip-
tion to the STEWARD, 2nd Cabin.
No. 3.
DUM SPIRO SPEHO.
As the representative of Messrs. Mackay, Baines, and Co, took leave
of the good ship Saldanha in tire Channel, cheer after cheer rent the
air as a parting salute from stem to stern. Everything wore the
aspect of contentment, with great hopes for the future. From all
sides and from all classes eyes (dimmed here and there with a tear)
looked listfully at the fast fading shores of Old England. When at
last the beautiful island faded into obscurity, man}’ of our fellow-pas-
sengers then, and not till then, began to realise the certainty of their
having left home and friends—“ it may be for years, and it may be for
ever.” Good fellowship and kindly intercourse of civilities were
offered and received on all sides, and judging by the expression worn
by the principal portion of our friends, hope took the place of regret.
The fellow-feeling that “ makes the world akin” seemed to have pos-
sessed them, and all appeared as happy as the novelty of existing
circumstances would permit. Would not such a scene have comforted
the eyes of relatives and friends left behind, who, no doubt, were
picturing unheard of miseries for us. No doubt of it! Now, alas !it
is our mournful task to say, that in numerous cases these civilities to
one another have given place to their reverse, the kindly feeling has
in the same way faded before the green-eyed monster jealousy and all
its attendant petty miserables; clique has been formed against clique,
unworthy motives have been ascribed to individuals without why or
wherefore, and, as a natural consequence, our pleasurable anticipations
have not been realised. Why should this state of things last ? We
have still three months to look forward to ’ere we arrive at our desti-
nation. We therefore appeal to the better sense and feelings of those
to whom our words may apply, to do their best to remove this truly
wretched state of affairs.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Marmozet, —’Too long for insertion.
Ph, D.—Very clever; place next week.
M. F.—Too person 1; speak to the Doctor.
Notioeh. —We have heard nothing of what yon write about.
W. Crawfurd. —The Mercury is not for sale It will be lent to anyone
for perusal who will return it in good condition.
SONG.
Tune. —Bartholomew Fair.
Association’s all the go,
People raving mad, sir ;
So I write to let you know,
Lest you should be had, sir.
If of cash you've got to spend,
Enough to go and farm, sir ;
Your name, I pray, you do not lend
To those who’d do you harm, sir.
But, if again you mean to work,
With heart and stout right arm, sir;
You must not listen to such talk,
Even though it charm, sir.
THE MERCURY, NOVEMBER 20, 18(31.
Association’s very well,
For Smith, or Jones, or Brown, sir;
But not to cultivate en regie ,
Best part of Brisbane town, sir.
Bushels of reasons, day by day,
Down men’s throats are thrust, sir;
Reasons as good, least so they say,
As shining golden dust, sir.
But when you come to sift the dross,
That clogs up such narration;
You’ll clearly see, that on the cross
Is such Association.
Pit. D.
The Fifth of November. —The advent of the sth of November caused
some little commotion among the lovers of fun. Our contemporary has
given such a vivid account of the procession of “ Guy Fawkes,” that it is
only left for us to add our mead of praise to the “get up.” Suffice it for
us to say, that the “ Guy” was so well represented, that we could almost
imagine it was a daily occurrence with the personificator.
General Health of Passengers. —The reports reaching us describe a
general improvement, although there are still some cases of sickness
amongst us. Our funny contributor remarks that there are many ailing.
We presume he refers to the bitter beverage sold on board. We sincerely
hope it will not lead them to their last bier. — Ed. M.
Saldanha Cattle Show. —The show of calves on Sunday last during
the prevalence of the squall was exceedingly good. The judges have not
come to a decision as to who deserves the medal of thq society. A Mr.
Joe made a good display with two of the Wiltshire breed.
Arithmetical Qdestion. —Suppose the thermometer to stand at 83° in
the second cabin, and sitting accommodation in the proportion of 1 to 3,
how much wisdom and good ta«te does it take to hold a prayer meeting?
LOST, a Gold Ear-Ring, Three Crystals set in Gold. Whoever will
bring the same to the STEWARD, Ist Cabin, will be rewarded.
FOUND, a Black Alpaca Apron. The same to be had on application to
“THE CURB,” Ist Cabin.
Gratis.
CROSSING THE LINE.
This difficult feat was performed at 6 a.m. on Monday last, without
accident. Mr. Appleton was the officer of the watch, and we must compli-
ment him upon the ease with which he piloted us into another hemisphere.
Up to the present time we are not aware of any passengers being disturbed
by the shock. Advantage was taken of the above event by all hands to
devote a few hours to pleasure. Want of space will prevent us giving a
detailed a< count of all that took place ; we therefore offer only a slight
sketch of the proceedings. The after part of the deck was devoted to a
Grand Concert, The programme was a very good one. embracing some
of the best morceaux of our own composers. We will not attempt to
critici-e the performance of our amateurs, as the Concert was so im-
promptu ; but to judge from the loud plaudits bestowed on their endeavours,
the audience must have been highly gratified. We must not omit,
however, to speak in the highest te;ms of the trio “Row weel my
Boatie,” sung by Miss Spinks and Messrs. Francis and Pollock. This,
undoubtedly, was the gem of the evening, and was rapturously applauded.
To cause a little diversion in the proceedings, a Signor Lionelli Dalli
appeared with his wonderful performances on the slack rope. We must
plead illness as fie cause of the Signor not coming quite up to the maik,
A prologue, recitation, and two comic songs helped to fill up the entertain-
ment. At the conclusion ‘‘Cod save the Queen” was sung by three
ladies, the entire audience joining in as a chorus. Three cheers for the
Captain, ladies, and performers, terminated one of the most agreeable
evenings we have spent on board the Saldanha. The names of the ladies
who kindly gave their services are Mis. Hassell and the Misses Spinks and
Curtis.
It must be well-known by this time to the greenest of our friends, that
Neptune holds undisputed sway in these latitudes; it was therefore no
matter of surprise to us to hear his well-known voice hailing our ship as
she was tearing impetuously through his domains. After a polite invita-
tion to come on board, his Marine Majesty stepped on the deck, accom-
panied by his belter half (who looked the picture of health) and the
constables who generally escort their Majesties on their visits. After a
hearty welcome from his numerous sons on the forecastle, his Majesty, on
rising from his seat, briefly addressed his family and their friends. (We
intended giving a verbatim account of the speech from the throne, but bis
Majesty suffered so mucb from emotion or some other cause, that it was
with difficulty we could catch the words he littered.) We uncler-tood him
to say, “ After allowing them full permission to remain on Lis pieserves,


he begged to return them his and his wife’s welcome to that which had
been just offered. He complimented them on their healthy appearance,
entreated them to be good boys, and not to disgrace their old father. (At
this point tears were seen to trickle down the farrows of his venerable
phiz.) He advised them to keep on good terms with the passengers, not
to eat too much preserved meat, as his Doctor had informed him that the
tallest of his sons had been suffering from an overdose, and, as a finale,
encouraged them to keep the best of feelings one watch towards another,
promising them on arrival at Moreton Bay to reward them with plenty of
grog and two sweethearts to each man. Their Majesties then took leave,
excusing their short stay on account of so many calls to make, desiring to
be remembered to all those who had not the honor of an introduction.
The Fashions.— Considerable ingenuity has been of late displayed by
the fairer portion of our number in the manufacture of all sorts of head
dresses to ward oft’ the too powerful attentions of Old Sol. Crinoline
hoops have taken a vapid jump from their hitherto low portion to higher
and more ornamental ones. Muslins and other light textile fabrics in
great demand. Skull caps of all shapes, sizes, and colours are making
great headway in the public taste. Under garments not sought after, or
very little worn. The Saldanha in spite of the hot weather retains her
braces and sheets, and we only know of one case in which she missed stays.
FOUND, a Red Handkerchief. The owner can have it by applying to
No. 3, Colonial Row, Steerage, Upper Deck.
No. 4.
THE MERCURY,
It is not at all unnatural for us to suppose that our editorial position
furnishes us with great opportunities for observing and being made
acquainted with, the general topics of conversation of the ship. One
which seems to furnish more occasion than any other for displaying
the oratory of the disputants, is the future prospect of themselves in
the new land. In nearly every case we find “ Great Expectations” to
be the order of the day. It has been our lot to hear some of the
most extravagant plans propounded, and arrangements made, for co-
partnership that (we should imagine) had ever entered into the mind
of man, in each case calculating upon success as a certainty, and
failure quite out of the question. As a specimen, we heard one
person with the utmost gravity of face, proving by an apparently most
straightforward line of argument, and backed up with proofs gathered
from the pages of Dr. Lang and others, that £7O per acre were to be
made by growing Cotton, and that a cultivator of land to the extent
of his land order, viz., 18 acres, must, as a natural consequence, obtain
a sum total of £1260 per annum. Many of our readers will hardly
credit that it is possible for thinking men to utter such absurd non-
sense, but we vouch for the truth of the above statement.
After a residence of more than seven years in the Colonies dnring
the richest era of their existence, it may not be considered presump-
tion on our part, to warn our friends against listening to any such
romantic speculations. There is no doubt that Australia is a fine field
for the exertions of willing hands, and that a working man will make
better wages there than in the old country, but at the same time it
must not be forgotten, that for the increase of pay, he has to give up
many of the comforts of home, the society ofTriends, and family
associations. The Queensland Government have certainly advanced
some of the most liberal offers to Immigrants, i. e. if the pamphlets
published on the subject are to be believed ; and we feel no doubt of
the ultimate success of the man who makes up his mind to work hard
and carry out the principles of sobriety and a proper saving
economy. Those who Imagine they will make a fortune in Queensland
without “ putting their shoulder to the wheel,” will find themselves
grievously mistaken.
TO CORRESBOA DENTS.
Lizzie.—You can get married on board ship.
Colonist. — Refer to the letter on Associations in a previous edition.
Correspondence.
NATURAL HISTORY.
To the Editor of the Mercury .
Sir,— No doubt all of your readers have heard of M. Du Chaillu’s
celebrated work on the “ Gorilla,” but few, if any, have, I fear, had the
opportunity of seeing one in propria persona. Now, sir, that natural wish
may he gratified, for on hoard this ship may be found one of the finest
specimens of this most extraordinary species. It is by no means social in
its habits, and is seldom to be met with, particularly if you want to see it,
when it may he generally considered ”Up a Tree." It is carnivorous,
greedy of prey, but lazy in the extreme ; it associates gencially with one
SONG.
By Adonis.
The ship onward sails in mild breezes or gales,
Bound for almost uncivilized land ;
From the island whose name is the “ Idol of
Fame,”
And sends forth such adventurous bands.
The Saldanhn bears some from fond hearth
and sweet home,
Yet they seem full of hope and delight;
As they here and there stare, building castles
of air,
May those castles ne’er fade from their
sight.
The ladies they look, like their pictures in
book.
So soft and so charmingly sweet;
Till a horn blows, or bell may with vehemence
tell,
That there’s pea soup and fresh and salt
beef.
’Tis then that all hands are employed, and all
eyes
Seek their favourite food, but alas !
From the nature of things, with sweets there
are stings,
So we’ll let the bee’s metaphor pass.
But when the repast no longer may last.
Again to the deck we repair;
Again talk or rant on some favourite cant,
And laugh with the ladies so fair.
Then let us all drink, and of sorrow ne’er
think,
But of sweet ones or friends left at home ;
We arc all of us bound to adventurous ground,
So courage boys, drink whilst we roam.
In a calm there’s no harm, 'tis a balm to the
arm
That plies quickly the needle and thread ;
It’s a sign that there cannot be any alarm,
As the Captain calls out “ How’s her head ?
WANTED, a Pious Young M-ai to wait on a select party of Gentle-
men. He must be of good address, and accustomed to keep
uniforms in order. A liberal salary will be given. Address 11, Paradise
Place, Upper Steerage.
NOVEMBER
Advertisements.
27, 1861.
Gratis.
mate, whose coal black eyes glimmer like stars through the darkness of
night; it is very tall, and remarkable for length of limb; it is also much
covered with long black hair, particularly about the head and face, its
temper is bad, and its disposition solitary; indeed it looks down on other
tiibes of the same species with the most perfect contempt, and one might
almost fancy that had it the power of thought , it must consider itself
superior to all others. It is needless to say more. Observers can satisfy
themselves.
I am, &e., MARMOZET.
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, — I bad hoped to have seen some remarks in your paper with
r* ference to “ Conservative’s” letter in the Gazette of last Saturday week’s
date. Perhaps, however, you consider that his strictures show so much
party feeling and so much want of common sense, as to icquire no observa.
lions on your part; indeed this is most likely, for how can the principles
he professes interest a body of individuals proceeding on speculation to a
land where manhood suffrage and the vote by ballot are adopted as the
universal opinion of the mass, and to which each man goes, in the hope of
eventually getting a finger in the political pie. the worn out
allusion to the Tailors of Tooley-sti eet. Does the writer of the epistle
know the meaning of the words he makes use of? If he takes my advice
ho will return to Tooley street without loss of time, and there study the
Manchester papers he refers to. At all events, if he risks Queensland
with his present notions, he runs a good chance of being put up to a new
“ dodge” of tar and feathering, in which he may occupy an unpleasantly
conspicuous position.
1 am, &c., OBSERVER.
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, —As you suggest, “ we do our best I have not come so far from home.
To make ourselves agreeable,” Just to oblige my neighbour;
While on the voyage from Moreton Bay, And far from me, out here at sea,
1 mean to all I’m able. Be sacrifice and labor.
Not that you see, there is in me on ® e " d alone ’, I ’ l ’ eT ® r own
Much that needs alteration; . 0 my rule of actioni;
My general ways demand all praise, I l d sl Vjf this same, my single aim
And fervent admiration. Is selfish satisfaction.
And well t’would be, if all like me,
At cards I play all through the day, Would shape their course of living*
I drink and smoke, aad spit, sir; For there’s no plan lor any man, ’
And half the night ’tis my delight, Such joy and profit giving.
To enjoy myself a bit. sir. And gir> nf)W you must
I sing or talk, or take a walk, • pleasan V ‘
When slower folk are sleeping; f to you my buck,
They’re in their beds, I o’er their heads, e a * present.
A row incessant keeping. Your’s truly,
A NUISANCE.
Local News.
We have much pleasure in announcing, that through the exertions of a
few spirited individuals, an Ethiopian Concert will take place by the
“ Saldanha Minstrels,” on Saturday evening next (weather permitting.)
There are also rumours of a Theatrical Entertainment, to take place as
early as possible. We hope it may do so, for anything that will tend
to dispel the monotony of sea life, will be sure to meet with the best
wishes of all.


Night Watch. —At a meeting of the members of the second cabin, it
was almost unanimously agreed that a Watch was desirable. We are in
a position to state, that the idea has met with the approval of the Captain,
Better late than never.
The Latest Arrival. —On Monday morning last Mr. Reeve was rather
astonished to find that a Flying Fish had (during the night) flown into his
cabin through the port-hole. We consider this rather a clever feat of
scaleing. The specimen was a very fine one, and was duly appreciated by
its possessor at tea time.
Every lover of nature with the least poetry of soul has, no doubt,
enjoyed to the utmost the late beautiful nights. Even the most bilious
and gloomy of our passengers must have felt the cloud lifted from his
thoughts, on inhaling the pure breeze of the Trade Wind as it comes with
its exhilirating breath from the Southern ocean. The fairer portions of
our number seem to have been affected by its influence, as we have of late
noticed that they do not seek the rest of the downy couch as early as was
their wont. In some cases we imagine the novelty of the scene has even
stirred up the softer emotions of the heart. On one occasion, we heard a
certain young lady warbling with trembling lips, “ Home, sweet, sweet
Home,” as she descended the companion ladder leading to her chamber.
Elopement in High Life. —Yesterday morning it was discovered that
advantage had been taken of the dark ness of the night for one of the
ship’s geese to elope with two of the ducks. The state of mind of their
guardian (the butcher) may be more easily imagined than described. It
is evident the ducks heads were screwed off the wrong way.
Advertisements.
LOST, a Steel Thimble lined with Silver. A reward of 2s. for recovery
of same. Address STEWARD, Ist Cabin.
NOTICE,— A Public Auction will shortly take place. All parties
having articles to dispose of, will please send in particulars to
GEORGE ROBINS, Mercury Office.
No. 5.
Protection, that fallacy of a by gone age, is not by any means a
palatable subject for a journal expressing liberal politics. We have
now,a case, however, where our liberal views must give way to protec-
tive ones, for our own safety. The right of authorship is pretty well
acknowledged in all civilized countries, and, although in our humble
opinion our little productions are hardly worth grumbling about—we
take up our pen in support of Editorial rights when we think we have
room for complaint. Liberal as we may be we cannot sit calmly by
and see—first our style, and lastly the tenor of our leading articles
taken as the basis of similar ones, as has been unmistakably the case
in the “Gazette” offlast week. The public will perhaps recollect our
leader of last Wednesday was chiefly directed against the fallacy of
putting too much faith in hearsay, and advising every immigrant to
throw on one side all absurd speculative views, and to make up his
mind to buckle to and carve out his own fortune by dint of industry
and economy. Any one who has read the article on “ The man for
the Colony” in the “ Gazette,” must in fairness acknowledge that it
embodied our views of the week previous, the only difference being
a more enlarged and minute description. The tenor of the articles
is synonymous. In candour we will endorse nearly every particular,
but on one point we must beg to differ, and that is—we never heard
of a Colony where there are neither Cooks nor Ladies’-maids, as the
article decidedly leads us to suppose. The description of what a
man has to undergo would apply better to an aboriginal state, or at
least to the very lowest outskirts of civilization.
Now we have had our little growl, we will continue our hints to our
fellow-passengers. Besides the “great expectations” we briefly
alluded to, there is one notion very prevalent thro’ the ship, and that
is, most seem to think going up in the bush is the great end of
immigration. We venture to assert that not one half of our friends
will do what they talk about. Many among us are totally unfitted for
roughing it, and from the nature of their previous occupation would
do for better in towns. To go up the bush is easy enough, as it only
requires a man to possess a good pair of legs to accomplish the feat
by walking a few miles away from any township. But to live in the
bush is not quite so easy a task. A man must either possess capital
or hire himself as a servant to follow out his little romance about
bushing it. We therefore advise our readers who look upon this
mode of life as the acme of Arcadian felicity, to think a while before
they take to it on speculation. Farm laboring is decidedly hard
work. Shepherding is by no means a lively occupation. Stock-riding
is not very easy, and one stands a great chance of breaking his neck
if he is located in a timbered country. To the tough, hard, sinewy
A VOICE FROM “MY MARY ANNE.”
Some horrid tale teller,
Some low sort of “ feller,”
Has us poor damsels most basely aggriered ;
What had we done to him ?
What had come over him ?
Think of the punishment we have received.
No more on deck must we,
Join in the revelry,
But to our bunks most unwilling must go;
Were he the sufferer,
Would he not make a stir ?
How’d he at sev’n like to go down below ?
To punish this perfidy,
There is no remedy,
We are hut victims of some foolish whim ;
We hope though that dozens
Of fleas and their cousins,
Will hover around and make mince-meat of
HUNGRY THOUGHTS.
When hunger calls,
As oft befals,
Us mortals here on board ;
Who cures the pain ?
And ne’er in vain,
Why, who but Mister Ward.
THE MERCURY, DECEMBER 4, 1861.
Correspondence.
His powers are great,
His temper straight,
Our wants he does supply;
But won’t be done
By any one,
So it’s no use to try.
The ladies call,
And try “some stall,”
To move him from his course;
Soft he replies,
But still denies,
Though urged by gentle force.
If bright eyes can’t
When cook says shan’t
O’erturn his stern decree;
But sends them back.
With no “ soft tack.”
To relish with their tea.
Then what’s our chance,
What use to dance,
So oft near Galley fire,
If Ward says “ No,”
It is no go,
So perish our desire.
Ph.D.
TWO Sons of Crispin, wise in their own conceit, beg to inform the
public that they are immediately prepared to repair the understand-
ings of those whose sole want is to walk on the slippery deck in a hoot-
iful manner. Address NICHOLAS AND HAMPSON, Skylight Cabin,
Chimney Row. N.B.—Please ask at the Cook’s Galley.
F CLARKE, Merchant Tailor, Clothier, and Outfitter, begs to
• announce that he is ready to execute commissions in the above.
Repairs neatly executed. Gents’ own materials made up. “ A stitch in
time saves nine.” Address 5, Colonial Row, Upper Steerage.
Gratis.
laborer or good rider, they are very well suited, but to the man who
has been habituated to the pen or yard measure, such occupations are
totally unfitted. Farming—land, sheep, or cattle. —The former re'
quires capital and perseverance to succeed, the latter takes more
money we fear than most of us possess. In conclusion —we take the
liberty of offering a few words of advice to the new-chum who has
more energy than bank notes. Take any situation that offers, either
in town or country, and in twelve mounths you will be able to know
more about the colony, and how far it is suited to you. Better to wait
a while and gradually gain experience, than rush blindly into specula-
tions where utter failure might be the result.
Trust no man. Neither lend nor borrow. Pocket Pride.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Enquirer.— We have not heard of any duty being charged on English
goods. No duty is levied in New South Wales or Victoria except on
Spirituous Liquors, &c.
An Injured Woman. —Divorce is only to be obtained in Law or Eccle-
siastical Courts; the best plan is to kiss and make it up.
X.Y.Z.—We never heard of any.
—♦—
To the Editor of the Mercury
Sir, —I am a very bashful young man, and tho’ single at present, lam
exceedingly fond of the society of the gentle sex, but really Sir, on
board this ship, where the dear creatures are as thick and sweet as buds
on a rose-tree, I do’nt know what to do or which way to turn. Now Sir,
I should not like every one to know it, but I have a shocking habit of
falling in love at first sight, and what makes matters worse, I have lately
had several attacks of this dangerous complaint, but how am I to help
myself, what can Ido to prevent it ? The dear darlings are such delight-
ful creatures, particularly some of them, that lam done for at once ; I
do’nt know who they are, or whether they know me, but I feel a sort of a
feeling, and all at once a spasmodically convulsive shudder seizes my
interestingly fragile frame, and, with a sigh of heart-breaking intensity, I
own invself vanquished. At the present moment lam suffering intense
pangs from having been simultaneously smitten with one angel in the
saloon, two in the steerage, four in the second cabin, and three single
young women from the depths below; each of these charming creatures
is equally magnificanbandanduallacious ; some I must not marry, and I
cannot marry all the remainder. Pray what am Ito do under the above
circumstances, I should reallv be obliged by any advice you can give,
I am, &c., CUPID.
[Answer.— ohoot Yourself ~Ev. M.]


Local News.
—♦ —
Public Auction. —Yesterday afternoon an auction postponed from the
previous Monday took place. The time of sale was fixed for 2 o’clock,
ana a few minutes previous to that hour, a most efficient bell-man pro-
claimed the approaching sale. Mr. Ryder, the auctioneer of the day,
mounted his rostrum a few minutes after the time fixed. The articles for
disposal were numerous, and consisted of cheese, candles, onions, pocket-
knives, shirts, towels, men’s clothes, overcoats, soap, fire-arms, bush and
sailors’ knives, scarfs, New York zebra coats, Ceylon jewelry, pickles,
blacking, household furniture, and house-wives. A numerous and
fashionable company attended, and several spirited biddings took place,
especially for a lady’s satin joupon, or petticoat, which eventually fell to
Crispin’s favored son. The provisions and cutlery cut off well, but the
clean linen seemed rather a drug, and biddings went off flatly. A very
spirited contest took place for the possession of the bush-knives. What
caused the run upon this particular article we do not know, but only
suppose that a Company of Bushrangers is in course <of formation. The
usual amount of chaffing and chaffering took place, and after the last bid
the Auctioneer announced that another Sale would shortly take place.
Concert. —The serious illness of a lady passenger prevented the appear-
ance of the Saldanha Minstrels on Saturday last. On the first approach
of fine weather we hear there will be a performance.
A SAD STORY OF FOWL “ SPECKLE-ATION.”
Oh Mercury, Mercury! rare constellation,
I scarce can address you without hesitation,
Yet I think you should publish, without paliation,
The following, wire-drawn, murderous narration.
First, with apparently much lamentation,
The paper I read it in, starts its narration:—
A murder, “it states,’’ that wo’nt bear toleration,
Had lately occurred at a neighbouring station:
A Goose and two Hens (quite a bright constellation,
Now Christmas is coming), without consideration,
Had been most basely slaughtered; and so much agitation
Was caused by the deed, that strict investigation
Was straightway commenced, and such great variation
Appeared, when I read through the examination
Of the witnesses called by the Constabulation.*
The commissioners suffered from great agitation,
And the meeting adjourned, amid much consternation.
The Leech was then called, who anatomization
Quickly performed, but the mystification
Only increased by such Beale speculation.
The Coroner sat; and w ithout deviation
The witnesses spoke, but no alteration
Was come to; though every one thought reparation
Should be forthwith afforded, to Goose’s relation.
EDWARD DUCK.
* The constabulary force (new word) —See “ Saldanha Dictionary,”
No. 6.
Some few weeks ago, it was our painful duty, to give a slight sketch of
the unhappy aspect of our social horizon. At the time we believe
the picture was not very much overdrawn. It is now with much
pleasure, that we can announce a more decidedly peaceful era in our
existence. From what cause it springs or where it originates, we
know not; but every one must feel fully impressed that there is more
unanimity of feeling and more cordiality amongst classes, than hereto-
fore. And well it is that it is so, for in the Colonies most of us will
meet with strangers, always ready to take every advantage of the
want of experience of new chums; no one can tell, therefore, to
whom, at some future day, he or she may look for help and assistance.
The best of all policies is to make friends, and as many of them as we
possibly can, whilst we have the chance.
Well may we say that chaos reigns supreme on board ship, and that
the moment the anchor is weighed, a perfect overthrow of all our
hitherto preconceived notions of domestic economy takes place.
Woman asserts her sway, and man becomes a patient nondescript sort
of animal, merging the housemaid into the washerwoman, and the
cook into the nursemaid, and this eccentric movement is equally dis-
cernible in all—from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the
poorest, from the inhabitant as well of the saloon as of the steerage
and although we cannot say we like to see one of the lords of creation
lugging a great child about, or else engaged in the somewhat dubious
occupation of emptying slops, still, we must confess that there are
THE STEERAGE COOK.
Under the lifeboat's narrow shade,
The cooking galley stands;
The Cook a chaining man is he,
A grin his face expands,
As all day long his subjects como
With puddings in their hands.
His hair is brown, and lank, and long,
His face is like the tan;
His brow is dripping o’er with sweat,
He’ll drink what beer he can ;
He laughs at passengers and crew,
And careth not for man.
Week in, week out, from morn to night,
You may hear the burgoo flow,
Or the pea soup sobbing in the pot,
With a measured heave and slow,
Like water in a washing tub,
When a lively breeze doth blow.
The single ladies from below,
Look in at the open door,
For they love to see the cooking range,
And hear the ovens roar ;
And catch his sugary words that fly.
As he blarnies “ Con Amore.”
MY WADDLE.
Who comes to see we’re safe in bed,
And won’t by gammon e’er be led,
But always does as he has said.
With Lantern.
Who’s daily found in depths below,
Where we all often gladly go,
And when we want him, we well know
His Lantern.
Who comes to see our floors are scraped,
(Sometimes e’en before we’re draped),
And to make sure we’re all ship-shaped,
With Lantern.
THE MERCURY, DECEMBER 11, 1861.
He goes at night into the waist,
And sits among the girls,
With his back against the ratlines,
And his face amongst their curls;
He heedeth not the envious rage
Of the less fort’nate churls.
They crowd like houris round him,
Singing in Paradise,
And each arm clasps a dear one,
As at his ease he lies ;
In starlight or in moonshine,
Facing the Western skies.
Thus boiling, hissing, baking,
Onward through life he goes,
Each morning sees the burgoo done,
With tea his evenings close ;
And burnt pea soup delicious,
Hath ear’nt a night’s repose.
Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend.
For the lesson thou hast taught,
And if ever by a galley-fire
In this sad life I’m caught;
At night I’ll seek thy Sweet reward,
For the toil the day hath brought.
SHORTFELLOW.
Who, at early dawn of day,
Downward wends his lonely way,
In order water pipes to lay,
By Lantern.
Who, as days and weeks draw out,
And we hail Christmas with a shout.
Will show us we can’t do without
IMPROMPTU —ON THE KITTEN
Playful little tigress,
Nurs’d in ladies’ dresses;
Would that I were thee,
Receiving their caresses. JOE.
Advertisements.
His Lantern.
MESSRS. NICHOLAS AND HAMPSON beg to inform their friends
that they have Removed from their hitherto smoky locality, ro a
more airy position on the Main-deck, where they may be found, meal
times and wet weather excepted.
WANTED immediately op landing, by a young couple, a few articles
of Furniture. A four-post bedstead essential. ‘Address, Jessamine,
Main-deck, Starboad side.
WANTED, an Albatross. Apply to the Steward, 2nd Cabin. N.B.
—No Cape-pigeons need apply.
LOST, a Gold Signet Ring, with large white stone. A reward will be
given to the finder. P., Mercury Office.
LOST on Saturday morning last, our allowance of Burgoo. Whoever
finds the same will be re-warded at the Cook’s Galley.
Gratis.
many things that a man may do on board ship, that so far from lessen-
ing him in our opinion, not only increases his marital dignity, but
proves to his better half how essential a husband is to her, and how
extremely helpless she would be without one. This being, therefore,
an established fact, we recommend our young unmarried friends to
look around them, for we are of the number of those who consider
that man and woman were made for each other, each in their proper
position ; but we most distinctly beg to state, that we do not consider
it necessary for a young man to turn “ molly coddle,” or to do family
nursing “in public” unless on special occasions. It may be conve-
nient, but still we don’t like to see it.
In answer to our Contemporary’s article headed “Mercurial Oint-
ment,” we beg to say as follows-Istly. Our accusations of last
week we again reiterate, and, in addition, beg to refer to the style of
Advertisements appearing in the last number of the Gazette. If they
are not copies of those in the Mercury, “ The one’s so much like both,
that one can’t tell t’other from which.” 2ndly. We smile at the fol-
lowing remark:—“ Notwithstanding all the excellence of our Contem-
porary’s style, it is not one we should be disposed to imitate.” How
sorry we are for this ! Perhaps the grapes are sour; at all events, we
can most positively state, that “ Washing Pockethandkerchiefs” had
nothing to do with our article. 3rdly. We are sorry our Grammar
should have been attacked, but we cannot grieve about the matter.
Had, however, our Contemporary taken the trouble to look at another
copy of our paper, he would have discovered that the error was


simply clerical, and “ marked” for “ alteration but 'we must say,
that considering the “ wealth of subjects” he boasts of, he might have
done a kinder act than endeavour to pick a hole in his neighbour’s
coat, for the sake of filling up his paper.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
P. —The proper plan is to apply to the Captain.
Walter. —Brisbane is not an island.
Correspondence.
—♦—
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sib, —About a fortnight ago I had the honor of writing you with
reference to a most unmerited and unjustifiable attack upon your political
opinions, in a previous Gazette , under the signature ot “ Conservative.”
Since that date, however, two further numbers of that paper have been
published, but no notice has been taken of the subject by either the writer
of the letter or the Editor of the Paper. Now this silence shows dis-
tinctly one of two things—either political fear, or absence of matter. If
the former, the writer of the letter must be considered as Mow contempt;
if the latter, pity and forgive him, for then truly the old motto. Ex nihilo
nihil fit will be most applicable. —I am, &0., OBSERVER.
NATURAL HISTORY.
On Saturday afternoon much excitement was caused by the sudden ap-
pearance on deck of a number of the inhabitants of the Southern Ocean ;
they were transplanted to their destination by their own private Atlantic
Cable , or Sea-toeed Telegraph. What the immediate object of their visit
was, we know not, but Professor Anderson, under whose immediate
patronage they made their entree, caused as much sensation by the exhi-
bition of the magically-natural style of their composition, as if he had
been illustrating his own particular natural magic. Feelings were aroused
by the examination of their feelers, and their movements were so rapid,
that some would-be as rapid individuals whose object was easily seen
through, were compelled to take barnacles in order to examine these
curious creatures, evidently not only desiring to see them, but to seewith
them. Temporary accommodation has been afforded for them in various
parts of the ship, and we wish them a pleasant sojourn amongst us.
On Monday last a fine specimen of the Albatross Communis , or Avis
Cummingsiensis was invited on board for the purpose of examination and
anatomization, A line was -dropped to it several days ago, but no satis-
factory answer was received until the above date, although during the
interval the anxiety for its arrival had not in the least aba[i)ted. We are
sorry, however, to be obliged to state, that immediately on its appearance
amongst us, it commenced such peculiar gambols that it was taken in
charge at once by the proper authorities, and eventually permanently
secured by the Beak ; in short, making a very undignified appearance for
so downy a bird. No sooneAvas it prevented from doing further mischief,
than a host of kind friends rushed eagerly to the poll, we presume, on
hospitable thoughts intent, as they all seemed most eager to stuff the now
arrival. Most unfortunately, however, the poor thing died from a pressure
of blood on the brain, and great crowds visited it during its last moments.
In appearance it was white, slightly marked with black, having the usual
long hill of the species. Its eye was bright and menacing, and the wings
when expanded measured, from tip to tip, about 10 feet. Yesterday
morning a post mortem examination took place with the most satisfactory
results. The flesh was ascertained to be fishy in flavour, though beef-
steaky in appearance : the legs and wings pipe stem-my, and the web feet
bacca pouchy. Notwithstanding, therefore, its premature dissolution, the
enquiry was considered a good case for future reference , and the operator,
no doubt, has feathered his mesPpretty well.
IMPROMPTU. — Water Time.— 6 a.m.
Oh ! what a go,
Waddy and Joe
Near came to words, about pumping;
Wad said Joe must,
But Joe said be cuss’d
If he would, and that Wad might go jumping.
No. 7.
THE MERCURY,
A good deal has been already written on the Future Prospects of
Ourselves in the new land. We believe firmly, that the subject
cannot be too well ventilated. We are sorry, however, we are not
able to look upon Emigration to the shores of Australia with that
poetic and heroic view that our contemporary fortunately possesses.
We teel almost confident, that the main object that has brought
together 400 souls to this ship, is the hope of bettering their condi-
tion with a view of laying something by for a good old age, of which
there was very little prospect in the old country. Again, ice take a
—♦—
Sports and Pastimes. —The late cold weather has set the minds of our
young friends to work to find out some amusement to counteract the effect
of the chilly breezes lately experienced. Pacing the deck is one mode of
getting a little calorie into the system, and is all very well, but rather
monotonous without it is enlivened by an occasional trip over one of our
young Saldanha’s, as he or she gets in the way. On Saturday evening
last the deck presented a busy scene, as groups surrounded a skipping-rope,
swing, and cord elastique, all of which amusements tend considerably to
brace the muscles and send the blood hot and flowing through all parts of
the body. One novelty was-presented (which we cannot leave unnoticed)
in an attempt to imitate the wondrous Leotard in the flying trapeze. The
gentleman who came nearest to him in flying from one rope to another,
was our friend the Purser. This is not the first time we have had occasion
to admire his agility. The Doctor, too, tried his physical powers, but was
not quite so successful in his efforts as he is in his medical comforts.
Other gentlemen followed suit ’till night put an end to their flighty
amusement.
Local News.
School News. —Nothing to communicate. We presume the children
are having their long vacation, as it is some time since we saw them at
their accustomed post.
Fowl Fishing Extraordinary. —On Monday the great event came off. or
rather cam eon, in the capture of the first Albatross taken on board the ship,
Cumming's events cast their shadows before them,” and the proverb
proved true in this case, as it was not long before three of his brethren
cast their shadows on the stern, as they were, one by one, gently hauled
to their last resting place on the deck. Great ovations took place as each
bird successively made his appearance over the taffrail. General hilarity
prevailed, and luckily no accidents occurred.
THE LAST OF THE PICKLES.
Tune. —Last Rose of Summer,
’Tis the last of the Pickles,
Left soaring alone;
And its little companions
Are eaten and gone.
No kindred cucumber,
No gherkin is nigh,
To respond to the last Pickle’s
Sorrowful sigh.
BIRTH,
I’ll not leave thee, thou lost one,
To pine in the jar,
While thy kindred are scattered
In regions afar.
Thus kindly I seize thee,
And eat thee up fast,
With the mournful reflection
That thou art the last.
On the sth instant, the lady (dog) of Mr. Shaw, Purser, of a Son and
Two Daughters. Mother and family doing well.
DEATH.
On the 6th instant, Mr. Porker, Junior, from the effects of an overdose
of cold steel —administered by the butcher. Eequiescat in Pace.
Advertisements.
LOST, Stolen, or Strayed, a Shot Belt, fitted with Spring Swivel for
Pouch. The Cove wo’t lost it will thank the present holder to
forward it to the Mercury Office. N.B.—No questions will be asked.
TX/ANTED, a Husband. Apply to EILY O’CONNOR, care of Editor
V T of the Mercury.
FOR SALE, a Quantity of Manure, found in the Burgoo of this morn-
ing. Parties intending to commence farming in Queensland, will
find it very suitable for the first crops of Potatoes and Indian Corn.
Apply to T. PEPPER, CORN, and CO., Export Stores, Lower Deck.
WANTED, a Few Members to complete a Discussion Society, now in
course of formation. Address SECRETARY, Mercury Office.
13UBLIC AUCTION. —Notice is hereby given, that a Public Sale will
take place on MONDAY next (weather permitting). All persons
having goods to dispose of, will please communicate with the undersigned
as early as possible. W. B. RYDER, Auctioneer, 2, Portland Place,
2nd Cabin.
DECEMBER
18, 1861.
Gratis.
practical view of the question, and cannot see in the undertaking any-
thing chivalrous or worthy of the pages of future historians. If,
instead of proceeding to a country that had been colonized over
twenty years, we had been going (like Columbus) in search of new
worlds, or of settling on such as had been only lately discovered, we
then might feel a little of that loftier conception of our self-sacrifices
and our devotion to the cause ot England’s greatness. The Colony
of Queensland is “ new only in name,” and native-born white children
may be found in Brisbane older in years than many of our fellow
passengers. Knowing this, we feel it our duty to speak like men of


business, instead of using visionary language on a subject of so much
importance. On perusing the columns of some of the late Brisbane
papers, our attention was drawn to the Labor Market Reports, which
generally give some notion of the prospects of immigrants as to
future employment. We there find that the markets were pretty-well
filled by constant fresh arrivals from the southern colonies; also, that
on the arrival of a ship from England, then expected, a surplus might
be naturally anticipated. Since that date (June last) the “ Wansfell”
pioneer of the Black Ball line, has most probably arrived at her des-
tination. It is therefore fair to presume, that the Saldanha’s entrance
into Moreton Bay with our large family, will add greatly to the num-
ber of unemployed, which may, by no means, prove agreeable to many
of us ! Men of small capital, who can take up the country in farm
allotments, are those that are principally wanted for that country.
Looking at the matter, therefore, in a serious light, we earnestly
implore those who do not possess much of the “ needful” to be care-
ful of every penny they possess. Beware, therefore, of cards or
other means of making it fly, for a time may come when the “ truth”
of our remarks may prove uncomfortably apparent.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Harry. —Your letter is of too personal a nature for room in our columns.
Upper Deck. —The same answer applies to your communication.
Correspondence.
—♦ —
To the Fditor of the Mercury.
Str, — Colonization, or as the Gazette calls it. Colonizing, seems to have
occupied no small portion of editorial space during the past few weeks,
though the exceeding weakness of the articles that have been brought
forward, is as unjustifiable as the method of treatment of the subject is
unfair to the weaker sex, of which I am a humble member. For such
information on the subject as I have received, I am truly grateful, and I
think I may safely come to the conclusion, that the would-be male
colonists will succeed if he only minds what he’s about, and uniformly
exhibit a strong heart and hand ; but how (to use the words of your Con-
temporary) he is to change “ the primaeval forest into a smiling home-
stead,’’ and cause “ the wilderness to blossom as a rose,” and this, of
course in solitary grandeur, I cannot conceive. He certainly must have a
woman to help him, or he will soon find himself (to use the old saying)
“all a muck.’’ I therefore assert, that in the article I have quoted
leading only in the sense of leading us astray, —
“There is one omission I regret,
A thing which would have great effect,
For I am quite convinced that no man
Will do as well, as he can do with Woman.”
Now, it is all very well for the editorial pen to soar into the clouds above,
and go into rhapsodies about “the wanderings of Abraham, the building of
Salamis, or the emigration of the Pilgrim Fathers,’’ but as they could not
do without women, no more can the Pilgrim Sons, and what is much more
to the purpose, we women do not intend to let them have an excuse for so
doing. Emigration Agents may preach as long as they like, that single
women go abroad for the single purpose of working, but such sermons
should only be preached to the Marines. For my part, I candidly confess
Igo abroad with decidedly matrimonial views. The facts speak for them-
selves, but should doubts arise in the minds of any gentleman inclined to
be sceptical, just let him pop the question without loss of time, to your
obedient servant, LIZZIE ARTLESS.
Dear Sib, —Dr. Combe, in one of his celebrated works, states that a
lymphatic temperament inclines to the wish for sleep. Now, I, although
of a highly nervous nature, and, of course, exactly of an opposite make-
up to the one quoted, beg to say, that on board this ship, sleep is one of my
greatest pleasures, especially at night—it shortens the voyage, and is the
best stay for an empty stomach. I wish therefore, through the medium of
your columns, to ask as a favour of those who indulge in a stamping-the-
deck propensity, to leave off their little feats of endurance, and desist from
walking the decks after 10 p.m., when all quiet people are supposed to be
in bed, for the purpose of getting that rest of which they, the stampers,
prevent the enjoyment.—l am, sir, &c., SOMNUS.
[We perfectly agree with “ Somnus” in his remarks. The stamping
has grown into a positive nuisance, especially at night and early in the
morning.— Ed. M.]
VERBATIM COPY FROM THE LOG OF A SALDANHA
JUVENILE, AGED TWELVE YEARS.
Diary, Thursday, November, 1861. —Got up at 7 o’clock this morning.
Mack, a sailor I believe, sent by the Captain to wake passengers. Washed
myself at half-past seven. Had breakfast, consisting of rice and coffee.
Eat the rice and relished it. Could not drink coffee, bitter and strong ;
had very little. Writing this before dinner. Don’t know what to have.
It consists, I believe, of preserved potatoes, cold pork, or some such stuff,
and that wretched oatmeal pudding.
Local News.
—♦—
We have no events to record that will prove interesting to our readers
with the exception of the following :
Public Auction. — A sale of miscellaneous articles took place on
Monday last, which, as usual, was well attended. The auctioneer made
his appearance at 2 o’clock precisely. The first article put up for compe-
tition consisted of a large parcel of dried fish, which though apparently
2nd class in quality, was declared to be class in flavour ; the bidders,
however, were not to be caught by chaff, and declined to be set against
each other by any such old soldiers. The military veterans were therefore
put away “to live to sell another day,” A new description of cracker was
then attempted by the auctioneer, who described them as Port Wine
Biscuits, and after a spirited contest they were knocked down to one of
our lady passengers. Fruits were dull, though jams were currant. Tallow
sold well, and many people dipped into their pocket with a most satisfac-
tory result; those unable to obtain the article waxed wroth, and with
small kinds some were delighted. Clothes went off well, and in one case
seemed to suit a nautical dandy. We hope he will see fit to bid on a
future occasion. The leather market was dull, and boots only half what
they should have been, which we consider odd. Fire-arms went off well,
but without doing much damage. The auctioneer’s sauce was quickly
taken up. Hosiery did well, although fleshings did better than flushings.
Cotton handkerchiefs went off, but bidders would not cotton to “ ties,”
even though recommended. Other things were much as usual.
Discussion Society.— On Tuesday a meeting of this society was held
amidships, and Mr. Francis was unanimously called to the chair. The
question for discussion was “ Which is the best suited for the colony, the
married or single man ?” and was opened by Mr. Lucock in a very able
and spirited manner on behalf of the married man. Mr. Scott, in a
humorous speech, replied on behalf of the single man, and Messrs. Perkins,
Downing, Barnes, Sewell, Cardew, Ryder, and Gilchrist, severally spoke
on the subject, and after a reply from the opener, the question was put to
the meeting, and resulted in a show of hands in lavour of the married
side of the question. The usual vote of thanks to the chairman was
moved by Mr. Ryder, The following subject will be opened by Mr.
Gumming, on Saturday evening next: —“Has the discovery of Gold
benefited the Australian Colonies ?”
Original Poetry. t
—♦—
BASIA.
“ Sweets to the sweet,” so do the Poets sing,
Sweet are such sweets that jo; and bliss do
bring,
Singular enough it is, we can’t den;,
Such sweets are sweeter than the sweets we
In pop’lous towns, or e’en in desert waste,
On land, on sea, to seek it all men haste.
What then is this so blissful and so dear,
That sorrow can alleviate, gloom can cheer f
In earl; ;outh its comforts we enjo;,
In it our childhood’s fane; finds alio;.
In short ’th master and supreme o’er all,
Helpless to its fascinations strong men fall.
To press a ros; cheek and cherr; lip,
At home, abroad, e’en in this ver; ship.
Wh; ! ’tis the acme of all earthl; bliss,
And ma; be called in simple words—
A. KISS.
bn;.
B; sweets I don’t mean extract from mo-
lasses,
But sweets as prevalent among all classes.
The young, the old, the poor, the high in
» fame,
Relish such sweetmeats equal); the same.
A SAILOR'S CONVERSATION WITH A
LANDSMAN ON BOARD THE SAL-
DANHA. By an Old Salt.
What’s a calm? says a landsman once to
me,
Says I when she’s not sailing fast;
When it don’t blow hard on the weather or
lee,
And the sails hang fast to the roast.
A blow says he, pra; what now do you mean,
Oh ! do’nt make me look so pale;
Not a blow in your eye, as mine ma; have
been,
But in the wind’s eye in a gale.
Oh! let me go, says the landsman, says he,
And do not frighten me so;
If once I’m on shore, I’ll not go to sea,
Till my grandmother tells me to.
The weather says he, why how can that be ?
Says I pr’haps you do’nt not know;
But whether or not, a calm at sea
Is a damn’d sight worse nor a blow.
Your grandma be biowed, says I to him,
See the old ship on her beam ends;
So you’d better sing some psalm or hymn,
And then write home to your friends.
LOST, by a Young Man, a Heart; was quite safe on leaving the Docks.
Wanted, a substitute for the abovej Apply ito GEORGE, Mercury
Office.
WANTED, some Hair Oil. Address O’T., “ The Nunnery,” Lower
Deck.
QHEAP JACK IS COMING!
WANTED, a Few Gentlemen and Ladies to set their wits to work to
provide some Amusements for Christmas Eve. IT’S ONLY ONCE
A YEAR.


No. 8.
Christmas now rules the land, but, being where we are, in the
middle of the rolling Atlantic, at the moment these lines are penned,
we are as yet uncertain what the New Year may bring forth. Year
after year passes away—New Year’s Day after Now Year's Day
comes—they are here, they are gone—“ dust to dust, ashes to ashes.”
Betwen their advent and their departure, what events may have
occurred !—what joys or miseries passed away!—Avhat hopes and
fears buried in comparative oblivion ! Dare we look back ? Can we
bear the retrospect? and, if so, dare we look forward? Are we
satisfied with ourselves and with our doings ? Let us consider all
these things. As yet, we know nothing of the coming year. As yet,
we are uncertain whether, in the land we ure going to, it will prove
the grim old tyrant we have too often found it in the Old Country,
armed with all the terrors and difficulties, real and imaginary, we
have been accustomed to ; or, on the other hand, will it shine brightly
over us, and, with roseate hue and genial warmth, rouse our hearts
and senses to joy and gladness at our new hopes, our new land, our
new prospects, and our new associations ?
A Happy New Year, therefore, to you all, kind friends ! May the
hearts of those well stricken in years be more gladdened than of old!
May the hearts of the young be lighter and more rejoicing than in
former times ! We wish all kinds of happiness to all--that those
now proceeding to the new land may fight the battle of life bravely,
and in future years gather round them children and grandchildren—
that the stream of true love may run as smoothly and pleasantly as
the silver streamlet through the verdant meadow in dear old England
—that the little ones now among us may grow and increase in know-
ledge and goodness, and, as each succeeding year comes, may they
recollect the celebrated war- cry of 11 Forward /”
We are but a little band, a mere speck, in the vast desert of life;
but as, in former years, the Pilgrim Fathers set their faces resolutely
to a given track, and succeeded —scorning opposition and despising
rebuke —in gaining their point, and in founding, by their resolu-
tion, the greatest colony the world has ever seen, so shall we, if we
proceed steadily onward, overcome all difficulties and surmount all
apparent obstacles. We have a new Year and a new World before
us. Let us consider them together, and. as we hope in the new
country to bring forth earthly fruits, so, in the new year , may we hope
to reap eternal fruit?, where “ moth and rust do not corrupt, and where
thieves break not in nor steal.”
Correspondence.
—♦ —
To the Fditor of the Mercury.
Sir, —lt appears thflt in a certain partof a certain ship called the Saldanha ,
for some time past, a good deal of altercation and discussion has been going
on with respect to the “ Night Watch.” Public meetings have been held,
rules have been agreed upon, the unanimous wishes of all have been con
suited, and the hours for keeping watch finally agreed to by the vote of the
majority, at a meeting of the whole of the dwellers in that particular part
of the ship. Things went on swimmingly at first, but at last a spirit of un-
willingness and rebellion, idleness and obstinacy, sprung up among a certain
few, led on by a valiant, tho’ somewhat minute, native of “ Cockeyne; ”
and from the commencement of the voyage to the present time, the same
select, though now, by no means to be envied few, have persisted in their
contumacy, and openly defied the powers of compulsion. Complaints were
of no use, threats fell on their ligneous and obfuscated comprehension with
no effect, hopers were hopeless; but at length, ever ready and willing for
the fray, lovely woman stepped in to the rescue, and with her never-failing
powers of endurance, openly offered to sustain the labours of the night
watch, for the respective defaulters, on every occasion during the voyage,
when the truculent heroes would, in the proper course of events, be on the
list for service; and, what is more to the purpose, four of these noble exam-
ples of the wrongly-called “ weaker sex,” actually sat up and watched in
turns from 10 p.m. one night to 6 a.m. the following morning, and this,
with the full knowledge of those whom it did mostly concern, who quietly
went to bed. Ido not envy them their dreams, and I am convinced that
they will, by their conduct, attain an unenvied notoriety. There should
be an end of this, and I hope the lesson will be profitable. I am, Sir, Yours,
&c., A MARRIED MAN.
Sir, —It might not prove uninteresting to your readers at this particular
season of the year, if I give them a sketch of a Christmas dinner I had
with some friends in Victoria. The summer of 1854 had been uhusually
hot on Forest Creek, and we were not surprised when the morning of the
25th December was ushered in with all the symptoms of one of those hot
winds from the North, that are bad for man and beast: close, stifling, and
oppressive, resembling more the blast from a baker’s oven than anything
else. I had been invited with a few friends to keep up the anniversary of
Christmas, by the host of the Prince Albert Hotel, and at 2 o’clock we sat
down, a very comfortable party, with doors and windows shut to keep out
THE MERCURY, DECEMBER 25, 1861.
Gratis.
the dust that was blowing in clouds outside. The thermometer standing
above 120 in the shade, most reasonable people would imagine, that on
such a perspiring occasion, the lightest delicacies of the season would be
provided ; but no, that would be contrary to the custom of following out
the old John Bull habit of never caring for climate ; he must have some
of the dishes of the old country, or he is not satisfied. The table, there-
fore, soon groaned under the weight of turkeys, fowls, ham, geese, roast
beef, winding up with plum-puddings and mince pies, and washed down,
of course, with copious draughts of beer. On the cloth being removed,
wine of every sort was soon pledged to absent friends, colonial toasts, and
our good selves. As you may imagine, after such a feast, the heat appeared
ten-fold, and there was some chance of a general falling off in the attack
on the bottles, when one of the waiters brought us the joyful intelligence
that a quantity of ice had just been received from Melbourne. Our Host
then proposed we should adjourn to the cellar, which, being underground,
was comparatively cool. Placing the claret in buckets of ice, we sat
chatting, drinking, and smoking, until, I am sorry to say, some of us looked
a little the worse for wear. Thus ended our Christmas dinner; and I hope
that, next year, everyone of your readers will be able to give such a good
account of one as I have. Yours, &c., OLD COLONIST.
Sir, —At this auspicious, and, to most, happy season, I cannot help pour-
ing out my evils into your editorial ear. lam a married man, and though
my wife may read these lines, she never can know that they were penned
by me, and I therefore seek relief and safety in thus writing you my sen-
timents, and those of other unfortunate young men in the same position as
myself. Now, Sir, the old adage that “ Christmas Day comes but once a
year,” is the only and solitary consolation I have left on board this good
ship Saldanha, in the year of our Lord 1861. I certainly never before
passed one of these anniversaries on board ship, and what is more, I never
want to pass another, for, foggy, to say the best of it, is the domestic pic-
ture at this present season; nothing seems to be right or to go right; the
wife, to use a mild term, is not quite so affectionate as usual, in fact, I
might almost say ,just t'other ! The small children are ill; the manufac-
ture of ornaments for Christmas trees is going on all around; all the babies
are screaming ; the ship rolling and creaking, and therefore the cooking or
boiling of the diurnal plum-pudding has become a dreadful uncertainty,
whereby the grief in the juvenile bosoms of my hopefuls is painful to wit-
ness, and I get blamed for the same, just as if it were my fault. If I stop
downstairs, I am told I am in the way, and if I go on deck, my better
half tells me, that lam never to be found when lam wanted. I really can-
not call my soul my own, and as to having any time to myself, “ the light
of other days has faded.’’ Oh, how I envy the free and unfettered bache-
lor, who goes, comes, and does as he likes; and I don’t mind confessing to
you on the quiet, that the vote that carried the question at discussion the
other day, on the married and single men for the colony, was made by me
on compulsion ; for my opinions are clearly those expressed by Mr. Scott
with reference to the subject, and I would most gladly, if I only dared,
avow my real sentiments to the world. I must now conclude, for my wife
is just calling me to mind the baby, while she takes her afternoon nap. So
no more at present from Yours, &c., PATERFAMILIAS.
MUSICAL INTELLIGENCE.
A Grand Concert that had for some time past been advertised, took
place on Christmas Eve, under the patronage of Captain Dawson and the
Officers of the ship. We have not space to give the Programme in detail,
and we shall therefore confine ourselves to a simple sketch of the proceed-
ings. The Main Deck was the scene of action, and was converted for the
nonce into a very fair concert room; forms and hencoops were pressed
into the service, to do duty as seats for the fair sex; flags were here and
there suspended, to add to the reality of the mise en scene. The only
drawbacks were the high wind and the intense cold, which, however, were
partly combatted by hanging spare sails to windward. The first part of
the proceedings commenced at seven o’clock, with some introductory Airs
by the band, after which a Prologue was spoken by Mr, Scott, and met
with great applause. We think it so good that we give it verbatim in
the next page. Then followed a Glee, with new words adapted for the
occasion, entitled “ Sail, Christmas Eve /” which we also give as follows:
Hail, Christmas Eve! | If joyous faces
As welcome as of old, All of us unfold,
For the Saldanha is our home to-day. I With such bright presence sadness flies away.
Hail! hail! hail! Hail 1 hail! hail!
The Duet of u Ave Sanctissima ,” sung by Mrs. Hassell and Mr. Francis,
was much applauded. The glee, “ See our oars with feathered spray,”
followed next, and was by many considered the gem of the evening. The
solo songs were given by Mrs. Hassell, Mrs. Beeston, Mrs. Brown, Miss
Cole, and Messrs. Pollock, Francis, Penney, Lewis, Wallace, and Downing,
each performer receiving his or her share of applause from a numerous au-
dience. The comic song of “ Lord Lovel ’’ was given by Mr. Scott in his
usual humorous style, and was rapturously encored. By this time the
shades of night had gathered over, making it necessary for lights to be
thrown on the subject; the latter were soon supplied, and lanterns were hung
in the most available places for shedding a lustre on the happy faces of the
spectators. A recitation by Mr. Manners of Hood’s “ Song of the Shirt,”


followed by an original address, written and delivered by the author, Mr.
Trotman, brought to a termination the first part of the programme. The
second part of the proceedings was set apart for the introduction of the
Saldanha minstrels in their Ethiopian entertainment. The company com-
prised the following gentlemen,—Messrs. Francis, Pollock, Wallace, Scott,
Inglefields, Penney, Daley, and Ryder. The usual number of sparkling
songs, witty sayings, and conundrums flew glibly and naturally from the
coloured gentlemen. The audience, both young and old, seemed highly
gratified and amused, if we may judge by the applause that greeted them.
As a finale, the National Anthem was sung by the Minstrels, and a hearty
chorus furnished by the audience. Before separating, three hearty cheers
were given for our worthy captain, who briefly responded, illuminating
his remarks by a liberal discharge of rockets, blue-lights, &c.
PROLOGUE WRITTEN FOR THE GRAND CONCERT BY MR.
SCOTT.
Kind friends, who sit around, pray list awhile to me.
And while I’m speaking to you, I hope you’ll quiet be ;
Excuse me ! I’m the prologue, wisely sent before,
Your wrath to deprecate, and pr’aps good will secure;
Much you must pardon, much, too, alas I excuse,
Your kind forbearance, therefore, don’t to us refuse;
We fear you’ll find our singing neither good nor clear.
Our stage is too confined, and your seats, too, we fear.
I’ve only come to tell you what we’re going to do,
To make the bill of fare acceptable to you;
At first we mean to give you, fate be willing.
As much as “ Jullien ’’ lately gave ycu for a shilling.
Of glees, of comic, and of sentimental songs,
Concluding each with chorus that to it belongs;
Then, not to make the evening’s frolic weaker,
We’ve got a very celebrated speaker,
Who will straightway, in manner mathematical,
Recite Hood’s “ Song of Shirt’’ in style theatrical;
Then, all serene, to finish up the Christmas spree,
The fam’d Saldanha Ministrels will give minstrelsy,
Performed by brothers, black as any blacking,
And who, Itiust, when seen, will not prove lacking.
But frolicsome, no doubt they’ll cause some fun.
And make you roar with laughteur ere they’ve done.
With these remarks, I close my modest rhythmic song,
And hope you will not think I’ve talked to you too long ;
Pray then our humble efforts do not take amiss,
And when we say farewell, oh, then, don’t hiss 1
Oh ! I forgot, there’s one more word to say,
I just remember, ’tis near Christmas Day ;
Happy returns 1 wish to each and all,
To young and old, as well as great and small,
And may each throbbing heart that now beats here,
Throb as emphatically in the coming year;
And may the future vision prove as bright.
As I now hope they do to all this night.
Local News.
—♦—
Schools. —On Monday last, the schools adjourned for the Christmas ho-
lidays. We ai’e not at present able to announce when they will be resumed.
Discussion Society.— Notwithstanding the unpleasantness of the wea-
ther, a meeting of the above Society took place on the main deck on Satur-
day evening last, to discuss the question—“ Whether the discovery of gold
was beneficial to the Australian colonies?” On Mr, Lucock’s being voted
to the chair, the opener, Mr. Gumming, spoke at some length in its favour,
and was ably supported by the following gentlemen:—Messrs. Perkins,
Downing, Crawford, and Barnes, and the opposition was led by Mr. Rider.
Messrs. Scott and Lewis followed on the same side, and on the vote being
No. 9.
Dear Readers, —As each of you grasps this Paper to read its
contents, consider that the “ Mercury” returns the pressure warmly,
and wishes each of you a Happy and Prosperous New Year. In a
casual retrospect of our short life as a ship’s journal, we congratulate
ourselves on the cordial manner our feeble attempts to please have
been responded to by our fellow passengers. To those unacquainted
with the secrets of a Marine Press, we beg to inform them that
sometimes our heart has almost failed of producing a readable Number,
from the paucity of news afforded by the events of the week, or as,
on some occasions, when the rolling and tossing about of the ship, com
bined with the cold, have so benumbed our editorial fingers, that with
difficulty we could write. Notwithstanding all these petty troubles,
however, we have kept faith with the Public, and brought forth a
Original Poetry.
—♦ —
Through the Southern Atlantic Friends
Swift and free our good ship glides, Talkii
And the light waves fast are sweeping, List’nii
Leaping gaily, kiss her sides. Of B
We have left our homes behind us,
Many a mile of dreary sea
Parts us now from what we have been,
And from all we yet may be.
Ah ! how many hopes and wishes
Will pursue us on our way,
Following kindly every morning,
Blessing us at close of day 1
Advertisements.
THE MERCURY, JANUARY 1, 1862.
put to the meeting, the question was carried in the affirmative. The pro-
ceedings concluded with the usual vote of thanks to the Chairman.
J uvenile Fete. —The great event of the week for the juveniles came to
an issue on Tuesday last, viz., the Christmas tree and treat for the child-
ren. The arrangements were under the superintendence of a Committee
ot ladies, who, we must say, have been indefatigable in their exertions to
make the matter a success. On Tuesday morning a grand trophy was
erected in the centre of the main deck, formed of ship’s muskets, pistols,
bayonets, and British ensigns. When completed, the ladies proceeded to
arrange the numerous articles for distribution. We are not sufficiently
well posted up in these matters, to describe the knick-knacks of all sorts
that were suspended so tastefully on every part of the tree, or trophy. The
whole was surmounted by a banner bearing the words, “ Praise God in the
Highest,” surrounded by a Christmas wreath. We must compliment
in the highest manner, the fair hands that manufactured the latter.
Where or how, on board ship, the materials were obtained to imitate
so closely the natural leaves puzzles ns immensely. After dinner,
the drawing took place, followed by the distribution of prizes. Each
child, on receiving his or her prize, received also a bun and some
nuts, kindly presented by our worthy captain. The breeze was rather too
strong for showing to the best advantage the trophy and its appendages ;
but some of the articles we saw in the children’s hands displayed a great
deal of care and inventive genius on the part of the fair givers. By about
four o’clock the affair terminated, all seeming highly gratified with its
complete success, the children all sunshine, and the parents appearing
proud of their offspring. The ladies who superintended the drawing and
distribution of the prizes were—Mrs. Francis, Mrs. Beeston, and the Misses
Curwen, Curtis, Reeves, Manners, and Spinks.
Accidents —Nat row Escape op One of the Passengers !! —As Mr.
McKie, one of the upper steerage passengers, was walking on the port
side of the ship, a block which happened to be swinging loose struck him
heavily on the temple, and for the moment caused some alarm among the
bystanders. We are happy, however, to inform our readers that the wound
has not proved of so serious a nature as was anticipated.
Friends are meeting round the fire-light.
Talking o’er our vessel's course,
List’ning fearful as the storm-wind
Of Becember roaicth hoarse.
Long and drear the months will seem
Until they hear from us again,—
Those who long to walk beside us,
Aiding us in joy or pain.
Let us strive with strong endeavour
That we may unite once more
All those tender ties we sever,
Parting from qur native shore.
LCST,'a Latch Key; the finder will oblige by bringing it to the owner,
Mr. BURGESS, Second Cabin.
LOST, a Gentleman’s Pocket Book, containing half-a-dozen cane-bot-
tomed chairs, half-a-dozen knives and forks, box of mahogany tapers,
three sacks of mashed potatoes, a lot of burgoo with the chill of, a breast of
mutton in long sleeves, and other small-sized large articles. 10s. worth of
reward will be paid to the person keeping the same for the sake of the
owner, A. T. BOYD, Regent-square, Second Cabin.
LOST, a Sheath Knife, W.R. on the handle. If found, to be brought to
the STEWARD, Second Cabin.
NOTICE. —A Grand Concert will take place on New Year’s Eve. Fur-
ther particulars will be announced.
Gratis.
Paper every week. Onr object has been to please, though we may
have laid ourselves open to the criticism of our friends.
In all human probability, we shall not have the pleasure of address-
ing you on many more occasions. Candidly speaking, no one will
feel more delighted than ourselves at the sight of Moreton Bay; yet,
at the same time, we cannot help feeling some regret that the tie that
has hitherto hound us closely to all on board will he so soon severed.
In conclusion, we hope that every succeeding year will prove more
and more successful than the last, to all our kind readers on board the
Saldanha !
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Enquirer. —Every Immigrant above 14 years of age is reckoned as an
adult, and by the 20th sec. of the Act, has a right to a Land Order.


Correspondence.
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, —Many letters have been written by many people on many subjects
in the papers that have been published by you and your contemp rary on
board this ship, but I cannot understand how (with the large number of
swells—male and female—now on board) the subject of dress should
have been omitted, and though I do not pretend to be very competent on
the subject, I do not intend to allow so glorious an opportunity to pass
without making some remarks with reference to the same. In the first
place I will proceed upon the broad basis, that dress was invented for three
distinct purposes,—lst, to cover the body; 2nd, to ornament the form and
endeavour to improve upon nature; and 3rd, to comply with the supposed
decencies and necessities of life, or rather of our fallen state. The first
and last of these heads we can dismiss on the ground of conventionality ;
but the second one! why, it would require the patience of Job and the
general acquirements of an admirable Crichton to come within a mile of
the facts. All sides of the question are open to discussion and argument,
but still there are some idiosyncrasies that I cannot understand. Who
invented bonnets, peg-tops, crinolines, balmoral boots, and all-round
collars? Can you answer this, sir? Perhaps you will say they are
fashionable, and that a change of fashion is pleasant; if so, why are not
these luxuries abundant on board ship? Have you ever studied the
human form divine? and if so, can you imagine that any possible means
of distortion has ever been, or ever will be, invented so thoroughly com-
plete as those invented by, and revelled in, on board ship by the quondam
followers of the fickle goddess Fashion ? I will endeavour in a future letter
to give a more detailed account of my observations with regard to the
above all-absorbing matter. In the mean time, I am, &c.,
GRUMBLER.
To the Editor of the Mercury
Mv Dear Godson, —My position as messenger of the gods gives me an
opportunity of hearing what’s going on above, which does not occur to
you or any other ordinary mortal. I therefore think it will prove in-
teresting to you, if I relate a conversation I overheard between their
Celestial Majesties a few evenings ago. The goddess of beauty was finding
fault with her little son for his apparent laxity of attention to his duties,
and consequent paucity of love affairs on board the good ship Suldanha :
she therefore called upon him for his defence. Cupid, who appeared to
suffer from the cold weather and the want of inexpressibles, briefly stated
that I, Mercury, was in fault, and judged more from my own want of the
softer emotions, than from What had actually occurred. From the com-
mencement of the voyage, no effort had been wanting on bis (Cupid’s)
part to make all things pleasant, and, as an instance, mentioned a case
that occurred during the ship’s stay at Plymouth, when a pair of stricken
doves, of either sex, went ashore, and prevailed on mighty Sol to perpe-
tuate their loving features, in one picture (framed and glazed, Is. 6d.).
Again—on a late visit to ship—sitting on her waist, he noticed that
several sons of Neptune were not wasting their time, as each pressed the
waist of his dear one. Also, the amount of billing and cooing in genera!,
on warm evenings, reminded him, forcibly, of a dove-cote. His (Cupid’s)
darts, in one part of the vessel, had met with entire success, and he kn»w
of one smart little craft that had received more attention than was quite
good for her. Other of Eve’s fair daughters had been similarly influenced,
and the Band of Hope had succumbed to their sweet music. Thus
ended Cupid’s explanation, which seemed to satisfy their Majesties. Old
Father Neptune at the same time desiring him to keep his weather-eye
open and look a-head for Brisbane.—l am your loving godfather,
“ MERCURY.”
To the Editor of the Mercury.
Sir, —The late strong breezes have greatly assisted our progress, and I
think there is every chance of our making a very fair passage. Wishing
you and your readers a happy and prosperous new year, I am, &c.,
G. DAWSON, Commander.
Ho. 10.
New Chums ! We are all New Chums ! Have we not all crossed
the Atlantic and braved the perils or the deep, for the purpose of
becoming New Chums ? Time is but as a moment, and years glide
swiftly on. The crawling child becomes a stalwart man, and that man
(in the course of a few short years) becomes a child again. There
must be a beginning to everything, and each man must play his part
in the great drama of Life ; and so shall we, if a merciful Providence
thus wills it. Why then object to the appellation ? for, as has been
wisely said, “ What’s in a name ?” In every Colony, in every station,
in every situation of life there must be New Chums—the infant in
arms, the boy “ with shining face, creeping, like snail, unwillingly to
school,” the apprentice in trade, the undergraduate at College, the
griffin in India, they each and all are New Chums ; and each and all
are, with tottering feet, stepping on the first round of the Ladder of
Time that leads to advancement; and so, therefore, it is with us. The
position is but the beginning ; such a position have we all filled, and
. * Local News,
—*—
Original
—♦ —
Poetry.
ORIGINAL POEM ON THE NEW YEAR.
Who can arrest Time’s rapid stream,
Which runs nay seems to fly ?
None else, save he, who reigns supreme
The ruler of the sky.
Time must its wayward course pursue,
And all remember this—
Another year has fled into
Eternity’s abyss.
Then, what is Life ? ’Tis but a gleam
Of sunshine from the skies;
Or, like a pleasant nightly dream,
Which fades ere morning rise.
BIRTH.
Advertisements.
THE MERCURY, JANUARY 8, 1862.
Christmas Day. —This great anniversary was kept up with unwonted
spirit by all hands, assisted by the elements, which did their best to join
in the revel, by kicking up the dust. Extra rations were issued throughout
the ship by order of the captain. Notwithstanding the gale blowing at
the time, full justice was done to the Christmas cheer, and we trust the
plum-puddings eaten on the occasion were fully appreciated, as, we are
informed, they ‘‘left not a wreck behind.” Numerous pleasant re-unions
took place in various parts of the ship during the evening, and, in some
cases, conviviality was kept-up till daylight.
New Year’s Eve.—A grand concert was to have taken place this
evening, but, owing to the inclemency of the weather and the probability
of the breeze freshening, it was, at the last moment, postponed to the
following evening.
Discussion Society. —We are requested to announce, that the next
meeting of this society will take place on Saturday next—weather per-
mitting. The question for discussion has already been announced.
At the momentof going to press, news was brought to us that Mr. Bolton,
of the first cabin, had met with a severe accident. We are sorry to say
the information proved correct, as, by a sudden lurch of the ship, that
gentleman was thrown against the lee bulwarks, breaking two of his ribs.
Medical aid was instantly called in, and we believe the patient is progress-
ing as well as can be expected.
Look at the Goodness of the Lord,
To us upon the wave;
How many placed the same as wa
Have found a watery grave?
How many, like the fallen tree.
Have from the earth been torn ?
Yet we are all still spared to see
Another New Year’s morn.
Then let us all God’s praises sound,
With heart and soul sincere,
That He may pour His blessings down.
And guide us through the Year.
On Thursday, the 26th ultimo, the wife of Mr. W, R. Waugh ot
daughter. Both doing well.
FOUND, a Bunch of Keys. The oWher can hear of them, by enquiring
at the office of this paper.
WANTED to Know, by the Commissioners of Weights and Measures,
the exact quantity, quality, and number of men required to lift
the Brandy spilt on the lower deck on Christmas Eve.
\ « / ANTED, by a Gentleman about to commence farming near Brisbane,
V T a steady Young Woman to act as cook and housekeeper. Wages
£35 per annum with rations. Address, in writing, to “ Farmer,” Mer-
cury office.
NOTICE. —A Public Auction will take place on Monday next (weather
permitting) at J-past 2 p.m. Parties having goods to dispose of
will please communicate with the auctioneer. W. 13. RYDER, 2, Port-
land Place, 2nd cabin.
Gratis.
must we all fill. The end is before us. We know it not, and it is
better, perhaps, that we should be in ignorance of it; but still we all
hope for good things—we all aim at success. For this purpose we
have all, from the greatest to the lowest, left home and country, sus-
tained by those greatest elements of sure prosperity—Hope and De-
termination. Let our motto therefore be Onward ! Let us put our
shoulders steadily to the wheel. Let no obstacle damp our ardour.
Let no apparent or temporary difficulty abate our energy. Nothing
ought to do so, therefore let us with one voice determine that nothing
shall or can do so, and then indeed we must reap our reward, and
show to our friends and ourselves, that though New Chums in name
we bring along with us the vigor, heart, and hands of true Britons.
Let us think who and what we are, and where we come from ; and let
us remember, that the bold Islanders with whom we kindred,
know not the meaning of the word Fail!
“We fail! But screw your courage to the sticking place, and we’ll not
fail.” - Shakespeare.


SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
Saldanha Races.
The lovers of racing were gratified by a little sport furnished by a few
members of the turf, on Monday last. We give the principal races as they
occurred. The course chosen was round the deck, past Oookenham Corner,
finishing at the Grand Stand, opposite the mizen mast.
The Pope’s Purse, for 6 year-olds; two entries.
Longlegdon ,, 1
Oliver Twist 2
of all ages, catch weights, distance once round the course. There were
five entries for this race, three of whom paid forfeit.
Young Lamplighter 1
Dr. Gumming 2
As soon as the flag dropped, Dr. Gumming jumped off with a strong lead,
followed closely by Lamplighter, which position they held for some time.
On arriving at the hill, Lamplighter improved his distance, and on turning
the corner, was level with his opponent." From this point, it was a neck-
and-neck race, Lamplighter only winning by a head. A good deal of money
changed hands on this event.
The Consolation Stakes (of what they could get) for horses that had
been beaten or never won a race. 6 entries, 4 acceptances.
Gherkins 1
Mr. Jones 2
Griper 0
Leo 0
ANSWEKS TO CORRESPONDENTS,.
Nicodemos. —We give no opinion on the subject. It is entirely for a
man’s conscience to decide.
Aquarius —Tne ship is named after Cape Saldanha in the South of
Africa. The Duke of Saldanha was Commander of the Forces under Don
Pedro against Don Miguel, in Portugal, and is now Portuguese ambassador
at the Court of St. James.
J. Boyd. —The song is very clever, but too long for insertion,
Correspondence.
—♦ —
Sib, —In continuation of my letter last week on the subject of fashion
on board ship, allow me to submit to your consideration the following facts.
The gentler sex seem to have lost much of their terrestrial individuality,
or rather seem in outward appearance to have suddenly moulted. Bonnets
having, almost without exception, become matters of history, and the cri-
noline, shorn of its expansive properties, has became the “ baseless fabric of
a vision,” and this last is owing, I suppose, to women not being required
to bustle about on board; so far, I have no objection to the omissions, but
the substitutions, horribile dicta ! The hats in place of bonnets —those
awful-coloured—l, I s’pose I may call them under-skirts—though they are
so short as almost to perhaps I had better not be too descriptive. And
then the stockings ! of course, I don’t understand much about ladies’ stock-
ings, but I think I am within bounds if I call them prismatic, for they are
of all hues and every colour of the rainbow, and I think must be considered
as altogether striking in appearance. And then, again, the hats ! hats with
broad brims and hats with narrow brims, white hats and black hats, and
large flat hats, and small round kissing hats, and hats with white feathers,
and hats with black feathers, and mushroom hats au natural. And besides
these hats, there is an eccentric machine in both the hat and bonnet line,
having many peculiarities of the bathing-machine, with a touch of the
coal-scuttle; this stupendous affair is most awful, and, when once seen,
can never be forgotten. But still, the sweet, smiling, and apparently happy
faces of the wearers, almost reconcile me to their peculiarities. I am, how-
ever, too unnerved to write more this week, so, 1 am, &c.,
A GRUMBLER.
The betting at starting was even on the Grinder, 2 to 1 against the Irish
horse. On starting, Oliver took the lead, and maintained it as far as the
corner, when he was collared by the Irishman, who gradually drew ahead,
winning easily by three lengths. »
The Grand Stand Plate, with a purse given out of the fund; for horses
No. 11.
THE MERCURY,
The time has at last come when the link that has hitherto bound us
to our Readers will be finally severed. In a few days, events which
have caused so much amusement, or the reverse, will be thought of as
things of the past. The future, with its hidden and vast uncertainty,
will have to be thought of both by Editors and Readers, and all the
available resources of experience and forethought will be required to
set us on the right path, to reach that position or fortune which has
caused us to leave our native shores. We must apologize for not
having published a Paper since the Bth instant; but we throw ourselves
on the kind indulgence of our friends to excuse the apparent neglect,
and to tell them honestly, that the accident we met with off Tasmania
literally knocked us off our legs for any Editorial exertions. Trusting
that success and fortune will be the reward of those passengers who
have honored us with their patronage, we beg to say to all and each
of you, Adieu!
MEMO. OF THE VOYAGE.
The Saldanha sailed from Gravesend the Bth October, 1861, and Ply
mouth the 17th of the same month. On 24th October the island of
Madeira was made; crossed the line on the 18th November; sighted the
island of Fernando de Nahrona 20th of the same month, arriving off Tas-
mania the 12th January, 1862. From this point, the luck with which she
had hitherto been favored, left her, and though the distance from Cape
Pillar to Moreton Island is only about 1000 miles she did not arrive there
until the 24th January. After getting the pilot on board, a heavy gale
from the S.S.E. sprung up, driving her to sea. After some days of tem-
pestuous weather with contrary winds, the anchorage was at last reached
on the night of the 29th January, 1862.
was put off.
JANUARY 25, 1862
—♦ —
Date.
October 23
November 4
November 7
November 14
November 15
November 15
November 15
November 18
November 23
November 23
December 8
December 21
VESSELS
Ships Names.
Deptford
Wild Duck
George Kendall
Deux Amis
Harwich
Fitz Antoine
Hanover
Lady Melville
Silistria
Lady Alma Bruce
Louise
Richard Cobden
— * —
Queensland: Printed at the “Courier” General Printing Office, George-stieet, Brisbane.
After a few false starts, they got away well together, and so continued as
far as the fore-pump, when Leo shied, throwing his rider, leaving Gherkins,
Mr. Jones, and Griper, the honor of contesting the race. In coming down
the' hill leading to the distance post, Griper got his foot into a hole, fell,
striking Mr. Jones heavily in the stomach. Gherkins then had it all to
himself, coming in a winner in a canter. A few scratch matches made up
on the course finished the day’s racing.
Local News.
Concert.— The first of a series of Promenade Concerts took place on the
main deck on Saturday evening last, and was well attended. The various
ladies and gentlemen who volunteered their services were well received.
The songs chosen were of the most choice character, varied by a few reci-
tations. The latter department introduced to the notice of the Saldanhans
a young lady evidently possessed of a high order of histrionic talent. Just
before the party broke up, a slight interruption occurred from the noise of a
fiddle in the next street, evidently played by an indifferent performer.
Porpoise.—Towards the end of last week, a porpoise made his debut on
deck, evidently against his will, as the crooked appearance of the harpoon
with which he'was struck, testified. The sight of him gladdened the eyes
of the epicures, for they saw visions of steaks and other little tit-bits. They
were not disappointed, for all that now speaks of his late dissolution is his
jaw, which is carefully preserved by one of the sailors.
Discussion Society. —The weather looking rather stormy, the discussion
ANOTHER Promenade Concert will be held on Saturday evening next
on the Main Deck (weather permitting).
FOR Sale, a Joe Manton Rifle, a first rate double-barrelled gun, and two
revolving pistols by Deane and Co. and Tranter, For particulars,
enquire of the EDITOK, Mercury Office. c
AUCTION.— A final Auction Sale will take place shortly. Further
particulars will be announced.
Gratis.
SPOKEN
WITH.
Where from.
London
London
Liverpool
Isle of France
London
Where to.
Hamburgh
London
London
Glasgow
Liverpool
Amsterdam
Liverpool
Madras
New Zealand
Calcutta
Local News.
Adelaide
Rio
Algoa Bay
Madras
Otago
Hongkong
Batavia
Bombay
The sight of land has so entirely absorbed the thoughts of the passen-
gers, that no other news worthy of importance has occurred. The pro-
menade concerts seem to have met with universal patronage, under the
able management of Mr. Scott.
- |\


I
f
•
•
i
<
*
#
•
•
■■■-f ; ■ y ,; yy t y,' §
, , ,'XB ' " v ■■ * j , ■■ i
|||| * | V" 1 ’;
i


