

THE PERFECTED PHONOGRAPH
THOMAS ALVA EDSON.
PROFR. DOUCLAS ARCHIBALD M.A,OXON.
DESCRIBED
BY
THOMS ALVA EDISON
WITH AN APPENDIX
BY
PROFESSOR DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD, M.A.,OXON.
Australian Exhibitions under the direction of
MESSRS. MACMAHON.
WM. MARSHALL & CO, LITH..MELB.




THE
PERFECTED PHONOGRAPH,
Described by its Inventor,
THOMAS ATVA EDISON.
WITH
AN APPENDIX
BY
Professor Douglas Archibald,
M.A., OXON.
JWelfcoum:
Wm. Marshall & Co., General Printers, &c., Royal Lane.
18 9 0.


EDISON’S LATEST PHONOGRAPH now Exhibited for the First Time
in Australia by Professor DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD, N.A., Oxon,
under the Direction of Messrs. MACMAHON.
INTRODUCTION.
No man is more entitled or better able to speak of an invention
than the inventor himself. Though Edison has produced the
most startling effect the world has ever seen in this his Perfected
Phonograph, he is himself little given to either talking or writing
his thoughts. The following article, therefore, specially contri-
buted by him on the Phonograph not only possesses intrinsic
value, but affords a rare opportunity of ascertaining how he was
led to the discovery of this marvellous invention, and to what
uses he considers it capable of being directed.
An attempt by an alien hand to either supplement or expand
what he has so concisely written on these points in the subse-
quent article would seem to savour of wanton trespass, I shalb
therefore, refrain from any such act of vandalism. There seem
however, to be two difficulties not fully dwelt upon by Edison,
which haunt many persons when they hear the Instrument, and
which in the course of my wanderings I find myself more
frequently asked to explain than any other.
First, how does the sound come out 1 and, secondly, how
does the machine reproduce the original quality of the sound,
including of course the chief marvel—human speech ? I propose
to deal with these in the simplest possible manner in the short
Appendix to the following article written by Edison himself.
E. DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD.


THE PERFECTED PHONOGRAPH.
years ago I contributed to the North American Bedew
(May-June, 1878), a paper on the “Phonograph and its
Future,” in which I sketched the solution of certain problems
accomplished by my invention, and predicted some of the uses
to which it would be put. Other weighty matters engaged much
of my time and attention after that article was published, but the
future of which I then spoke has now arrived, and the predictions
which I made at that time are now verified. For, when these
words appear in print, the demonstration of the Phonograph’s
practical adaptability to the purposes mentioned by me will have
been completed, and the perfected instrument itself will be in the
hands of the public, to be tested and employed by them at will.
Rumors, I understand, have been circulated to the effect that,
subsequently to my announcements made ten years ago, I allowed
the Phonograph to go adrift, leaving its further development to
chance and to the tender mercies of such disinterested persons,
not connected with me, as might conceive that they were doing
me a favor by claiming to have developed my idea. Those who
may have been taken in by these rumors would do well to inform
themselves concerning the prolonged labor involved in carrying
out important) inventions. They are also referred to in my former
statements in this Review , as proof that the signer of those state-
ments, at least, knew clearly what he was talking about, and
predicted only that which he has now fulfilled.
Since the time of Lucretius, the movements of atoms have
been invested with an intense interest for philosophers and
scientific students, and the wave motions of light, heat and sound
have engaged, with a constantly increasing degree of importance,
the attention of modern investigators. When we consider the
relations of these motions to mathematics and to music, the
conception of Pythagoras that number and harmony constituted
the principle of the Universe, does not seem to be very far out of


the way. In the Phonograph we find an illustration of the truth
that human speech is governed by the laws of number, harmony,
and rhythm. And by means of these laws, we are now able to
register all sorts of sound and all articulate utterance —even to
the lightest shades and variations of the voice—in lines or dots,
which are an absolute equivalent for the emission of sound by the
lips; so that, through this contrivance, we can cause these lines
and dots to give forth again the sound of the voice, of music, and
all other sounds recorded by them, whether audible or inaudible.
For it is a very extraordinary fact that, while the deepest tone
that our ears are capable of recognising is one containing sixteen
vibrations a second, the Phonograph will record ten vibrations or
less, and can then raise the pitch until we hear a reproduction
from them. Similar vibrations above the highest rate audible to
the ear can be recorded on the Phonograph, and then reproduced
by lowering the pitch, until we actually hear the record of those
inaudible pulsations.
To make the general idea of the recordiug of sound more clear,
let me remark one or two points. We have all been struck by
the precision with which even the faintest sea-waves impress upon
the surface of a beach the fine, sinuous line which is formed by
the rippling edge of their advance. Almost as familiar is the
fact that grains of sand sprinkled on a smooth surface of glass or
wood, on or near a piano, sift themselves into various lines and
curves, according to the vibrations of the melody played on the
piano-keys. These things indicate how easily the particles of
solid matter may receive an imparted motion, or take an im-
pression, from delicate liquid waves, air waves, or waves of sound.
Yet, well known though these phenomena are, they apparently
never suggested until within a few years that the sound-waves set
going by a human voice might be so directed as to trace an
impression upon some solid substance, with a nicety equal to that
of the tide in recording its flow upon a sand beach.
My own discovery that this could be done came to me almost
accidentally while I was busy with experiments having a different
object in view. [ was engaged upon a machine intended to
repeat Morse characters, which were recorded on paper by inden
tations that transferred their message to another circuit auto


matically, when passed under a tracing-point connected with a
circuit-closing apparatus. In manipulating this machine, I found
that when the cylinder carrying the indented paper was turned
with great swiftness, it gave off a humming noise from the in-
dentations—a musical, rhythmic sound resembling that of human
talk heard indistinctly. This led me to try fitting a diaphragm
to the machine, which would receive the vibrations or sound-
waves made by my voice when I talked to it, and register these
vibrations upon an impressible material placed on the cylinder.
The material selected for immediate use was paraffined paper,
and the results obtained were excellent. The indentations on
the cylinder, when rapidly revolved, caused a repetition of the
original vibrations to reach the ear through a recorder, just as if
the machine itself were speaking. I saw at once that the problem
of registering human speech, so that it could be repeated by
mechanical means as often as might be desired, was solved.
The history of the Phonograph as it was then devised and
manufactured in small quantity, merely for purposes of public
exhibition and explanation, need not be repeated here. The idea
occurred to me in the spring of 1877, and, according as I could
get leisure, I gave my attention to preparing the few exhibition
machines which were placed before the public in 1878, and then
universally recognized by scientific men and every one else as an
absolute novelty. These Machines, of course, exemplified only a
small part of the capacity of the Phonograph. I was hard at
work describing and noting down the various parts of the machine
as it would appear when perfected, and making drawings of them
in various forms.
As it was impossible to drop my work and sit down to tell
the public what I was doing every day, I noted briefly in my
North American Review article of May-June, 1878, some of
the things which I proposed to accomplish. The details of the
electric light and other inventions afterwards absorbed much of
my time and attention. My laboratory was converted into a
factory in order to supply the demand for the electric light, and
my progress in carrying out my ideas about the Phonograph,
though continuous, was necessarily retarded. For months past,
however, I have had a special factory in operation, producing the


component parts of the perfected Phonograph, so as to bring the
machine within the reach of the public in the form which I
originally designed it to take.
It may be of interest, here, to contrast briefly the Perfected
Phonograph with the mere exhibition models shown, all over the
world, in 1878. Those models were large, heavy’machines, which
purposely sacrificed distinctness of articulation, in order to secure
a loud tone which could be heard in a large room when emitted
through a funnel-shaped transmitter. Tin-foil was used as the
material on which the indentations were to be made. The
cylinders were revolved by hand, or by clock-work ; and there
were numerous other details of construction which differed from
those of the instrument as now completed. At that time I had
made various designs for a special kind of electric motor, differing
from all others, to run the machine, in place of clock-work ; and
the Phonograph, as we now manufacture it, is provided with such
a motor, which turns the cylinder noiselessly, uniformly and
easily. Instead of tin-oil, I now use a cylinder of wax for re
ceiving the record of sound pulsations, as in the original experi-
ment. One diaphragm (the “ recorder ”) receives these pulsations,
which are incised on the wax, in exceedingly fine lines, hardly
visible to the naked eye, by means of a small point pressing
against the wax. A turning tool attachment, near this recording
diaphragm, pares off the surface of the wax, removing any record
which may previously have been left there, and smoothing the
way for whatever you wish to speak into the “ recorder.” When
you have finished speaking, too simple motions bring the repro-
ducing diaphragm into place directly over the wax; and this
diaphragm, provided with a very delicate, but durable, needle,
takes up and reproduces the vibrations registered in the fine lines
of indentation, bringing them to the ear by means of a tube.
Sometimes, indeed, one can hear the recorded words as they are
thrown off by the needle from the revolving cylinder, without
using a tube at all, and simply by putting the ear close to the
wax. The adjustments of these receiving and transmitting
diaphragms, known as the " recorder ” and the “ reproducer,” are
very exact, but very easily arranged. And a machine, once ad-
justed after being set up, will run well with very little attention


or readjustment, for a long period of time. The battery, also,
conveniently placed in a box under the desk which holds the
instrument, will last for six weeks or more, according to use,
without renewal. A scale and indicator running the whole
length of the cylinder, in front, enable you to observe at what
point you began talking, so that the reproducer may be set at
that point on the wax as soon as you wish to take off the record.
Another very handy attachment supplies a key for suspending
the reproduction of sounds when it is going on too rapidly for the
copyist who is writing it out. A second key when pressed down,
will run the reproducer back so as to repeat anything which has
not been clearly understood, and this may be done any desired
number of times.
A single wax cylinder, or blank, may be used for fifteen or
twenty successive records before it is worn out. But if the re-
cord is to be kept, the wax blank must not be talked upon again,
and is simply slipped off from the metal cylinder and filed away
for future reference. It may be fitted on to the cylinder again
at any time, and will at once utter whatever has been registered
on it. One of these wax blanks will repeat its contents thousands
of times with undiminished clearness. Further, we are able to
multiply to any extent, at slight cost, phonographic copies of the
blank, after the talking, or music, or other sounds have been put
upon it once.
It is curious to reflect that the Assyrians and Babylonians,
2,500 years ago, chose baked clay cylinders, - inscribed with cunei-
form characters, as their medium for perpetuating records ; while
this recent result of modern science, the Phonograph, uses
cylinders of wax for a similar purpose, but with the great and
progressive difference that our wax cylinders speak for themselves,
and will not have to wait dumbly for centuries to be deciphered,
like the famous Kileh-Shergat cylinder, by a Rawlinson or a
Layard. With our facilities, a sovereign, a statesman or a
historian, can inscribe his words on a Phonograph blank, which
will then be multiplied a thousand-fold ; each multiple copy will
repeat the sounds of his voice thousands of times, and so, by pre-
serving the copies and using them in relays, his utterance can be
transmitted to posterity, centuries afterwards, as freshly and


forcibly as if those later generations heard his living accents
Instrumental and vocal music—solos, duets, quartets, quintets,
etc,—can be recorded on the Perfected Phonograph with startling
completeness and precision. How interesting it will be to future
generations to learn from the Phonograph exactly how R,ubin-
stein played a composition on the piano; and what a pi’iceless
possession it would have been to us, could we have Gen. Grant’s
memorable works, “ Let us have peace,” inscribed on the Phono-
graph for perpetual reproduction in his own intonations ! We
are in a position to obtain results of this sort, by the present
Phonograph, from the wave motions of sound ; so that it seems
to me we realize here the “ poetry of motion ” in a new sense,
combined with the science of motion.
In my article ten years ago, I enumerated among the uses to
which the phonograph would be applied : 1. Letter writing and
all kinds of dictation without the aid of a stenographer. 2.
Phonographic books, which would speak to blind people without
effort on their part. 3. The teaching of elocution. 4. Repro-
duction of music. 5. The “ Family Record ” —a registry of
sayings, reminiscences, etc., by members of a family, in their own
voices, and of the last words of dying persons. 6. Music boxes
and toys. 7. Clocks that should announce in articulate speeeh
the time for going home, going to meals, etc. 8. The preser-
vation of languages, by exact reproductions of the manner of pro-
nouncing. 9. Educational purposes; such as preserving the
explanations made by a teacher, so that the pupil can refer to
them at any moment, and spelling or other lessons placed upon
the Phonograph for convenience in committing to memory. 10.
Connection with the telephone, so as to make that invention an
auxiliary in the transmission of permanent and invaluable re-
cords, instead of being the recipieut of momentary and fleeting
communications.
Every one of these uses the perfected Phonograph is now
ready to carry out. I may add that, through the facility with
which it stores up and reproduces music of all sorts, or whistling
and recitations, it can he employed to furnish constant amusement
to invalids, or to social assemblies, at receptions, dinners, etc.
Any one sitting in his room alone may order an assorted supply


of wax cylinders inscribed with songs, poems, piano or violin
music, short stories, anecdotes, or dialect pieces, and, by putting
them on his Phonograph, he can listen to them as originally sung
or recited by authors, vocalists and actors, or elocutionists. The
variety of entertainment he thus commands, at trifling expense
and without moving from his chair, is practically unlimited
Music by a band, in fact whole operas, can be stored up on the
cylinders, and the voice of Patti singing in England can thus be
heard again on this side the ocean, or preserved for future
generations. On four Cylinders eight inches long, with a diametei
of five, I can put the whole of “Nicholas Nickleby” in Phonogram
form. In teaching the correct pronunciation of English, and
especially of foreign languages, the Phonograph as it stands seems
flo be beyond comparsion, for no system of phonetic spelling can
convey to the pupil the pronunciation of a good English, French,
German or Spanish speaker so well as a machine that repioduces
his utterance even more exactly than a human imitator could.
The speeches of orator, the discourses of Clergymen can be
had “on tap ” in every house that owns a Phonograph. It would
not be very surprising if, a few years hence, Phongrapliic
newspaper bulletins should be issued on wax cylinders. E\en
now, so soon as the Phonograph comes into general use,
newspaper reporters and correspondents can talk their matter
into the Phonograph, either in the editorial office or at some
distant point, by a telephone wire connected with a Phonograph
in the composing room, so that the communication may be set
up in type without any preliminary of writing it out in long
hand.
The wax cylinders can be sent through the mails in little
boxes which I have had prepared for the purpose, and then put
upon another Phonograph at a distant point, to be listened to by
.a friend or business correspondent To obviate the difficulty
-caused by the friend’s not having a Phonograph of his own, pay
stations will be established to which any one may take the
Phonogram that he has received, have it placed on the instrument,
and the contents recited to him from the machine, as well as
.copied out at the same moment by a typewriter. Thus the
Phonograph will be at the service of every one who can command


a few cents for the fee. And which of us would not rather pay
something extra, in order to hear a dear friend’s or relative’s,
voice speaking to us from the other side of the earth 1
Authors can register their fleeting ideas and brief notes on
the Phonograph at any hour of day or night, without waiting to.
find pen, ink or paper and in much less time than it would take
to write out even the shortest memoranda. They can also publish
their novels or essays exclusively in Phonogram form, so as to
talk to their readers personally ; and in this way they can pro-
tect their works from being stolen by means of defective copy-
right laws. Musical composers, in improvising compositions, will
be able to have them recorded instantaneously on the Phonograph.
For the present it has been decided to make all the Phono-
graphs of unifoi’m size ; so that a record put upon the machine
in New York may be placed on another machine of the same-
pattern in China, and speak exactly as it was spoken to on this,
continent. Each wax blank will receive from 800 to 1,000-
works ; and of course several blanks may be used for one docu-
ment, if needed. This uniform size and pattern make the thing
perfectly practicable in offices which have business connections,
all over the globe. My private secretary to day speaks all letters
into a Phonograph, from which they are taken off by a type-
writer or ordinary long-hand writer, with an immense saving of
time and trouble. Persons having a large correspondence can
talk all their letters into the Phonograph in a very short time, and
leave them to be listened to and copied by an assistant, without
the delay involved in stenograph or the trouble of going over and
correcting the copyist’s work, which is almost inevitable under
the conditions of dictation now prevailing.
Furthermore, two business men, conferring together, can talk
irto the recorder by means of a double transmitting tube, with
perfect privacy, and yet obtain upon the cylinder an unimpeach-
able transcript of their conversation in their own voices, with
every break and pause, every hesitation or confident affirmation,
every partial suggestion or particular explanation, infallibly set
down in the wax.
They can then have this conversation written out or typed
by a secretary, for future reference ; or can, if they prefer, have


it multiple-copied by our mechanical process. In this way, many
misunderstandings may be avoided. Interesting philosophic or
literary discussions and dialogues may be recorded in the same
way. In fact, the Phonograph will do, and does at this moment
accomplish, the same thing in respect of conversation which
instantaneous photography does for moving objects ; that is, it
will present whatever it records with a minute accuracy un-
attained by any other means.
The most skilful observers, listeners and reliable novelists, or
ven stenographers, cannot reproduce a conversation exactly as
it occurred. The account they give is more or less generalized.
But the Phonograph receives, and then transmits to our ears
again, every least thing that was said—exactly as it was said—
with the faultless fidelity of an instantaneous photograph. We
shall now for the first time know what conversation really is ;
just as we have learned, only within a few years, through the
instantaneous photograph, what attitudes are taken by the horse
in motion.
Letters of introduction may be spoken on to a Phonograph
blank, without any of the formality of address and phraseology
now customary, or the trouble of folding, enveloping and address-
ing a written communication. In fact, all correspondence will
be greatly simplified and wisely abbreviated by the use of
Phonograms. A telephone subscriber can place at his telephone
a Phonogram which will announce to the exchange, whenever he
is called up, that he has left the office and will return at a certain
time. Similarly, one man calling at the office of another and not
finding him, will talk into the Phonograph anything he wishes to
say. This saves the trouble of writing a note, and obviates the
uncertainty of giving to clerk, office boy or servant an oral
message that may be forgotten or incorrectly delivered. Hotels
and clubs will, naturally, find this function of the Phonograph
extremely serviceable ; and their guests, or patrons, will avail
themselves of Phonograms constantly. The accuracy of inter-
views with newspaper reporters will also be determined, no doubt,
by Phonographic record. And travelers in vestibule trains will
be glad to use Phonograph blanks in place of letter paper and


telegraph blanks, owing to the difficulty of writing while on a
rapidly moving train.
It must be borne in mind that I am not talking now of things
which may be made possible in the future. I did my predicting
ten years ago, and the functions above mentioned are those which
the present Perfected Phonograph is able to fulfill at this moment.
To use the Phonograph, a little instruction and practice are
needed, but much less than the typewriter requires, and hardly
more than the training needed for the operation of a sewing
machine.
Various other uses for which the Phonograph is now fully
ripe might be mentioned; but I do not want to give to these
memoranda the character of a catalogue. Enough has been said,
I think, to indicate that the Phonograph, unlike children, should
be “ seen ” and “ heard.” It is no longer in a state of infancy.
It may be still in its childhood ; but it is destined to a vigorous
maturity. The Phonograph, in one sense, knows more than we
do ourselves. For it will retain a perfect mechanical memoiy of
many things which we may forget, even though we have said
them. It. will become a perfect factor in education ; and it will
teach us to be careful what we say—for it imparts to us the gift
of hearing ourselves as others hear us- exerting thus a decidedly
moral influence by making men brief, business like and straight-
forward, cultivating improved manners, and uniting distant
friends and associates by direct vocal communication.
THOMAS A. EDISON.


THE PRINCIPLE OF THE PHONOGRAPH.
HOW THE SOUND IS RECORDED.
In order to understand how the wonderful results attained by
the Phonograph are produced, we must first glance for a few
moments at what sound is, and how by such simple means as a
piece of glass, a steel needle, and a cylinder of wax, which really
represent the whole essential parts of the Phonograph, all kinds
of sound can be recorded, preserved and reproduced at will.
First, sound consists of a series of wave-like movements of the
air, analogous to the waves of the sea, but differing from them in
one essential point, viz., that whereas in sea waves the water
moves up and down, while the wave movement is propagated
horizontally; in the case of sound the air moves backward and
forward in the same direction as the wave is transmitted, Ihe
air is thus alternately compressed and rarefied, and as such con-
ditions travel forward in all directions from the origin of the
sound, though they become feebler as they spread, they are
capable of transferring the sensation of sound from one place to
another. VV hen they meet an obstacle, such as a window or the
drum of the ear, they cause it to move forwards and backwards
as often as the region of compression er rarefaction meets it.
The sensation of sound is produced in the human brain when
such movements or waves follow one another not less than 16
times per second or more than 38,000 times per second.
A deep bass voice causes about 100 waves per second, while
the highest soprano has reached about 2000. If we again ha\e
recourse to the analogy of the sea waves, we shall find that, m
addition to the large waves, there are often present numerous
smaller waves, down to mere ripplets., each system moving
independently of the other, and giving to the outer surface or
contour the most varied shape.


It is precisely the same with sound, and it is to the presence,
number, size, and position of these smaller waves that is due that
marvellous difference that exists quite apart from pitch between
the sounds emitted by a drum, an organ, a flute, a violin, a banjo,
a piano, the human voice, and even between the voices of
different persons.
The different elements of musical sound or speech are related
to the air waves, producing them in the following manner :
SOUND. WAVE.
1 Pitch or Note upon 1 Frequency.
2 Intensity or Loudness 2 Size.
3 Quality (by which we 3 Shape (which depends
distinguish one sound upon the number of
from another). smaller waves super-
posed on the large
ones).
The human ear and the recording part of the Phonograph are
very similar in construction. In the former the waves beat up
against a membrane, and cause it to vibrate (l)a certain number
of times per second, which registers the pitch: (2) a certain
amount, which depends on the size of the wave, and which
registers the loudness ; (3) in a certain manner or shape, which
registers the quality of the sound.
In the latter a thin plate of glass takes the place of the skin
membrane. In the ear these movements cause certain bones to
vibrate which are attached to nerve fibres, acting like bell ropes
upon the brain.
In the Phonograph a sharp needle attached to the centre of
the glassdiaphragm or plate carves on a rotating cylinder of
wax the number, size and shape of the air movements. So deli-
cate is the machinery, and so fine the needle, that not only are
the large waves carved on the wax, but even the minutest ripple
and it is thus that the Phonograph is enabled to perform that
wondrous feat of registering and preserving on a wax cylinder
the complicated wave shapes which correspond to the vowels and
consonants of human speech as well as to those by which the
same note differs when played on different musical instruments.
So far then for the recording of sound by the Phonograph
and its prototype the human ear.


HOW THE SOUND IS REPRODUCED.
Now comes the more difficult question of how the sounds are
reproduced. Here the analogy of the human ear fails us. The
ear records, but the mouth repeats, and with a degree of diver-
gence from exactness dependent upon that very valuable human
possession called conscience or bias. The Phonograph is troubled
by no qualms of conscience, it is moved by no considerations of
bias or personal gain. It is perhaps the only absolute truth
speaker in the world. Whatever sound goes in comes out
unaltered.
The manner in which the sound reproduction is effected in
the Phonograph will perhaps be best realised by a familiar
analogy—We often notice a boy as he runs past some railings
will press a stick up against them, and cause them to emit a
semi.musical note by its successive concussions with them. Now
imagine the railings to move, and the boy and stick to remain
stationary. You will have the very same effect produced.
Further imagine the railings to-be replaced by the wax cylinder
in the Phonograph, with its sound record traced out in indenta-
tions, and imagine the boy’s stick replaced by a ball pointed
needle, attached to the centre of a thin glass plate. (In the
latest machine the same glass plate serves both to record and
reproduce). Then if the wax cylinder be made to turn round by
any contrivance, the indentations on its surface as they pass
underneath the ball-pointed needle, like a succession of railings
of different sizes and shapes, will cause the needle to vibrate, and
the glass plate attached to it to shake the air precisely as the air
shook it when they were made. Consequently, every time this
is done, provided the wax indentations do not wear out, we shall
have the same sounds reproduced which caused these particular
indentations. If a cornet was played in, a cornet sound will
come out. If a man spoke or sung in, the seme kind of move-
ments will be reproduced in the air surrounding the glass plate
by the needle jumping over the hills and valleys on the rotating
wax, and the glass plate will appear to speak like a human
being.
Such is the simple means by which such a marvellous result


is attained. But it should be remembered that while the essen
tials are simple, the elaboration of the details by which the
Phonograph has been made a practical machine has involved
immense skill, thought and work.
Some persons wonder at the source of energy of the sound
given out. This is derived simply from the rotation of the
cylinder by an electric dynamo, worked by a battery.
E. Douglas Archibald.
COPY OF THE PHONOGRAM
Spoken in London on March Bth, 1890, by the Right Honorable
William Ewart Gladstone, M.P., addressed to His Excel-
lency Lord Carrington, Government House, Sydney; con-
veyed thither by the hand of Edmund Douglas Archibald,
and respoken on June Bth, 1890, by the Phonograph, in the
presence oj their Excellencies Sir Henry and Lady Norman
and Suite :
“10 St. James’ Square, London.
“ My dear Lord Carrington,
“ I gladly avail myself of this opportunity to assure you
with how much pleasure I hear of you and of your career as
Governor in New South Wales. lam also alike honored and
gratified in being the first person to make a communication
through the Phonograph to Australasia, as worthily represented
by the great colony at whose head you have been placed. In the
Phonograph is a new bond of amity between Australasia and
the United Kingdom, and I regard each addition to these free
and friendly ties as an inspired benefit and a fresh guarantee for
the endurance of a connection alike honorable and beneficial on
that side the water and on this.
“ I am, my dear Lord Carrington,
“ Very faithfully yours,
“W. E. GLADSTONE.”
Wm. Marshall & Co., Printers, Melbourne.




The Caligraph Writing Machine.
This machine is so simple as to its working parts, and the
arrangement of its keyboard that any intelligent person may
learn in a week to operate it without any special instruction.
There are dozens of operators in Sydney, who devoted no
time to practice before bringing their Caligraphs into active
business use.
The speed obtainable after a few weeks trial is twice or
three times that of handwriting.
As many as 12 or 15 copies all equal to an original may be
manifoded with semi-carbon at one operation.
The machine is adjustable at all points, and is completely
under the control of the operator.
Five hundred Caligraphs are used in Australia; fifty
being in the Government Departments of New South Wales
The Caligraph is used by the departmental officers of the
Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.
JAS. E. CUNNINGHAM,
Official Shorthand Writer and Caligraph Agent,
Lyndhurst Chambers, Elizabeth Street.
EDISON’S MIMEOGRAPH
This famous autographican duplicator and typewriter
reduplicator is used in conjunction with the Caligraph by the
Board of Technical Education, the Department of Public
Instruction, The National Life Assurance Society, The Aus-
tralian Joint Stock Bank, The Borough Council of Waverley,
The Borough Council of Woollalira, Messrs. Robert Harper and
Co., and others.
3,000 copies may be made from one stencil.
The autographic stylus has no wheel tip, and may be used
with the facility of an ordinary pen
The typewriters stencils produce copies equal to the best
original work A new system of stencilling has just been
introduced.
JAS. E. CUNNINGHAM,
Official Shorthand Writer and Caligraph Agent,
Lyndhurst Chambers, Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
