

pr
pr -yq
The Sleepless Vigil I
of The Fleet. j
/d
ADDRESS GIVEN
Rev. HENRY HOWARD
at the
Meeting of the S.A. Branch of the Navy League,
on May 31, 1918, in the Institute Lecture Room,
North Terrace, Adelaide, to celebrate the Second
Anniversary of the Battle of Jutland.
Published by
THE NAVY LEAGUE.


The Sleepless Vigil of The Fleet.
“All merchants shall have safe and secure
conduct, to go out of, and to come into England,
and to stay there, and to pass as well hy land
as hy icater, for buying and selling by the ancient
and allowed customs, without any unjust tolls;
except in time of war, or when they are of any
nation at war with iis. And if there be found
any such in our land in the beginning of the war,
they shall be attached, without damage to their
bodies or goods, until it he knoicn unto us, or our
chief justiciary, how our merchants be treated in
the nation at icar with us; and if ours be safe
there, the others shall be safe in our dominions.” —
Magna Charta, Art. 41.
“A battle at sea is fought for one purpose, and
for one purpose only, namely, the right to use
the sea, and obtain all the naval and military and
economic advantages floicing from its command .”—
Archibald Hurd.
From Jutland Bank to our own Cape Jervis is a
far call measured in miles, and a naval engagement
in the North Sea is separated from the Great Aus-
tralian Bight by well-nigh half the world. Reckoned,
however, in relation to the security and integrity
of the Empire—an Empire whose dependencies
girdle the world—mere geographical position be-
comes a negligible factor, mileage ceases to have
significance, so that Jutland and Jervis may be


treated as interchangeable terms. Hence it comes
to pass that victory yonder becomes the pledge of
security here, this vital fact cannot be too strongly
stressed, too loudly proclaimed, or too widely
spread, because what it means to us who dwell in
this outermost fringe of Empire, for Britain to
retain supremacy of the sea, has never yet come
home to the average Australian mind. We have
accepted our splendid security as a mere matter
of course, unmindful of how it has been purchased
and careless of its cost. We have eaten and drunk,
married and given in marriage, worked and played,
slumbered and slept in perfect safety, only, how-
ever, because the white ensign of the Fleet has
fluttered unchallenged to the Four Winds that
SAveep the Seven Seas.
I hat we have not known this, or knowing have
not appreciated it, must be told to our shame. But
that which is shame to us is glory to England, for
it proves how unostentatiously has this immunity
f i om peril been extended by Britain to her dominions
oversea. So silent and unobtrusive has been this
far-flung defence, that though we have thus shel-
tered beneath the navy’s powerful wing, not only
have we never felt its pressure, w'e have forgotten
the very presence of its patient watch and ward.
It is this vast, and to us for the most part, voiceless
and invisible force, which in these dark days has done
more than anything beside to keep our world from
slipping back into the black abyss of that barbarism
an ay from which it was hoped she had permanently
evolved. The navy is indeed the strong right
arm of the British war machine, and when, as to-day
the operations of the army are being conducted on
so many foreign fields, along such extended fronts.


and on so colossal a scale, the provision for
safe transport of troops, munitions, stores, horses,
mules, forage, and all the thousand and one re-
quirements of a vast campaign, rests entirely on
the vigilance, the valour, and the
efficiency of the Fleet.
In such a war as we are waging at present
it is upon the sleepless watch of the sailor that the
effective work of the soldier absolutely depends.
Whatever may be obscure to the future historian
of the war, this at least will be clear, that Wednes-
day, July 29, 1914, when the First Fleet, as it was
then called, slipped from its anchorage at
Portland to take up its station in the North Sea,
became one of the most decisive moments in modern
history. It became the pivot upon which the des-
tinies of our twentieth century civilization will he
seen to have turned. When all is over and done,
when the sea shall have claimed its last victim of
this strife, and the grass grows green over the
millions of slain, it will have to be admitted that
the supreme factor in defeating the merciless aims
of the Prussian has been the fleet. Its prevision, its
preparedness, its promptitude, and its precision
have rendered possible everything that was neces-
sary to the successful conduct of the war, from the
corking up of the German fleet in its own bottles to
the saieguarding from submarine and other menace
the transport of twelve to fifteen millions of men,
together with stores and munitions in millions of
tons.
Those who quarrel with Britain’s insistence on the
maintenance of her naval supremacy forget that a
nation’s naval and military efficiency must bear


proportion to the perils of her position, to the
economic needs of her situation and population, and
to the tasks which under God she is called upon to
discharge. Measured thus by the treasure in human
life that Britain is called upon to provision and
defend, by the vast colonial possessions that look
to her for protection, by the moral interests she is
required to preserve and promote, and which must
be jeopardized by her decline or defeat, and lastly,
by her conception of what she owes to the world as
the custodian of its social freedom and justice, the
planter-out of their great principles and the univer-
salizer of their fruits, her supremacy on the sea
becomes not only permissible but absolutely impera-
tive in the best interests of the race.
Safeguarding- the Highways.
.As a matter of cold fact, Britain’s naval
supremacy means the supremacy of good faith. It
safeguards the highways of the seas for the mer-
chant service of all nations, that they may “pursue
their lawful occasions” unmolested and unafraid.
Britain construes her mastery, not merely as a
possession to be enjoyed and exploited for her own
ends, but as a great trust to be faithfully and fear-
lessly administered for the benefit of all. The mighty
shuttles that weave the web of the world’s com-
merce and link up the distant markets of the globe,
have been able to fly to and fro with safety and
regularity only because their paths have been policed
and patrolled by those grim watchers, whose deep-
throated thunders bellow doom against the outlaws
of the sea.
Hence it came to pass that Britain’s rulership
of the deep meant Germany’s freedom to pursue


unsuspectedly her policy of what has been euphemis-
tically termed “peaceful penetration.” Under the
shelter of the very flag against which she was weav-
ing her deadly plot, and along all the trade routes of
the world she built up her vast commercial interests,
which, however, she merely employed as a mask
beneath which she surreptitiously wrought her net-
work of military espionage and intrigue in prepara-
tion for “The Day.” All this free use of the paths
of the sea was possible because she was trusted by
the keeper of the roads. Its traitorous abuse became
easy of accomplishment under the very eyes of a
nation that, frank and above-board itself, does not
readily suspect others, and thus fell a victim to the
treachery that was trading only to betray.
The freedom of the sea that Germany desires is
freedom for herself alone. All other Powers would
require to obtain from her permits to trade under
such restrictions and exactions as she might choose
to impose. She would thus toll-bar the ocean high-
ways, exacting dues from all that would “go down
to the sea in ships and do business in the great
waters.”
Keep the Seas open.
Britain’s notion of freedom is to keep the seas
open to the mercantile marine of all nations, great
and small, to cleave a right-of-way for all lawful
adventure, and to guarantee safe conduct as far
as such safety can be secured for every man, woman,
and child, whether white or black, whether yellow
or brown. It is for such freedom as this that the
British navy rides and rules the wave. Keeping its
sleepless vigil, its value must be measured by what
it prevents no less than by what it achieves.


Trained to the highest point of alertness and pre-
cision, there is nothing merely human perhaps that
can compare for fitness, for fearlessness, and for
all-round-the-clock efficiency with our wide-awake,
well-aware fleet. Swift, silent, resolute, to do or
dare or endure, the navy, whether playing a waiting
or an active game, is the last word in patient, heroic
self-sacrifice for the defence of trade and the pro-
tection of hearth and home. In spite of all appear-
ance, the fate of the Empire pivots on the fleet.
'Once the power of the navy is broken our disin-
tegration is at hand. Yet in spite of this obvious
fact, it seems impossible to bring it home to the
consciousness of the unimaginative pacifist that in
such a case nothing could save these lands from
falling to the Prussian as his most coveted prize.
Indeed, the military are known to be in possession
of documents, signed and sealed in Berlin, by which
all necessary arrangements for the disposition, par-
tition, and governmental control of the Australian
Commonwealth by the Germans for the Germans are
shown to have been completed before the first shot
was fired in 1914, so certain were the enemy of
success.
Had it not been for the lightning swiftness with
which the already provisioned fleet was despatched
to its station in that July, England would to-day
be fighting for her existence on her own soil, France
would be over-run by the barbarian, and in Australia
the Union Jack would have climbed down in favour
of the German flag. What this would have meant
for us the defiled and devastated countries of Europe
make plain to everyone who has not a head of wood
or a heart of stone.


The Meekness of the Prussian!
We must not forget, however, in the midst ofi
these anniversary celebrations, the claim of Ger-
many to have won the battle of Jutland, thereby
depriving us of the lordship of the sea. But if
she really wrested from us this coveted supremacy,
then ever since, with even more than maidenly
modesty, she has been veiling it from vulgar gaze.
Victory does not usually clothe the Prussian with
spontaneous meekness. Such shrinking reserve is
difficult to associate with her possession of power.
Whence or why this sudden display of delicacy ?
Can it be consideration for the feelings of our
stricken and defeated navy? Then let not this
tender solicitude press too heavily on our con-
queror. We are prepared to “take it as read,”
and promise to bear up if she will so far over-
come her bashful hesitation as to come out into
the open with her prize. True, she might feel
somewhat shy and awkward at first in assuming
her newly-gained supremacy, but that would soon
wear off. Indeed, we might even proffer our
assistance in this direction, for it would be a pity
if through over-sensitiveness in assuming her dis-
tinction the world should be defrauded of its
display. As it is, however, we are confronted
with the spectacle of Admiral von Scheer demon-
strating Germany’s naval supremacy with a
reticence that those who are not familiar with
Prussia’s retiring disposition might be rude enough
to call by another name.
Lest we Forget!
In the meantime Britain's naval invincibility
is being quietly but firmly maintained, with fidelity


to all its best and bravest traditions. The death-
less spirit of Drake and Nelson still breathes
through all our fleet. It has even communicated
itself to our mercantile marine, and fused the
whole of our maritime forces into one far-reaching
battle line. From High Admiral down to lowly
fisherman, all are drinking of the same sacramental
cup, and being baptized with the self-same baptism
of devotion to the Cause. It is a spirit that enter-
tains no doubt, suffers no depression, knows no
defeat. We come of a race that never knows when
it is beaten, and therefore never is. We may be
battered and shattered by shot and shell, but the
spirit of the fleet survives and surmounts all wreck
and ravage. Like the little “Revenge” in Tenny-
son's famous Ballad of the Fleet, “our pikes may
be all broken or bent, and our powder all of it
spent, and our masts and rigging hanging over
the side,” hut think not that was defeat,
“When the lion there lay dying, and they yielded
to the foe,
And the stately Spanish men to their flagship
bore him then,
Where they laid him by the mast, old Sir Richard
caught at last,
And they praised him to his face with their
courtly foreign grace;
But he rose upon their decks, and he cried :
‘I have fought for Queen and Faith like a valiant
man and true;
I have only done my duty as a man is bound
to do:
With a joyful spirit I, Sir Richard Grenville, die!’
And he fell upon their decks, and he died.”
Nay! let a man go down like that, whether in
naval or military warfare, and only fools will con-
found it with defeat.


Branches of this League are established in
MELBOURNE,
SYDNEY,
BRISBANE,
LAUNCESTON,
and in many Cities of the following Countries—
GREAT BRITAIN,
NEW ZEALAND,
CANADA,
SOUTH AFRICA,
Etc., Etc.
Particulars as to joining the League can be
obtained from
J. EDWIN THOMAS, President,
Cavendish Chambers, Grenfell Street.
H. P. MOORE, Hon. Treasurer,
Gawler Chambers, North Terrace,
G. L. S. TYLER, Secretary,
Clifton Chambers, Currie Street.


*
.
Bsn
is. >J
A 40323
QILUNQMAM,
> & PUBLISH!
DCLAIDE.
