

FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION.
THE
SUGAR-BEET INDUSTRY.
SYNOPSIS—
1. Its importance from i,n Agricultural Standpoint.
2. Prospects of the Industry in Australia.
3. Conditions for the successful establishment of factories.
4. How to start the Industry in Australia.
BY
CLEMENT VAN DE VELDE,
Civil Engineer (Diploma University of Ghent).
Late Assistant to the Professor of Analytical Chemistry at the
University of Ghent, and
Manager of Beet-Sugar Factories in Belgium and Holland.
W. M. MACLARDY & CO, Printers and Lithographers,
82 Pitt Street.
1595.


IMJSSMMTS mUTOti Ml
LIMITED.
CAPITAL ... £BOO,OOO-PETIT-BOURG, FRANCE.
Decanville’s Patent Narrow-gange Permanent and
Portable Railways and Rolling Stock.
These famous portable Tramways are extensively used in Europe
on Sugar Estates for the economical transport of Beetroot to
the Factories.
The Permanent Two-feet Gauge Railways are
eminently suitable as Feeders to the Main
Lines, and would be so especially
in new countries like
Australia.
“ THEY ARE LARGELY USED IN FRANCE FOR THIS PURPOSE.”
THEIR GREAT CLAIMS ARE:
Cheapness in Construction. Effectiveness.
Cheap Maintenance. Minimum Working Expenses.
GENERAL AGENT FOR AUSTRALASIA:
CLEMENT VAN DE VELDE, C.E.,
WYNYARD BUILDINGS, WYNYARD SQUARE, SYDNEY.


INTRODUCTION.
The efforts hitherto made in the Colonies of Victoria, New South Wales,
New Zealand and Tasmania for the introduction of the beet-sugar industry
have failed—not from any permanent cause, but simply and solely because
the several communities have not been sufficiently educated to properly
understand and appreciate the full advantages of beet culture, and it was
scarcely to be expected that, in the absence of the indispensable knowledge
and experience of the requirements of the industry, the result could have
been otherwise.
It is with a view of adding my quota to that knowledge, based upon
no inconsiderable experience gained in the beet-sugar producing countries of
Europe, combined with some years of colonial experience, that these pages are
presented, with the hope that they may claim the interested attention of the
farmers, and assist thereby, in securing the object in view, viz. : The culti-
vation of sugar-beet as the means of raising the status of agriculture, and at
the same time to lay the foundation on a sure and solid basis for the
manufacture of beet-sugar.
This pamphlet is earnestly and respectfully commended to the thought-
ful attention of the Members of Governments and Legislatures, as in my
humble opinion primarily attaches to them the patriotic duty and responsi-
bility of taking the initiatory steps to secure the introduction of this most
important— this indispensable—branch of industry.
C. V. DE V.


The Sugar-Beet Industry.
CHAPTER I.
Its Importance from an Agricultural Standpoint.
What is the object of the Sugar Beet Industry? Is it to produce
sugar for the inhabitants of the countries in which it is introduced ?
No.
The object of this great industry is to produce food for the cattle,
at a time of the year where it is most required, to produce manure
for the land, and to give the farmers the first element for the rotation
of crops, so indispensable in modern agriculture.
Sugar, then, must be considered as a bye-product of the Industry.
If producing sugar were the main object it would be preferable to
import the commodity from the already producing countries, and to
imitate the example of Great Britain, where, although none is
manufactured within its territory, sugar is cheaper than in any part
of the World. But what has become of the Agriculture of the
United Kingdom, and what is the state of the agriculture and
farming of Victoria, New South Wales, New Zealand and Tasmania,
all large sugar importing countries ?
The manufacture of beet sugar is essentially an agricultural
industry. By protecting it the nations of Europe, even such countries
as Belgium and Holland, whose general tariff is based on freetrade
principles, know that by doing so, they protect the real source of their
wealth, that is to say, their agriculture and farming, without which
they could neither live nor thrive. It is, perhaps, not too much to
say, that without the beetroot the whole farming of Europe would
be in a state of ruin ; its suppression would cause a revolution.
Its object.
Sugar, a bye-
product.


No plant, as much as beetroot, has contributed to the develop-
ment of agriculture in Europe, and it has become the true type of
progressive culture.
Owing to the low prices of all products of the soil, intense culture
alone will reward the farmer for his labours; through it his crops
will be doubled and their cost of production reduced. It is
only in exceptional circumstances, such as one meets in Russia, the
Argentine Republic and the United States, the great grain-producing
countries, that the old style of growing cereals is still remunerative.
But'the agricultural interests in these colonies are at the present time
brought very low and the crisis can only be overcome by immediate
recourse to newer and more improved methods of cultivating the
soil.
There are doubtless many well-trained and intelligent farmers in
Australia who, even in the present difficult times, succeed in realising
profits. But on the whole, it must be admitted that farming is carried
out in spite of all notions of common sense If agriculture has
acquired a certain development in Australia, it is only by force of
circumstances, owing to the cheapness of land, the excellence of the
seal and climate and the high prices at which produce generally has
been sold in the past.
Nature and circumstances have spoiled the farmers of the Sunny
South, and they realise it to-day. How many have told me lately r
We have been living too long in a fool’s paradise.
Under the new circumstances, if farmers want to turn their
occupation into a profitable pursuit, they will have to work hard and
work with intelligence, as without these necessary aids there can be no
intense culture and no high farming. But it is indeed a happy thing
for a man to know that if he does work his labours will be rewarded.
Is there any other encouragement required?
Intense culture means: Manuring, deep cultivation, drainage,
rotation of crops. It means keeping the land clean, free from weeds
and stones, stumps and ringbarked trees. In a word, intense cultiva-
tion means hard work; but it also means abundance for those who
labour.


Sugar beetroot is the corner stone of intense culture. Why I
Because (1) it is impossible to grow it successfully otherwise, and it
forces the farmer into it; (2) beetroot is susceptible of an industrial
application which allows of its production being carried out on a large
scale, the more so that the value of the manufactured product, viz.,
the sugar, permits of a remunerate price to be paid for the beet; (3)
sugar is the product of air and light, it is elaborated in the roots through
the leaves, and consequently its extraction from the root does not
impoverish the soil; (4) all the rest, mineral and organic matter
extracted from the soil for the formation of the root, is returned to the
soil in the form of manure, product of the industry, a small proportion
only being transformed, as food for the cattle, into more valuable
articles, viz., milk, butter and meat. Beetroot thus enables the
farmer to fulfil in the most rational manner the prescription of the
natural law of restitution to the producing soil.
For the above reasons, beetroot has become the true foundation
of good farming. Fortunate, therefore, are farmers of these colonies
where soil and climate are suitable for the cultivation of this most
valuable and indispensable crop.
The profits of sugar beetroot growing are twofold: direct and
indirect.
The direct profit is the difference between the cost of production
and the sale price of the crops. Its importance will be explained
later on.
Beetroot cultivation presents many indirect profits and advan-
tages, which are, perhaps, greater than the direct ones. The
■ successful cultivation of this root requires the use of mineral
manures, deep ploughing, special cultivation of the soil, great
cleanliness; and all this necessitates that improved implements be
introduced on the farms where they were missing before. At
the same time, the circumstances of the colonies must be steadily kept
in view. The occasional dearth of agricultural labour renders it more
imperative than in Europe that farmers should provide themselves, as
far as possible and gradually, with the best and latest descriptions of
labour-saving implements. The profits of beet cultivation will allow
them to buy such implements.
The foundation
of good farming.
Direct profit of
beet cultivation
Indirect profits
and advantages.
Improved imple-
ments are intro
duced on the
farms.


The fanner being enabled to judge of the efficacy of mineral
manures will extend their use to his other crops, which, sown after
beet, will find an improved soil, and will he placed in a better
condition for their growth and development. Under present conditions
the farm lands become poorer, and the crops smaller from year to
year, while on beetroot farms, the lands constantly improve, and the
value of crops is kept up to the highest limit. There is no doubt
that, compared with the present system of farming, the value of the
crops will be doubled.
The farmer, who cultivates beet, gets in return from the factory,
and at a reasonable price, a quantity of pulp in proportion to the
amount of beet he supplies. He keeps the leaves and the collars, which
have been cut off before delivery. This refuse of the beet, but
especially the pulp, has great fattening qualities for cattle generally.
It should be especially welcome in a time where high qualities of meat
or, live stock are required for export to England. I sometimes hear
that since the days of ensilage, which provides food for the cattle
during winter months, the importance of root crops has greatly
diminished. Such opinion seems to me to be absurd. Successful
dairy-farming and agriculture are intimately connected. If ensilage
is able to supply food (inferior in quality to beet pulp) it will not
force the farmer into the methods of intense cultivation, which alone
is rational. An intelligent farmer will grow sugar-beet (if he has a
market for it), get his share of pulp in return, and have recourse to
ensilage as well. The first will cause the abundance of the second.
The cows being properly fed at a time of the year when they
generally get nothing to eat, will also give extra quantities of milk
and butter, of which there was no appearance previously.
If mineral manures are indispensable in intense culture, stable
manure is not so the less, as it preserves the lightness and porousness
of the soil necessary to keep the moisture and facilitate the circula-
tion of air. Therefore, one of the great aims of modern farming is to
produce as much stable manure as possible, and to utilize for it the
bye-products of the farm, straw, etc. Of course, that can only be
done by keeping the cattle under rOof at least in the winter months,
and provide them with good straw litter that will absorb their
solid and liquid excreta. It is advisable that farm cattle should


be kept under roof, not only ini view of the production of stable
manure, but also in view of keeping them in good health and
condition. All farmers know what the cows suffer in the open
air during the cold nights of the winter. Under the actual system
of farming in Australia, with very little recourse to ensilage,
the cows are “ turned out ” when, in consequence of want of food,
they cease to give milk, and the poor animals have to look out
for themselves. They are seen wandering under the trees, eating the
foliage that hangs within their reach, and devouring anything they
can get hold of, to keep themselves alive. Naturally, with such treat-
ment, the cows, and the whole live stock, lose in weight and get
impoverished for the whole year. In the meantime, in some colonies,
Victoria and Tasmania for example, chaff and straw, that is to say
the elements of manure and food, are exported, the cattle’s excreta is
lost in the paddocks or on the roads, and those beautiful lands, other-
wise so favoured by nature, are unable to supply themselves with the
beef required for their handful of inhabitants. If New South Wales
produces sufficient slaughtering stock, or nearly so, it is only due to
the immensity of its territory compared with its small population.
Such facts simply illustrate the state of agriculture in these colonies.
The sugar factory itself produces a certain amount of combined
mineral and organic manure. The beet juice is purified by the
addition of a per centage of lime that precipitates the im-
purities, the excess of lime added being itself precipitated in the
form of carbonate of lime. All these solid matters are afterwards
compressed into what are termed '• scum cakes,” which are easily dis-
tributed over the land.
Extra manual labour is always required on beetroot farms, not
only to attend to the cultivation of beet, but as already explained,
because it increases the area under cultivation, crops are more
abundant, etc., and great activity reigns in such establishments nearly
all the year round. It is only at the beginning of the autumn that
work on the farms slackens, just at the moment that the sugar factories
are started, and when the services of those farm hands are readily
engaged. When the factory’s season is over, work in the farms
recommences. Could any industry be more favorable to the solution


of that great Australian problem : the settlement of the people on
the land.*
The advantages to be derived from the establishment of the
industry, from a national point of view, are incalculable.
* According to the Hon. Richard Gird, promoter of the beetroot industry in
California, at the Chino Factory, in the course of two years, four schoolhouses
were erected, and were attended by 310 children.


CHAPTER II.
Prospects of the Industry in Australia.
Suitability of
soil and climate
of Victoria.
In Victoria it has already been proved beyond question that a large
portion of the colony, especially Gippsland, the Port Fairy, Warrnam-
bool and Ballarat Districts, and the Valley of the Yarra, are eminently
suitable for the cultivation of sugar-beet. Experiments made,
especially those under the direction of Mr. A. N. Pearson, chemist of
the Department of Agriculture, show that more than satisfactory crops
can be obtained as regards both quantity and quality of roots.
In New South Wales I am personally engaged in making
experiments on the tableland of the New England District with a
variety of seeds and manures kindly supplied by the Department of
Agriculture. Mr. W. H. Walker, of Tenterfield, has generously placed
the land and all necessary labour and farm implements at my disposal.
I may mention here that seed planted towards the middle of October
has come up within four days. Ido not think that this has ever been
seen before. It shows the extraordinary germinative powers of the
soils and climate of some parts of this Continent. I inspected the
field the week before last Christmas, and I can only say that, so far, the
appearance of the crop is extremely good, although the season has
been anything but favorable. The probabilities are that all the high
lands of this colony are perfectly adapted for growing this crop.
A recent visit to Tasmania has convinced me that there are some
eminently suitable districts for beet cultivation. At Westbury, from
want of proper guidance, in one case seed had been planted 4 inches
deep (it should be |-inch). A delay has thereby occurred ; but a large
quantity of seed has come up all the same. It is most remarkable. In
Of New South
Wales.
Of Tasmania.


Europe, under similar circumstances, not a single seed would have
come to the surface.
Very rich beet has also been’ grown in New Zealand, and the
geographical position of the Colony indicates a climate which should
be very favorable to the cultivation of this crop.
The question now arises ; Can the Industry be profitably estab-
lished in Australia 1
The possibility of producing the raw material at a price that will
leave a profit to the farmer and the manufacturer as well, is of course,
the knot of the question.
It is sometimes thought and often said that, owing to the low price
of labour in Europe, it would be impossible to grow beet in these
colonies ; that is to say, the price the manufacturer could afford to pay
for it, would not be remunerative to the farmer.
Farm labourers in European beet-sugar producing countries earn
undoubtedly small wages; but, is their labour cheap 1 All those
women and children employed are more convenient than cheap, because
the amount of work performed* by them is in proportion to their
wages. A German specialist, Professor Hollrung, of Halle-on-Saale,
who visited America on the occasion of the Chicago Exhibition,
made inquiries into the cost of production of beetroot in the State of
Nebraska, and has reported that it does not cost more, in fact less, to
produce beet there than in Germany. The reasons ascribed are—(l)
the wages being higher, the labourers are better looked after and yield
from 30 to 40 per cent, more work than their German confreres ; (2)
the greatly reduced cost of land compared with Europe generally ; (3)
the non-existence of compulsory insurance of the labourers against
accidents, old age, infirmities, etc., to which the German employers are
subjected to; (4) the virginity and natural richness of the soil, reducing
the quantity of artificial manure or allowing to dispense with it
altogether, etc., etc. All those reasons may be equally applied to
Australia, and one great reason may be added to it: the wonderful
climate of these colonies, so eminently suitable for the production of
rich beet and abundant crops.
Owing to the genial climate of South-eastern Australia, the season
for sowing and harvesting sugar-beet will be much more extended (at
least double) than in Europe or some of the American States. This


is extremely favorable to both the farmer and the manufacturer. To
the farmer it means less extra manual labour, and ■with his own
family he will be able to look after a much larger area, the total amount
of labour required being divided Over a longer period. To the manufac-
turer it means a great savings' as instead of having to take delivery of the
whole crop within four Or five weeks (before the frost sets in) and
protect a large portion of it in silos about the factory, where it loses
part of the sugar contents for which he has paid, he-will be able to
take delivery of the beet in quantities almost equal to his daily
requirements, and so save also a double manipulation of the roots.
Mr, A. N. Pearson estimates the cost of production of an acre of
beet in Victoria, with artificial manure, at £8 1 Is., and as this gentleman
has already acquired a certain amount of local experience in this matter,
no doubt, his figures must be near the mark. Considering they include
the value of the farmer’s own labour, such crops are certain to leave
a very satisfactory direct profit. The cost in California is estimated at
from £4 16s. to £6, without artificial manure. However, experience
alone will be able to settle absolutely the question of the cost of pro-
duction, but, results obtained so far, induce me to believe, that for the
reasons above mentioned, it will be possible to raise beet cheaper in
Australia than in Europe. The agricultural aspect of the Industry
is thus very promising.
Desiring this pamphlet should remain simple and easily digestable
matter, it is not my intention of entering here into the details of
the probable cost of manufacturing beet-sugar in Australia, but I will
confine myself to general remarks. The cost of manufacture is
composed of three principal items, which, in order of importance, may
be classified as under :
1. The cost of beet.
2. The cost of labour.
3. The cost of fuel.
If, what has been said about the cost of raising beet in these
colonies is confirmed by practice, it follows that the manufacturer
will be able to buy his raw material on better terms than the European
manufacturer can.


The wages of the factory labourers will be greater in
Australia. But I must here remark, that in respect to the use of
labour saving appliances, much progress has yet to be made in the bulk
of European factories. There are certainly a few mills in Europe,
especially in France, wonderful establishments, which are improved up
to dgte, and where not a man could be saved, but in the generality of
the mills, much of the manual labour could be saved by mechanical
contrivances. I am, therefore, certain that the difference in the cost
of labour* between Europe and Australia, can be easily adjusted by
the adoption of real modern plants.
The cost of fuel will, in many instances, be cheaper in Australia,
where wood can be obtained at very low rates, such as 4s per ton.-f
Those are the considerations which induce me to believe that it
will be possible to manufacture beet-sugar cheaper in Australia than
in the old country.
After the cost of production, the profits of the manufacturer
depend principally on the sale price of the sugar. It must be noticed,
therefore, that the net sale price of sugar is higher in Australia than
in Europe. Owing to the higher protective duties (40 per cent.
ad valorum) the beet-sugar manufacturers of the United States alone
are placed in a better position.
The sale price of the bye-products of the factory has also a
certain importance. They are especially: the pulp} and the molasses.
The disposal of the pulp requires some special attention. It is
not likely that there will be a market for it from the first season.
Many farmers who will supply beet to the factory will not be
disposed to buy the pulp in return, either through ignorance of its
value as cattle food or through want of foresight in making the
necesssary arrangements to feed their stock with .it. At first they will
grow beetroot, but during the pulp season their cattle will be “ turned
out ”as usual. I think, therefore, that if one-third or one-half of the
pulp production can be sold to the most intelligent farmers during the
first seasons, such result would be very satisfactory.
* The average wages of the sugar factory labourers in Prance in 1893-94 wa
2s. 1 Id. per day.
t The coal used in French factories cost an average of 18s. per ton.
J The average sale price of pulp in Prance is 4s. per ton at the Factory.


However, the pulp is a too valuable product to be wasted, and
the company will have to utilise it themselves in fattening cattle with it.
This must be done as much with the object of demonstrating to the
farmers the value and qualities of this fciod as as a matter of economy.
Consequently the Company will have to acquire a certain number of
cattle to fatten and erect “ temporary ” sheds to accomodate them.
I use the word “ temporary ” because although the fattening of
cattle will probably be a lucrative operation, it will not be possible to
continue it long and it is not advisable that it should be continued.
It is to be expected that the farmers will not be long in seeing the
advantages of getting their share of pulp, and for that reason after
two or three seasons the company will be enabled to give up utilising
it themselves, however lucrative the operation may be. And for the
following reason it is to be hoped that the pulp will be speedily taken
by the farmer. As already explained, beetroot cultivation requires
intense culture. There is no intense culture possible without the use
of stable manure, which the farmer must produce in abundant quan-
tities. But how can he produce manure if he does not feed his cattle ?
Hence the necessity for him to buy the pulp.
Looking thus at the future of the sugar factory, it will be seen
that the company has a direct interest in the question of having the
beet farms well conducted, otherwise, through the impoverishment of
the land about, the supply of raw material would be seriously
compromised after a few years.*
As for the molasses, its value is little or nil in Australia.
However, it is probable, that before the first factory is put up, new
processes of manufacture already applied now in some factories, will
do away altogether with this bye-product, almost the whole of the
sugar being extracted from it.
Considering all circumstances together, it will be admitted, that
the prospects of the industry are as promising to the manufacturer
as they are to the farmer.
As long as the Australian Colonies remain separated, the local
beet industry in each of the Southern Colonies would be sufficiently
* If this little pamphlet reaches California, I would draw the special attention
of the beetroot people over there to this point.


protected by the existing tariffs against the competition of their
respective neighbours, and against the cane sugar of Queensland.
But it is feared by some that in case of the federation of the colonies
(which, alas ! seems a long way off) the beet-sugar in the South could
not hold its own against the cane industry of Queensland, owing to
the suppression of these intercolonial protective duties on this article.
If the beet industry is carried on, as I will endeavour to explain
in the following chapter, where I propose dealing with the conditions
for the successful establishment of factories, the competition of
Queensland will, in my opinion, never to be feared much, and I do
not think, therefore, that the Queensland sugars will have any
advantage over the beet-sugars in the Southern Markets, the more so,
that before they get thbre they will always be loaded with freight,
and other charges.
The cane industry will always be many years behind in progress
with that of the beet. Most of the improvements brought into the
manufacture of cane sugar come from the Continental beet factories,
the two processes being very similar. Progress in this particular line
travels to the colonies via England and Scotland, and experience
shows that it takes several years to travel round that way. The
explanation is that there is no sugar industry in Great Britain.
The Queensland sugar production is, no doubt, susceptible of
further development; but, I do not think that, owing to the labour
difficulty, the output of that colony will ever exceed 150,000 tons.
But let it attain 200,000 tons in the course of years, and we will see
directly that it will be so much the better for Queensland and United
Australia, and will not interfere in the least degree with the future of
the beet industry.
It is even quite possible, thanks to the assistance now given by
the Government of Queensland in the establishment of co-operative
mills, that within the few following years, the production of Queens-
land, New South Wales and Fiji combined, may overtake the.
consumption of sugar of Australasia. But, again, this can little affect
the establishment of the beet industry in the South-eastern colonies,
as long as the local protective duty on sugar remains in existence.


YEAR.
POPULATION.
SUGAR CONSUMPTION.
1900
4,503,209
191,489 tons
1905
5,100,537
216,650 „
1910
5,770,804
245,117 „
1915
6,529,087
277,325 „
1920
7,387,009
313,765 „
1925
8,357,661
354,994 „
1950
15,494,071
632,652 „
And it must be remarked, that in case of federation, the Colony of
Fiji is not likely to be included in the Union; and, therefore, sugar
from that quarter, which will probably amount next year to 30,000
tons, will continue to be subject to the payment of the protective
duty on sugar, that, no doubt, will be established by our federal
legislators.
Federation, through the exclusion of Fiji, would thus, at once,
cause a deficit in the home production of the quantities of sugar
required for the consumption of Australasia.
Under all circumstances, this over-production, if it ever does
come, will not last long. According to the latest available statistics,
the average consumption of sugar per head in Australia is
estimated at 9T2 lbs., and a total population numbering 3,984,629
persons. With an annual increase of 2-50 percent, in the population,
and supposing even the consumption of sugar per head to remain
stationary, on that basis the population of these colonies and the
consumption of sugar will be as follows in the following years :
These figures show conclusively that Queensland and N.S. Wales
will never be able to supply the Australian demand for sugar, and,
therefore, cannot possibly interfere with the future developments
of the beet industry in the South.
A partial federation of some of the colonies might, however, be
of more consequence. Supposing, for instance, federation between
Victoria, Tasmania, Queensland and New South Wales, it follows
that their limited market would, within two or three years, be over-
stocked with the cane-sugar of the two last-named colonies.
Such circumstances would undoubtedly retard the establishment
of the beet industry in Victoria, Tasmania and New South Wales till


the day of complete federation of all the colonies, or till the demand
for sugar in the federated provinces would exceed the production of
cane-sugar in the two eastern colonies —the greater demand being
brought about by the natural increase in population.
This would be a matter of great gravity to the agricultural
interests of Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania.
In a country like Australia, where the manufactured products
can find no market beyond its own boundaries, the manufacturing
industries Will only become a source of general wealth when the popu-
lation will be counted by millions. In the meantime, all the richness
of these colonies must be produced by the development of their natural
resources, viz., the agricultural, pastoral and mineral industries.
If it is now considered that a revival of the agricultural industry
is only possible through the establishment of beet cultivation, or
through a permanent rise in the value of the other products of the
soil, our legislators will, no doubt, consider whether such partial
federation would be the most desirable thing under present circum*
stances.
From the preceding remarks it may be inferred that federation of
all the Colonies would favor the cane industry without interfering
with the establishment of the beet industry.
Partial federation, not including the Western Colonies, might, for
a short time, favor the cane industry of the Eastern Colonies, and
would retard the introduction of the beet cultivation in those Colonies
included in the limited Union, and, consequently, the revival of their
agriculture and the benefit of all its national consequences.
But it is advanced by some that a democratic Federal Parliament, ’
containing necessarily a strong southern majority, would not long
tolerate the employment of kanaka labour on Queensland sugar
plantations, and the possibility of such occurence increases the
necessity of the establishment of the beet-sugar industry. It is to be
hoped, however, that nothing of the kind will ever occur, it being
well proved to-day that, far from interfering with the legitimate
occupation of the whites, the assistance of black labour on work that
the whites refuse to perform, serves on the contrary to give employment
to thousands of Europeans. Moreover, it is to be expected that


Queensland will not join into a federation without some gbod guarantee
on this black labour question, as much of the prosperity of the Colony
depends on her sugar industry.
Whatever may be the future of Federation, nothing should
legitimately interfere with the progression of beet cultivation on the
lines laid down in the fourth chapter of this pamphlet.


CHAPTER III.
Conditions for the Successful Establishment of
Sugar Factories.
Referring now to the establishment of sugar factories in a certain locality,
1 it is necessary, before all, to ascertain the possibility of obtaining a
full supply of raw material within a certain radius. The full supply
of beet must be assured from the first season, as operating on a too
small quantity would entail a certain loss, which might compromise the
future of the enterprise. Losses the first year often mean borrowing
money at high interest, of which we all know the consequences.
Therefore, it is necessary to make reliable contracts with the farmers
before the formation of a company, and especially before putting up a
factory. If only promises of planting beet are depended upon,
disappointment is certain. A farmer will promise to grow 20 acres,
but if he is asked to sign a contract in due form, he will probably think
the matter over more carefully, and will discover that he can only
guarantee five or ten acres, especially when he will know what growing
rich beet means. A farmer should never contract for more than one-
third or one-fourth of the total acreage he has under culture, as the
rotation of crops must be kept in view for the production of rich beet,
and the success of the whole farm.
The manufacturer, in the contract he makes with the farmers,
should insist on the rotation of crops as much in his own interests as
in those of the latter, and it would be advisable to specify that no
beetroot shall be accepted which is grown on land having borne a
similar crop within two years previously. Mild climates like ours are
evidently favourable to the spread of plant disease, and every pre-
caution must be taken against such possibilities. There are no better
remedies against disease than rotation of crops and intense cultivation.
I fear that not sufficient attention is given to this important matter
The full supply
of raw material
must be assured
from fhe first
year.
Rotation of
crops must be
insisted upon.


in the districts of the United States, where, for the present, the
industry is so successfully carried on. They are raising several crops
of beetroot in succession on the same lands, but they may be sorry for
it one of these days. I have no personal acquaintance with the
American beet industry, but from printed reports I have read, I
question whether the agricultural aspect of the industry is well
understood.
The erection of modern sugar-works, as recommended in the
preceding chapter, is very costly, and the general expenses connected
with the process of manufacture are considerable. It is, therefore,
obvious that the factory should be of a certain importance in view of
dividing interest, sinking fund, and general expenses, on as large a
production as possible. Now-a-days, everything is produced and sold
cheaply, and the only way to reduce the cost of production is to
manufacture on as large a scale as possible. Such is the secret of
modern industry. The erection of a factory working less than 250
tons of beet per day of 24 hours, would not be advisable. Admitting
that in these colonies an acre of land would produce an average of 18
tons of rich beet, and supposing the factory to work 120 days, it will
require 250 * 12Q =1,666 acres of beetroot per season. But, as pointed
1 O
out before, the full supply of the factory must be assured, even under
the most unfavourable circumstances, and to make up for possible
deficiencies in the crop, it will require not less than 2,000 acres
annually. As beet can only be grown in rotation every three or four
years, the establishment of a factory of such importance will be the
cause of about 7,000 acres being under cultivation with different
crops.
To work in the shortest time the largest possible quantity of beet
is the essential condition of success of a sugar factory, and everything
must be done to obtain that result. The cane sugar industry is placed
in exactly the same conditions, and this explains why, in New South
Wales and Queensland, all the small mills are struggling for existence
or closing their doors, while large factories are in full prosperity. The
central mills which have been erected in Mackay, with Government
assistance, made losses till the day their production reached 2,000 tons
of sugar per season. From that moment large profits have been
realised.


Ihe foregoing shows clearly the necessity of erecting factories
1 only in settled districts, offering all the resources for the production of
such large quantities of sugar-beet.
The next condition equal in importance to the absolute necessity of
assuring the full supply of beet, is that this beet should be rich in
sugar. In order to induce the farmer to grow rich beet, which entirely
rests with himself, the price paid for it by the manufacturer is based
on its sugar contents.
In view of the establishment of the industry in these colonies, I
would suggest the following basis for the transactions between
farmers and manufacturers : Beet, to be paid at the rate of 14s. per
ton, delivered at the factory, on a standard of 14 per cent, of sugar,
Is. 6d. extra per ton to be paid for every degree above. For beet
below the standard of 14 per cent. Is. 6d. per degree should be
deducted, and the manufacturer have the option of refusing roots
containing less than 12 per cent, of sugar. The collars to be cut off
vertically to the axle of the beet, down to the root of the last leaf.
It may be mentioned here that the beet grown during the last
season by the Agricultural Department of Victoria, under the
direction of Mr. A. N. Pearson, averaged 16.8 per cent of sugar.
The standard price of 14s. per ton is in proportion to the present
prices of sugar. It would necessarily vary should any substantial rise
or fall take place in the article,
The next condition of success is that the manufacturing plant
should be complete, and of such workmanship as not to cause
interruptions in the process of manufacture from the first to the last
day of the season. By a complete plant must be understood one
capable of extracting the maximum quantity of sugar, with a mini-
mum amount of manual labour, fuel and other general expenses.*
The Board of Directors of the companies, which may be formed
at first in these colonies, will not for some time be competent to deal
with this question, and will have to rely entirely on the advice of
their manager. Hence the necessity of securing the services of an
%
* According to the Hon. E. Gird, they have sustained large losses in
California, owing to their incomplete and inferior manufacturing plant.


experienced and straightforward man, as the manager would be the
means of making or marring the company. Once the industry estab
lished, these difficulties in the future will, of course, be much lessened.
A competent manager should, it is almost obvious to state, be
thoroughly acquainted with every branch of the great industry which
he is called upon to superintend, so that he may control, when
occasion arises, the work of his subordinates—engineer, chemist, &c. ;
whatever may be their degree of competency. The machinery of a
modern sugar mill is more complicated than in any industry I know
of, its uninterrupted working is essential to the success of the venture,
and its construction should be within the intimate knowledge of the
manager.
The manufacture of sugar is essentially based on chemical science ;
consequently, a competent manager should be acquainted with the
science of chemistry, at least, so much as applies to this special
manufacture. It is also advisable, especially in a country where the
industry is to be introduced, that the manager should be well versed
in the agricultural part of the industry. The farmers will have to
acquire all their experience in the cultivation of sugar-beet, and it
will be in the interest of the companies to have at the head of their
concern a man able to guide the farmers.
Men possessing those qualifications are not rare in Europe. Only
one thing is necessary to secure their services: pay them what
they are worth.
As a last remark, I beg to say that factories should be erected in
view of increasing the output, by the addition of new machinery, as
soon as the supply of raw material will permit it. Owing to want of
foresight on this point, and also through false economy, most of the
colonial cane sugar mills dook like old patched up establishments after
a very short number of years, and the work is rendered thereby very
expensive and inconvenient. Very few escape alterations and additions
already after the first season. Besides, it is a pity to spoil the aesthetic
appearance of a modern sugar factory, which is always a sight of great
interest when kept clean and in good order. All visitors to the great
central beet factories of France are struck by their beautiful, orderly, and


clean appearance. Although, originally erected over 30 years ago, and
having undergone constant additions and modifications, as required by the
incessant progress made in the industry, those huge establishments
appear to be of quite recent construction.*
* I would recommend to those interested in this matter, and who would
happen to go to France, to visit the central beet factory of Abbeville. They will
see there what must be understood by “a plant up to date.” If they com-
municate with me I will be pleased to facilitate their visit.


CHAPTER IV.
How to Start the Industry in Australia.
The starting of a new industry in a new country like Australia
necessarily presents many difficulties, but none perhaps as many as
the beetroot, which is an agricultural and manufacturing industry
combined. Pointing out those difficulties may retard the erection of
the first factories which farmers in some districts are so eager to get,
but by showing how to overcome them, I hope to hasten the establish-
ment of the industry on a sound basis, which is the manifest interest of
all concerned.
Jn the preceding chapter, referring to the conditions required for
the successful establishment of sugar factories, some of these difficulties
have already been indicated. The great importance of - ‘ starting from
the first season with a full supply of rich beet ” has been shown. In
this chapter I propose to dwell particularly on the difficulties encoun-
tered in new countries in the fulfilment of this condition. It may be
said that this has been the invariable cause of failures of new concerns.
So far the public have declined to take up shares of intended beet,
sugar companies in Victoria, and in the other colonies no attempts
have even been made to float such companies, as there was not the
remotest hope of raising the capital required, and in consequence some
of the Governments have been requested to intervene, if not actually
in advancing the money, at least in guaranteeing the payment of
debentures and their interest.
I here venture to express the opinion that capitalists show discern-
ment in not investing “ at present ” in the industry, and the Governments


would be unwise in assisting “at present” in the erection of factories.
The interests of the industry, and consequently of the farmers, require that
no factories should be started at the present juncture, as their failure
would bo a certainty, and the whole cause would be jeopardised for many
years to come.
The history of the introduction of the beet industry in the United
States is in evidence to guide us. It has there recently entered on an era
of prosperity, but it has taken over 25 years to arrive at that stage. The
want of experience and proper guidance have been the leading causes of all
their failures and delays in the definitive establishment of the industry.
There is a possibility of establishing it in Australia within two or
three years, provided a proper start is made. One thing is certain :it is,
that no beet-sugar can be made without sugar-beet. And I now ask the
question : Take any district where it is intended to erect factories, such as
Mafia or Port Fairy in Victoria, Westbury in Tasmania, Tenterfield in
New South Wales, how many farmers are there in those places having the
required knowledge and experience to guide them, and are able to grow
the quantity and quality of beet required to insure the financial success of
a sugar factory ? There are numberless farmers willing to grow beet, and
they have sufficient suitable land for the purpose ; but how many know
how to grow sugar-beet ?
Two hundred farmers may be required to assure the supply of a
factory, and the least to be expected is that each of those farmers should
have grown a certain quantity of beet for say one or two seasons before
there can be any certainty about the full supply being obtainable. I ask
the question again: How many farmers have the required experience ?
Are there many, dozens ? Would an experienced manager rely on being
supplied with suitable sugar-beet by a farmer who has never grown any
before? It would be simply madness. Sugar-beet growing means the
introduction of intense culture, a revolution in the Australian methods
of cultivating the land and working the farms ; and this can not be
learned without experience. The large number of farmers above mentioned,
as required in the vicinity of every factory, have to be trained into these
new methods before there should be any question of erecting such costly
manufacturing establishments.


The question thus arises ot how this can be done with the least
expense and with the least delay. The matter of delay is particularly
important, as Australia’s farming is in an acute crisis, for which early
remedies must be found. The agricultural depression is a national
calamity, which affects the railway revenues, the public finances, and the
whole trade of the colonies.
The Governments of Victoria, Tasmania and New Zealand have
shown their anxiety for introducing the industry in allowing the free
importation of the manufacturing plants, and in promising large bonuses
of several thousands of pounds for the production of the first beet-sugars,
The sacrifices that the Governments are willing to make could be much
reduced and rendered effective if, instead of offering to make them “after”
the erection of the first factories, they would feel disposed to make some
“ before.”
It is not the offer of a bonus (except it is made about equal to the
capital required) that will induce the investment of a large capital of eighty
or a hundred thousand pounds in the new industry, as no less will
be required for the starting of a company. It must be clearly shown
as a condition that the industry can be established on a sound basis,
and the first inducement that the capitalist requires is the certainty of the
supply of the raw material of the desired quality, because on that day the
financial success of the undertaking will be absolute. Let the day pome
when the supply of beet will leave no doubts, and there will be no difficulty
in erecting factories. Millions of money are lying idle, interest on capital
becomes small, and chances for sound investment are looked after eagerly ;
and should there still be difficulties in securing the capital subscribed, at
least on that day will it be possible to the Governments to come to the
rescue in guaranteeing debentures and their interest without exposing the
public exchequer to unreasonable risks. By doing so, the Governments
will, at that moment, serve the interests of the whole community.
1
I will now refer to the practical side of the question.
First of all, the services ot experts should be secured by the Govern-
ments. Secondly, in order to induce every farmer to acquire the necessary
training under the guidance of those experts, cash prizes worth competing
for should be offered for the production of the best acre of sugar-beet.


As previously stated, in most of the districts where the erection of
factories is contemplated, it is only, the exception among the farmers,
who, so far, have acquired some experience in the cultivation of beet.
The majority of them are “ hanging back,” for which they have all
. . . . bad reasons. But “ hanging back farmers,” allow me to tell
you that, through your indifference and inaction, you retard the
establishment of the industry, and, consequently, your own interests.
You are none too many in yOur respective districts to insure the supply of
a factory. Perhaps, the prospects of a good cash prize will wake you up.
Anyhow, let me hope, that this little scolding will induce you to follow
your more enterprising brethren ; and to put, yon also, your shoulder to
the wheel.
It may be asked what will the farmer do with his acre of beet when
there is no factory to sell it to. Well, he will feed his cattle, his horses,
and pigs with it, and the second season he will have an abundant crop of
cereals on the same acre, demonstrating already the indirect profits of the
beetroot cultivation. The farmers will get their eyes opened at once
as to the value of intense culture ; this acre of beet will cost them
nothing. On the contrary, it will be all profit to them.
I know very well that a farmer who is desirous of growing beet can
find in the literature which has been published on the subject almost every
information required, and the secretaries of the various agricultural depart-
ments, such as Messrs. D. Martin in Victoria, W. 8. Campbell in New
South Wales, and P. W. J. Moore in Tasmania ; and also Mr. J. L.
Thompson, Principal of the Hawkesbury Agricultural College, and Mr. A.
N. Pearson, already mentioned, are to be commended on the genuine efforts
they have made to instruct the farmers in this new branch of industry. But
printed information and lectures is the method to which recourse has been
had in other countries, notably in the United States, and which has been the
cause of so many valuable years being lost in the establishment of the
industry.
The farmers have to be met by more practical methods, and what is
really wanted is to obtain the services of experts who, for a couple of'
seasons, would constantly move among the farmers, who, stimulated by the
promise of cash prizes, should be induced to grow beet according to
scientific means.


These experts, by their knowledge of fanning generally, would arouse
the interest of the agriculturists, and command their confidence.
Such experts would also, by experiments, settle the question of what
are the best varieties of beet to grow, the kind and proportion of manures
to be recommended in the different districts ; and they would not neglect
to raise seed the second year, the more so that the acclimatation may lead
to improvements in the varieties.
And while writing these lines, it just strikes me that by the raising
of seed, to be sold afterwards to the farmers, the whole affair may be made
self-supporting.
It would also be necessary that the requisite special agricultural
implements be purchased and placed at the disposal of the expert for
general use. And, lastly, that for the first two seasons the supply of seed
be imported and sold at cost price, or gratuitously distributed to the
farmers.
If these various suggestions should receive attention, I undertake to
assert that within a very short period of time, and with comparatively small
pecuniary assistance from the Governments, not only will the whole
science of agriculture in these colonies undergo a vast improvement, but
the farmers will reap a pecuniary reward for their labours from the
establishment of numerous sugar factories, which will secure to them a
safe and remunerative outlet for their beet crops.
For my own part, I shall always be pleased to afford any advice and
assistance, which either the Governments or the Agricultural Societies
may require, in view of the solution of this great national problem.


N|essrs. L’HERONDELLE & Go.,
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERS,
FRANCE.
Special Agricultural Implements for the cultivation of
IT
wS
i
LATEST LABOUR-SAVING APPLIANCES.
MOST PERFECTED SOWING MACHINES.
Sswing MasMnes and Mineral Manure Distributers esmbiaed.
Tilthing Machines & Mineral Manure Distributors combined.
Horse Hoes with or without Mineral Manure
Distributors.
&e. &c. &c.
SOLE AGENT FOR AUSTRALASIA:
Clement Van de Velde, C.E.,
Wynyard Buildings, Wynyard Square,
SYDNEY.


Messrs. GANDELIER AND SONS,
Agricultural Engineers,
FRANCE.
Winners of 450 Medals and 345 First Prizes at Agricultural Shows-
Special Agricultural Implements
FOR THE
Intense Cultivation of Sugar Beet,
With a Minimum of Hand Labour.
Horse Ploughs, with single, double and alternative socks, for single
double and triple furrows
(Brabant’s Patents.)
FOUR-SOCKS STUBBLINC MACHINES.
The Scarifying, Harrowing & Stnhbling Machine.
IMPROVED WEEDING MACHINES.
BEETROOT HARVESTERS, &c., &c.
Sole Agent for Australasia:
CLEMENT VAN DE VELDE, C.E.,
WYNYARD BUILDINGS, WYNYARD SQUARE, SYDNEY-


Com pap ie de Fives-Lille,
LIMITED. CAPITAL, £480,000.
PARIS.
Engineers and Contractors.
The Leading 1 Firm in the World for the Construction
of
Sugar Manufacturing Plant.
This Company, owning and working three
large central Sugar Factories in France, where
all new inventions are put to severe test, is neces-
sarily placed in a unique position of competency
to he entrusted with the construction of Sugar
Manufacturing Plants for countries abroad.
General Agent for Australasia:
cm? m DE TELDB, 0.1.
Wynyard Buildings, Wynyard Square, Sydney.
