

The Land of the Golden Grain.
SOUVENIR
PINNAROO
LAMEROO
PARILLA.
The New Wheat Growing Districts
of South Australia.




THE
LAND OF THE GOLDEN GRAIN
SOUVENIR
Pinnaroo,
Lameroo,
Parilla.
THE NEW WHEAT - GKOWING
DISTRICTS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Published by
THE CRITIC PROPRIETARY, LIMITED
Gresham Street, Adelaide
DECEMBER, 1911




FARMERS
I FARMERS
FARMERS
YOU CANNOT
Farm Successfully without the aid of the best Farm Implements and Machinery.
You need Messrs. CLUTTERBUCK BROS, complete line of the best and most up-to-date Farm Machinery and Requisites
The Olds Gasoline Engine
The Biackstone Oil Engine
Best by every Test
Efficient
Economical
Simple
Durable.
Thousands of Horse-
Power sold in South
Australia during the
year.
The Engine that has
never been beaten
in competition, and
has won over 1000
prizes.
V -
Many hundreds being
used in South Austra-
lia for Chaff-cutting.
Irrigating, &c., and
giving universal
satisfaction.
NOTE.- Olds Engines have 40 per cent, less wearing parts than most engines
A simple, economic, effective and reliable driving power
The Celebrated Massey= Harris Farm
Implements 't* *4*
World Famous on their Merits. British Built, they have no equal : they
lead, others follow.
The Massey-Harris Binder The Massey-Harris Drill
The Massey-Harris Cultivator The Massey-Harris Rake, &c.
High=Class Motor Cars to suit every-
body, from £l7O upwards >s* >?
•The Martini The Dennis The Russell The Marvellous Flanders 20
The EMF The Sampson The Brush
NOTE. —Duplicate Parts for these Cars kept in Stock
SEPARATORS, PLOWS, OILS, TWINES, ARTIFICIAL FERTILIZERS, AND ALL FARM REQUISITES
Send for Prices and Particulars-
CLUTTERBUCK BROS., Hindley St., Adelaide
Travelling Representative lor Pinnaroo District: Mr. J. O LEARY.
3


HOSKING ®. RYAN, Ltd.
( CAPITAL: £10,200 , Fully Pain Up.)
Farms, Stations, (Q, Unimproved Lands for Sale in all Districts.
C> Of Sizes and Prices in City and all Suburbs.
The Largest Selection of ail Classes of Property.
Buyers conducted to inspect.
W *o* ■
T. RYAN, M.P., (Chairman of Directors).
II
•*
W Mdt
%
mss
feps
Usk
- r &RYAN L
•*«5 ~~ 1 ~r.~
?i a«»ss«
m
if
SI til
m
■i
HEAD OFFICE:
Register Chambers, Grenfell St., Adelaide.
Licensed Land Brokers, Auctioneers, Public Accountants.
Instates Managed.
Documents under Real Property and Crown Lands Acts Prepared. Fire, Accident, and Live-Stock Insurances Effected. Loans Arranged on Freehold Security
A.genta for Carmien Portable G-a.B.
4


The Pinnaroo District for Wheat
is our recommendation.
Let us show you through.
CHEAP TO BUY
CHEAP TO CLEAR.
EASILY WORKED
HANDY TO RAILWAYS
ABUNDANCE OF WATER
GOOD RAINFALL
1
m
EDWIN JUKES, A.EA.S.A., A.C.P.A. (Director).
HOSKING & RYAN, LTD.
Register Chambers,
GRENFELL STREET,
ADELAIDE.
EDWIN J. HOSKING, J.P. (Director).
5


LAMEROO.
TRAIN AT LAMEROO, BOUND FOR ADELAIDE.
6


BIRTHDAY PARTY AT MR. JOHN KELLY’S FARM AT PINNAROO.
SECOND STORE ERECTED BY MESSRS. EDWARDS AND
SONS, GENERAL PROVIDERS, OF PINNAROO.
NATIONAL BANK, LAMEROO.
FAREWELL SMOKE SOCIAL TENDERED TO MESSRS. E. A. MANN AND E. P. SEDDON, PRIOR TO THEIR
DEPARTURE FROM LAMEROO.


KINNANE BROS’ BULLOCK TEAM (30),
Which carted 260 bags of wheat from their farm, Mulcra, Vic., to Pinnaroo, 5 miles. Drivers—T. Joyce and D. Wintertield. Mr P. Kinane mounted.


Progressive, Pushful, Pinnaroo.
Even to-day. with aii the knowledge we have,
with the magic of superphosphates to win victories
more marvellous .ban we ever thought of, with
farming implement of unmeasured skill, and witli
methods of onlti\ von that rival for superiority
the whole of the 1 mmon wealth. he would be a
may go east or west or north or south and discover
a now province. What they have done on the
West Coast may be done anywhere else for that
matter. And ibis all goes to prove that South
Australia is more wonderful than the most optimistic
think her. She has had many triumphs over
Blazing the Trail.
What is the best way to describe the victory in a
word ? This —“ Inciedible !” Only that word
can effectively describe the transformation witnessed
in the Pinnaroo country during the last 10 years.
In 1901, except for two or three isolated farms, the
A. S. & I. H. Conrad, architects.
bold man, indeed, who would write any estimate
of the area that must come under the plough within
10 vears, or who would talk of the harvest figures
of 1922 ! (Ireat possibilities are still sleeping,
to awaken with the conquering march of trade and
commerce. We do not know South Australia even
now. To-morrow a Parliamentary Commission
PINNAROO DISTRICT HOSPITAL.
sceptics. Pinnaroo has been one of them. Idrst
scoffed at, then doubted, afterwards damned with
faint praise, this country now laughs at its pessimists
in ringing tones of prosperity, and holds merry with
the men who all through have had the fait h. Pin
naroo is one of the greatest agricultural achievements
not of South Australia merely, hut of Australia
huge district was a wilderness of malice scrub.
Those who thoroughly realised the importance of
fallowing in relation to the successful utilization of
such land and expressed tin opinion that by the
adoption of proper methods ol cultivation, the soil
could be made to produce wheat on a payable scale,
when not ridiculed, were regarded with tin- utmost


MESSRS. BELL & CO.’S WHEAT
STACK AT PINNAROO.
PARILLA
S.A. Farmers’ wheat stacks.
10


scepticism. But what has happened ? Not only
has the country grown wheat and other cereal crops,
but it has developed into one of the biggest grain
districts in the whole State.
Pinnaroo began to boom from the start. This
was inevitable. The land was there in great fertility
and in great quantity. It was not to be won for
commerce, however, by men going and looking at
it from the fence rail. The picture of the Pinnaroo
country that you see to-day was not by any means
the picture that could have been seen 10 years ago.
Strong muscles and strong hearts had to go out
and blaze the trail. The wilderness had to be made
to blossom as the rose. And the roses are there
now —not a few of them, either. The brightness of
wheat fields and grass paddocks and homesteads is
everywhere, and settlers are still spreading it. They
are still tearing off the mallee coats of scrub and
putting on the land the green gaiments that are
only obtained from the wardrobe of prosperity.
There is no time for resting here. If the pioneers
had rested there would not have been any Pin-
naroo.
A Picture of the Past.
One of the pioneers was Mr. R. L. McKenzie, and
he and the earliest arrivals in the famous district
have given us graphic mental photos, of the Pin-
naroo that was. Timber stretched from horizon
BOYS AND THEIR TEACHER.
t ( > horizon- much of it dwarfed, stunted some of
it of excellent proportions. The whole landscape
was monotonous and uninviting. But the men
who knew were able to look ahead. And what
they saw was I9U with its busy wheat fields. Har-
testers singing in the big paddocks. The teeth
of many ploughs ripping up more of the country and
making imposing additions to the acreage totals,
Scrub tumbling down to the swing of axes Stacks
of grain at the sidings. More settlers. Lengthen-
ing railway lines. In short, the organised activity
of a boom that was not merely a spasmodic smile
of progress, but the whole face of the country laugh-
ing with genuine, well-merited, unrestrained glad-
ness.
In the Early Days.
In the days of 10 years ago before this boom of
prosperity was sounding throughout South Australia,
Pinnaroo was a big business proposition. It had to
be proved There was the wilderness that had
to be tamed, and, fortunately, there were the men,
too, with the courage and the faith to do the taming,
Some people tried to persuade them that they were
GIRLS’ CLASS AT LAMEROO.
foolish, but they went right ahead and conquered.
To-day the boot pinches the other fellow ! Nobody
dares to dispute that the Pinnaroo country is not
without imperfections, but whatever the disadvan-
tages that end of the scale is sent up with a kick by
the advantages. It must be confessed that even
some of the early settlers, encouraged to despondency
by the trials that faced them, gave the country up.
If only their vision had been a little longer and their
hearts a little stouter they would have waited and
reaped the reward that many are reaping to-day.
Here is the story of one such man who was tried and
found wanting. Without a scintilla of farming
knowledge—a fatal handicap for a start —he set
out from Tailem Bend with a team of horses and a
well loaded wagon. The sky was all blue and sun-
shine until the sandy country was reached. Some
of the cargo had to be jettisoned at the first sand
ridge, and with a lighter wagon and a lighter heart
the would-be farmer travelled to the next ridge.
Off came the rest of the load and a return was made
to the spot where the unloading began. The
pendulum of the weary clock of his experiences
swung between the two places for several days.
That did not mean much progress, of course, and it
seemed that the onward march was never to be
resumed. Still the fellow tried, but, sick at heart
he came home again. Team, wagon, and equip-
ment were sold 1 o the first bidder, and the man,
tired of South Australia, went over to try his luck
in Western Australia. To-day, so they say. he i


just making a living on 70 odd acres, and no doubt
the purchaser of his team and wagon, if he could be
traced, is one of the wealthy men of Pinnaroo. If
Pinnaroo is a place for big hearts it does the square
ttung by paying tor energy and faith in big cheques,
Dashing Industry.
If the township of Pinna, oo did not actually spring
up in a night its growth was well flavored with
romantic development. When the district had
proved itself beyond cavil and the opening spaces
of cultivated ground were extending, the rude dwell-
ings of the men who were conquering the bush
business and the comfort and convenience oi the
people.
Striking Figures.
Take some fi gures and you shall understand the
advance of Pinnaroo. In 1901-2 the area under
crop in the counties of Chandos and Buccleuch was
120 acres. The wheat raised totalled 1,056 bushels,
which represented an average of 8.80 bushels to the
acre. Last season the area cropped in these two
countries aggregated 179,302 acres ; the bulk yield
of wheat was 1,956,461 bushels, and the averages
were—-Buccleuch, 8.15 bushels, and Chandos 11.87.
The highest average recorded in Chandos, which
deed, generally speaking, it is only on those farms
where the practice has lacked system and science,
and, in short, the whole of the operations have been
more or less slummed—that is not a nice expression
use ’ but in fairness to the district, cannot con-
scientiously be avoided—that the crops have failed
to reach a good standard. Nearly all the men who
fallowed and worked thmr land systematically possess
cro P s ranging from good to excellent, thus conclu-
sively demonstrating the accuracy and wisdom of the
predictions made by the advocates indicated,
Samples to Prove It.
A striking example of the success achieved in
quickly lost all proportion to the status that had
been won in agriculture. So. with fitting dignitv.
houses and public buildings came along. Pinnaroo
maintained its reputation for dashing industrv. No
sooner was a township talked about, and. lo ! there
it was. The majority of the buildings have been
erected during the last two years, and now Pinnaroo
sounds a bustling and progressive note in the town-
ship proper. Substantial shops and attractive
dwelling houses. State school and churches, hotels,
and fine institute, banks and butchers and bakers
and candlcstickmakers, too, may be—everything
at any rate that is required for the equipment of
PORTION OF A WHEAT STACK, PINNAROO.
includes Pinnaroo proper, was 13.02 in 1909-10,
while in the preceding year the tally was 12.12.
Admittedly in those three years the seasons from the
wheat raising standpoint were good, and practically
everything favored satisfactory returns, but those
who have watched the country carefully and criti-
cally analysed each step in its material progress are
convinced that even in what may be characterised
as times of comparatively small rainfall, it will
come through the ordeal with flying colors. This
year the cereal rainfall has been about six inches
below the average ; nevertheless some splendid crops
may be seen in different parts of the district. In-
many instances was recently brought under notice,
It consisted of a beautiful sample of Le Huguenot
(hay) wheat pulled from a 50-acre paddock *owned
by Messrs. F. H. Edwards & Sons, at Pinnaroo.
and stood 6 ft. 1 in. high. It revealed magnificent
growth, and would have been difficult to beat anv-
where in the State. Convincing proof of the abiding
confidence which the farmers have in the future of
the district is provided by the fact that from Sep-
tember 15 to October 27, 32 harvesters, 20 binders,
15 strippers, five windmills, and five wagons were
received at the Pinnaroo railway station alone,
Other machinery included winnowers, rakes, dravs,


and oil engines. One agent stated that up to the
middle of October he had booked orders for 33
harvesters. It is not an exaggeration to say that
fortunes have been made in the Pinnaroo country.
While some of these have in a measure been due to
successful land transactions, there is abundant
evidence to show that a number at any rate have been
won from the soil itself. One farmer, for instance,
who landed in the district six years ago with scarcely
a penny in his pocket or anywhere else obtained a
block of land aggregating 600 acres. This he culti-
vated, and after having reaped five successive good
crops, sold it a month or more ago for £3,800, which
did not take into account stock and implements
valued at about £I,OOO.
About Shows.
if there is one thing more than another about the
people in the Pinnaroo district which appeals to the
visitor it is their go-aheadness in connection with
enterprises of public interest. When a couple of
years ago it was proposed that an agricultural
society should be formed and a ground secured for
show purposes at Pinnaroo, the suggestion was
hailed with manifest delight, and the initial exhibi-
tion was held just over 12 months ago. The ground
has the makings of one of the most attractive in
the southern portion of South Australia. The
second show was held in October, and was attended
by between 1,500 and 1,600 persons. The entries
numbered 1,700. against 657 the previous year
and the gate receipts totalled £63. Among the
BANK OF ADELAIDE, PARILLA.
names which appeared on the prize list were those
of Messrs. F. H. Edwards & Sons, Z. H. Jones, Mc-
Cabe Bros.. F. A. J. Pahl, G. and W. Wilson, Wright
and Roberts, J. E. Symonds, F. A. Kretschmer, W.
Venning, A. H. Sharrad, J. F. O’Loughlin, A. U.
Burman, T. O’Dea, J. McWaters, R. L. McKenzie,
C. R. Kitson, A. I. Reed, and H. J. Koch. Recently
a Masonic Lodge was inaugurated at Pinnaroo, and
officers were appointed as follows: Worship u
Master, Bro. E. C. Yates ; S.W., Bro. B.
field ; S.W., Bro. M. Erichsen ; J.D., Bro. G. H.
Lang ; Treasurer, Bro. B. A. Raek; Secretary,
Bro. W. H. Kruse ; 1.G., Bro. C. E. Dahl; Chap-
lain, Rev. Bro. T. Luke, and 1.P.M., Bro. G. E.
Lane.
Pinnaroo Alright.
It will be many years yet before the full stop to
activity in Pinnaroo shall be made to the busy
sentence. Pinnaroo cannot stop growing for a
very long time. Once asleep in the gloom of un-
awakened possibilities, it basks to-day in the sun-
shine of assured prosperity. The country is alright.
So the people must be alright, too.
Pinnaroo Hospital.
The Pinnaroo District Hospital is situated on an
elevated position overlooking the Town of Lameroo.
The site has been handed over by the Government,
and is part of the public reserve. Through the
generosity of the residents, and a very substantial
subsidy granted by the Government, it has been
found possible to erect a modern hospital of pavilion
type to serve also as a Sanatorium for the district.
The building has been properly equipped under the
direction of Dr. L. J. Dunstone, and fitted with the
latest appliances for medical and surgical treatment.
The architects for the building are Messrs. A. S. and
I. H. Conrad, architects of Adelaide, to whom we
are indebted for the illustration, and the
work has been carried out by Mr. J. Mclnerney,
BANK OF ADELAIDE, LAMEROO.


1901-2. 1902-3.
1903-4.
1904-5. 1905-6
. 1906-7.
Acres
120 76
115
258 845
6,360
Bushels
1,056 360
1,296
1,028 7,742
72.31-’
Average
8.80 4.74
11.27
4.00 9.16
11.3"
Hundred
Bews.
1907-8.
1908-9.
1910-10.
1910-11
Acres
12,520
18,322
22,327
31,086
Bushels
91,377
215.278
285,965
367,608
Average
7.30
11.75
12.81
11.48
Cotton.
Acres
3,168
9,763
13,405
21.378
Bushels
20,900
93,898
142,923
204,009
Average
6.60
9.62
10.68
9.54
Von Doussa.
Acres
1,685
4,682
6.220
Bushels
—
11,659
41,801
50,250
Average
—
6.92
8.97
8.08
PlNNAROO.
Acres
6,774
19,672
34,734
48,625
Bushels
55,350
278.021
515,249
657.051
Average
8.17
14.13
14.83
13.51
Barilla.
Acres
2,370
6,105
12,513
25.941
Bushels
8,420
75,504
155,212
302,025
Average
3.55
12.19
12.40
11,64
Price.
Acres
Bushels
1,400
7,238
5.817
48.718
8,198
59.581
12.170
103,010
Average
5.17
8.38
7.27
8.47
Peake.
Acres
Bushels
Average
130
270
2.08
3,903
30.294
7.76
6,375
52,916
8.31
13,000
109,790
8.45
contractor, of Lameroo. Mr. A. P. Yeomans,
manager of the National Bank at Lameroo, is Hon.
Secretary to the institution, and the Committee
comprise Messrs. R. A. O’Connor (Chairman), Dr.
L. J. Dunstone, W. H. Skinner, A. Anderson, H.
Mayo, and W. J. McDonald.
Wheat Y ields.
Interesting and instructive food for reflection is
afforded by the official figures showing the yields
obtained during 1901-2 to 1910-11 from tlie land
opened up by the Pinnaroo railway. For the first
six years the returns were not apportioned to the
respective hundreds, but were given collectively
in the Counties of Chandos and Buccleuch, which
include the Hundreds of Pinnaroo, Parilla, Bews,
Von Doussa, Peake, and Cotton.
Improved Railway Wanted.
Considerable dissatisfaction has been expressed
lately concerning the state of the railway line. The
rails in many places are said to have assumed a
snake-like wriggle, and there appears to be a growing
feeling among the residents that unless something
practical is soon done in the direction of materially
improving the condition of the line it will be unsafe
to travel upon. Even as it is the trains are able to
proceed only at a slow pace, and there is no doubt
that if the drivers forgot themselves for a while
and imagined that they were on the Melbourne
track there would be serious trouble. In view of
the enormous amount of produce which has to be
carried over the railway, steps should be taken
immediately to put the line in proper order.
LAMEROO.
Lameroo is next in importance to Pinnaroo, and
it contains many vigorous and enterprising residents
who spare no efforts to promote the welfare of the
people and of the district. Just over a year ago
an Agricultural Society was also brought into
existence here, and a capita! ground near to the
township secured. The first show was a gratifying
success, and the second one. held toward the end of
MR. GEORGE LOWE,
The popular Secretary of the Lameroo
St. Patrick’s Day Sports Committee.
14


GRAMAPHONES
WOODMAN’S
Rundle Street Adelaide,
October, proved a still greater tribute to the loyalty
of the residents and the progressive methods which
they pursue. Nearly 2,500 people were present
on the latest occasion, when the entries totalled
980 —-an increase of 182 —and the gate receipts
reached the £6O mark. Mr. S. Housler was re-
presented by a wonderful collection of between 40
business place Lameroo
is rapidly shooting a-
head, and, judging by
the advancement made
in the last twelve months,
it will make a keen fight
with Pinnaroo for pride
of place. Houses and
shows are steadily in-
creasing in number, and
they are being built on
lines which reflect the
greatest credit upon the
contractors and the
owners. They are solid
and sure like the future
of the district.
MR. TOM LECKIE,
Pioneer, and well-known resident of the District.
and 50 products from his farm, which simplv stag-
gered visitors and surprised even those who had
been in the district for several years. No
more eloquent testimony to the wonderful pro-
ductiveness and immense possibilities of the soil
could have been desired. Prominent among the
prize takers were Messrs. A. A. Koch, Hill, Jacobs,
Reichstein Bros., Fenwick Bros., R. B. and C. E.
Koch, A. J. Thompson, and P. J. Baker. As a
WHEAT BUYERS AT THE SETTLERS’ HOTEL, LAMEROO.
15


W. H. Chappell’s
“Pioneer
Pharmacy.”
Mr. W. H. Chappell’s Pharmacy is yet another
tribute to the prosperity of the Pinnaroo district,
containing, in addition to a well-stocked and tho-
roughly equipped dispensary, a complete stock of
patent and veterinary medicines, toilet articles,
soaps, and high-class perfumes, stationery, post-
cards, cameras, and photographic goods, brushware,
and all sick-room and nursery requisites; in short,
everything pertaining to an up-to-date pharmacy.
Mr. Chappell is a qualified chemist by examina-
tion, and has also had considerable training in horse
and cattle diseases and treatment. Immediate at-
tention given to all enquiries by mail and goods for-
warded to any part of the district. Correspondence
invited.
Mr. Chappell is also agent for Mr. Mantine,
jeweller, Adelaide, and carries a very choice assort-
ment of jewellery, &c., in stock. Repairs under-
taken, and all work guaranteed.
Also consulting depot for A. R. Creswick, surgecn
dentist, whose representative may be consulted fort-
nightly.
“The Pioneer Pharmacy,”
W. H. Chappell, M.P.S
Pharmaceutical and Veterinary Chemist, PINNAROO.
PARILLA.
The township of Parilla, although much smaller
than either Pinnaroo or Lameroo. has pleasingly
substantial proportions, and is gradually climbing
into prominence. Originally the township blocks
numbered 80, each half an acre in area, and asi
indicating the stability and prospects of the place
it is worthy of note that many of these have changed
hands at over £BO a piece. There are numerous
business establishments in existence, and all appear
to be doing a good trade. There are two hotels —
one is conducted on temperance lines —for the
convenience of residents and visitors, and they are
fully justified. Lately a new school has been
erected, much to the satisfaction of the people and
of the children particularly. Some idea of the
productiveness of the land in the neighborhood of
Parilla may be gathered from the fact that last
season approximately 95,000 bags of wheat were
stacked at the railway station—nearly three times
the quantity placed there in 1909-10.
MR. BLUM’S TEAM OF 14 HORSES.


Miss E. Siemering.
Miss E. Siemering is a successful general merchant of Pinnaroo, having established a good business
connection. The firm was started in April, 1909, and has made excellent progress. The fine premises
have been erected for more than two years. At the outset Messrs. E. Kruse and C. Dahl were joint
managers. Mr. Kruse gave up his joint management in May of this year to open a business
at Murray ville. The trade of Miss Siemering at Pinnaroo is that of general commercial provider
and is one of the best established and best known in the district. The shop deals mainly with residents
in the Pinnaroo country.
MR. E. KRUSE.
MR. C. DAHL,
Manager of the Stores.
FRONT VIEW OF E. SIEMERING’S MUTUAL STORES.


Mr. Thomas Leckie.
The pioneer of Lameroo —a grand specimen of
the type that has made South Australia famous for
its wheat and wool—is Mr. Thos. Leckie, who is
now enjoying the evening of a busy life half a mile
out of the township in a fine, nicely-appointed home
whence he looks out on the fields he has conquered.
Mr. Leckie deserves all the leisure of old age, for
his career has been marked by great energy and un-
daunted perseverance. He is a rugged Scotchman
with the enterprise and courage and shrewdness of
his race. Mr. Leckie was born in Scotland 63 years
ago, and came to Australia with his parents when
he was four years of age. He landed in Melbourne
in 1852, and found his way to South Australia in
1874. He associated himself with pastoral pursuits,
and for 14 years was a trusted and worthy servant of
Mr. Henry Scott on Coonalpyn Station. When the
famous 1888 leases fell into the hands of the Govern-
ment, Mr. Leckie occupied civil office as Inspector
nf Improvement, and filled that position with credit
until he came to his farm at Lameroo in 1896. He
took up absolutely the first block in the district—
one of 450 acres—and his faith was robust and un-
wavering. He it was who blazed the trail through
a forest of doubt and scepticism. Mr. Leckie
cleared the 450 acres and subdivided it into paddocks.
Now listen to the way he" tilled the fields, because
returns such as he got could only have followed the
most careful and intelligent cultivation. His best
average yields without super were 15 bushels to the
acre. He had eight crops in succession from the
same block before he used mineral super. When
the railway came to the district he put two tons
on the land. He distributed that quantity on 33
acres, and he took off 36 tons of hay. This made
the ninth crop in nine successive years—truly a
remarkable result. After introducing super, Mr.
Leckie’s average yield gave 18 bushels to the acre,
but in his best patches he had as much as 30 bushels.
He sold out in October of 1910, and has lived a
retired life ever since. Mr. Leckie is a member of
the Agricultural Bureau, and has been identified
with that splendid movement from the time it
started. Mr. and Mrs. Leckie have three sons and
five daughters.
THE NEW HOMESTEAD OF MR. T. LECKIE, LAMEROO.
VIEW ON THE HOMESTEAD.
18


MISS LECKIE. ON HER FAVORITE PONY.
SOME OF THE FAVORITES.
THE OLD HOMESTEAD.
MR. AND MRS. T. LECKIE.


F. H. Edwards & Sons.
Messrs. F. H. Edwards & Sons, of “ The Universal
Stores,” Pinnaroo, are the owners of “ Hope Farm.”
On July 12, 1604, this firm applied for and were
allotted Section 71. Hundred of Pinnaroo. This
section contains less than 500 acres, but Edwards
and Sons have since bought other blocks as they
have come into the market until they now hold over
5,000 acres. 1.500 of which are under crop this year.
All the land is cleared with the exception of about
500 acres. Horse breeding was started in 1906
by the purchase of a good sire in a well-bred draught,
“ Young Robin.” which has left some of the best
stock in the district. The firm has bred and keep
a fine lot of cattle and pigs, and have just established
a flock of about 350 sheep which are doing well.
All stock do well here. The farm has been a great
success from the start, but some very hard and
THE PRESENT STORE OF THE WELL KNOWN GENERAL PROVIDERS.
rough work was necessary at first when supplies of
horse feed, seed wheat, stores, and so on were carted
from Tailem Bend, and later from the head of the
railway, as it progressed. During this period their
teams travelled over 3.000 miles on a very bad and
heavy track. About the middle of 1905 people
were experiencing considerable trouble to get stores
and other necessaries in the bush, and as Messrs.
Edwards & Sons had a team on the track, the idea
occurred of starting a small store. They created
a building of pine and mud—the first in the town of
Pinnaroo. This place for a considerable time was
opened only twice a week, and the first order to
Messrs. Wilkinson & Co. to stock was for about £2O.
The goods had to be carted by wagon from Peake.
The business outgrew the place in about two years
and more imposing premises were built. In another
two years they found the accommodation quite
inadequate, and the present fine building was secured.
Mr. Bruce Edwards was appointed postmaster about
the middle of 1906, but the business of the firm grew
so extensively that a year ago he was compelled to
relinquish the position, and to devote himself en-
tirely to it.
SECOND BUILDING ERECTED FOR THE CARRYING ON OF THE FIRM’S BUSINESS.
20


STRIPPERS AND WINNOWERS AT WORK.
HORSES AND CATTLE AT THE OUTBUILDING ON MESSRS. EDWARDS & SONS’ FARM.
ORIGINAL STORE AND POST OFFICE OF MESSRS.
F. H. EDWARDS & SONS, OF PINNAROO.
21


Mr. Frank Jenkins.
Pinnaroo Timber and Iron Yards.
Mr Frank Jenkins lias built many of the houses
amt business premises in Pmnaroo, and what is
more has built them well. As timber and iron
merchant and builder and contractor he has estab-
Jishect an excellent reputation-'a reputation as
stable as the homes he has constructed. Mr. Jenkins
was born in erowie in 1873, and was educated
t une. V\ nen he left school he served his apprentice-
slop as a carpenter with Tuck Bros., of Terowie.
ten lie went to \\ .A. for 15 months, where lie had a
con ensmg plant. Mr. Jenkins returned to S.A. in
1890. remained at Terowie for 12 months, and
THE WELL-KNOWN PINNAROO TIMBER YARDS.
transferred to Adelaide and worked at his trade as a
journeyman carpenter for about 10 years. After
this splendid training Mr. Jenkins began business at
Victoria Park, and remained there "for two years
Then he made probably the best step in his life! In
September, 1909. he came to Pinnaroo where he
had the contract to build the Commercial Bank,
He remained until Xmas of that year, building a few
houses, and in February, 1910,'established himself
permanently in the district. The business has
grown to a great extent since.
MR. FRANK JENKINS,
Timber Merchant, Pinnaroo
22


Koch and Sharrad.
The well-known blacksmiths of Pinnaroo.
Messrs. Koch and Sharrad are blacksmiths, wheel-
wrights, machinists, and undertakers of Pinnaroo.
The partners are Messrs. J. W. T. Koch and A. H.
Sharrad. The badness has grown extensively
since it began in May. 1908. Both have served
their apprenticeship and have had experience which
is a guarantee of good workmanship. They keep
four forges going, and they make agricultural imple-
ments of ail kinds, and buggies, wagons, drays, and
scrub rollers form special features. All these im-
plements have been tried throughout the district,
and found thoroughly satisfactory. No wonder,
then, that the business lias made rapid strides and
is daily growing in favor. The firm employs 14
men constantly.
MR. A. H. SHARRAD.
GENERAL VIEW OF WORKSHOPS.
VIEW SHOWING YARD OF MESSRS. KOCH & SHARRAD.
MR. J. W. T. KOCH.


The Pinnaroo Hotel.
No township, however small, is complete without
an hotel —-that is, a well-appointed, well-conducted
hotel. Pinnaroo has been fortunate in this respect.
The Pinnaroo Hotel, of which Mr. R. W. Stone is
the happy proprietor, is the leading establishment
of its kind in this rapidly growing and increasingly
prosperous district. There is accommodation for 40
boarders, and meals can be arranged for fully 300
visitors. That will convey a capital idea of the
extent of the hotel. It is up to date in every way,
and only the best brands of wines, spirits, and liquors
are kept. The hotel is replete with modern furnish-
MR. R. W. STONE,
The popular host.
NO. i DINING-ROOM OF THE PINNAROO HOTEL.
THE PINNAROO HOTEL, PINNAROO.
ings, and boarders and visitors a,re assured of every attention and comfort. There is a fine billiard-
room, boarders' parlor, with handsome piano, a cabinet gramophone, easy chairs, lounges, and so on.
and there is a heating apparatus to ensure the greatest cosiness and happiness in the winter months.
CORNER OF THE SPACIOUS BALCONY.
24


J. H. Foster .
Blacksmith, Machinist , Wheelwright,
and Tinsmith of Pinnaroo.
Mr. J. H. Foster, blacksmith, machinist, wheel-
wright, and tinsmith, now of Pinnaroo, had one of
the pioneer establishments of Lameroo. He was
there for three years until April IS, 1909. The
Pinnaroo business was started on September 1, 1909,
and it has made great advancement, which is not
surprising in view of the excellent training Mr. Foster
has received. Blacksmithing in all its departments
is carried out, and includes steel towers, tank-making,
bore lifting, and repairs, and pipe fitting and laying.
Mr. Foster served his apprenticeship at Dutch
Bros., at Mount Barker, and after leaving tha + firm
he joined May Bros., of Cawler, for 12 years—a
capita' training. He then went to Broken Hifi
to the South Mine as fitter for about 11 months.
Later Mr. Foster again joined May Bros, for seven
months. Mr. Foster subsequently accompanied
the steamer “ Zoraster ” as third engineer to the
Cape. He left the boat at Beira, journeyed up
country, and took a position as fitter, &c., for Bewick,
Moreing, & Co. in a mine. Subsequently Mr. Foster
joined the liner “ Manchester Exchange,” and next
transferred to the steamer “ Allie ” and brig “ Rapid ”
and other vessels, spending about five years in
further maritime experience. Mr. Foster returned
to Australia on the s.s. “ Hobart ” in 1904. and
went back to Mav Bros., of Cawler, again for a little
term. After that to Broken Hill in the employ of
Bewick, Moreing. & Co. for about eight months as
foreman fitter. Then Mr. Foster was associated
with H. C. Richards, of Blyth-street, Adelaide, as
machinery expert, and afterwards with Bagshaws as
fitter. After all this educational wandering, Mr.
Foster decided to establish a business on his own
account, and opened at Lameroo. This he sold to
Mr. Gustav Martin, who carries on the trade there
now.
THE WORKSHOPS OF MR. J. H. FOSTER, MACHINIST. PINNAROO.
25


Mr. R. C. Ledger.
Mr. R. C. Ledger, of Pinnaroo, says he is well
satisfied with his lot at Pinnaroo, and he has good
reason to be. He came to the district in October,
1905, and this season will reap his fifth crop. He
has had an average return of 15 bushels to the acre,
so that his land has responded excellently to the
treatment it has received. Mr. Ledger’s holding
is five miles south from Pinnaroo, and consists of
1,000 acres, of which 700 have been cleared. It
was at one time nothing but dense mallee scrub.
This year Mr. Ledger has 300 acres in crop on his
own account, and a similar area on shares. Mr.
Ledger is now building himself a new home, and the
original residence is still standing. This farmer
is hopeful indeed of the future of Pinnaroo, and is so
satisfied with its capacity for cereal growing' that
he proposes to devote his attention exclusively to
this industry.
VIEW OF THE OLD HOMESTEAD,
Showing the making of concrete blocks for the new house.
OUTBUILDINGS ON THE FARM.


L. M. Small.
Mr. L. M. Small, of Pinnaroo, is strong in the
faith of Pinnaroo, and the energy with which he has
tackled the country is proof of it. To him the
future of the district is very bright, for he is con-
vinced that with good cultivation the prospects
thoroughly justify expansion. Mr. Small has 1,040
acres about six miles west of Pinnaroo. He pur-
chased the holding from Mr. Edward Kelly, of Kadina,
and there were then only 100 acres cleared. In the
first week of August this year he set about the big
job of getting all the land ready for the plough,
and that task is now completed. The crops are
looking well, and should return 12 bushels to the
acre. The property is enclosed all round with
sheep-proof fence, and the three paddocks into which
it has been subdivided are similarly protected.
Next season Mr. Small purposes to sow 800 acres,
and with the careful cultivation he follows the
future yields ought to be most profitable.
MR. L. M. SMALL,
Manager of the farm.
Views taken on Edward Kelly's Farm
Block 89, Parilla Boundary.
L. M. Small, Manager.
VIEW ON THE FARM,
Showing team of horses.
27


W. H. Kelly, J.P.
One of the most prominent residents of Pinnaroo
is Mr. W. H. Kelly, J.P., who has been in the dis-
trict for four years. No man has a stronger belief
in the country than he has. He says Pinnaroo will
always be a good farming district ; in fact, as good
as any mallee country in S.A. Mr. Kelly’s con-
fidence is best expressed by what he has won from
the land himself. He has reaped on the average
18 bushels to the acre. About six miles of the
property are wire-netted, as Mr. Kelly adopts mixed
farming. Mr. Kelly’s holding is situated about a
mile north-east from the township, and comprises
about 1,900 acres, all of which was thick with mallee
when he came to the district in 1907. About 1,600
acres are cleared, and 850 acres are under crop this
year. There are two bores on the property, and
these are sunk to a depth of 240 feet, the water
being mainly used for stock and garden purposes.
Mr. Kelly is a member of the District Council of
Pinnaroo, with which he has been connected two
years. He is on the School Board of Advice, and
his name is associated with everything that aims
at the progress of Pinnaroo.
SIDE VIEW OF MR. KELLY’S HOUSE, SHOWING BORE.
THE RESIDENCE OF MR. KELLY, JUN.
VIEW OF YARDS AND OUTBUILDINGS ON THE FARM,
RESIDENCE AND GARDEN OF MR. W. H. KELLY, SEN., AT PINNAROO.
28


THE HOMESTEAD OF MR. FRANK HUNT, FARMER OF PINNAROO
Frank Hunt .
“ This district has come to stay.” That is how
Mr. Frank Hunt, of “ Nest Plains,” Pinnaroo, sums
up his confidence in the country. “ Nest Plains
is four miles north of Pinnaroo, and embraces 1.165
acres. Mr. Hunt was early attracted to the country.
He took up his land when it was thrown open for
selection. It was then heavily timbered with
mallee, but clearing was undertaken with stout hearts
and good muscles, and the holding is now all ready
for the plough. This season about 800 acres are
under crop. Mr. Hunt has had some splendid
yields, for on the average has reaped 16 bushels to
the acre. He has a bore 260 feet down. The
water is good for stock and garden, and it is also
used for domestic purposes. Mr. Hunt is pro-
minently associated with public matters.
LUNCH TIME ON THE FARM


THE HOMESTEAD.
Mr. John Kelly.
“ Glenburnie,” of Pinnaroo, is the home of Mr.
John Kelly, who has only recently sold his farm for
delivery after the present harvest. He now intends
to live in retirement at his beautiful residence, “ Glen-
burnie,” whose surroundings should ensure a time
MR. JOHN KELLY AND FAMILY IN WAGON AND PAIR.
of restful and genial leisure. “Glenburnie” is
about half a mile north-east of Pinnaroo, and adjoins
the show grounds. There are 53 acres on which
are dotted the fine homestead, pretty gardens of
flowers and fruit, and during the two years of their
growth the plants have made wonderful advance,
and testify eloquently to the character of the soil.
Mr. Kelly held a farm four miles west of Pinnaroo.
He selected it a few months after the opening of
the railway. It comprised 1,097 acres, 700 acres
of which Mr. Kelly cleared and placed under crop.
This season will give him his fifth harvest. With
the exception of the first crop, which was poor, the
average yie'd was about 15 bushels to the acre.
It is significant that, notwithstanding the primitive
manner in which farming has been carried on in the
district, such remarkably good results have been
obtained.
FRUIT GARDEN ON THE FARM OF MR. JOHN KELLY.


Kinnane Bros .
of Mulcra Farm, Pinnaroo.
Kinnane Bros, have Mulcra Farm, of Pin-
naroo. They have materially helped to make the
name of Pinnaroo famous in South Australia. Their
well-conducted farm is nine miles north-east of
Pinnaroo, and consists of 1,920 acres of undulating
country, with dark loamy flats and occasional
sand ridges. It was selected by Messrs. Peter and
Michael Kinnane a few years back, and was originally
timbered with mallee. All the land is now cleared,
and this season there are 1,540 acres under crop.
It will be the third harvest. The last two yields
SOME OF THE STOCK HORSES IN THE PADDOCK.
BINDING THE HAY ON MESSRS. KINNANE BROS.’ FARM.
gave 13 bushels to the acre. The Kinnane Bros, are
of opinion that the district will be a permanentbme
with a high average in wheat production. With
fallowing the land will produce equal to some of
the best in the country. It is their intention to
keep sheep a little later on. The Kinnane Bros,
are progressively fencing their holding with posts and
wire. Fruit will grow well there, and 100 trees are
now growing*
HORSES AND STABLES ON MULCRA FARM.
31


F. R . Kretchmer.
Mr. Kretschmer, of “Jungle Dale.” Chandos,
considers the district a thoroughly safe one. and
says it will compare favorably with any in South
Australia. When the land is free of the mallee
stumps, as the ground holds the moisture so well,
hoi' fruit growing he thinks the soil is admirably
adapted, and he has planted 100 trees which are
doing well. “Jungle Dale” is seven miles west
of Pinnaroo, and is alongside the Chandos siding.
There are 1.740 acres which Mr. Kretschmer took
up in October. 1908- a wilderness of mallee scrub.
It is all cleared, and this year he has 1.600 acres
under crop. The two previous harvests averaged
him 15 bushels. Mr. Kretschmer has built a com -
fortable homestead and substantial outbuildings.
He goes in a good deal for horse breeding, and deals
chiefly with draughts of the Clydesdale class: in
fact, he has the best horses in the district.
MR. KRETSCHMER’S STALLION,


GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
GROUP OF HORSES, STABLE, AND YARDS ON MR. F. R. KRETSCHMER'S FARM, AT CHANDOS.


Mr, A. J. A. Koch.
Farmer, of Lameroo.
Sunny View ” is the residence of one of the
most prominent and esteemed residents of Lamerooi
Bhe name is synonymous with success and persever-
ance and pluck—a blessed trinity of virtues. This
is Mr. Archibald John Albert Koch, the eldest son
of Mr. John Koch, of Walkerville, and formerly of
Cunningham and Kainton, Yorke’s Peninsula, where
for many years he was a popular identity in agricul-
tural circles. Mr. Archibald Koch had excellent
training in the art of progressive farming under his
father at Yorke’s Peninsula, and as early as eight
drove his first plough. At 19 he went to Kadina,
MRS. A. J. A. KOCH AND CHILD IN SULKY.
HOMESTEAD AND GARDENS OF MR. A. J. A. KOCH, AT LAMEROO.
where he submanaged and then managed a chaff
mill for Mr. Koch, senior, and there received a know-
ledge of mechanical affairs in the three years he was
associated with the work that lias stood him in ex-
cellent stead on the farm. When Mr. Koch was IS
he took up his first allotment in the Pinnaroo district.
It consisted ot 1,405 acres, and nine months after
the railway came lie settled on the property and
began to clear his land. Before the line was opened
his father secured two blocks, and the aggregate
holding of the Koch’s advanced to 3,900 acres —
which stood for enterprise and hard work. There
are four brothers, and, having good muscles and
STOCKING THE HAY ON THE FARM.


stout hearts, they promptly purchased the father’s
interest and farmed in partnership. Subsequently
this was dissolved, and the area was subdivided into
four. This season each will reap his own crop.
During the partnership these brothers had three
seasons which gave them an average of 15 bushels
from 4,100 acres ! Mr. Archibald Koch is a great
believer in the district, and when he says that with
favorable conditions it must be an agricultural
success, he speaks with the voice of a sound, educated
authority. Mr. Koch has always taken an active
and enthusiastic interest in public movements. He
is Secretary of the Agricultural Bureau, is a member
and a Vice-President of the Committee of the Agri-
cultural Society, of which he was the pioneer Secre-
tary. Mr. Koch was one of those who early
recognised the advantage and usefulness of the
agricultural bureau, and it was a decided compliment
to his efforts that, he was selected as the first Secre-
tary of that branch. Mr. Koch must have had a
BINDING.
Mr. Koch on the drive.
monopoly of “ first secretary’s ” because he also
filled that capacity in connection with the initial
field trial in the district. He is a director on the
board of the Eudunda Farmers’ Co-operative Society,
a trustee of the Lameroo Institute, and a member
of the quarterly board of the Methodist Church.
Mr. Koch is deeply interested in horse breeding, and
hopes in the near future to breed for himself on a
fair scale. Mr. Koch believes in variety in wheats,
and has sown this year Walker’s Wonder, Federation,
Silver, and Yandilla and Marshall’s. He is achieving
good results with hay growing. Mr. Koch married
at the age of 24 years, Miss Elizabeth Jane Burdin,
of Cummins, Yorke’s Peninsula, and formerly of
Kulpara, Y.P. Her father is Mr. John Durdin, of
Cummins, one of the first settlers in that district.
Mr and Mrs. Archibald Koch have one son.
SOME OF THE HORSES AND STABLES ON THE FARM.
35


MR. R. B. KOCH,
Farmer, of Lameroo.
BUGGY AND PAIR—MR. R. B. KOCH DRIVING.
Mr. R. B. Koch.
Mr. Ralph Bernard Koch is another member of
the worthy and well known family. His farm con-
sists of about 960 acres, and some idea of the energy
he has shown in the holding may be gleaned from
the fact that all the country, which is level, has been
cleared, and this year there are 350 acres under crop.
The wheats he has used are Walker’s, Gluyas, Federa-
tion, and Yandilla King’s. He uses about 80 lb.
of superphosphates to the acre (mostly Lawe’s).
The property is enclosed with a six-wire fence and
suh-divided into nine paddocks. There is a bore
260 feet deep and a storage equal to 4,000 gallons.
BINDING THE HAY.


This is a feature which stamps the up-to-date farmer.
The water is laid on to each paddock. Mr. Koch
has about 400 Merino sheep and lambs, with a few
crossbreds. He takes a keen interest in horse
breeding, devoting his attention to heavy draughts,
of which he runs 20 odd of a fine, sound, useful type.
Mr. Koch has been very successful in the show ring
at Pinnaroo and Lameroo, and has taken at both
places the dry mare and champion prizes. When
sheep were shown for the first time in the district,
Mr. Koch captured the first prizes. He has a neat }
comfortable house of four rooms on his holding
Further proof of his enterprise is shown in the
presence of a chaff cutting 6 h.p. petrol engine—an
FLOCK OF SHEEP AND LAMBS ON THE FARM.
THE HOMESTEAD.
Osborne —which does two tons an hour. Mr. Koch
is the second son of Mr. John Koch, and, like his
brother, was among those who, with an unshaken
faith in the district, came here early and established
its value. That was on March 24, 190 b. when the
line was five miles out of the township. He set
to work with a will, however, and in the first year
had 280 acres under crop.
SOME OF THE HORSES AT THE STABLES.
37


MR. C. R. EIME,
Fanner, of Lameroo.
Mr . C. R. Eime.
Eime is another name deservedly prominent and
successful in the district. It is one of the names
that have made the Pinnaroo country. Mr. Charles
Richard Eime, of “ Karra Warra,” Pinnaroo, is a
fine representative of the sturdy, energetic, enter-
prising farmer. “Karra Warra,” by the way, are
native names meaning wood and water. It is
situated about two miles west from Lameroo, and
adjoins the railway line. The holding comprises
902 acres, and was taken up by Mr. Eime in 1901.
It was then all mallee scrub, but he set to and fal-
lowed 30 acres. Later he cleared all the land with
the exception of about 60 acres. This present
MRS. El ME AND THE CHILDREN HAVING THEIR MORNING DRIVE.
VIEW OF HOUSE ON THE FARM.


season will give him his fifth crop, and on the average
he has had a yield of about 14 bushels to the acre.
Mr. Eime favors mostly the Gluyas wheat for early
variety, and for hay wheats Yandilla King, Walker's
Wonder, and White Tuscan. The farm is sub-
divided into five paddocks. Mr. Eime will devote
considerable attention to sheep so soon as his land
is wire-netted —a work he will shortly undertake.
Mr. Eime isnot only an ad vocateof efficiency in the
field, but is a believer in home comfort. His house
is demonstration of that. It is a fine six-roomed
dwelling, very nicely appointed, with all conveniences.
There is a trim lawn in front of the house, and a
nice little orchard at the side. Mr. Eime has a
bore on his property. It is 260 feet down and
assures a plentiful supply for requirements. It
is only natural to expect that this farmer is optimistic
regarding the future of the district. He says it is
bound to prove good, although, as a prudent prophet,
he expects there will be difficulties with dry seasons
and noxious weeds.
SOME OF THE HORSES AT THE HOMESTEAD.
VIEW OF THE MAYFIELD.
39


Mr. F. W. Eime.
Lameroo boasts some capital settlers, and high
up in the list is Mr. Friedrich Wilhelm Eime, who has
given conclusive evidence that he is a man of mettle.
His holding is half a mile west of the Lameroo
railway station, and it readily denotes the farmer
of initiative and up-to-date ideas. The area is
1.275 acres of undulating country, with sand ridges.
Mr. Lime went there early in August, 1904, and he
VIEW OF HOMESTEAD AND FRUIT GARDEN AT LAMEROO.
has had seven busy years. He has made a success
of the work by his own strong arms. He cleared
the first If 6 acres with an axe, and claims to have
been the first to have mullinised in the district.
At present Mr. Eime, by dint of persistent and un-
daunted energy, has cleared all his land with the
exception of about 80 acres, which he is reserving
for timber. The first season after he had put in
the 26 acres—May, 1905 —he reaped, without the
use of super. II bushels to the acre. For the past
five years his average has been fully 15 bushels,
but he has harvested as much as 22 bushels. Ex-
cellent testimony to the way Mr. Eime sows the
good seed and to the cultivation that is practised
is that he has taken no fewer than 32 bushels off an
GROUP OF CATTLE IN ONE OF THE PADDOCKS
40


SCENE ON THE FARM.
Binding the wheat.
80-acre paddock of fallow. Mr. Eime's property is
notable for the improvements that have been made.
His stables, for instance, are built of concrete, and
' e the best in the district. There is a nice orchard
f about four ’ three ’ and two - vear ' s landing, and in
it there are 40 trees, including oranges, from which
he already has had a small crop. From the well-
cultivated land this year the result from stubble
paddocks should give nine bushels, and from pre-
pared fallow land 15 bushels should easily be won.
Mr. Eime breeds a type of heavy draughts, and has
had good results. He strongly recommends dairy-
ing to those who would take it up in a practical
and earnest manner in consequence of the late
summer feed, thistles mostly, produced by late
rains. Mr. Eime has associated himself with most
commendable enthusiasm with practically all move-
rnents for furthering the interests of the district.
He has been a Councillor since its inception, and at
present is the Chairman of the Pinnaroo District
Council, which consists of six Hundreds—Pinnaroo,
Par ill a, Bews, Cotton, Price, and Von Doussa. Mr.
Eime, like all advanced men, has taken a deep in.
terest, too, in the agricultural bureau. He has been
Chairman of the branch for 18 months, and was one
of the founders in the Bews district. Mr. Eime has
been a member of the Institute Committee from the
beginning, is on the Committee of the hospital, and
is a Vice-President of the Agricultural Society.


A . A. Koch .
Mr. Arthur Arnold Koch, of Lameroo, helps to
carry the banner of a locally famous family, and
does it well like the rest of them. Like the others,
too, he has a strong belief in the future of the dis-
trict, especially in view of what has been accomplished
in the present dry season. Mr. Koch’s property is
six miles north-west of Lameroo, and consists of
1,633 acres. He took it up in 1906, has made such
excellent progress that it is now all cleared, and this
season there are 1,000 acres under crop. He has
THE HOMESTEAD OF MR. A. A. KOCH, OF LAMEROO.
AMONG THE WHEAT.-Big crop on the farm.
42


reaped on the average 14 bushels. The holding is
sub-divided into seven paddocks. On it there is
a bore 240 feet in depth, with a storage capacity for
7,000 gallons. The water is good for domestic
and for stock purposes. The homestead is a four-
roomed house. Near to the dwelling are the barn
implement shed, and blacksmithy, cow shed, and so
on—ail neatly kept and built Part of the orchard
{of about 100 trees) has been established for three
and part for two years, and everything is making
excellent progress.
OUTBUILDINGS AND STABLES.
MAKING HAY WHILE THE SUN SHINES.-Binders and stookers at work.
STOCKS OF HAY ON THE FARM.
43


Mr. Oliver Baker.
Mr, Oliver Baker, of Pine Farm, Lameroo, is
another one of those behind the success of Lameroo.
His excellent holding is approximately eight miles
north of Lameroo Bore, and the whole of the 1,249
acres have been cleared with the exception of a
small area to be burnt after the present harvest.
Mr. Baker intends shortly to subdivide the farm
into paddocks. Mr. Baker has a bore 278 feet in
depth, and there is storage capacity for 1,000 gallons
of water. This year there are 800 acres under crop.
Mr. Baker knows how to work his ground, and during
the past few seasons his returns have averaged 14
bushels to the acre.
MR. OLIVER BAKER AND FAMILY, OF LAMEROO.
MR. OLIVER BAKER’S FINE TEAM.
LEAVING THE BORE FOR THE BINDERS
44


STRIPPERS AT WORK.
HOMESTEAD OF MR. OLIVER BAKER. PINNAROO.


J. B. G. White,
Farmer of Lameroo
VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
MR. J. B. G. WHITE.
Farmer.
“ Pioneer Farm ” is the prettily situated home
of Mr. John Bailey Gard White, of Lameroo, and
the owner claims the distinction of having had the
first wheat in the district. “ Pioneer Farm ”is an
attractive little centre six miles north of the Lameroo
township. There are 1,665 acres, of which 1,400
acres are cleared. This year about 1,000 acres
are under crop. Since coming to the district in
1903, Mr. White has reaped on the average 16 bushels
to the acre. He has built a nice homestead, which
is welljsituated on a rise facing the Lameroo road.
There is a boie on the property sunk to a depth of
230 feet, and there is storage capacity for 2,000
gallons. The water is laid on to the garden, stables,
and house.
SECOND HOMESTEAD ON THE FARM.
46


MARES AND FOALS.
Views
on
“Pioneer
farm.”
TEAM GOING OUT.
HAYCARTING ON THE FARM.
47


MACHINERY ON THE FARM.
THE OLD HOMESTEAD.
SCHOOL HOUSE BUILT BY MR. H. H. RATCLIFFE ON HIS FARM.
Mr. H. H. Ratcliff.
Mr. Herbert Henry Ratcliff has already built two
homes in Lameroo. That shows that he is not only
one of the earliest settlers, but one of the most ad-
vanced. The original rude dwelling was one of
the first in the district, and the fine comfortable
house that stands to-day is the best expression Mr.
Ratcliff could convey of his faith in the country.
His farm is out nine miles north-east from the town-
ship, and three miles due east from the north bore.
It embraces 1,070 acres of undulating and plains
country, and all but 50 acres of it was once all heavy,
mallee timber. Now there are about 1.000 acres
cleared —more evidence of Lameroo industry. Mr.
Ratcliff came to the district in 1907, and began
clearing at once. Time meant money. This year
(500 acres are in wheat, looking as well as any crop
in the district. In the few seasons he has been in
the district he has reaped about 15 bushels to the
acre. Mr. Ratcliff favors mostly the Lewis, Federa-
tion, Bluey, Silver King, and Yandilla King for
grain, and Hughenot for hay. He is a strong advo-
cate of mixed farming, so in the near future he will
associate wheat growing with horse breeding, sheep,
pigs, and poultry. Mr. Ratcliff has a fine stallion
called “ Sir Gulliver,” by “Gulliver,” and he gives
very good results for a fee of £2 2/.
ME. H H. RATCLIFF’S STALLION, SIR GULLIVER, BY GULLIVER.
48


HORSES IN THE PADDOCK.
OUTBUILDINGS ON THE FARM.
THE NEW HOMESTEAD OF MR. H. H. RATCLIFFE.
49


Mr. William Needs.
It is five years since Mr. William Needs, of Lameroo
came to the district, where he has made his mark as
a successful farmer and a popular townsman. Mr.
Needs has 1,450 acres of cleared land and it is sub-
divided into 14 paddocks. There are 700 acres
under cultivation this season. .Mr. Needs’ holding
is 11 miles south of the Lameroo township. He
came to the district in 1906, and by dint of hard
work and the unstinted enthusiasm of the true
pioneer, he has substantial accomplishments to his
credit. Since 1906 lie has had five crops, and the
average has figured out at 12 bushels an acre. There
are three bores on the property. The average depth
of the three bores is 239 feel. Mr. Needs has also
made a study of wheat, and lie has come to the
conclusion that the best varieties are Federation,
Yandilla King, and Oluyas-certainly a most ad-
mirable trio.
NO. 2 HOMESTEAD AND GARDENS.
FRONT VIEW OF BORE AND OUTBUILDINGS.
VIEW ON THE FARM.
50


Ho considers that the future of the
district will be happy and bright so long as systematic
fanning is followed, and that fallow is essential to
the best results. Mr. Needs believes in mixed
farming, and will shortly run some sheep on his farm.
He is now wire-netting some of the paddocks to
keep the dogs and other vermin out. Mr. Need
is keenly interested it public matters and in all
SIDE VIEW OF OUTBUILDINGS ON THE FARM.
movements that tend to the advancement of the
district. He was a Councillor for three years,
and was one of the original holders of such an office.
Last year lie resigned, much to the personal regret
of his colleagues. He has been actively associated
with the Agricultural Society since its inception
and is a member of the Agricultural Bureau. Laraeroo
could do with more men of Mr. Needs’ type.
THE RESIDENCE OF MR. WILLIAM NEEDS, FARMER, LAMEROO.
51


MR. THOMAS VIVIAN,
Farmer, of Lameroo.
Oak Farm is another gem that has been cut
out of the rough material of Lameroo. This is the
happy home of Mr. Thos. Vivian, two miles east of
Lameroo. The holding is a small one, but it is
big in solid accomplishments. There are 617 acres
and Mr. Vivian went on to them almost exactly
seven years ago—that is to say. November 20, 1904-
It was then just 617 acres of mallee scrub. This,
of co urse, meant work, and Mr. Vivian was quite
equal to it, too. The following February he rolled
some ground and put in about 30 acres, which gave
him a result of five bushels to the acre —harrowing
and then sown broadcast. He has been gradually
clearing each year, and last season saw the last of
(las work, for the farm was then an established
fact—the scrub had been defeated. This year Mr.
Vivian has about 400 acres under crop,' and his
average for the past four seasons has been about 14
bushels—a most creditable testimony to the effi-
ciency of good cultivation. The farm consists of
tour paddocks. There is on the property a bore
Thomas Vivian , Farmer of Lameroo.
VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD,
Showing building of the new house.
STALLION, ROBIN.
52


down 250 feet, and there is storage capacity of 2,000
gallons. The supply is an excellent one, and does
for domestic requirements as well as for stock. Mr.
Vivian votes for the following wheats for this country r
—Federation, Walker’s Wonder, and Bluey. He
has found them give good results. Mr. Vivian is
noted in the district as a successful horse breeder,
for he combines that industry with wheat growing.
He has a fine stallion, “ Robin,” bred by Mr. J.
Cleggett, of Langhorne’s Creek. It is by “ Glen-
raore,” by “ Benmore,” and out of “ Bess,” by
“ Model Prince.” Mr. Vivian has had very good
r esults, and his percentage of foals has been 80%.
At the last show at Lameroo a colt by “ Robin ”
won the first prize—very excellent proof of success.
Mr. Vivian considers there is a good future before
the district with systematic farming.
MR. VIVIAN BINDING HAY.
VIEW OF HORSES AND CATTLE ON THE FARM.
53


Colwill Brothers .
T . n i u x? 4.1 , m ~
The Colw.ll Brothers, of Trewina Farm,”
the landT e W ‘‘' s , ucces J what
mu n . u | district is capable of producing.
Those who have the least doubt about the capabilities
of the soil are recommended to go to that farm and
see for themselves the results of its fertility. The
property is a large and splendid one, and comprises
acres. This consists of undulating country
which was once heavily timbered with mallee. But
the same old job has been tackled with the same old
vigor, and to-day the Colwill Brothers have 2,000
north n f p' lT r , % nine eS
north of Pai ilia, in the pick of the fertile area. This
season will give these sturdy cultivators of the land
their second crop An excellent idea of the capital
cultivation which has been practised may be gleaned
from 116 lm P ortant a nd all-conclusive fact that last
season the average yield was 15 bushels to the acre.
The land was only lightly cultivated, and it speaks
volumes for its quality that those returns were pos-
sible in the circumstances. The soil is a nice
chocolate loam, and very easily worked. There
are now 1,650 acres under crop The remainder
of the land will be cleared as quickly as possible, and
when the whole of the holding is available for the
plough it will be one of the most valuable in the
district. Immediately on the opposite side to the
Colwill Brothers homestead block and on the
T la /P‘? n Road ’” they have an area of 2,498 acres
which they purpose selling. Here is an excellent
opportunity to acquire a magnificent block in proved
country. Everv facility for inspecting the land
will be given to those who have an idea of purchasing
it, and the early bird may catch a verv excellent
worm. The splendidW
achieved in the* district do not leave any doubt
regarding the character of the soil and what the
Colwill Brothers have accomplished on their home -
stead holding may be accomplished on this block too
There is a bore of 260 feetdeepbeautif^
water for stock and domestic purposes B At the
bore there is a storage capacity of 3,000 gallons
The wheat Colwill Bros favor for the countrv are
Federation, Golden Drop, and Gluyas Las/vear
they cut two tons of hay to the acre There h a
nice homestead, and well constructed stables and
machinery sheds.
HORSES AND STABLES ON MESSRS. COLWILL BROTHERS’ FARM AT PARILLA.


VIEW OF MESSRS. COLWILL BROS.’ HOMESTEAD.
OUTBUILDINGS AND HAYSTACK ON THE FARM.


MR. HILL AND TWO OF HIS CHILDREN ON THEIR FAVORITE MOUNTS,
Recent Prize-winners at Pinnaroo Show.
HOMESTEAD OF MR. SAMUEL HILL
Mr. Samuel Hill,
Pine Grove Farm,” where Mr. Samuel Hill
is the genial and successful host, is roughly four
miles north of Parilla. On every side there is
evidence of thoroughness and system and energy.
\\ here these are to he found there is only one result
—unqualified success. And Mr. Hill has won that.
His farm is splendidly equipped. It consists of
•*•143 acres. The area is divided into farms, which
are opposite to each other along the Claypan Road.
SCENE ON THE FARM.
There is a choice homestead block of 1,549 acres,
and 1.000 acres are cleared. A smilar extent of
clearing has been done on the other. Mr. Hill
has had built an attractive residence of six rooms.
This block is split into three paddocks, and Mr. Hill,
has erected substantial staid rn. and ■■ oms On
the men. This season 7<- * of the .stead
block are under crop, am . vi 11 I >■ thi:
harvest, the two previous on f»aviug , di !
bushels. Water has been laid < a from tin* I n;. ~n ti.
MACHINERY, SHEDS, AND BORE ON THE FARM.
56


block across the road. Mr. Hill for this country likes
Golden Drop, Federation, and Gluyas wheats. Fur-
ther evidence of this excellent horse breeding cauntry
is supplied by Mr. Hill’s experience. He has been
most successful with his stallion, “ Sandy Walker,” a
beautiful heavy draught with a splendid temperament
and an excellent disposition for work —one of the
best in these important respects that Mr. Hill has
known. Last year “ Sandy Walker ” bred ten foals,
and this year his owner expects a similar number.
Mr. Hill thinks the future of the district is assured
STALLION.
BINDER AT WORK
MR. AND MRS. HILL, OF PARILLA.
The two ponies in the buggy were awarded First Prize at the first Lameroo Show.
A FEW OF THE HORSES IN THE HOME PADDOCK.
provided proper fanning is followed, although
a dry season is how in evidence. Mr. Hill
expects a nine bushel average this season.
The bore is 245 feet down, and provides an
excellent supply of water for all requirements.
Fifty head of horses are kept all the year
round. On the block opposite to the home-
stead there is a large, strongly built imple-
ment shed—Mr. Hill believes in looking aftei
his tools- —and two living rooms. Altogether
“ Pine Grove Farm ” is an example to be
followed.
57


Mr. Michael Robinson.
Mr. Michael Robinson has a really fine property
in “ Green Hill Farm,” seven and a-half miles north
of Parilla. It is another of those holdings which do
infinite credit to this or any other district—one of
the brightest leaves in the successful book of this
country. There are 1,642 acres, and the whole of
it was once timbered heavily with mallee and with
pine. It is all cleared and divided into four pad-
docks. The boundary is defined by wood and iron
posts threaded with two wires. A portion of the
property is wire-netted, and one paddock of 24 acres
is dog proof, six feet high. Mr. Robinson came to
the district in May. 1909, and this season lie will
garner his third crop, the two previous years having
yielded 14 bushels to the acre. Mr. Robinson
has now 1,600 acres under crop. He favors Golden
Drop, Gluyas. and Federation wheats. Mr. Robin-
son is a noted horse breeder. His speciality are
Clydesdales, and he has secured some magnificent
draughts. Mr. Robinson uses a stallion of the
Clydesdale class. This is “ Royal Champion II.,”
bred by Mr. Becker, of Laura. It is a three-year-
old, and one of the best stamps. His father. “ Royal
Champion,” and his mother —a blue ribbon mare—
are both imported. “ Royal Champion 11. ” is
proving a very good sire, and promises to have a
distinguished career in that respect. Mr. Robertson
is convinced of tlie advantages of mixed farming,
and intends shortly to go in for sheep. He has a
big faith in the district, and. judged by the short
rainfall in the past season. Mr. Robinson is of opinion
that (he district should prove one really well suited
to dry farming. There is a bore on the property
of 264 feet, with a storage capacity for 5,000 gallons.
THE HOMESTEAD.
VIEW OF THE HOUSE
HORSES IN PADDOCK AT FARM.
58


BUILDING THE HAYSTACK.


THE MISSES ROBINSON.
RACEHORSE,
STALLION, ROYAL BLUE
60


BEST STUD MARE, WITH FOAL.
CHEIF BORE ON THE FARM
Pipes run from the bore to the house, garden, stables
stallion stall, and chaff cutting engine (Anglo Pctler),
51 horse power. The homestead is one of the best
appointed in the district, and has all modern con-
veniences. Mr. Robinson, as becomes a successful
agriculturist, takes a general interest in all matters
affecting the welfare of the district. He is very fond
of sport, and is a practical supporter of it.
HARVESTERS AND STRIPPERS IN FRONT OF BARN.
61


A. J. Stevens
of Parilla.
SOME OF THE HORSES AT THE STABLES.
MR. A. J. STEVENS AND FAMILY, OF PARILLA.
Parilla rightly boasts of some splendid farmers.
They are there in goodly number—just the men
required to open up, develop, and prove new country.
Mr. Alfred James Stevens has an excellent reputation
in the district, and a visit to las farm, only a quarter
of a mile from the Parilla railway station, shows the
reason for that. The property is one of 1,261 acres*
and there are four miles of fencing on it. Mr.
Stevens purchased the land about two years ago,
and there are 300 acres to be cleared. He has
taken off one crop—that of last season —and it
returned him 19 bushels to the acre —a most satis-
factory result. There is a bore 240 feet down,
with a storage capacity of 4,000 gallons. Water
HARVESTER AND TEAM.
62


is laid on to the garden by |-in. piping, and the
stables is also connected So far Mr. Stevens’ ex-
perience has shown him that early wheats are best
for the country, and he has used Viking with marked
success. Mr. Stevens has 260 acres in crop this
season, and this promises to yield about 12 bushels.
A nice, comfortable home has been built of galvanised
iron. It has six rooms with verandahs on three
FAIR SPECIMEN OF WHEAT ON MR. H. J. STEVENS’ FARM.
VIEW OF HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS.
VIEW SHOWING TWO OF MR. STEVENS’ BOYS IN THE WHEAT.
sides, and everything is up to date. Mr. Stevens
has complete confidence in the district, and he, too
considers that with proper systematic cultivation
it must become a good dry farming centre. He
thinks super to the extent of 80 lb. to the acre should
be used on the sandy parts, and 40 lb. to the acre
on the flats. Mr. Stevens favors either Law’s super
or Wallaroo super for the soil in this country.
63


THE EXTENSIVE PREMISES OF W. CAMPBELL & CO., LAMEROO.
Drapers, Grocers, Ironmongers, Bakers, and General Storekeepers.
Messrs. W. Campbell & Co.
The firm of Campbell & Go. is the best well-
known brm of general storekeepers throughout the
I’innaroo district. They are the providers for the
district. It is over twelve months ago since Mr.
' ani !'l J '‘il established the business at Lanieroo, and
l‘ as gently purchased the established business of
Mr. J Mayfield, of I’arilla. The valuable expe-
lictue oi .Mr Campbell stands him in goal stead in
Hie conducting of hi* businesses. Heing a keen
lm\. r, liie prices compare very favorably with other
(nms in the same line. Me buys in larger quanti-
ties, and .so is able to give bis customers good value.
C.ope stocks are earned by both branches, and the
der.ann.eios stocked heavily from floor to ceiling
Al,!l •''' * ’ -’Hmental delicacies and necessaries
• 11 ' ■ ■ 1! * 7 • i; mis every confidence in the
li! ' : 'V.Koto liial m the future it will be-
\ '' ur ’ bigge-4 wheat and fruit growing
• o .: te •: s Hi \: -i r.dia.
W. CAMPBELL & CO.,
Drapers, Grocers. Ironmongers, Bakers, and General Storekeepers, Parilla.
64


McCabe Bros.
“Pine Park” is the picturesquely situated home
of McCabe Bros., of Pinnaroo. The house perches
attractively in a nest of pines, and commands a
delightful outlook. “ Pine Park ”is two miles west
of Pinnaroo. and comprises 1.(531 acres. OSO of which
are under crop this year. About 250 acres are left
for clearing. The average yields of these progressive
and hard working brothers have been about 13
bushels to the acre. There are 3.1 miles of wire-
netting on the property, which is w'ell equipped.
There is a bore and windmill. The bore is 252 feet
down, with over 50 feet of water in it. The mill is
lo ■ don the top of a high sandhill, and the water
is run by pipes to the homestead, stables, and garden
Horse breeding is combined with the farming, and
light horses are bred, with excellent results. “Sabre.”
by “ Light Artillery." is the sire now being used.
He has won prizes at Pinnaroo. Lameroo, and other
shows, and has proved his mettle. He has also
raced with a fair amount of success. Heavy draughts
are also bred, and have found so much favor that
McCabe Bros, intend to go in more extensively for
this class of horse.
THE HOMESTEAD.
THE MINIATURE LAKE NEAR HOMESTEAD,
After live inches of rain.
VIEW OF MESSRS. McCABE BROS.’ FARM AT PINNAROO.
65


Thyer Brothers .
“ Lealhome ” is already a land mark of Lameroo,
and Thyer is an historic name. Mr. and Mis. F.
Thyer are the original pioneers of the district, and to
them great credit is due for the untiring industry
Maitland Thyer came to the district. In those
days the property was mostly big mallee scrub,
except for the 10 acres that faced the township.
It was no light job that faced them, but they took
their coats off, and in popular phraseology just
“ bucked into it.” And this is what resulted,
The season the Thyer Bros, had under crop
about 40 acres, and this returned two bags (large)
still, more after that, until now the whole of the
land is available to the plough. The returns have
averaged about 12 bushels to the acre. These
energetic and progressive brothers have built a
comfortable homestead, and have planted a nice
orchard with about 100 fruit trees. These are doing
splendidly, and the grapes give excellent results,
The Thyer Bros, devote themselves entirely to wheat
THE HOMESTEAD OF MESSRS. THYER BROS., LAMEROO.
and courage of the early years in new and untamed.
country. Lealhome is hair a mile east, due
east. of the Larneroo township, and embraces half
of the portion of the eastern township reserve.
The holding is 953 acres, and was secured on the
occasion of the first allotment in August of 1904. In
September of that yeat Mr. Francis and Mr. William
to the acre. The wheat sown was secured in the
district, and was put in by a light spring tooth cul-
tivator, sown broadcast with the hand, and no
manure whatever was used. What a fine compli-
ment to the fertility of the district' The Thyer
Bros, went on using their muscles. Next year
they had about 180 acres in wheat, next year more
growing. They are members of the Committee of
the Agricultural Bureau. Mr. F. Thver is narti-
cularly interested in public matters. He is on the
Committee of the Agricultural Society, is a'member
of the Institute Committee. President'of the Vthlelic
sports, and is one of the most enthusiastic n f Hie
committeemen of the Larneroo Racim** (Mill)


Mr. W. W. Spicer .
Mr. W. W. Spicer, of “ Tincanyah.” Lameroo
has a fine holding which reflects the greatest credit
on his industry and patriotism to the country. He
is one of that splendid community of farmers who
have proved the faith that is in them concerning
the potentialities of the district. Pinnaroo and
Lameroo and the surrounding areas have been
lucky in the men who have gone there to win the
scrub for cultivation. One of them certainly is
Mr. Spicer, who has one of the best farms in Lameroo.
H is property is on the nort h boundary of the H undred
of Cotton, and 11 miles north-west from La neroo .
Mr. Spicer took it up in March, 1907 -1.800 acres
of stiff virgin undulating land. It was all timbered
with mallee with the exception of a little corner of
15 acres. There was plenty of work ahead, and
Mr. Spicer and his men “ got to it.” It was a case
of conquering the wilderness, and the frown of
unoccupied country has given place to the smile of
cultivation. There are now 1.000 acres cleared,
and the rest of the job will be progressively done.
Three crops have already been taken oil’, and this
season will give the fourth. So far the harvests
have returned on an average 10 bushels to the acre.
Mr. Spicer has made a study of wheats, and as a
result of close observation and practical experiments
he favors Yandilla King, Gluyas for late sowing
and King’s Bluey and Walker’s Wonder. The
holding is neatly divided into paddocks, and water is
supplied from a bore 197 feet deep, with 52 feet of
water. This is run to the garden and house by
pipes following natural gravitation. A nice five
roomed cottage lias been erected at “ Tincanyah.”
A garden has been laid out with various kinds of
fruit trees, vegetables, flowers, roses, and so on
A plot of lucerne has been established as an experi-
mental plot of an acre, and Mi'. Spicer, who is a
go-ahead agriculturist, intends to go in extensively
for this fodder. Me thinks that the future of the
district is assured, and with systematic farming
good results will always be obtained.


Mr. John Gray.
Mr. John Gray is one of the leading public men of
Parilla, and it is due to the efforts of settlers of his
enthusiasm and calibre that the district has gone
ahead so rapidly. He is a member of the District
Council. Chairman of the Public Hall Committee,
f resident of the Literary Society, a local preacher,
and member of the School Board of Advice for the
1 innaroo district, and, in fact, is associated with
any movement which has for its object the advance-
ment of the country. South Australia can do with
plenty of this type. “ Glenowie,” Mr. Gray’s home,
is seven miles north of Parilla, and the holding
comprises 1,566 acres of undulating country with
sandy ridges. Originally heavily clothed with
mallee. the land is now all cleared with the exception
of about 100 acres, which are left for use of timber.
The boundary is fenced with wood and iron posts
and wires, and is partly subdivided for horse pad-
docks. This year there are 1,400 acres under
wheat. Speaking of his favorite varieties for the
district , Mr. Gray votes for Marshall’s No. 3, Federa-
tion. Golden Drop, Viking, and Gluyas. This
season the last-named three have done best. This
year Mr. Gray will reap his fourth crop. Hugenot
is grown for hay. For three seasons Mr. Gray has
averaged with his wheat 12 bushels to the acre.
On the property there is a bore of 275 feet, which
gives a plentiful supply of water for all purposes.
A service of one inch piping is run from the storage
tank of 4,500 gallons. This pipe also serves the
garden, which is coming on nicely with fruits and
vegetables, and fine beds of strawberries. Horse
breeding is followed with great success, as the country
is most suitably adopted for young stock. The
heavy draughts have been bred with capital results.


J. F. Millsteed, Farmer of Lameroo.
WHEAT HEAP OF 1,100 BAGS ON MR. MILLSTEED’S FARM AT LAMEROO.
MR. J. F. MILLSTEEI).
One of the largest and best properties in Lameroo
is that belonging to Mr. John Francis Millsteed.
More than that, it is one of the best equipped and
gives some of the very best results. It is. like
many others, a history of pluck and initiative. Mr.
Millsteed’s farm is three miles north-west of the
Lameroo township. It comprises 2.456 acres, all
of which is cleared. He purchased the property
in September, 1910. Them only 500 acres remained
to be cleared, and this has since been done. The
property is subdivided into three farms of equal
size si9. SI9. and SIS acres. Mr. Millsteed’s
homestead, which has recently been built, is a com-
fortable iron dwelling. Mr. Millsteed believes in
plenty of water. There are two bores on the pro-
perties. These have been sunk to a depth of 27*'
feet, and are on the top of round hills. At one
bore there is a storage capacity up to 20.000 gallons,
and at the other water may be conserved up to 7.000
gallons. Evidence of excellent farming is shown
by the fact that last season the crop yielded 21
bushels to the acre. Mr. Millsteed has complete
confidence in the future of the district, and he
thinks the country is easily alO bushel one. This
go-ahead farmer proposes to adopt a system of
mixed farming.
69


VIEW OF STABLES AND OUTBUILDINGS ON MR. MILLSTEED’S FARM.
70


(Other pages were allotted to Thyer Brothers, W. W. Spicer,
John Gray, O. Obst, but not printed.)
400 copies of this book
were reproduced by
Pinnoroo Border Times
by photo-offset method
April 1982
All efforts were made to trace the printers.
Critic Proprietary Ltd. and the agents
Hosking & Ryan, without success.
71


