

A LETTER
TO THE
LORD BISHOP OF TASMANIA.
%fi.A




PETVM jpPm >
I M ' W
PAMP.
©OX
THE GORHAM “ HERESY” AND THE “ NON-NATURAL”
EXPLANATION OF THE ARTICLES OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND;
A LETTER
TO THE
LORD BISHOP OP TASMANIA
CONCERNING
CERTAIN OPINIONS EXPRESSED BY HIS LORD-
SHIP IN HIS LATE CHARGE;
ALFRED STACKHOUSE, M.A.,
CHAPLAIN OF PERTH,
“ But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they ‘'all heresy, so
worship I the God of my fathers. —Acts xxiv, 14«
LAUNCESTON:
HENRY DOWLING, BRISBANE-STREET :
WALCH & SON, HOBART.
1851.


“ I am the more disposed to enter at length into this unhappy sub-
ject, from the persuasion that, neither the real character and necessary
icsults of the decision itself,” (that of the privy council) “ nor yet the
true nature of Mr. Gorham’s heresy (as I venture to regard it), have
been adequately considered by many, who so cordially rejoice at the
inci eased latitude of opinion, now conceded to the clergy of the Church
of England.”
It is perfectly incomprehensible to me how the denier of baptismal
regeneration can make up his mind to use the services, in which the
fact is so positively insisted on. He must, as it seems to me, speak
with doubting lips, and a misgiving heart. He must surely use the
Church’s words, not in that literal and grammatical meaning, which
she so evidently enjoins ; but rather in that non-natural sense, through
the application of which, an attempt was made, some years ago, so to
explain away the Articles, as to render it possible for a man to hold
any doctrine of Rome, and yet to subscribe them in that peculiar sense.
The principles of Tract 90 (for it is that to which I allude) are, in my
judgment, so essentially dishonest, that I have no mind to wink at the
adoption of their system in this diocese, whether they lean or lead to
Rome, or to Geneva.”— Charge of the Lord Bishop of Tasmania , 1851,
pp, 43 and 61.


LETTER.
My Lord—
Had I consulted my “domestic comfort” and my natural
feelings, I should have laid aside your Lordship’s charge with-
out comment, and allowed it to be supposed, alike by the
Church and the world, that the statements therein made upon
the subject of Infant Baptism were unanswerable, because no
one attempted to refute them; but the ambassador for Christ
must not regard his personal ease, or his private feelings, when
duty calls for his exertions. And I cannot but feel that the
publication of your Lordship’s strong expressions respecting
the views of Mr. Gorham, and of the Evangelical clergy, has
imposed an obligation upon those who hold those views in
principle, if not in every exact particular, to explain the
grounds upon which they honestly adhere to the Creed, the
Articles, and the Liturgy, as by law established.
Your Lordship has indeed expressed your belief, in the words
of the Bishop of Exeter, (words often quoted and as often
denied) that not more than five or six clergymen of the Church
of England would be found to hold the opinion of Mr. Gor-
ham —which you have denounced as heretical. You have added
also, that you feel persuaded “that the Evangelical clergy
would, as a body, look upon such a doctrine as directly opposed
to the plain teaching of the Church for centuries; hostile to
the interpretation of Holy Writ, as laid down by our Befor-


mers; hostile to the letter and the spirit of the Articles, to
which they have subscribed, and to the Liturgy, which they
have covenanted to use.” But, after thus defending them from
the charge of holding “ the Gorham heresy,” your Lordship
has declared, with equal plainness, your opinion that one who
denies “the presence of the regenerating power of the Holy
Ghost in baptism, absolutely in the case of infants” “ must
speak with doubting lips and a misgiving heart.” “He must
surely use the Church’s words,” you observe, “ notin that literal
and grammatical meaning, which she so evidently enjoins;
but rather in that non-natural sense, through the application
of which an attempt was made some years ago , so to explain
away the Articles , as to render it possible for a man to hold
any doctrine of Rome , and yet to subscribe them in that pecu-
liar sense”*
Having held this view then from my first admission into
holy orders in England—the hypothetical, hopeful, charitable
view of the Baptismal service, which your Lordship has
thought fit to compare with the notorious Tract 90; having
been associated from my diaconate with brethren who believed
that this was the true sense of the Church’s words, and having
received my “ bene decessit ” to this colony from a bishop of the
same school, my dear friend and honored father of Bombay—
I should indeed deserve censure if I allowed private feelings
to silence the voice of conscience, and withhold me from the
painful duty of refuting this, as I must be allowed to call it,
unwarrantable imputation.
My Lord, I dare not abide the charge of insincerity, and
non-natural interpretation, I dare not suffer your Lordship’s
opinions upon this subject to appear before the laity in this
colony unanswered. Would that the individual who now takes
the liberty of addressing your Lordship might be allowed to
confine his attention to the occupations of his own parish*
* Charge, p. 61.


while some brother presbyter, better skilled in controversy,
engaged in this peculiarly trying work ; but after such state-
ments have been put forth by your Lordship, ex cathedra,
some one must lift up his voice on the defensive —necessity is
laid upon us. If this attempt on the part of a Presbyter ot
the Church should appear unseemly, I must be allowed to
plead the precedent of your Lordship’s example ; for you have
denounced as heretical an opinion which the two Primates,
your Lordship’s superiors, not to speak of the highest court ot
the realm, have sanctioned as “not contrary or repugnant to the
declared doctrine of the Church of England, as by law esta-
blished.” With such a precedent I may surely venture to
defend that opinion from your Lordship’s distinct and startling
condemnation.
I beg, then, the favor of your Lordship’s attention while I
endeavor to show that the Evangelical view of Infant Baptism,
and even the opinion of Mr. Gorham respecting “ prevenient
grace,” is
I. Scriptural.
11. In accordance with the writings of the fathers of our
Reformed Church.
111. Perfectly consistent with a believing use of the service
for Infant Baptism, and an honest adhesion to the
Articles in their plain and grammatical sense.
I. In adducing the Scriptural evidence in favor of our view
I beg to remind your Lordship that—although Sir H. J. Fust
and almost all who have opposed the opinion of Mr. Gorham
have drawn their arguments from the Articles and services of
our Church—Holy Scripture is the only standard of truth to
which the Church herself refers.
“Holy Scripture,” says our 6th Article, “containeth all
things necessary to salvation jso that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any
man, that it should be believed as an article of faith, or be


thought requisite or necessary to salvation.” Ought not, then,
my Lord, allow me to ask, ought not this to be the one para-
mount question not what saith the Church; but what is written
in the Bible ? Even the authorised statements of the Church,
in fact her whole framework and substance in every part, is
by herself submitted to the test of the inspired word, and she
diiects her members to examine according to their 'private
judgment , in dependance on divine assistance, “ whether these
things be so.”
In accordance, then, with this Church principle of first im-
portance, I beg now to refer to the only standard of truth.
My Lord, you have condemned Mr. Gorham’s opinion as
heresy ; but may I ask, with an opened Bible before me, where
in all its pages I am to look for any warrant for any other doc-
trine concerning Baptism ? Shall we read through the Acts
of the Apostles? There is the case of those who were ct pricked
to the heart” on the day of Pentecost. There is that of the
Ethiopian Eunuch, who was baptised on his decided profes-
sion of faith in Jesus Christ as the Son of God. There is that
of Saul of Tarsus, who was told to arise and be baptised, and
wash away his sins, after he had first been brought by divine
grace into the state of a little child, and after an express
assurance had been first given him that the God of his fathers
had 11 chosen™ him, that he should know His will and see
that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth.”
.further, there is the case of Cornelius and his friends, whose
warrant, as Gentiles, for participation in the sacrament of bap-
tism consisted in the fact that they had received the Holy
Ghost as well as the believing Jews. There is the case too of
the Jailer at Philippi, of Lydia, of the disciples whom Paul
found at Ephesus, and who “believed” although they were
not baptised with Christian baptism, and they had not so much
as heard about the miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit. My
Lord, in every one of these instances we cannot but observe


the distinctive marks of the “ prevenient grace” to which your
Lordship so much objects; in fact, which you have denounced
as heresy. All these persons, at all events according to man’s
estimation, were first made partakers of divine grace, and after-
wards baptised in token and confirmation of that grace going
before, lam aware, however, of the argument. It is said
that although this was and still is the case with respect to
adults, it is not so with infants. But where, my Lord, allow
me to ask again, where is the Scriptural proof to justify this
reasoning? If it be allowed that probably there were children
in the families of the Jailer and of Lydia, is there a shadow of
evidence to suggest the supposition that the same rite was
applied in one sense to the parents, and in another to their
infant offspring; that in the one case it was the seal and con-
firmation of grace going before, and in the other the instru-
ment for conveying grace without any previous intervention
of divine power? My Lord, we read in St. Paul’s epistle to
the Ephesians, that there is one Baptism ; we receive that
word in its plain, obvious, natural sense, and in the same sense
we repeat it in our confession of faith, and, therefore, we can-
not but believe that what Baptism was to the Jailer, the father,
and to Lydia, the mother, it was also to the children of these
favored believers; e,g supposing that children were included
in their households who were baptised.
Is an argument for infant baptism derived from the circum-
cision of the old covenant? Still the same acknowledgment
must be made. Though Abraham was directly commanded to
circumcise his children, as far as I am aware, he was never told
that the rite would be applied to them in a different sense from
that in which it was applied to himself. Nor have I been able
to discover any evidence of any distinction from that originally
declared sense in its application to the children of Israel in
after times. To Abraham, we are expressly told, circumcision
was u a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet
n 3


being uncircumcised,” (prevenient grace) and we have no
reason to understand otherwise than that the same rite was used
also as a sign and seal of grace, assumed according to the
judgment of charity, and because they were the children
of believers, in the case of Abraham’s descendants, who were
circumcised in infancy.
The resemblance between Christian baptism and Jewish cir-
cumcision in this respect, is clearly stated by Thomas Eecon,
chaplain to Archbishop Cranmer. Your Lordship has reminded
me of his authority by quoting from his writings in favor of
your view of infant baptism. In reply to a supposed objection
to infant baptism, he argues—“ Though infants have not power
to believe or to confess their belief, yet have they faith imputed
unto them for the promise sake of God , because they he the
seed of the faithful; as he said to Abraham, ‘I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed.’ Seeing, then, that they also
have the promise of salvation, why should they be forbidden
the promised pledge or seal of the same promise of salvation?
The sacraments of the Jews differed nothing from ours in
effect, but only in the outward element and form of executing
the same.”* I could adduce many more explanations of a
similar character from the writings of the divines (not puritans)
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; but they would
swell this pamphlet far beyond its proposed limits, and I can-
not think that they are necessary to determine the meaning of
Holy Scripture upon the point in question. Our Church refers
us to the Bible for the authoritative decision in every question.
We have taken the subject of infant baptism to be examined
by this test, and we find that whether we turn to the Old or
the New Testament, there is no reason to believe that it was
ever designed to be anything more than a sign and seal of
grace either actually existing, or assumed in the spirit of faith
and charity.
* Works, Parker, Society edition, vol. iii, p. 61(3,


Bat although I do not think it needful to multiply quotations
from the old divines for the interpretation and explanation of
the Scripture evidence in favor of our view of infant baptism,
your Lordship must allow me to prove by some selected passages
11. That the doctrine of “prevenient grace” and the view
which your Lordship has been pleased to condemn as “non-
natural” is in accordance with the recorded opinions of the
fathers of our Reformed Church.
Before I proceed, however, to adduce evidences upon this
point from the writings of the Reformers, I beg to observe
that I by no means desire to conceal, still less to deny, that
they contain very strong expressions, which, if taken by them-
selves, would appear to favor your Lordship’s view. I would
rather direct attention to the fact, of which every person who
has read the writings of the Reformers must be aware, that they
did use such strong expressions respecting baptism; because
that fact being admitted, the most satisfactory argument
may be grounded upon it to prove that those who first compiled
or first used our baptismal service must have understood the
words in the sense which your Lordship has so emphatically
condemned. Assuming, then, as a fact which needs no proof,
that those who first compiled or first used our baptismal service
have employed very strong, I will venture to say, the strongest
expressions concerning baptism, I have only to prove from
their writings that they intended their words to be understood,
and that they themselves used the words, according to the
Evangelical view, “ hypothetically, hopefully, charitably.”
My Lord, the passages which might be quoted in proof of
this point would fill a large volume. The limits of a small
pamphlet of course will only admit of a few selected extracts.
Some of the works of the Reformers are now before me;
Strype’s memoirs, &c.; and what is wanting in my own small
library is amply supplied by a valuable work by the Rev. W.
Goode, on “ the effects of Infant Baptism.” This latter work


13 an invaluable boon to the clergy in the colonies, who are
necessarily deprived of the privilege of access to the great
hbiaries of the universities, and of the British museum.
My first quotations shall be taken from the catechism which
was set forth by the authority of Edward YI, in 1553. In a
work entitled “ Enchiridion Theologicum” now before me—a
work which was recommended to divinity students at Oxford
by the late Dr. Burton—it is said that “this was the last work
of the Reformers of that reign” (Edward YI); “whence it
may fairly be understood to contain, as far as it goes, their
ultimate decision; and to represent the sense of the Church of
England, as then established , In this, according to Arch-
bishop Wake, the complete model of our Church catechism
was fhst laid; and it was also in some measure a public work;
‘the examination of it having been committed , (as the injunc-
tion testifies) ‘ to certain bishops and other learned men ;’ after
which it was published by the king’s authority. It was printed
both in English and Latin in the same year, 1553.” Strype
observes “The author of this catechism is not certainly
known ; some conjecture him to be Ponet, the Bishop of
Winchester. But whosoever was the author, the Archbishop
(Cianmer) we may conclude to be the furtherer and recom-
mender of it to the king: it being that prelate’s great design
by catechisms and articles of religion, and plain expositions of
the fundamentals, to instil right principles into the minds of
the youth and common people, for the more effectual rooting
out of popery, that had been so long entertained by the indus-
trious nurselling up the nation in ignorance.”* But I need
not speak of the authority of this catechism after your Lord-
ship’s reference to it to confirm your view of baptism.f The
following is the explanation respecting the subject in question.
The spelling of the words is adapted to our modern custom.
i r v. * Str yP e ’ s Cranmer, vol. i, p. 423, Oxon. ed.
T 1 observe that this reference is omitted in the printed copy of your Lordship's
charge; but it is given in the Lectures on the Catechism.


u Master, Tell me what thou callest sacraments?
Scholar. They are certain customable reverent doings and
ceremonies ordained by Christ, that by them he might put us
in remembrance of his benefits , and we might declare our pro-
fession, that we be of the number of them which are partakers
of the same benefits, and which fasten all their affiance on
him; that we are not ashamed of the name of Christ, or to be
termed Christ’s scholars.
Master . Tell me (my son) how these two sacraments be
ministered ; baptism, and that which Paul calleth the Supper
of the Lord?
Scholar , Him that believeth in Christ; professeth the
articles of the Christian religion, and mindeth to be baptised,
(I speak now of them that be grown to riper years of discre-
tion ; sithfor the young babes their parent’s or the Church’s pro-
fession siifficeth) the minister dippeth in, or washeth with pure
and clean water only, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and then commendeth him by
prayer to God, into whose Church he is now openly as it were
enrolled , that it may please God to grant him his grace,
whereby he may answer in belief and life, agreeably to his
profession.”
Then follows a question and answer concerning the use of
the Lord’s Supper, after which the catechism proceeds—
“ Master. What doth baptism represent and set before our
eyes ?
(This is the passage, if I mistake not, which your Lordship
quoted in confirmation of your view of baptism; but, surely,
if the question be compared with the answer, it must appear
rather to favor the Evangelical view.)
Scholar . That we are by the Spirit of Christ new born and
cleansed from sin; that we be members and parts of his
Church, received into the communion of saints. For water
signifieth the spirit. Baptism is also a figure of our burial in


Christ, and that we shall be raised up again with him, in a new
life, as I have before declared in Christ’s resurrection.”
A few extracts must now be taken from Cranmer’s own
works. Your Lordship has quoted from them also.
“ Therefore, as in baptism those that come feignedly and
those that come unfeignedly, both be washed with the sacra-
mental water, but both be not washed with the Holy Ghost , and
clothed with Christ; so in the Lord’s Supper, both eat and
drink the sacramental bread and wine, but both eat not Christ
himself, and be fed with his flesh and blood, but those only
who worthily receive the sacraments.”*
The following passage occurs in his sermon on sanctification.
Now the Holy Ghost works by this word, (he was speaking
of the word preached) in this manner. Firsts he that believes
the Gospel , and receives the doctrine of Christ , is made
the Son of God , as St. John witnesses in his Gospel, saying,
as many as receive him, he hath given them power to be made
the children of God. For when we believe in Christ and are
baptised, then we are born again and made the children of
God. And when we are his children, then he gives the Holy
Ghost into our hearts as St. Paul testifies
These are the benefits and works of the Holy Ghost
in us. And to the intent you may the more easily bear them
away, I will as briefly as I can repeat them again to you.
First of all, the Holy Ghost provokes and stirs up men to
preach God’s word. Then he moves men's hearts to faith ,
and calls them to baptism , and then by faith and baptism he
works so that he makes us new men again. And when we
are thus newly born and made again, and are become the
children of God, then the Holy Ghost dwells in us, and makes
us holy and godly, that we may be the temples of God, in
whom God may dwell and inhabit,”
It may be said, doubtless it is said, that these and other
♦ Works, Parker, Society edition, vol. i, p. 221.


similar passages in Cranmer’s works relate to adult rather than
infant baptism ; but where is the proof that Cranmer under-
stood infant baptism in a different sense? On the other hand
there is abundant evidence to show that he held a similar
opinion concerning infant baptism.* He does not appear to
have considered it needful to speak particularly upon this sub-
ject ,* but his chaplain and other divines, of whose sentiments
he must have fully approved, have supplied what is wanting
in his own writings. I will proceed, therefore, to adduce the
evidence of Becon, the Archbishop’s chaplain, and of Martin
Bucer and Peter Martyr, who were invited by Cranmer from
the continent, and made regius professors of divinity at the
two universities.
Becon, Chaplain to Archbishop Cranmer .
I have already quoted from his works, and your Lordship
has adduced his evidence in favor of what is called u baptismal
regeneration”; but may I beg your particular attention to the
following passages. They are in the catechetical form :
“Father . What is it to be baptised with the Holy Ghost?
Son . To be regenerate, to be born anew, to be made of earthly
heavenly, &c.
Father . Is this baptism of the Spirit necessary unto ever-
lasting salvation? Son, So necessary, that without it the
baptism of water profteth nothing. As in the Old Testament
the circumcision of the flesh profited the Jews nothing at all
without the circumcision of the Spirit, so likewise , in the New
Testament, the baptism of water availeth nothing without the
baptism of the Spirit.” f
What is baptism f The washing of every believing Chris-
tian in water that taketh upon him to profess the name of
* Comparing the Sacraments of the Old and New Testaments, in his anwers
to Gardiner, he said—“ Our Sacraments contain presently the very things sig-
nified no more than their’s did.”
t Works, R. S, edition, pp. 202, 203.


Christ; which water certifteth our faith of the inward wash-
ing and cleansing of our souls by the Spirit of God; a token
of our regeneration , of the mortification of our flesh, of our
burial with Christ, and of our resurrection unto a new life.
“If the believing Christians only are baptised according to
this saying of Christ, ‘he that believeth and is baptised shall be
saved, 7 why should the infants be baptised, which for imper-
fection of age are not able to believe. 77 The answer to this
question is the passage before quoted in which the circumci-
sion of the old dispensation is alluded to.
The following question and answer are still more explicit.
li What if the infants die before they have received the sacra-
ment of baptism ? God 7 s promise of salvation to them is not
for default of the sacrament minished, or made vain and of
no effect. For the Spirit is not so bound to the water that he
cannot work his office where the water is wanting; or that he
of necessity must always be there } where the water is sprinkled,
Simon Magus had the sacramental water, but had not the
Holy Ghost, being indeed a hypocrite and filthy dissembler.
In the chronicle of the Apostles 7 acts, we read that while Peter
preached, the Holy Ghost came upon them that heard him, yea
and that before they were baptised , by reason whereof, Peter
burst out into these words, and said, “ can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptised who have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we?’ 7 “ True Christians , whether
they be young or old, are not saved because outwardly
they are baptised with the sacramental water , but because they are
God’s children by election through Christ , yea and that before
the foundations of the world were laid ; and are sealed up by
the Spirit of God unto everlasting life, the gifts and calling
of God being such , that he cannot repent of them’’*
If this is not the doctrine of “prevenient grace, 77 1 am at a
loss to know what words could more clearly express it. Cran-
* Works, Parker, Society edition, vol. iii, pp. 616, 6]/.


mer’s chaplain then, one of your Lordship’s witnesses, too,
held the Gorham u heresy.”
Peter Martyr, Regius Professor of Divinity , in the uni-
versity of Oxford .
Peter Martyr, when a divinity lecturer at Strasburg, was
invited by Cranmer, soon after the accession of Edward YI,
to come over and help him in the work of Reformation; and
after a brief residence with himself at Lambeth, he was placed
by the Archbishop, in 1548, as Regius professor of divinity in
the university of Oxford. Strype observes respecting him—
“As to the learned Italian Peter Martyr, who is worthy to be
mentioned with Melancthon or Calvin, there was not only an
acquaintance between him and our archbishop, but a great and
cordial intimacy and friendship, for of him he made particular
use in the steps he took in our Reformation; and, whensoever
he might be spared from his public readings in Oxford, the
Archbishop used to send for him, to consult with him about
the weightiest matters. This Calvin took notice of, and sig-
nified to him by letter how much he rejoiced that he made use
of the counsels of that excellent man. And when the refor-
mation of the ecclesiastical laws was in effect wholly devolved
upon Cranmer, he appointed him, and Gualter, Haddon, and
Dr. Rowland Taylor, his chaplain, and no more, to manage
that business; which shows what an opinion he had of Mar-
tyr’s abilities, and how he served himself of him in matters of
the greatest moment. And in that bold and brave challenge
which he made in the beginning of Queen Mary’s reign, to
justify, against any man whatsoever, every part of King
Edward’s reformation, he nominated and made choice of
Martyr therein to be one of his assistants in that disputation,
if any would undertake it with him,” Let us observe, then,
the doctrine of this Oxford professor, who was so highly
esteemed by Cranmer, upon the point in question.


As regius professor of divinity, he read lectures upon the
epistle to the Romans, and the Ist to the Corinthians, which he
afterward published. The following is part of his comment
upon Romans ix, 8: —“This passage declares, that what has
been before promised generally was restrained, by the secret
election of God, to certain men in particular. In the same
way it happens at this day, respecting the children of the
faithful. We have a promise that God is willing not only to
be our God, but also the God of our seed; which promise
being indefinite, is applied to infants by the secret election of
God ; not indeed always to all , hut to certain ones in particu-
lar, as it shall seem fit to God’s purpose ; and since this is
unknown to us , and we ought to follow the outward word
which is committed to the Churchy under that promise we bap-
tise our little ones , as the ancients circumcised their’s, The
Anabaptists blame us for doing so; because we know nothing
concerning the spirit, nor the faith, nor the election of those
little ones. But we do not think those things of any weight
in the matter; we only regard the word of God which is offered
to us in the form of a general and indefinite promise. But
we commit its fulfilment to God, since we cannot judge
respecting his election. But let them in their turn tell us how
they baptise adults, when it is uncertain whether they belong
to the election, and whether what they say they believe and
profess, they truly say, and come to Christ with a sincere mind.
Here they can answer nothing except that they follow the con-
fession of faith which adults make before the Church when
they are to be baptised. But since they may easily be deceived
in that confession, and cannot know anything for certain either
concerning their state of mind, or concerning their election,
there is no reason why they should find fault with us. For
the same thing altogether happens to us in the case of
little ones , which are offered to the Church to he baptised ,
which happens to them in the case of adults,”*
* Peter Martyr, in Rom, ix, 8. Ed. Basil, 1559, vol. viii, pp. 788—790.


Martin Bucer, Regius Professor of Divinity in the uni -
versity of Cambridge .
The invitation of Cranmer to Peter Martyr was followed, in
1548, by one from the same quarter to Martin Bucer, Peter
Martyr’s fellow-laborer at Strasburg. In Strype’s Cranmer
I have the original letter of the Archbishop. It expresses the
highest opinion of him, and urges him to come over as soon
as possible to assist in maintaining the truth. “ In 1551, when
he was by Cranmer’s appointment, regius professor of divinity
at Cambridge, he was requested by the Archbishop to review
the book of Common Prayer, and place before him his animad-
versions upon it.” He entered fully into the examination of
the work, but made no objection to those parts which have
occasioned so many mistakes, and so much controversy in later
days.* Let us observe, then, again, the opinions which were
approved by Cranmer, and were found to be not inconsistent
with the baptismal service.
The following passage is taken from his exposition of Matt,
xix. “Whence, indeed, we, who cannot reject any from the
grace of God except the deniersof it, ought not only to permit,
but also to exhort that all children indiscriminately should be
brought to the Lord, that is offered to his Church, because
that which he himself commands cannot but be best. If they
already belong to the Church } and theirs is the kingdom oj
heaven , why should we deny them the sign of baptism, by
which they who belong to the Church are in the habit of being
received into it. If there be any goats among them,
thei will then be excluded by us, when they
shall have proved themselyes to be so. Meanwhile,
let us not be more scrupulous than Christ, who pronounced
children indiscriminately brought to him to be citizens of the
kingdom of heaven; and on that account was angry that they
were driven away from him, and ordered them to be brought
* Works, Parker, Society edition, vol. iii, pp* did, 617.


to him, and when brought took them up in his arms, put his
hands upon them and blessed them.”
“ Moreover, from the fact that infants are destitute of faith,
nothing less follows than that, as some think, they cannot
please God or be holy. Since John the Baptist is said to have
been full of the Holy Ghost from the womb (Luke i); the
child is not said to have been endued with faith, and yet he
was great in the sight of the Lord, For God leads his own as
is suitable to the aye and condition of each% Faith ought to
proclaim the glory of God, and to be efficacious through love;
and as these things do not belong to infants, what if also they
have not faith, being nevertheless marhedfor salvation by the
Spirit of God . But as to what they object from the last
chapter of Mark, c he that believeth not shall be condemned,’
they show that they have not rightly weighed that passage.
For theie a command of Christ precedes concerning preaching
the Gospel in the whole world, and then it is added, 4 He that
believeth and is baptised shall be saved, but he that believeth
not shall be damned;’ which is as much as to say, he that
has faith in the Gospel preached by you, and shall confess it
by baptism, shall be saved, but he that has not shall be damned.
And thus this sentence by no means applies to those who have
not heard the Gospel. Therefore, with elect infants the Spirit
of the Lord is present , by which , so far as suffices for their
aye and condition , they are led ; and when they grow up, at
the time ordained by the Father, it teaches them to believe the
Word of God, and leads them by faith unto salvation. But
they that depart hence before they grow up, since they are
Christ’s, they shall also be with him and be happy,” &c.*
With these and other similar statements before me, can I
err, my Lord, in venturing to declare that what you have been
pleased to term “ heresy,” and a non-natural interpretation of
the baptismal service, was clearly taught from the divinity
* Bucer’s Eman. in Evang, Basil, 1536, or fol. in Matt, cxix, pp. 403, 404,


chairs of Oxford and Cambridge, under the direct sanction of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, at the time when the book of
Common Prayer was first introduced?
My limits will not admit of many selections from the writings
of the reformers of the same school—bishops and professors;
but I must be allowed to adduce the opinions of Bishops Ridley
and Hooper, upon one important point, because they explain
the strong language of u the fathers ,” which gave rise in very
early days to those errors concerning the sacraments which
still so widely prevail, to the great hinderance of the truth.
Bishop Ridley, Bishop of Bochester from 1547 to 1550,
and of London from 1550 till deprived hy Mary. Martyr 1555.
In his first conference with Latimer he gives the following
opinion respecting the Fathers. “ But what is to be said of
the Fathers? How are they to be esteemed? St, Augustine
answers, giving this rule also that we should not, therefore,
think it true, because they say so, though they ever so much
excel in holiness or learning; unless they are able to prove
their saying by the canonical scriptures, or by a good probable
reason; meaning that to be a probable reason, as I think, which
orderly follows upon a right collection and gathering out of
the Scriptures. Let the papists go with their long faith, be
you content with the short faith of the saints, which is revealed
unto us in the written Word of God. For one man having
the Scriptures and good reason for him , is more to he esteemed
himself alone , than a thousand such as they , either gathered
together , or succeeding one another . The Fathers have both
herbs and weeds, and papists commonly gather the weeds and
leave the herbs. And the Fathers speak many times more
vehemently in sound of words, than they meant indeed, or
than they would have done, if they had foreseen what sophis-
tical wranglers would have succeeded them. Now, the papists
are given to brawl about words, to maintain their own invent


tions; and rather follow the sound of words, than attain unto
the meaning of the Fathers, so that it is dangerous to trust
them in citing the Fathers. In all ages the devil has stirred
up some light heads to esteem the sacraments but lightly, as
to the empty and bare signs; whom the Fathers have resisted
so fiercely, that in their fervour they seem , in sound of words ,
to rise too far the other way, and to give too much to the sa-
craments, when they, in truth , did think more measurably,
And , therefore, they are to he read warily , with sound judg-
ment ”
Bishop Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester from 1550, and of
Worcester from 1552 till deprived by Mary in 1553.
Martyr , 1554.
In his fifth sermon on Jonah, answering a question concern-
ing the opinion of the Fathers, be says—“ Nothing is more
expedient to answer directly to this question, than to consider
the times of our Fathers. They thought it best to name the
sacraments by the name of the thing that was represented by
the sacraments. Yet, in many places of their writings, they
so interpret themselves, that no man, except he will be wilfully
blind, can say but they understood the sacrament to signify ,
and not to be the thing signified ; to confirm, and not to exhi-
bit grace; to help, and not to give faith ; to seal, and not to
win the promise of God (Rom, iv.) ; to show what we are
before the use of them, and not to make us the thing we declare
to be after them ; to show we are Christ's ;to show we are in
grace, and not by them to be received into grace ; to show we
are saved, and not to be saved by them ; to show we are
REGENERATED, AND NOT TO BE REGENERATED BY THEM :
Thus the old doctors meant”
I cannot forbear to add one extract from Bishop Hooper’s
“Declaration of Christ and his office.” This, with other
similar explanations, ought to be generally read, especially by


those who have doubts respecting the views of the reformers.
u Although baptism be a sacrament to be received and
honorably used of all men, yet it sanctifieth no man; and
such as attribute the remission of sin to the external sign do
offend, John (Matt, iii) preached penitence in the desert, and
remission of sin in Christ. Such as confessed their faults, he
marked and declared them to be of Christ’s Church. So that
external baptism, was but an inauguration or external conse*
cration of those, thatfirst believed and were cleansed of their
sin, as he declareth himself in the same place. Ego (inquit)
baptizo aqua. I christen with water. As though he said,
my baptism maketh no man the better; inwardly, it changeth
no man; but I call and preach to the outward ear, I exhort
to penance (i t e., repentance) and such as say they do repent,
and would change the old sinful life, I wash with water. He
that inwardly cleanseth is stronger than I. His grace it is
only which purifieth the soul. I baptise in penance, to say,
(e.g. f that is to say) into a new life. This new life cometh not
until such time as Christ be known and received. Now to put
on Christ is to live a new life. Such as be baptised must re-
member, that penance and faith preceded this external
sign, and in Christ the purgation was inwardly ob-
tained, BEFORE THE EXTERNAL SIGN WAS GIVEN. So
that there are two kinds of baptism, and both necessarv ; the
*/ ?
one interior, which is the cleansing of the heart, the drawing
of the Father, the operation of the Holy Ghost; and this
baptism is in man, when he believeth and trusteth that Christ
is the only author of his salvation. Thus be the infants ex-
amined concerning repentance and faith , before they be bap-
tised with water ; at the contemplation of the which
faith God purgeth the soul. Then is the exterior
sign added, not to purge the heart , but to confirm , manifest ,
and open unto the world that this child is God's . And likewise,
baptism, with the repetition of the words, is a very sacrament


and sign that the baptised creature should die from sin all
his life, as Paul writeth, Rom. vi. Likewise no man should
condemn nor neglect this exterior sign, for the commandments’
sake; though it have no power to purge from sin, yet it con -
Jirmetln the purgation of sin, and the act of itself pleaseth God,
for because the receivers thereof obey the will of his command-
ment.”*
Bishop Hooper also, in his answer to Gardiner, observes—
“lt is ill done to condemn the infants of the Christians that
die without baptism, of whose salvation by the Scripture we
be assured.” “This sacrament (baptism) and all
other, be but the confirmation of Christ’s promises which he in
the person that receiveth the sacraments before , or else these
external signs availeth nothing . This may be easily known
by the use of baptism everywhere. The testimonies of the
infant to be christened, are examined in the behalf of the
child of faith, what they believe of God.”
Omitting other testimonies of a similar character, which
my limits will not allow me to adduce, allow me to remind
your Lordship of a work which, in the time of Archbishop
Whitgift, the successor of Parker in the See of Canterbury,
was sanctioned by the highest episcopal authority. In Strype’s
life of Whitgift, a copy is given of certain “orders,” which
were “agreed upon by the archbishop and other bishops in
convocation,” “for the better increase of learning in the infe-
rior ministers;” the first of which is as follows—“ Every
minister having cure, and being under the degree of master of
art, and bachelor of law, and not licensed to be a public
preacher, shall before the 2nd day of February next, provide a
Bible, and Bullinger's decads , in latin or English, and a paper
book. And shall every day read over the one chapter of the
Holy Scriptures, and note the principal contents thereof
briefly in his paper book; and shall every week read over one
* Declaration of Christ and his office, first published in 1547,


sermon in the said decads, and note likewise the chief matters
therein contained in the said paper (book); and shall once in
every quarter, viz,, within a fortnight before or after the end ot
the quarter, show the said notes to some preacher, near adjoin-
ing, to be assigned for that purpose,’ 7 There can be no doubt,
then, that in the opinion of Archbishop Whitgift and the
other bishops, who put forth these 11 orders” in 1586, Bullinger s
decads contained nothing heretical or contrary to the doctrine
of the Church of England. The study of this work was en-
joined for the instruction of the junior clergy, who were pre-
paring for the all important work of preaching the word. I
must be allowed, then, to quote some extracts from this work,
to show what was considered to be the doctrine of the Church
of England, concerning infant baptism, in Archbishop Whit-
giffs time.* Though not possessing a copy of the original, it
is my privilege to have the “ paper book 77 of one who has
“ noted 77 down some of “ the chief matters contained therein. 77
REGENERATION.
“Now regeneration is the renewing of the man, by which,
through the faith of Jesus Christ, we, which were the sons of
Adam and of wrath, are horn again the sons of God, and
do therefore put off the old man, and put on the new, which
both in understanding and will, doth freely serve the Lord.
This regeneration is the renewing of the mind, not of the
body; as we heard in another place, out of the third chapter
of St. John's gospel. The author of this regeneration is the
Holy Ghost, which is from heaven, given unto man; I mean
to a faithful man . For the gift of the Holy Ghost is given
for Christ his sake, and that, too, unto none but those that do
believe in Christ”
THE SACRAMENTS.
u Now let us see in what things sacraments consist. By the
♦ Whitgift was Archbishop of Canterbury from 1583 to 1604.


testimony of the Scripture, and of all the godly men, they consist
in two things, to wit, the sign and the thing signified; in the
word and the rite, in the promise of the Gospel and in the
ceremony, in the outward thing and the inward, in the earthly
thing (I say) and the heavenly In baptism,
water, or sprinkling of water, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and all that which is
done of the Church, is a sign, rite, ceremony, and outward
thing, earthly and sensible, lying open and made plain to the
senses; but remission of sins, partaking of everlasting life,
fellowship with Christ and his members, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which are given unto us by the grace of God, through
faith in Christ Jesus , is the thing signified, the inward and
heavenly thing and that intelligible thing, which is not per-
ceived hut hy a faithful mind”
To prove that “in respect of the likeness of the sign and
the thing signified, the name of the one is given to the other,”
he refers to Genesis xvii, where circumcision is called the cove-
nant; and Exodus xii, where the lamb is called the passover;
and then proceeds—“ Now we are come also to the sacraments
of the New Testament, whose signs also bear the names of the
things signified. For Peter saith, Acts ii, ‘ Let every one of
you be baptised in the name of Jesu Christ, for the remission
of sins. 7 And Paul, also, in the Acts of the Apostles, heareth
—‘Arise, and be baptised, and wash away thy sins, by calling
on the name of the Lord/ Therefore, truly, baptism is called
a cleansing, or washing away of sins. And Peter also, else-
where, saith, ‘ Baptism saveth you, not that thereby the filth
of the flesh is put away, but in that a good conscience maketh
request to God/ And Paul also saith (1 Cor. vi), ‘Ye are
washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God/ Therefore the due and
right comparing of these places between themselves doth mani-
festly prove, that to the sign of baptism , which is water , is
given the name of the thing signified”


u That we may yet at length make end of this place, they
are sacramental and t figurative speeches ,
when we read and
hear that the bread is the body of Christ.
also that they
are purged from their sins, and regenerated into a new life ,
which are baptised in the name of Christy and that baptism is
the washing away of all our sins . And after this manner
speaketh the Scripture; and this form of speech kept the old
doctors of the Church, whom, for so doing, none that is wise
doth dispraise; neither can one discommend any man which
speaketh after this manner, so that he also abide in the
same sincerity, wherein it is manifest that those holy men of
God did walk. For as they did willingly and simply use those
speeches, so did they not roughly and rigorously strain the
letter and speeches; they did interpret them in such sort, that
none was so unskilful but that he might understand that the
signs were not the thing itself which they signified , but that
the signs do take the names of the things, therefore they used
Words SIGNIFICATIVELY, sacramentally, mystically,
AND FIGURATIVELY.”
“In baptism and the Lord’s supper we practise no other
faith than whereby we believe, that we are purged from our
sins by the grace and mercy of Christ; and that by his body
given for us, and his blood shed for us, we are redeemed from
death, and become heirs of eternal life. Not the sacraments ,
but faith, through the Holy Ghost , applieth these things unto
us; which thing all the writings of the Apostles do
WITNESS.”
“ The holy and elect people of God are not then first of all
partakers of thefirst grace of God , and heavenly gifts , when
they receive the sacraments: for they enjoy the things before
they be partakers of the signs. For it is plainly declared unto
us that Abraham our father was justified before he was circum-
cised. And who gathereth not thereby that justification was
not exhibited and given unto him by the sacrament of circum-


cision, but rather that righteousness, which he by faith before
possessed , was by the sacrament sealed and confirmed unto him ?
And, moreover, who will not thereof gather, that we which are
the sons of Abraham, are after no other manner justified, than
it appeareth that our father was justified, and that our sacra-
merits work no further in us than they did in him ? especially
since the nature of the sacraments of the people of the Old
Testament and our’s is all one.”
This is confirmed by the cases of the Ethiopian eunuch,
Cornelius, &c.
u Forasmuch, therefore, as Cornelius with his household re-
ceived the Holy Ghost before they were baptised, it is manifest
that he did not obtain the Holy Ghost as given first by bap-
tism or with baptism. Again, we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, ‘They that gladly received the word of Peter were
baptised. 7 Therefore before they were baptised of Peter, they
had obtained the grace of God through faith. For why, I
PRAY YOU, DO WE BAPTISE OUR INFANTS? Is it because
they believe with their heart , and confess with their mouth ? I
think not. Do we not , therefore , baptise them because God
hath commanded them to be brought unto him ? because he hath
promised that he will be our God , and the God of our seed
after us I To be short , because we believe that God of
HIS MERE GRACE AND MERCY, IN THE BLOOD OF JESUS
Christ, hath cleansed and adopted them, and ap-
pointed THEM TO BE HEIRS OF ETERNAL LIFE? We,
therefore , baptising infants for these causes , do abundantly
testify , that there is not first given unto them in baptism , but
that there is sealed and confirmed which they had before .”....
“ They object, I know well enough, against these things,...
that we do evacuate and make of none effect the sacraments,
and that we teach that the faithful receive in them or by them
nothing but bare water, and bare bread and wine; and that by
that means God by us is accused of falsehood and lying. We


briefly answer, If they set void or empty things (as I may so
say) against full things, so as they be void or empty, which
have not the things themselves included in them, truly I had
rather confess them to be void than full. But if they call them
void or empty, and mean profane or unholy things, that is to say,
which differ nothing from profane signs; if by bare they under-
stand things of no force, we openly profess that we have sacra-
ments which are holy, and not profane; effectual, and not without
force; garnished from above, not naked; and, therefore, full,
not void or empty. For they are holy things, and not profane;
because they are instituted of God, and for godly men, not
for profane persons. They are effectual , and not without
force ; for in the Church, with the godly and
FAITHFUL, THEY WORK THE SAME EFFECT AND END
WHEREUNTO THEY WERE ORDAINED OF GOD. Whereof
more hereafter. They are also worthily said to be beautified
and adorned by God, and not bare things; which have the
word (of) God itself, wherewith they are most beautifully
adorned; and, therefore, also, they are full, and not empty
sacraments, because they have those things which make a
perfect sacrament.” ....
“The bountiful and gracious Lord, of his mere mercy, re-
ceiveth mankind into the partaking of all his good gifts and
graces, and adopteth the faithful , that now they be not only
joined in league with God, but also the children of God;
which thing, by the holy action of baptism, being instead of
the sign, or the very sign itself, is most evidently by represen-
tation laid before the eyes of all men . For the minister of
God standeth at the holy font, to whom the infant is offered to
be baptised, whom he receiveth and baptiseth into the name or
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, For we may find both ‘ Into the name/ and ‘ln the
name/ so that to be baptised ‘into the name of the Lord/ is
to be sealed into his virtue and power (for the name of the


Lord signifieth power), into the favor, mercy, and protection of
God, yea to be grafted, and as it were to be fastened, to be dedi-
cated, and to be incorporated into God. To be baptised *in the
name of the Lord 7 is by the commandment or authority of God,
to be baptised, I mean by the commission or appointment of God,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be received into the
company of the children of God, and to be counted of God’s
household, that they which are baptised are (for are read may
he), and be called Christians, and be named with the name of
God, being called the children of God the Father, &c. His
speech, therefore, doth somewhat resemble that which we read
elsewhere, that ‘ the name of God was called upon, over some
one; 7 which is in a manner as if we should say, that one is
called bv the name of God, that is to be called the servant and
Son of God. 7 They therefore which before by
GRACE INYISIBLY ARE RECEIVED OF GOD INTO THE SO-
CIETY of God, those selfsame are visibly now by
BAPTISM ADMITTED INTO THE SELFSAME HOUSEHOLD
of God by the minister of God, and, therefore, at that
time, also, receive their name, that they may always remember,
that in baptism they gave up their names to Christ, and in like
manner also received a name. After this manner, by a most
apt analogy, the very sign resembleth the thing signified. To
be short, baptism is done by water, and water in men’s matters
hath a double use; for it cleanseth filth, and, as it were,
reneweth man. Also, it quencheth thirst, and cooleth him that
is in a heat. So, also, it representeth the grace of God, when
it cleanseth his faithful ones from their sins, regenerateth and
refresheth us with his Spirit. Beside this, the minister of
Christ sprinkleth or rather poureth in water, or being dipped
taketh them out of the water, whereby is signified that God
very bountifully bestoweth his gifts upon his faithful ones ; it
signifieth also that we are buried with Christ into his death, and
are raised again with him into newness of life. Pharaoh was


drowned in the gulph of the Red Sea, but the people of God
passed through it safe. For our old Adam must be drowned
and extinguished, but our new Adam, day by day, must be
quickened and rise up again (out of the water). Therefore is
the mortification and vivification of Christians very excellently
represented by baptism.”
“ Sacraments, therefore, do visibly graff us into the fellow-
ship of Christ and his saints, who were invisibly graffed by his
grace before we were partakers of the sacraments; but by re-
ceiving of the sacraments, we do now open and make manifest
of whose body we would be and are members; the Lord with
his signs and marks, by his minister, also visibly marking us
for his own household, and his own people.”. 6i wtg
not first graff ed into the body of Christ (as we have often re-
peated already) by partaking of the sacraments; but we which
were before ingraffed by grace invisibly , are now also visibly
consecrated
“ If the inward anointing and sealing of the Holy Ghost be
wanting, the outward action wfil be counted but a toy to the
unbelievers, neither worketh the sealing of the sacraments
anything at all; but when faith the gift of the Holy
Ghost, goeth before, the sealing of the sacraments is very
strong and sure. Some also have said very well, If your
minds be destitute of the Holy Ghost , the sacraments do no
more profit us , than it doth a blind man to look upon the
bright beams of the sun”
“ The Holy Scripture teacheth that we are washed clean from
our sins by baptism. For baptism is a sign, a testimony, and
sealing of our cleansing. For God verily hath promised sanc-
tification to his Church, and he for his truth sake, purifieth his
Church from all sins, by his grace, through the blood of his
Son; and regenerateth and cleanseth it by his Spirit, which
cleansing is sealed in us by baptism , which we receive; and ,
thereof it is called in the Scriptures, cleansing and remission


of sins , purifying , new birth , regeneration } and the laver
or fountain of regeneration ; as circumcision is called the co-
venant; and sacrifices, sins, and sanctifications.”
These extracts from Bullinger’s decads I cannot but think,
my Lord, are sufficient to prove that the doctrine of “prevent
ent grace” which your Lordship has been pleased to call
“ heresy ” and the interpretation of our baptismal service,
which you have objected to as u non-natural” was sanctioned
by the highest ecclesiastical authorities, under the Primacy of
Archbishop Whitgift. Perhaps I may be allowed to point out
also, in passing, how the reformers seem to have connected the
errors of what is now called “ baptismal regeneration ,” and
** transuhstantiation ,” as proceeding from the same cause, and
in principle the same. Wbitefield, therefore, it appears, was
not very extravagant when he said that u he would as soon
believe the doctrine of transuhstantiation, as that all people,
who are baptised, are born again.”*
A cloud of witnesses might be adduced, if it were either
desirable or necessary that this pamphlet should be enlarged
into a volume; but the foregoing testimonies will suffice, I
trust, to prove the second part of my argument. There are,
however, two other authorities of a later date, whom I must be
allowed to bring forward, because their testimony relates to two
most important particulars in this controversy. The particu-
lars to which I allude are as follows:
* “ Why not believe a material as well as a moral change”—asks Mr. Hoare, in
a work entitled “ Baptism according to Scripture”—if the exercise of the under-
standing and of the senses be excluded? Nay, transuhstantiation has a greater
show of Scripture authority in its favor. Christ did say of the bread and wine,
‘ This is my body, this is my blood ;* but he never said, ‘ Every one who is bom
of water, is born also of the Holy Spirit.* The uniform tenor of his teaching-
was, that men’s profession and principles, and privileges, should be tried by their
practical effects. ‘By their fruits ye shall know them” (Matt, vii, 20). And as
transuhstantiation might as well be believed as that every baptised person is ne-
cessarily born of the spirit,* so to claim the power of absolutely setting-
God on work to new-create the soul in baptism, is little short of the presumption
of the Church of Rome, which asserts the power of her priests to turn the bread
and wine, in the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, into Christ’s real body and
blood ! It would not then be true (as declared in John i, 13) that ‘the sons of
God are born, not of the will of man ,’ for baptism is administered at the will of
man; whensoever and to whomsoever he pleases,”


3. “That God’s sacraments have their effects, where the re-
ceiver doth not * ponere obicem] put any bar against them, which
children cannot do;” and 2. That one who denies the universal
regeneration of infants in baptism—to use your Lordship’s
words—sets “at nought the judgment of the immediate suc-
cessors of the Apostles, of Fathers, of Councils, of Catholic
antiquity, of the most learned divines of his own Church, 7
that he may follow in the wake of the Puritans and Noncon-
formists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries .
With reference to these points I beg to adduce the evidence
of Dr. Abbott, who was regius professor of divinity at Oxford,
from 1612 to 1615, and Bishop of Salisbury from 1615 to
1617; and of Bishop Carleton, who was Bishop of Llandaff
from 1617 to 1619, and of Chichester from 1619 to 1628—also
one of the four representatives of our Church at the synod of
Dort.
Bishop Abbott observes, in reply to a treatise by a person
named Thomson —“ lam astonished that the words of Luther
are here brought forward by our author, (although they are
not Luther’s, in the form in which they are produced by him)
whose object in these words, in that passage, is to oppose that
papistical sayiiiy of the scholastics , which is the foundation
of the opus operatum doctrine , which here nevertheless
IS WITH INCONCEIVABLE AUDACITY, LAID DOWN AS A
doctrine of the catholic faith, that sacraments always
confer their effect upon one that does not place a bar in the
way; when, on the contrary, Luther maintained that the effi-
cacy of all the sacraments depends solely on faith.”
The following is the testimony of Bishop Carleton:—
“ That opinion, which teaches that sacraments confer grace
upon one who does not place a bar in the way, by the virtue of
the work done, without any good and deserving notion, seems
to have arisen about the age of John Scotus. Aquinas, seems
to have added some stones to this building, when he taught,
c 3


* that the sacraments of the new law cause grace after the
manner of an instrument. 7 These words gave occasion to
the sophists that followed to philosophise after their manner.
But Aquinas has nothing about the work done, or about a bar.
These things seem to have been added by those that came after .
And thus the Iridentine creed , like a patched coat , made up of
many and various rags , was at length put together , and became
one. Before these times this opinion was unheard
of in the Church of Rome. 77 *
In reply to a work entitled Apello Coesarem, by one of the
earliest leaders of the Arminian school, in the time of Laud
" same writer observes, u Concerning this judgment of
charity, we do not inform the world any otherwise than St.
Augustine informed the Church long since against the Pela-
gians. The Pelagians urged those things as you do, that they
that were baptised were regenerate and justified. St. Augus-
tine answereth they are so for ought that we know, and until
they themselves show themselves to the contrary. Then so
long as we have no cause to the contrary, we judge them in
charity, to be such as we desire they should be; did we devise
"liis • or chd we first inform the world of this? it hath been
of OLD received thus in the Church. We do but say
that which the ancient Fathers have said before us / and you
follow that which your fathers the Pelagians have taught before
you. But here is a great difference; we, following the ancient
Fathers, follow the Church ; and you, following the Pelagians,
follow the enemies of the Church.”
iC Of these who receive the sacrament of regeneration, and
are judged by us to be regenerated and justified, many may
proceed and make a great progress in the Church, to be en-
lightened to taste of the heavenly gift, to be made partakers
of the Holy Ghost (that is of many graces of the Holy Ghost)
to taste of the good word of God, and of the powers of the
Consensus Eccles. Cathol. contra Tridentinos.—Franc. 1613.


world to come’ (Heb, vi), and yet they may fall away totally
and finally. But they that are regenerate, justified, and called
according to God's purpose, (ask not me who these are, it is
enough that they are known to God) they may fall into divers
temptations and sins, which bring men under God’s wrath;
but these never fall away either totally or finally. This was
expressed by D. Overall, in the conference at Hampton Court.
By this distinction of men regenerated and justified, Sacra-
mento tenus only, and such as are so indeed, according to God's
purpose and calling, he might easily and fairly have satisfied
himself in all these objections, which he draweth out of the
book of homilies, and out of our service book. For first he
hath not proved that a justified man may fall away totally and
finally; neither doth that follow from any words by him pro-
duced. And if it were proved in direct terms, how easy is the
answer, that it is there meant of such as are regenerate and
justified, Sacramento tenus, and no further; for that such fall
away, it was never doubted in the Church, as St, Austin
showeth. And therefore when he sayeth that children duly
baptised are put into the estate of grace and salvation, I grant
they are so to us; we must esteem them so judicio chari-
tatis.”
In another part of the same work, with reference to a taunt
about puritan doctrine, in “ Apello Cmsarem,” Bishop Carleton
remarks — u This is the first time that I ever heard of a Puritan
doctrine, in points dogmatical; and I have lived longer in the
Church than he hath done, I thought that puritans were
only such as were factious against the bishops, in the point of
pretended discipline; and so, lam sure, it hath been under-
stood in our Church . A puritan doctrine is a strange thing,
because it has been confessed on all sides that protestants and
puritans have held the same doctrines without variance. The
discipline varied in England, Scotland, Geneva, and other
where; yet the doctrine hath been hitherto held the same,


according to the harmony of the several confessions of these
Churches. Not one doctrine of the Church of England ,
another of the Church of Scotland , and so of others . What
is your end in this, but to make divisions where there
WERE NONE? AND THAT A RENT MAY BE MADE IN THE
Church ; Forsooth that place may be given to the Pelagian
and Arminian doctrines; and then all that are against these
must be called puritan doctrines
1 may now proceed to show—
111. That the view of infant baptism which has been proved
to be scriptural, and in accordance with the recorded opinions
of the fathers of our reformed church, is also perfectly consistent
with a believing use of our baptismal service, and an honest
adhesion to the Articles, in their plain and grammatical sense.
After the testimonies which have been adduced from the
writings of the reformers, it would be sufficient to argue under
this head that those who framed our Articles and Liturgy
could not have so utterly disregarded their own views upon the
subject, as to make it next to impossible that they should use
the service otherwise than u with stammering lips and faltering
tonguebut leaving this for your Lordship’s consideration,
I beg to offer a more direct and decisive evidence.
It is my privilege to be able to furnish this in the words of
one, in whose diocese, as your Lordship has reminded us, this
colony was formerly included—the venerable Bishop of Cal-
cutta. The following explanation is extracted from his Lord-
ship’s last charge, which was printed in Calcutta in the early
part of 1849 :
(l The case of Holy Baptism, especially as it regards infants,
is different. It is generally considered to be full of difficulty.
Ido not think so. I allow that certain isolated expressions, if
The writer begs to acknowledge his obligations to the Rev. W. Goode, for
ms invaluable work on the “ effects of infant baptism.” A considerable portion
of the above extracts, from the writings of the Reformers, have been taken from
that work.


cited without the context or a reference to the Scriptures and
our Articles of Religion, may have the appearance of support-
ing certain unsafe opinions. This must be the case whatever
form our offices should take. It is sufficient if the mind of
our Church is clear when the whole of her doctrine is fairly
weighed.
“Let us begin, then, with the Article which speaks of both
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. ‘ The Sacraments/ says
the twenty-fifth Article, using the plural number, * in such only
as worthily receive the same, have a wholesome effect or opera-
tion.
“ ‘The grace of God’s gifts/ says Article twenty-sixth, ‘is
conferred only on such as by faith and rightly do receive them.’
“ The twenty-seventh treat specifically on Baptism in the
following manner:
“ 1 Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of dif-
ference whereby Christian men are discerned from others that
be not christened, but it is also a sign of Regeneration or new
birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that receive Bap-
tism rightly are grafted into the Church; the promises of for-
giveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God,
are visibly signed and sealed; faith is confirmed, and grace
increased by virtue of prayer unto God. ;
a Here we find that the Article confines itself to those who
‘receive Baptism rightly/ that is, not merely by lawful admi-
nistration, but by worthy reception ; in other words, to adults
who come to it with ‘ repentance and faith/ as the Office and
Catechism explicitly declare.
“ It then proceeds to observe, that ‘ The Baptism of young
children is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most
agreeable to the institution of Christ/ without a word of detail
with regard to them ; leaving it to be inferred that the same
requisites are necessary as in the case of adults—an inference
which the office for infant baptism fully confirms.


“In this our Church closely follows the inspired word. The
baptisms recorded in the New Testament are those of adults,
and those only; the pre-requisites being repentance and faith.
There is not the slightest doubt, indeed, of the divine autho-
rity for infant baptism, just as for infant circumcision—for we
read of whole ‘ households 7 being baptised with the believing
heads of them ; but we have not one single detailed account
of the particular blessings then conferred; that is, things are
left precisely as in our twenty-seventh Article.
“ Accordingly, the adult, considered as sincere in his repent-
ance and faith, is upon that footing admitted to the outward
and visible ‘ sign of regeneration or new birth, 7 and is most
scripturally pronounced in the office as ‘ born of water and of
the spirit, 7 that is, as regenerate in the most comprehensive
sense; is recognised by the Church as such; is translated from
the visible kingdom of Satan to that of God 7 s dear Son;
is incorporated into the body of Christ; and has ‘faith con-
firmed and grace increased, by virtue of prayer to God. 7
“If the baptised person was sincere, the blessing stands
good; if insincere, we can only conclude that he was ‘born
of water, 7 but not ‘of the spirit. 7
“Archbishop Cranraer says, ‘ln baptism those that come
feignedly, and those that come unfeignedly, both be washed
with the sacramental water, but both be not washed with the
Holy Ghost, and clothed with Christ. 7 * Simon Magus, 7 says
Bishop Latimer, ‘ came out of the water as great a blackamoor
as he went in. 7
“In like manner, in the instance of children, the Church
equally requires the profession of repentance and faith; and
after that profession, and on the footing of it, as made in its
name by its sponsors, she administers the outward and
visible sign, and then charitably pronounces the child
‘born of water and of the spirit, 7 that is, regenerate. If the
infant, when it reaches the years of intelligence, fulfils the


engagements made in its name, the blessings stand good; if
not, they are in substance void, just as in the case of the adult.
“ But as God only can see the heart, both the adult and
infant are accounted, till the contrary is manifest, regenerate
or born both of water and of the spirit, and retain, in the eye
of the Church, their high sacramental privileges and advan-
tages.
“ Nothing can, as it appears to me, be more natural and
scriptural; for the whole of the two offices proceeds on the
assumption that faith and repentance exist, or shall hereafter
exist, in the mind of the candidate; that the promises made
in his own person or by his sponsors are sincere, and that the
promises have been, or shall be performed—precisely as the
Scriptures do.
“ This view fully harmonises all the language and doctrine
of our Church in her several formularies; and thoroughly
agrees with the inspired standard of all truth.
“ What is then the question which some so eagerly debate.
It is neither more nor less than this, Are the blessings pro-
nounced as to the efficacy of baptism conditional or uncondi-
tional ? Is the efficacy universal in all cases when it is duly
administered, or does it depend also on the disposition of the
receiver ? Has this sacrament in 1 such only as worthily re-
ceive the same a wholesome effect or operation/ or has it that
effect in all?
“Surely this question answers itself. The blessings are
promised under conditions—that is clear—they cannot then
by any force of argument be interpreted unconditionally.
“ Surely, then, regeneration or new birth, in the full moral
import of these terms, as used generally in the inspired lan-
guage of Scripture—as including the commencement of a
change of nature, the beginnings of the ‘taking away of the
heart of stone and giving a heart of flesh/ the dawning of
illumination in the blind and dark mind of fallen man ; the
incipient turning from the love and service of Satan unto the


love and service of God; ‘ a resurrection from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness/ a * quickening together with
Christ. 7 Surely regeneration in this transcendent sense can
never be affirmed to be invariably and universally the effect of
baptism, so that the commencement of the mighty change is
not again to be sought for by persons baptised ; but the terms
‘born again 7 and ‘regenerate 7 are still to be applied to them,
however dead they may be in sin, worldliness, and unbelief.
Surely such can never be the true doctrine, if we follow, as
we ought, the inspired Scriptures.
“On the contrary, we are surely bound, not only to use
these words in their sacramental and charitable sense—which
we do; but also, and much more, in the general scriptural
meaning of them, as synonymous with all the other numerous
terms which abound in the Bible, and which describe the
beginnings of the mighty transformation of fallen man into
the image of God.
“I am aware, indeed, how many excellent persons, from the
force of education, and an exclusive line of reading, abstain
from calling on baptised persons to examine themselves whether
they are ‘ born of God. 7 I doubt not that many preach sub-
stantially the Gospel on this subject, though they decline the
use of the words regeneration and new birth, except with
reference to baptism. I cannot myself but consider this a
very serious error, the baneful effect of which on those who
hold it, and on the younger clergy and laity, is not lessened
by such cases of piety. It should indeed teach us great
charity as to individuals, but not lessen our firm adherence to
what we consider the truth of the Gospel.
“ Bo we, then, in the least degree lower the real efficacy
and importance of holy baptism by the simple and scriptural
view I have presented? On the contrary, we place it in its
true light and dignity. We dwell upon its importance with
all earnestness. We appeal to the consciences of men on the
footing of it. We not only treat of regeneration and new


birth in its moral and individual necessity in the case of every
human being; but we treat of it also in connection with the
Sacrament which is its sign and seal, and the means, when
duly received, of its conveyance, and we urge men to fulfil the
stipulations on which its blessings depend.
“ But to take a contrary course; to represent large congre-
gations as regenerate, in the sense of being actually 4 partakers
of a divine nature/ without any regard to their fulfilment or
non-fulfilment of the conditions, on the footing of which all
the benefits of their baptism were pronounced, is a most
awful delusion. It is, in fact, to declare blessings first under
conditions, and then to turn round and deduce an universal
inference from them, with those conditions left out.
“I venture to assert that the Scripture knows nothing of
the unconditional opus operatum efficacy of baptism under the
New Testament, any more than of circumcision under the
Old—with regard to which the Lord’s promise of 4 circumcis-
ing the people’s heart to love the Lord their God,’ his com-
mand, 4 circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be no more
stiff-necked,’ his denunciation, 4 no stranger uncircuracised in
heart nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary/
and his solemn declaration, ‘All the house of Israel are un-
circumcised in the heart/ in the Old Testament—together
with the yet stronger ones of the New —place this point beyond
all doubt.
44 It has always appeared to me that the only safe course is,
not to argue forwards but backwards, not to suppose that ex-
ternal privileges and the reception of the sacrament will
prove our individual possession, at any subsequent moment, of
the grace and blessings it represents and seals, which they
will not, and cannot do; but to argue back, humbly and
cautiously, from the present actual state of our hearts and
affections before God to the sacrament, which is the sign and
pledge of them. Let us first ascertain by the scriptural marks
laid down by St. John and other inspired writers, that we are


really *born of God and love God/ and then we may infer
with holy joy and gratitude, that we possess all the blessings
which the Church and her ordinances have pronounced. Sal-
vation depends on our personal faith, not on the reception of
the sacraments.
“ The fact is, the root of these evils lies deeper. There is
in too many cases a want of a full, scriptural acquaintance
with the way of salvation, A single false principle here may
corrupt our whole doctrine. A single scriptural expression on
such a vital point omitted or explained away, may indeed
seem to some a small matter, if other terms supposed to be
equivalent to it, are retained, and yet may be connected with
a total misconception of the whole Gospel, and bring on the
most ruinous consequences.”
I will not attempt to add any remarks of my own, after this
most satisfactory explanation. My three points are now, I
venture to think, sufficiently proved; and I trust that whatever
your Lordship may still declare, and whatever some of your
clergy may repeat, the majority of the laity will be able to
understand that the “ ordained priest of the Church of Eng-
land” may “ give his faithful diligence always so to minister
the doctrine and sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the
Lord hath commanded, and as this Church and realm bath
received the same,” although he does deny the presence of
the regenerating power of the Holy Ghost absolutely in the
case of infants in the ordinance of baptism; and although he
does consider that the Church’s words are “to be interpreted
hypothetically , hopefully , charitably .”
Reverting for a moment, in conclusion, to the scriptural
proof, I would remind your Lordship that this, after all, is the
one thing of paramount importance.
My Lord, I must be allowed to defend the puritans and non-
conformists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries from
your Lordship’s charge; but whatever their opinions may have
been, I am not disposed to think that we can “as well or


better draw truth from the streams muddied by the prejudices
aud superstitions of fifteen centuries’ accumulation, than from
the Apostolic fountain-head.”* I beg to say, by all means let
us go to the fountain-head at once, and there, if perplexities
have been occasioned by the altered character of the stream,
which time has brought down to us; if rites, which were
instituted in simplicity, by the divine founder of our religion,
have been made mysterious by human traditions; there let us
draw from the living water of revelation—the inspired and
infallible word of God.
My Lord, I am willing to set “at nought the judgment of
the immediate successors and disciples of the Apostles, of fathers,
of councils, of catholic antiquity, of the most learned divines
of our own Church, together with all the prejudices and super-
stitions of fifteen (or as now of eighteen) centuries’ accumula-
tion,” if your Lordship will allow me to follow you in your
application to the Holy Scriptures, under an agreement that
our views upon the subject of infant baptism, shall either stand
or fall according to the testimony of inspiration.
With respect for your Lordship’s office, and a sincere expres-
sion of thankfulness for many acts of personal kindness, which
I desire thus publicly to acknowledge, I beg to remain, your
Lordship’s humble and obedient servant,
ALFRED STACKHOUSE.
Perth , September 8,1851,
* It is with pain, akin to awe, that we behold such a man” (the ordained
nriest of the Church of England) “ setting at nought the judgment of the im-
mediate successors and difciples of of fathers ot councds of
catholic antiquity, of the most learned divines of his own Church—and tor w nat.
That he ma/follow in the wake of the puritans and non-conformists of
teenth and seventeenth centuries; men, many of them, certainly o P ety,
but few of deep learning ; men, who thought that they
draw truth from the streams muddied by the prejudices and st^ d
fifteen centuries’ accumulation, than from the Apostolic fountain-head.
Charge , page 54.


NOTE.
As your Lordship has given an extract from the works of the Rev. C.
Simeon, in the appendix to your charge, I beg to lay before you some
more complete extracts from the “ Appeal to men of Wisdom and
Candour,” by the same author, to explain Tiis own sentiments upon this
important subject.—
“ We now come to state what our views of the subjects really are :
<f We have before shewn, that man by nature has nothing in him that
is spiritually good, or good towards God. But in order to be made
meet for heaven, he must be made spiritually good ; that is, he must
love what God loves, and hate what God hates; and be, and do, what
God commands. Does God hate sin in all its branches ?he must hate
it too, and loathe and abhor himself for having ever committed it.
Does God love holiness ? he also must love a holy God, and holy exer-
cises, and holy affections ; and must so love holy things, as to make
them the continual objects of his most earnest pursuit; in relation to
everything that is holy and heavenly. 1 the same mind must be in him
that was in Christ Jesus.’ Has God required him to come as a weary
and heavy-laden sinner to Jesus, and to live altogether by faith in
Christ, for wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemp-
tion ; and to glory, not in any human strength or goodness, but wholly
and exclusively in the Lord Jesus Christ ? the man’s mind must be
brought to this, and Christ must be exceeding precious to him in all
these points of view; yea, he must * determine to know nothing, and to
rejoice in nothing, but Christ and him crucified.’ These views and these
principles must not rest as mere notions in the head, but must be wrought
into the heart and exhibited in the whole of the life and conversation.
“This change far exceeds the power of fallen man. Whatever
powers you may be pleased to invest him with, they fall very short of
this. A semblance of these things he may put on; but he cannot form
them really and truly in his heart. This is the work of the Spirit of
God, who is promised to us for this very end; 1 A new heart will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you ; and I will take away the


stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh ; and
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
and ye shall keep my commandments to do them* (Ezek. xxxvi. 26,
27.) As to the mode of effecting this great work, we have already
observed, the Spirit is not restricted ; but whenever it is truly effected,
then we say, that the man is born again, and born of the Spirit; and
the change that has taken place within him, we call the new birth.
“ Now the question is, Whether this he the new birth or not ? and
whether we do right in insisting upon it as necessary to man’s salvation.
In answer to this, we reply, not only that the Scriptures call this
a new birth, a new creation, a being born of God, and a being born of
the Spirit, but that an experience of it is predicated of all who are in
a state of favor with God now, or shall find admission into His king-
dom hereafter. 4 lf any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, or a
new creation,’ says the Apostle: 4 old things are passed away; behold,
all things are become new.’ And our Lord, with repeated assevera-
tions, says to Nicodemus, 4 Verily, verily, I say unto thee. Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.’ (John hi, 3 5.)
“These declarations of our Lord to Nicodemus are peculiarly
strong; because the import of them cannot with any appearance of
reason be explained away. Some indeed have endeavored to explain
this of baptism; but I wish that those, who think it can bear that
construction, would see what sense they can on that supposition make
of the whole context. Let us suppose for a moment that baptism is
the new birth, and that baptism was the point which our Lord so
strongly insisted on ; why should our Lord, when explaining and en-
forcing his first assertion, so carefully distinguish between water-bap-
tism, and the operations of the Holy Spirit; 4 Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit , he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God ?’ Here, admitting that he insisted on
the necessity of being born of water, he insisted also on being born of
the Spirit, in order that he might convince Nicodemus that he spoke,
not of an outward and carnal, but of an inward and spiritual, change.
Again—how can his subsequent explanations apply to baptism ?On
the supposition that he speaks of a spiritual birth, his reasons are
clear and forcible ; 4 that which is born of the flesh, is flesh;’ and
therefore unfit for a spiritual kingdom ; but 4 that which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit,’ and exactly suited to that kingdom which he was


about to establish. Again —If it were baptism of which he speaks,
what connexion has that with the wind, ‘which bloweth where it
listeth,’ and which, though inexplicable in some respects, is invariably
and infallibly to be seen in its effects ; If it were baptism, it would
blow, not where the Spirit listeth, but where the parents and the
minister list: and as for its effects, they are for the most part visible
to no human being. Moreover, how could our Lord with justice ask
Nicodemus, 4 Art thou a master in Israel, and knowest not these
things ?’ Nicodemus might have well replied, 4 Yes, lam a master in
Israel, and yet know not these things : for how should I know them ?
Where are they revealed ? What is there in the writings of Moses or
the prophets that should have taught me to expect so much from bap-
tism ? God required the circumcision of the flesh as you do baptism ;
but he required the circumcision of the heart also : and, if there be a
spiritual change of a similar nature required of us under your dispen-
sation, and that be the thing which you call a new birth, then I confess
I ought to have had clearer views of these things, since they were
evidently inculcated in the Jewish Scriptures, and were represented
also as particularly characterising the Messiah’s reign.’
“ As some distinguished characters are very strong and
positive upon this point, we think it not improper to enter somewhat
more fully into it.
“ If by the term regeneration they meant an introduction into a new
state , in which the baptised persons have a right and title to all the
blessings of salvation, we should have no controversy with them.
“ If they meant that all adults, who in the exercise of penitence
and faith are baptised into Christ, have in that ordinance the remission
of their sins sealed to them, and the Holy Spirit in a more abundant
measure communicated to them, we should not disagree with them.
u If they meant that infants dedicated to God in baptism may and
sometimes do (though in a way not discoverable by us, except by the
fruits) receive a new nature from the Spirit of God in, and with , and
by that ordinance, we could cordially join with them.
“ But they go much farther than all this.
“ With some we hope that there is really an error of judg-
ment, arising from the strong things which are spoken of baptism in
the Holy Scriptnres. They do not consider, that, when it is said,
4 Repent, and be baptised for the remission of sins those words were


addressed to adults, who had just been informed that Jesus was the
Christ, and that, if they believed in Him, and became His disciples,
their sins should be blotted out. Expressions of this kind were highly
proper as addressed to adults ; but afford no ground for the idea, that
the rite of baptism is the new birth.
“We are no more disposed to detract from the honor of that sacred
ordinance than our adversaries themselves ;we admit, and beg you to
bear in mind our admission, that great, exceeding great, benefit accrues
to the soul from baptism. In many instances, where the ordinance is
really attended upon in faith, and prayer is offered up to God in faith,
we do believe that God bestows a peculiar blessing on the child ; and,
though we cannot ascertain that He does so, but by the fruits that are
afterwards produced, yet are we warranted from Scripture to believe,
that the effectual fervent prayer of righteous people shall not go forth
in vain; and that ‘ whatsoever we ask, believing, we shall receive.’
But even from the ordinance itself we may consider great good as
arising to the soul; since, as in the case of circumcision, the person is
thereby brought into covenant with God. The Israelites, as a nation
in covenant with God, were highly privileged; for I to them,’ as the
Apostle says, 1 belonged the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants,
and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises.’
(Rom. ix. 4.) The same, I doubt not, may be justly said of all that
are baptised ; indeed, we doubt not, but that our Reformers had that
very passage of Scripture in their eye, when in our baptismal service
they instructed us to thank God for having regenerated the baptised
person by his Holy Spirit; and, in our Catechism, to speak of children
as by the ordinance of baptism ‘ made members of Christ, children of
God, and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven.’ These expressions
are doubtless strong ; and so are St. Paul’s expressions respecting the
benefits of circumcision; and every blessing which he asserts to have
been conveyed by circumcision, we may safely and truly apply to bap-
tism. By the very admission of persons into covenant with God, they
are brought into a new state , have a right and title to all these privi-
leges ; and by the exercise of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ they come
to the actual possession of them.
“ But the chief source of the fore-mentioned error is, that men do
not distinguish between a change of state and a change of nature .
Baptism is, as we have just shown, a change of state: for by it we


become entitled to all the blessings of the new covenant; but it is not
a change of nature. A change of nature may be communicated at the
time that the ordinance is administered; but the ordinance itself does
not communicate it now, any more than in the apostolic age. Simon
Magus was baptised; and yet remained in the gall of bitterness and
the bond of iniquity, as much after his baptism as he was before. And
so it may with us : and is an infallible proof, that the change, which
the Scriptures call the new birth, does not always and of necessity
accompany this sacred ordinance. As the circumcision of the heart
did not always accompany the circumcision of the flesh, so neither does
the renovation of the soul always accompany the outward rite of bap-
tism, which shadows it forth; and if only our opponents will distinguish
the sign from the thing signified, and assign to each its proper place
and office, there will be an immediate end of this controversy.”
Launceston t
Dowling, Printer, Brisbane*streeL
