

11
iiii ii ifF
•; " !!
;; :: •• ••
/Tt t x T7
GD 1 11 hj Gy I!
:: •• " v
;; ;j •• ••
ENCHANTED
i II II •' II
EVENING
•• •• II
•• •• mm mm
II *1 *• "•
II "• •• II
** •• •• ..
* * •• •• M
•• •• ■■ ..
51 1! ;j ••
•• •• II ;;
II II •• ••
•* •• II II
:: :: ::
li II !i jj
I ii BY ii ii
BETTY PATERSON
iiii iiii
jj jj AND jj jj
•. •• •• ••
G. HERMON GILL
|| || . Melbourne: jj ||
OSBOLDSTONE & CO. PTY. LTD. IIII
:| || Printers and Publishers || ||
Asas-a
jpaieen


iqjt-o
YOUR BOOK
This is YOUR Book, your very own.
Written for you and you alone.
Where you may walk and talk and sing
Within the Magic Fairy Ring.
When it is opened by your hand.
You’ll find yourself in Fairyland,
Where you may wander as you will
And be like Babs, or, p’raps, like Bill.
(You’ll meet them later). You’ll be led
With them by Woolly Wonder Ted
To meet the Sailor, Theodore.
With Gen’ral Tompkins, and lots more
Of Little Folk who here do play
Where life is happy all the day.
Where Fairy Princess with her wand
Plays with Sylvester by the pond.
And Santa Claus you’ll hear discuss
The “Why” of Philip Platypus.
(He’ll tell you how he came to be
A Bird and Beast and Fish all three).
Whilst Percy Softfur’s magic dish
For dinner gives you what you wish.
(It’s easy done, he’ll show you how.
So read it, please, and start right now).
And whether girl or whether boy.
I wish you happiness and joy.
You’ll find them both if you just look
Within the leaves of this . . . Your Book.


Jr J*%tW *-'
fetlTj —-
■pfutKaOrt
Page 3


The Enchanted Evening
BY
Betty Paterson and G. Hermon Gill
H! . . . Babs and Billy stood quite still, and their
little hearts beat quickly. For there was a light
showing under the drawing room door, and every-
body else was in bed. Who, then, could it be?
“P’raps it’s a burglar,” said Babs. She was rather
frightened, and wished they had stayed in bed, instead of
creeping downstairs to try and catch Father Christmas. Billy
held her hand tightly. He felt he just had to be brave.
There seemed to be a great number of people in the
drawing room, all speaking at once. A loud voice kept
shouting, “Fall In! Fall Out!” and a gruff one was saying,
“Yo, Heave Ho! Belay, Me Hearties!” and a very high-up,
squeaky little one was crying, “Oh! Where are my gum
leaves? Where arc my gum leaves, please?” Then suddenly
a deep, kind sort of voice said, “Come along, children. Come
along. I shall have to be going soon.”
Billy opened the door just the teeniest, weeniest bit.
Page. 4


lr 7/6/
The first thing the children saw inside was a woolly dog.
He was a black and white woolly dog, and had been sniffing
under the door, as little black and white dogs do, and when
Billy opened it, the little dog tumbled over, topsy-turvey, in
his surprise.
He quickly scrambled to his feet again, and, with his
tongue sticking out, he began to bark, “Woof! Woof! Woof!
Woof!” A woolly sort of bark.
“What a funny bark!” said Billy.
The woolly dog was so angry that he stopped barking,
and, still keeping his tongue out, said: “It’s not a funny bark.
IBs a woolly bark, ’cos I’m a woolly dog. I’m Ted, The
Woolly Wonder.” And suddenly he began to sing
TED’S SONG.
I’m a little woolly pup with a wild and woolly growl,
When the harvest moon is up I’ve a dismal, woolly howl;
I greet strangers in the dark, if they come around the place,
With a wild and woolly bark, and then after them I chase.
Though I never eat or drink, I am always fat and full;
Soap and water make me shrink, ’cos I’m made and stuffed with wool.
I have woollen button eyes and a little woollen nose,
And I’m coloured with fast dyes from my head down to my toes.
And my name is Ted! Ted! Ted! from my toes up to my head.
“I think you’re so clever,” said Babs, when he had finished.
“Why?” asked the woolly dog whose name was Ted from
his toes up to his head.
“To sing with your tongue out,” said Babs, “though it is
a bit rude.”


“I always have my tongue out,” said the woolly dog whose
name was Ted from his toes up to his head. “I sleep with it
out, and wake with it out; I play with it out and work . . .
“Here! Here! Here!” said a voice. “Who are these young
people?” It was Father Christmas, and really, for Father
Christmas, he looked a little bit cross.
“Well! Well! Well!” he said, before the children could
speak. “It’s Babs and Billy. Both of you should be in bed.
Page 6


Klren suddenly found themselves in the
[uite a crowd of little folk,
pas a sailor, called Theodore, in a round
md wide trousers; and a marching soldier
i a red coat and a busby, called General
Henry Tompkins; and a native bear,
called Percy Softfur; and a very pretty
dolly, called Sybil Claire, with
bright pink cheeks and china
blue eyes, and the loveliest
ress * Sylvester,
\ green coat;
\ \ y- \ and a Fairy
star on her forehead,
and a long white wand,
was a very funny-looking
animal—a sort of mixed-up
Tut! Tut! .... Hum! .... Dear Me! .... This is very
serious.”
“Oh! Please, Father Christmas . . . .” began Babs. But
Father Christmas turned and walked quickly up and down the
room, in his long boots and fur-trimmed red coat, stroking his
beard and muttering, “Very Serious! Very Serious Indeed!”
“Now you’ve made him cross,” said the woolly dog whose
name was Ted from his toes up to his head, and a lot of
voices called, “He’s cross. Father Christmas is cross.”
Page 7


animal, like a little bit of everything. And he was called
Philip Platypus, Made of Unbreakable Felt.
“Oh!” said the children. And then Billy, who felt he had
to be bravest, because he was a boy, said, “Who are you?
And what are you doing in our drawing room?”
It was Theodore the Sailor who answered, and he said,
“We’re the Christmas Tree Toys, and you shouldn’t see us till
to-morrow, so you’ve made Father Christmas cross. Heigho!
Heigho! Heave Ho! Me Hearties!” And he danced a hornpipe,
and then he said, “Come on, you lubbers, let’s have a chantey.”
And they all sang, Theodore the Sailor being the solo singer.
It went like this, and, as they sang the chorus, they all
pretended to haul on a rope:—
THEODORE THE SAILOR’S CHANTEY.
First Verse.
Theodore: “We’re the Children of The Christmas Tree,
Chorus: Yo Ho! Yo Ho!
Theodore: There’s Sybil Claire as well as me,
And Gen’ral Henry Tompkins, he
Is bold and brave as he can be,
And that not very brave, you see.
Chorus: YoHo! Yo Ho! Heave Ho!
Second Verse.
Theodore: And Woolly Wonder Ted’s with us,
Chorus: Yo Ho! Yo Ho!
Theodore: With Little Philip Platypus,
Who is a sort of Omnibus,
All filled with birds and fishes, plus
Some animals mixed in a fuss.
Chorus: Yo Ho! YoHo! Heave Ho!
Here the children noticed that General Henry Tompkins
had stopped singing in the chorus and was looking very sulky,
and, before Theodore the Sailor could start the third verse,
he suddenly shouted, “Halt! Halt!” in a very loud, fierce voice
—very fierce indeed.
Everyone looked at him, and Theodore the Sailor asked,
“What’s the matter, General? What do you mean by ‘Halt’?”
“I mean ‘Stop!’ ” said General Henry Tompkins, crossly.
Page 8


“Then why don’t you speak properly?” said Theodore the
Sailor. “If you want people to stop, you should say, * ’Vast,
there! ’Vast Heaving! Bela-a-a-a-ay!’”
Theodore the Sailor called out that last word in a very
loud, gruff voice. It was what he called his “tops’l halliard
voice.”
“I don’t know all your common sailor talk,” said General
Henry Tompkins.
“You don’t know anything,” said Theodore the Sailor.
There was an awkward silence, and everybody felt very
uncomfortable.
“I do wish you wouldn’t quarrel,” said Babs.
Then they all started talking at once, except Fairy
Princess, who had gone over to Father Christmas and was
speaking to him very earnestly, running beside him as he
walked up and down.
“Silence!” called General Henry Tompkins, suddenly.
“Silence in the ranks! Fall Out! Fall In! As you were!”
“What’s the matter nowV ’ asked Theodore the Sailor.
“You’re not to say I’m not very brave,” said General
Henry Tompkins.
“Why not?” asked Theodore the Sailor.
“Excuse pie, Sir,” said Babs to General Henry Tompkins,
hoping to change the subject, “but why are you always
marching?”
Everybody burst out laughing, except General Henry
Tompkins, who went very red. The woolly dog whose name
was Ted from his toes up to his head laughed so much, that
he rolled on his back on the floor, his legs waving in the air.
“That’s just it,” said Theodore the Sailor, when they
stopped laughing, wiping the tears from his eyes. “Why is
he always marching?”


Page 10


“I’ve told you before,” said General Henry Tompkins.
“So that I can march after the enemy, or.”
“March after the enemy, or,” said Billy, wonderingly.
“What do you mean?”
“Or march away from them,” said Theodore the Sailor.
And they all laughed again, except General Henry Tompkins,
and he cried instead.
“Oh, dear!” he sobbed. “It’s not f-f-f-f-fair. I have to
m-m-m-m-march away sometimes. ’Cos if the enemy
c-c-c-c-caught me they might knock my head off, and then it
would have to be stuck on again with a m-m-m-m-m-match.
I’m only made of wood, and Tin all hollow inside. How would
you like to have your head stuck on with a match?” he asked
Billy.
“Not at all,” said Billy. And Babs said, “Tm sure you’re
very brave, really, you know,” which quite bucked General
Henry Tompkins up, and he sang this song, first calling out,
“Silence in the ranks” several times.
“It’s called, ‘A Soldier Brave,’ ” he said.
GENERAL HENRY TOMPKIN’S SONG.
A soldier brave am I,
Pm bound to do or die,
The Enemy just quakes with fear
If he should know that I am near,
And I will tell you why.
It’s ’cos I’m very bold
(Or so I have been told),
As in my regimentals dressed
With medals painted on my chest,
My little gun I hold.
And when the battle’s done,
(Of course. I’ve always won).
Ah! How the girls run after me,
They all of them adore, you see,
The Man Behind The Gun.
I’ve a fine little gun, and a coat all red,
Stripes down my trousers and a busby on my head.”
“Ahoy! Ahoy! Ahoy!” interrupted Theodore the Sailor,
rudely. “March after the enemy, or.”


Everybody burst out laughing, and poor General Henry
Tompkins broke down and sobbed as though his little heart
would break.
“800, hoo! 800 hoo!” he went. “Boo! Hoo!” And the
next thing was he cried so loudly that Father Christmas came
over to see what had happened.
“He keeps picking on to me,” sobbed General Henry
Tompkins, pointing to Theodore the Sailor.
Father Christmas patted him on the shoulder. “Cheer up,
General,” he said. “Be a little man. Run away and play
soldiers.” And he wiped General Henry Tompkins’ eyes with
his pocket handkerchief. And when the little fellow was quite
happy again, and marching along, saying, “Left, right! Left,
right!” as merry as could be, Father Christmas turned and
spoke to Babs and Billy.
“Fairy Princess has begged me to forgive you this time,”
he said. “So, if you promise never to try to catch me again,
and promise never to tell anybody about seeing me to-night,
I’ll let you stay here.”
“Oh!” said Babs and Billy together. “Thank you so much,
dear Santa Claus. We promise. We promise.”
“All right,” he said. “Now, have you met all the toys?
Here’s Ted the Woolly Wonder Dog, and Sylvester the Jumping
Frog, and Philip Platypus, and . . . .”
“Oh!” interrupted Babs, pointing to Philip Platypus, “isn’t
he funny?”
“Do you think so?” asked Father Christmas. “I think he’s
rather nice. Of course,” he said, blushing a little, “I was very
young at the time, and .... But would you like to hear
about him?”
“Oh! Please! Please!” they cried. So, seating himself in
a chair, and lifting Babs on to one knee and Billy on to the
other, while the toys sat around his feet in a circle, Father
Christmas told this story.
Page 12


m s*. Sr ’HjB
j \ ~'Jr jjfcrj y~4— I"■ j V <!*
THE STORY OF PHILIP PLATYPUS.
“Many, many Christmases ago,” said Father Christmas,
“when I was quite a little boy at school, I used to wonder what
I’d be when I grew up, and it was then that I thought of
Father Christmas.
“We lived—my mother and I—right up at the North Pole.
It was very cold—all ice and snow—and every day, as soon


, r - 4'mam t n
I I
Page 14


as school was over, I hurried home, and, after cutting some
fire wood off the North Pole for my mother, and helping with
the washing-up, I worked hard making toys.”
“Did you have a beard then?” asked Billy.
“Of course!” said Father Christmas. “I’ve always had a
beard. But you mustn’t interrupt. Well, the bears and seals
used to give me fur, and the birds gave me feathers, and my
mother gave me chips of wood that she didn’t want from the
fire. And I made all sorts of lovely toys. But,” and here he
shook his finger solemnly, “I neglected my home work, and did
not learn my geography properly.”
He stopped and sighed. “Ah!” he said. “That was how
little Philip Platypus came along.
“Well, for two or three Christmases everything went well.
I made toys all the year, and at Christmas time I took them
round the world. I took them to little Dutch children, and
English children, and French children, and—oh! to all sorts
of children.
“It came to the fifth Christmas. I had left school then,
because the business had grown so big, and I had a workshop
in my mother’s back garden, down by the ice-bergs. It was
late on Christmas Eve, and I had just finished taking all the
toys round the world in my reindeer sleigh.
“I had unharnessed and tied the reindeer up to the North
Pole for the night, when I saw another sleigh coming along,
drawn by the funniest-looking animals I had ever seen. They
had long back legs and long thick tails, and they bounded along
faster than Snowdrop, my pet reindeer, could go at his fastest.
I found out later that they were called kangaroos.
“In the sleigh were two little black children—a boy and
a girl.
“‘Please, are you Mister Santa Claus?’ they said. ‘We’ve
come for our toys.’


X Jp Jr
JT \J , '*2
«<jA^
“Well, you could have knocked me down with a snowflake,
I was so surprised.
“ Who are you?’ I asked. ‘And where do you come from?’
“ We’re little Lallewoon and Jaga Jaga, from Woodoodoon-
derongopilly, in Australia/ they said. ‘And, please, we’ve come
for our toys.’
“So I said to my mother, ‘Do you know a place called
Woodoodoonderongopilly in Australia?’ And she said, ‘There
wasn’t such a place when I was at school.’
“And an Eskimo came along, and I asked him. But he’d
never been to school at all, so he’d never heard of it.
“And I asked polar bears and walruses and seals and
birds, but none of them had ever heard of Woodoodoonderongo-
pilly in Australia. But at last I met a fish, who knew another
fish, who had an uncle whose aunt had a friend whose little
sister had gone out swimming one day without her mother,
Page 16


3
place. But a shark had
chased her, so she had
swum away for nights and
nights, and days and days,
until at last she got home
again. And the shark had
given her such a fright,
that she never went back.
“Well, as soon as I heard
that, I called on this fish.
She was quite an old lady
when she was a very little
girl fish, and she’d got lost.
And she swam for days
and days and nights and
nights, until at last she
came to Australia. She
had been top of her class
in geography at school, so
she knew it at once. And
she said it was a very nice


fish by this time, but her memory was good and she could
i ead without her g’lasses, and she still knew her geog’raphy.
And she showed me her atlas, and there, sure enough, was
Australia. And, all through not knowing my geography, I had
missed it, and had no toys for Lallewoon and Jag’a Jaga and
their little brothers and sisters at Woodoodoonderongopilly.
When I told them, they cried like anything.
“So I thought Fd have to do something. But I hadn’t a
toy left—only some scraps—a duck’s beak, some fur and some
swans’ feet.
“‘Oh! Please! We want our toys! We want our toys!’
sobbed Lallewoon and Jaga Jaga. So I set to work, and out
of the scraps I told you about, I made Philip Platypus.
“And I think,” said Father Christmas, “I made quite a
good job of him.”
“He looks rather funny,” said Babs. “He looks, somehow,
as though he’s made of all odd bits. He wouldn’t be fair
playing Birds, Beasts and Fishes, would he?”
Then she blushed, for Philip Platypus was looking at her
rather crossly, and she knew he had overheard what she said.
So she added, quickly, “Of course, I think he’s pretty, too.”
“And I think,” said Billy, “he’s like a Noah’s Ark. He
seems to have a bit of everything in him.”
“And I think,” said Philip Platypus, loudly, “you’re both
very rude.”
“Now! Now! Now! Now!” said everybody, while the two
children felt dreadfully ashamed.
‘ Don’t you worry about him,” whispered Theodore the
Sailor, in his gruff voice, to them. “He doesn’t mean anything.
Only he’s rather touchy. You see, he doesn’t know whether
he s fish, flesh, fowl or good red herring, as the saying is, and
it is rather worrying, I suppose.”
Page 18


Sear
Tprr€f
Page 19


Just then another squeaky little voice made itself heard—
the one that Babs and Billy had heard first of all when they
were outside the door. “Oh, dear!” it said. “Oh, dear! Where
are my gum leaves? Where are my gum leaves?” And they
saw that it came from Percy Softfur, the little native bear.
“I haven’t had a bite since lunch,” he wailed, “and I’m a?rful
hungry.”
Everybody looked anxiously round, and at last Sylvester
the Jumping Frog said, “Oh! Here they are! Here they are!”
And he pulled a small picnic case from under a chair. “You
must have put them there by mistake, Percy,” he said.
“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” said Percy Softfur, “I’m so glad you
found them. Really, I’m quite starving.” And, putting the
case on the floor, he opened it, and sitting down in front of it,
he took out a neat little plate and knife and fork and spoon,
tied a serviette under his chin, and then sat thinking deeply.
“What shall I have?” he said. “Now, let me see. For
lunch I had Irish stew, so I think I’ll have steak and onions
now.” And he pulled out some gum leaves from the case and
put them on the plate. But, just as he was picking up his
knife and fork to start eating, he altered his mind.
“No, I won’t,” he said; “I’ll have .... Now, let me see.
I’ll have some Spanish cream.” And, putting down the knife
and fork, and returning the gum leaves from his plate to the
case, he took out some others—that looked exacfty the same—
and picked up his spoon to eat them instead.
But before he could start he’d altered his mind again.
“Spanish cream is rather rich,” he said. “Perhaps I’d better
have something light. I know—a ham sandwich.” And he put
the second lot of gum leaves back into the case and took out
the first lot once more.
“But,” whispered Babs to Sylvester the Jumping Frog,
“they’re all the same. They’re only gum leaves. Why does he
Page 20


rail them steak and onions and Spanish cream and ham
sandwiches? . . . .”
“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” complained Percy Softfur, inter-
rupting her. “I don’t feel a hit like a ham sandwich. I don’t
know what to have.”
“Why don’t you shut your eyes and pick, Percy?” asked
General Henry Tompkins, “like you usually do.”
“I suppose that’s the best way,” sighed Percy Softfur.
And, putting all the gum leaves back in the case, he closed his
eyes and stirred them all up with the spoon, and then put a
spoonful on his plate. Then he opened his eyes and said, “Dear!
dear! Hard-boiled eggs! My most favourite dish.” And he
started to eat them up, oh, ever so quickly.
“But,” said Billy, “they’re gum leaves. They’re all gum
leaves.”
“That’s right,” said General Henry Tompkins. “That’s all
he eats. He never eats anything but gum leaves. So he
pretends they’re all the things he likes, and so he always
enjoys his food.”
Percy Softfur ate awfully fast, and he finished his plate
of gum leaves in no time. As soon as it was all gone, he said,
“That was the loveliest pork pie I’ve had for a long time.
Dear! Dear! It was delicious.” And, wiping his face, plate and
spoon with the serviette, he put them all—except his face, of
course—back in the picnic case and shut it with a click.
“It was a nice pork pie, was it, Mr. Softfur?” asked Babs.
“It wasn’t pork pie,” answered Percy Softfur. “It was
gooseberry fool.”
“Oh!” said Babs.
“You see,” explained Percy Softfur, “I eat anything I like
that way.”


“Which way?” asked Billy.
“This way,” said Percy Softfur. “This is the way to eat.”
THE WAY TO EAT.
Now, if your porridge nasty seems,
Pretend it’s strawberry ice creams.
And if the cabbage you just hate ,
Imagine it is chocolate.
If fat is stuff you can’t abide,
Think it has raspberry jam inside.
Potatoes which you cannot eat,
Are really quite an extra treat,
If you, for instance, call them cake.
And if you will the trouble take,
When you find soup is hard to start,
To say, “My word! I love this tart,”
You will enjoy all food, I’m sure,
And send your plate along for more.
“Do you really think all those things when you’re eating
gum leaves?” asked Billy.
“Of course I do,” said Percy Softfur. “You see, I can’t
eat anything hut gum leaves. Pm made that way.” He sighed.
“I get rather tired of them sometimes, so I pretend Pm eating
something Pm very fond of,” He reached out for the picnic
case again. “Dear me! I feel quite hungry. I think Dll have
some ice cream.” And he pulled out some more gum leaves
and ate them.
“I’ll try that the very next time I have to eat porridge,”
said Billy.
“So will I,” said Babs, “when Pm given cabbage.” She
thought, “I think Pll call my cabbage ‘raspberry jam,’ ’cos I
love that.”
“And Pll call my porridge ‘chocolate guns,’ ” said Billy, “or
Page 22


perhaps ‘aniseed balls.’ I wish it was breakfast now. What a
lovely game!”
“My word!” said Sylvester the Jumping Frog, “I wish it
was breakfast, too. Gosh! I’m hungry.”
“Please, Mr. Sylvester,” said Babs, “what do you like for
breakfast?”
“Oh!” said Sylvester the Jumping Frog, “I like all sorts.”
“Licorice allsorts?” asked Billy.
“No, just all sorts —flies and slugs and mosquitoes and
“Ooooo!” said Babs. “I suppose that’s why you jump, so
as to catch flies?”
“No,” said Sylvester the Jumping Frog. And he pulled
a handkerchief from his pocket and blew his nose very loudly.
“No,” he said, as he put the handkerchief away again, “I
learned to jump because of Beatrice.”
“Who was Beatrice?” asked the two children.
“She was a butterfly’s daughter,” answered Sylvester.
And, pulling a small folding toadstool from under his coat, he
unfolded it, stuck it on the carpet, and sat on it; and, taking
a very tiny banjo from his pocket, he pulled the handle of it
out long and started to play and sing.
SYLVESTER’S SONG.
When I was a tadpole in a pool,
A smart little tadpole going to school,
With yellow nose and a waistcoat white,
My tail all long and my eyes all bright,
And swam all day in the sunny water,
I fell in love with a butterfly’s daughter.


She was a caterpillar, Oh! so sweet,
With shiny shoes on her tiny feet,
A nice striped dress and a pretty hat,
She made my heart go pit-a-pat-pat.
We learned our lessons and we played together
Through the bright Spring days and the sunny weather.
But then we came to a day, alas!
When Beatrice was not there at class,
Her little sister came with a note
For teacher, here’s what her mother wrote,
“She’s gone away, but she’s coming back soon,
At present she’s in bed, she’s a sick cocoon.”
Here Sylvester the Jumping Frog stopped singing, and,
pulling out his handkerchief, blew his nose loudly again.
“You can imagine how I felt,” he said. “I went round as
soon as school was out, but the doctor wouldn’t let anyone see
Page 24


Page 25


her —not even me.”
on his knee, silent.
He sighed deeply, and sat, with his banjo
“What happened then?” asked Babs, softly.
So Sylvester took up his song again.
SYLVESTER’S SONG AGAIN.
The days went by and I felt quite sad,
From being quite good, I grew quite bad.
The worst little tadpole in the pool,
I got expelled in disgrace from school,
All because my Beatrice had gone away
I grew naughty and naughtier ev’ry day.
Then at last, on a fine Summer morn,
As I sat feeling, Oh! so forlorn,
Down in the dumps and in deep disgrace,
I saw my Beatrice going the pace,
She was flying above me in the sky,
A lovely white and golden butterfly.
I called out loud, “Oh, Beatrice, Dear,”
But she, alas! she could not hear.
For she was talking, and laughing, too,
With a dragon fly, all silver blue.
And I couldn’t get out of that dreadful pool
’Cos I hadn’t learned to jump, through leaving school.
Here Sylvester the Jumping Frog stopped singing again,
and, pulling out his handkerchief, sobbed into it, the tears
running down his face.
“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” he cried.
“There! There! There!” said Theodore the Sailor, blowing
his nose loudly with a big, red-spotted handkerchief. “There!
There! There! There! There!”
Page 26


At last Sylvester was sufficiently recovered to go on, and
he took up his song again, which makes the third time.
SYLVESTER’S SONG THE THIRD TIME.
I was so sad that I nearly cried,
And to jump I tried and tried and tried,
But you can’t make omm’lettes without eggs.
And you can’t jump if you haven’t legs.
So I stayed in the pool with my waistcoat white,
While the other two flew in the sunshine bright.
Sylvester the Jumping Frog stopped singing again, and
he pulled out his handkerchief, but it was only because he was
going to sneeze. So he sneezed awfully loud, and then put the
handkerchief back.
“It’s living in marshy ground that does that” said General
Henry Tompkins, behind his hand, to Babs. “It’s frightfully
unhealthy.”
But Sylvester the Jumping Frog looked quite cheerful, and
when he started his song the fourth time, it went like this,
with quite a merry little tune.


SYLVESTER’S SONG THE FOURTH TIME.
Then a Fairy came by singing,
All the heather bells were ringing,
And the little spiders swinging
On their webs all in the sun,
And the dewdrops all were shining
On the honeysuckle twining
Round the pool where I was pining
At a-missing all the fun.
Then I felt, down in the water,
That my tail was growing shorter
(As, of course, it really oughter
When the Summer has begun),
And my little legs were growing,
And
But Sylvester’s voice grew fainter and fainter, and the
room grew darker and darker; and, slowly, all the toys and
Father Christmas and everything faded away, until the only
thing left was the Fairy Princess.
She grew brighter and brighter, and smaller and smaller,
Page 28


and she seemed to float off up in the air, until she was just
like a bright star, and as she went she sang:—
I wave my Fairy Wand on high,
To sweep the cobwebs from the sky,
And put the stars out, one by one,
And say, “Another day’s begun.”
Then voices, accompanied by soft, sweet music, were heard
singing faintly, the sound of which was just like the whisper
of the wind in summer, and the rustle of leaves, and the tiny
tinkle of running water over pebbles in a brook, and the
whistling of birds in the trees.
Another day of love and joy
For every little girl and boy.
And happy thoughts, which are the seeds
Of those sweet flowers, kindly deeds.
Happy thoughts, kindly deeds.
Babs and Billy, Babs and Billy,
Close your eyes. Tightly! TIGH T L Y!
Pi incess grew smaller and smaller, and vanished.
The singing and music stopped, and all was dark. Babs and
Billy closed their eyes awful tight.
When they opened their eyes again it was morning. They
were in bed, and the sun was streaming through their window
and Mummy and Daddy were standing in the room.
“Hello, kiddies!” they called. “Good morning. And hurry
up and see who’s waiting for you in the dining room.”
When they got downstairs they could hardly believe their
eyes.
ATM y ied Babs - “ There ’ s Ted the Woolly Wonder Dog,
and Sybil Claire and . . .
"General Henry Tompkins,” called Billy, jumping up and
d°" n f° r joy, ‘ and Theodore the Sailor and ”


I r
v /
f W fe:\
Page 30


“And Sylvester,” said
Babs, excitedly, “and Philip
Platypus .... and”—and
she picked him up in her arms,
just as you see her on the cover of this book—“here’s dear
Percy Softfur.”
But the toys said nothing then, because Mummy and
Daddy were there; and toys never speak in front of grown-ups,
unless the grown-ups speak to them first, and then they might
answer. But Mummy said, “Hello! Have you children found
names for them already?”
“Yes!” said Billy. “You see . . . .”
"Hush!” said Babs, putting her finger to her lips,
warningly. “It’s a secret.”
“Well,” said Daddy, “hurry up, you two. Never mind your
secrets. Now, who’s for a good plate of porridge this
morning?”
“I am,” called Billy. “But Pm going to pretend mine’s
aniseed balls.”
“And Pm going to pretend mine’s hard boiled eggs,” said
Babs, giving Percy Softfur a great big hug, “’cos they’re Percy’s
most favourite dish.”
Page 31


Printed and Published
by
OSBOLDSTONE & CO. PTY. LTD.
Temple Court Place, Melbourne, C.l.
