

THE
COMPULSIVE CLAUSE
IN THE
Prefent Act of Insolvency,
FULLY CONSIDERED.
WITH ITS
Good and Bad Confequences plainly
Bated, and clearly anfwered.
To which is annexed,
PROPOSALS
FOR THE
More Effectual Recovery of Debts,
AND
Without ARRESTS.
WITH the
EVILS of GOALS for Debtors
Reasonably Exposed.
LONDON:
Printed for R Davis, the Corner of Sackville-Jlreet y Pic-
cadilly, and C. Henderfon at the Royal-Exchange. 1761.
[Price One Shilling.]




THE
COMPULSIVE CLAUSE, &c.
AS there is no People in the Univerfe
that can boaft of Laws fo wife and
wholefome, as thole which belong to
this Kingdom; fo is it impoflible for any
Government, befides our own, to be capable
of inffituting any that will fo generally be-
nefit every individual, from the Prince to
the Peafant.
This will not appear too bold an Affer-
tion, when we come to confider the Tex-
ture and Compofition of our Legiflature,
whofe Excellency confifts in being the com-
plicated Voice of all the People. But as
this Voice would, in the grofs, be fo boi-
fterous and confufed, as not to afford a
Diftindion of their feveral Inclinations, a
few is feleded by the univerfal Choice, and
impowered to ad for the general Benefit.
So that, if I may be allowed the Expref-
fion, our Legiflature is happily formed of
the very Effence of the whole. Under fuch
a well-regulated Form of Government, no-
thing lefs than Happinefs can be expeded |
B and,


and, as far as human Laws can provide,
Happinefs is enjoyed. Yet we are not to
infer from hence, that the bell: Law that
ever was enabled, rnuft give Satisfaction to
every Individual; on the contrary, thofe
mult of courfe be difgufted with it, who
were the Caufe of its being made; for
as all new Laws arife from fome prefent
Inconvenience; fo, in molt cafes, is it the
Male-conduCt of fome Part of the People,,
which renders fuch a Law necelfary.
The prefent Asi oj Injohency is a wife
and glorious Law; the compulfeve Clanfe
therein contained, with its Appurtenances,
is worthy the Humanity and Generofity of
thofe who compofed it. Yet, realonable as
it appears to the fenfible and thinking Part
of the World, there is not wanting Com-
plainants of its Inconveniencies. To thefe
therefore I addrefs the following Pages, in
hopes of explaining the certain good that
mull inevitably attend it; tho’, at prefent,
thofe Advantages may not appear in their
favourable Colours. I fuppofe, my Reader,
if you have had a Debtor, that has
taken the Benefit of this ccmpulfive Claufe y
you are impatient to tell me what a Lofer
you are by it:
Here


Here is a Man , fays you, that would, per-
haps, have paid me every Shilling he owed me ;
but either by ill Advice, or by his own bad
Principles, has thrown himfelj into Goal, in
order to cheat me, and the reji oj lots Creditors',
and now we Jkall not have a Farthing oj our
Money.
A hard Cafe indeed, as you reprefent it;
but let us examine into its real Merits,
and we {hall find it, perhaps, exhibit a dif-
ferent Complexion. I’ll fuppofe you to be
in Trade, as being mod likely to have ma-
ny Debtors; as fuch I {hall diredt my Dif-
courfe to you: You complain, that your
Debtor, by throwing himfelf into Goal,
hath cheated you; and, under the Sandion
of the Ad of Parliament, has annihilated
the Debt due to you; and fo, of courfe, this
muft be a very bad Ad that can enable a
Rogue to cheat honeft People in this man-
ner j this is the Subftance of your Griev-
ance ; to which give me leave to anfwer a
few Words.
In the fir ft Place, I am perfuaded that no
Man, in his Senfes, can be fond of Con-
finement 5 and this Debtor of your’s would
never have gone into a Goal, if his Circum-
ftances would have permitted him to have
B 2 > kept


kept out of one, you have already explain-
ed as much in other Words; by telling u§,
that you will not be paid a Farthing of your
Debt. So that the Truth appears to be, that
the poor Mali, Dy giving up his All, turns
out not able to pay a Farthing in the Pound;
how then could he be reafonably expected
to pay Twenty Shillings ?
He is a Cheat , or elfe he might have paid
People.
To this the Anfwer may be very fhort;
prove him fo, and then you may glut your-
felf with Revenge, by having him bang’d ;
for if he has not given up his All in the
Schedule he has fworn to, but fecretes to
the Value of Twenty Pounds, this very ACt
of Parliament condemns him to die with-
out Benefit of Clergy. But you have more
Objections.
1J this Man could not have cleared himfelf of
his Debts by this means , Time might have pro-
duced a favourable Turn in his Affairs y and he
might have been enabled to difcharge them to
every bodys Satisfaction.
That fuch a Turn in any, Man’s Cir-
cumftances, is not impoflible, I will ad-
mit ; but at the fame time mulf fay,
the ProfpeCl is very diftant, For, a Man
involved in Debt, not having wherewithal
to


to difcharge any Part of it, has but fmall
Hopes of making a Fortune; even his
Creditors, whofe Intcreft it fhould be to
lend him all the Affiflance in their Power,
purfue a quite contrary Plan, and one by one
are, perhaps, weekly putting him into the
Hands of Bailiffs. There are not wanting
Examples of this kind; and a poor Debtor,
befides being taken out of his Bufinefs, by
which he fhould be enabled to pay his Cre-
ditors, has expended in one Year, byCofts
of Writs, Civility-money to Officers, and
Spunging-houfe-bills, more than half his
Debts amounted to. Thus, inftead of be-
ing able to pay his Creditors, he is involved
ftill deeper in Debt, with the hopelefs Re-
flexion, of never being out of the clutches
of Bailiffs.
Would any Man, poffefs’d of the fmallefl;
Share of Humanity, defire a Fellow-crea-
ture to exifl, for I cannot call it live, in fuch
a dreadful State of Anxiety. No, I will
not entertain fo mean a Thought of any
thinking Being; it muft be for want of Con-
flderation, that any Creditor fhould value
Money at the Price of torturing a poor
Debtor, who is willing, though he may not
be able, to fatisfy him.
He


He deferves it all , has brought it on himjelj.\
'has been idle , extravagant , has gamed,
and [pent his Creditors Money luxu~
rioujly.
Thefe Charges, I mull: own, are very
heavy ones, and what I will, by no means,
undertake to vindicate ; yet this I mud ob-
ierve, that when a Man is reduced in the
World, nothing is more ufual, than to im-
pute the whole Catalogue of Crimes to the
already too unhappy Objed; and where
common Report once tells Truth, fhe will
be found mod evidently falie ten times.
' Admitting the word: part of the Charader
to be true, are we for Faults, perhaps in-
advertently committed, for ever to remain
unforgiven ? Is no Punifhment fufficient to
atone for the Heinoufnefs of the Tranf-
greffion ? Mud a IVlan, becaufe his Youth
has been led away with Follies, and, as
Shakefpear exprefles it, the Heiday of the
Blood, too powerful for his weak Reafon,
meet with no grains of Allowance ?Is it
not Punifhment enough for him to en-
dure the Stings of his adverfe Fortune,
that, while fome People have been ac-
quiring Edates, he has perhaps been foolifh-
-3y fpending one, beddes his Creditors Mo-
ney ?


ney ? I lay, for a Man to find himlelf in-
volved in thefe Circumdances, without the
Power of Redrefs, is Punilhment great
enough for the Crime, efpecially confider-
ing he might, all that Time, by too
frequent Examples, be made to believe,
that what he was doing was merely in-
nocent.
Hitherto we have fuppofed the word::
You, that you will not have a Farthing;
and I, that he has likewife differed every
Branch of his Finances to be entirely ex-
haufted. But this is not the Cafe of one in
fifty, who takes the Benefit of this Claude ;
unlefs it be thofe whofe fmall Dealings,
and low fphere in Life, render them un-
worthy of Notice ? I mean the Notice of
a Creditor, not that of the Legiflature, who
knows the Worth of the Labour of the
meaned: of the People, and the Mifchief,
as well as Folly, of tying their Hands. But
thofe of the higher Claffes in Trade and
Bufinefs, very few of them, when the Cre-
ditors come to chufe Afiignees, and indpeft
the Schedule, but whofe Debts due to them.
Stock in Trade, &c. will afford a Dividend,
and feme of them not inconfiderable; and
here let me make one Obfervation, which,
, though


though very ftriking, is yet overlooked, or
mifunderftood by the Majority of diffatif-
fied Creditors.
If a Debtor’s Schedule is likely to pro-
duce a large Dividend, his taking the Bene-
fit of this Claufe is not fo much repin’d at,
but gives more Satisfaction, than he whofc
Schedule affords little or nothing; whereas
there is great Probability, that he, who was
not fo abfolutely reduced, might have been
enabled, fome time or other, to have paid
Twenty Shillings in the Pound; while he
who was fo indigent, was almofl: under an
Impoflibility of ever anfwering the Creditors
Expedation; yet, in this latter cafe, the
Claufe is generally thought on with the
greateft Acrimony ; and why, Mr. Creditor ,
becaufe the Law has fettled the Account be-
tween you to your Difadvantage. I will
tell you exaCtly what the Law has done;
it has convinced you, that you are not worth
fo much as you imagined, though you are
really, and, botici Jide t as rich now as you
was before your Debtor made Oath to his
Schedule; for it is not a Balance ftruck in
a Leidger , that enriches the Owner of it to
the Amount of that Sum.
This


This Claufe will he the Ruin oj Trade ; for
People will be fearful of giving Credit ,
as the Debtor has it in his Power, at any
Time he pie a/es i to fhake off his Debts.
The former Part of this Objection is fu-
perficial enough, though very frequently
made ufe of by Trades-people ; but how
Trade can be ruined by People being cau-
tious, I muft own, I cannot clearly com-
prehend. I rather think it will be a Help
to Trade, as idle People, of no Character or
Principles, by this means will meet with no
Credit, and, by being fhut out of Trade and
Healings, muft betake themfelves to lome
kind of Labour; fo that Trade will be, in
a manner, weeded, and confequently grow
and thrive in its proper Soil; then fhould
there any take the Benefit of this Claufe,
his Affairs will afford an Opportunity of
fcrutinizing his Condudl, on which will de-
pend his future Credit: Having it in his
Power, at any time he plcafes, to fhake off
his Debts, can be no Lofs to a Creditor; for
if the Debtor is able to pay him, he will re-
ceive his Money, as I will not fuppofe that
one Man in ten thoeland will take the Be-
nefit of this Claufe, in order to cheat his
Creditors, and get hanged for it; which
q muft


mull be the Cafe, if he is able, though not
willing, to pay; and as to any Debtor tak-
ing the Benefit, when there is not a Necef-
fity for it, is juft as much as faying, that a
Man will find Profit and Pleafure, in leav-
ing his Habitation and Family, to take up
his Refidence in a Goal, in order, after a
Time, to draw down the Frowns and Con-
fute of the World upon him, and by giv-
ing all the Effects he is Mafter of, be turn-
ed out deftitute, for the flow moving Figure
of Scorn to point at.
It ‘will make him carelefs at leaji ; and he
may lavijlo away his Creditors Money
without Fear oj a Goal, which might
alarm and deter him.
I acknowledge a Goal to be a moft
dreadful Profpedl; yet would be glad to
know, what Difference there is, in the
Comparifon, between a Prifon, and being
ruined ? ( the Term for lofing all a Man
has) efpecially to a Perfon in eafy Circum-
ftances, as I will fuppofe a thoughtlefs,
carelefs Man to be moftly. I believe one
may venture to pronounce, that, in fuch
cafe, neither of thefe Terrors are thought
of, as the leaft of them would appear in a
Light fufficiently fhocking.
This


This wile and good Asi of Parliament ,
was not made for this Ibrt of Debtors only,
but others Hill more to be pitied j luch as
thole who are reduced by inevitable LolTes
and Misfortunes, who cannot furely be De-
linquents defending perpetual Confinement ;
others there are worthy our highell Efteem,
who, perhaps, from no other Motives but
thole of Humanity and Companion for their
Acquaintances in Dittrefs, have become
bound for them, laved them from the gap-
ing Jaws of Deltrudion, and have been
paid, for their generous Commileration, in
no other Coin, but being left in the lurch.
Should fuch Men, inllead of meeting with
Rewards fuitable to their Merit, undeferv-
cdly endure a Life of wretched Imprifon-
ment ? God forbid. Give them Liberty,
and remove them from the difmal Scene
of beholding their Fellow-creatures in Mi-
fery.
They JJmld take more Care.
You fay right, and thefe very People arc
now of your Opinion 5 but it is too late,
unfortunately for them; their youthful
Difpofitions were Strangers to Care; and,
no doubt, but by this Time they fufiiciently
regret it.
C z We


We Jkall he ruined at this rate j Jo
many oj our Debtors every Week going
into Goal to clear fhemfelves, that , what
we have been toiling jor many Tears , we
Jhall loje in as many Weeks .
If your Induftry in Bufmefs has only
produced fuch imaginary Wealth, I foiefee
you will, in a fhort 1 ime, be as rich as the
Man with his Bafket of Glaffes, who was
to have married the Emperor’s Daughter ;
yet you are as near having your Money
now as you were before j for, if your Deb-
tor is an honeft Man, he will not fail to
to pay all his juft Debts, if it fhould ever
lie in his Power, notwithftanding any Law
to excufe him ; and if he is a Rogue, you
are as near as you were j for he would ne-
ver have paid you at all, though you might
have had the Satisfaction of keeping him in
a Goal. You are now only having your
Gold refined from the Drofs, and a few
Weeks will leave you in the Poflefiion of
what is pure. Do not have quite fo bad
an Opinion of the World as to imagine,
every Body that owes any thing will go to
Goal; have but a little Patience, and the
hurry of this fort of Bufinefs will be over.
There


There may be more Objections made,
and Defeats complained of, than what we
have here brought on the Carpet; but thofe
being chiefly in the Attorney’s Practice, and
not fo popular as thefe, the Reader is not
troubled with them.
PROPOSALS for the more effeßual , Re-
covery of Debts , and 'without flrrejis, end the
Evils of Gcals for Debtors.
Liberty is a Gem fo incflimable to Man-
kind, and fo tenacious are they of it, that
it is always the laft T reafure they can be
made to reflgn. Xdiftory furnifhes innume-
rable Examples to confirm it; but it is no
where fo highly valued, fo much proted-
ed, and confequently fo much enjoyed as it
is in this happy Ifland. What glorious
fh'uggles did our Anceftors make to preferve
it? And, let me add, that their Sons, how-
ever degenerated in fome other refpeCfs,
have always, in this grand Point, fhewed
themfelves worthy the Name of Britons.
If Liberty is then fo precious, how jealous
fhould we be of the fmallefl Infringement
of it ? Care enough, I mufl: fay, we take
of 'our National Liberty , yet Part of the
Com-


Community are undefervedly in a worfe
Jtate than Slavery. The brave and generous
are confined by the mod daftard and bale,
ior no otacr Reafon oftentimes but their
being ignorant of fo much Craft and Kna-
very, as thofe they may happen to deal
with. I am not without Hopes, that the
Power of imprifoning each other for private
Healings, where no Fraud appears to be
defigned, fhall be utterly abolifhed. The
Compuljke Claufe in the Ad: of Parliament
lately made for infblvent Debtors, affords
good Room to expect the Approach of fo
happy a Period. As the Law never means
to punifh involuntary Crimes; it is therefore
imreafonable to imprifbn a Man for Debts*
which he might always have intended to
pay, though his Abilities might be wanting
to do it. Prifons for Treafon, Felonies, and
many temporary Occafions, muff be abfo-
lutely neceffary ; but thofe for Debtors, in-
stead of remedying the Evil, I cannot think
but they augment it.
It is a common Obfervation, that Goals
are Schools and Nurferies for all man-
ner of Wickednefs. And as one fcabby
Sheep mars the whole Flock* fo one Fel-
low,


low, of bad Principles, fhall fpread his Con-
tagion through every Part of the Seminary:
what facilitates this Corruption, is the De-
Ipair of the Honefl, who, finding that Vir-
tue has not faved them, are willing to make
an Exchange for other Rudiments, which
may, perhaps, as they think, anfwer their
Purpofe better. No Wonder then if they
fhould be generally abandoned, and a Goal
thought to be the fitteft Place for them,
which mull certainly be one of the great
Reafons for continuing them in Ufe. But
were they demolifh’d, without doubt there
would be an Encreafe of good Morals in
the People. Goals are fo hateful and
noxious to Men, who were never confined
in any, that the very Keepers of them, ex-
cept perhaps the Head of all, are obliged,
for that Reafon, to have been Prifoners them-
felves, to render their Polls tolerably agree-
able ?
What Numbers of thefe Gentry are em-
ployed in keeping many thoufands, of other-
wife ufeful Members of the Community, in
Idlenefs? And what greater Numbers of
Bailiffs, and their Followers, Runners, Set-
ters, and other vile Clalfes of Wretches,
Pells


Pefts of Society, are bulled in providing Food
for this devouring Monfter; all whom muft
otherwife have taken themfelves to ufeful
Labour, which would contribute to the pub-
lic Emolument ; a Goal is a heavy Burden
to thofe without, who fupport, by their
Labour and Induftry, this numerous Body
in a State of Stagnation.
How elfe can they fubftft, who have not
a Farthing of Money, or a Rag of Cloaths,
but what are provided for them. Victuals
and Drink they muft be fupplied w r ith, and
fomebody muft work for it. Had they
Conveniencies procured for them, whereby
they might apply themfelves to fome kind
of Manufacture, the Defpondency that
hangs about them, would deprive them of
the Will to do it; for, in their Condition,
’tis Matter of Indifference to them, whether
they perifh, or be continued in Confine-
ment j beiides thefe Inconveniencies to the
Public, there is another great one likewife
attends it, and indeed contributes not a little
to the keeping up the Number in the Goals!
which is, that the Prifoner, when he ob-
tains his Liberty again, having, by long
Confinement, been fo habituated to Idle-
nefs.


ilefs, that he is rendered very unfit for
Society, and, infiead of following the Bufi~
nefs he was brought up to, (as moft of
them are of fome Trade or Employment)
he endeavours to put in praftice the Lefibns
he learned while at one of the JJm < verfities i ,
(their cant Word for Goals) and thus he be-
comes a Nufance to all honefi, induftrious,
well-meaning People.
I Ihould hope this is not always the cale $
but if it is not, I think little elle is to be ex-
pected ; and he mult be a Man of very
good Senfe indeed, befides his upright Mo-
rals, who could live in fiich a communica-
tive Climate, and not imbibe the Manners
and Cuftoms of the People: It may be ur-
ged, and with a fhew of good Reatbn, in
behalf of this Inftitution, that it brings the
Idle and Carelefs to a right Senfe, and by
being pinched in this manner, they will be
made doubly induftrious. That the Defign
of it is fuch, is readily granted 3 but I am
afraid few Examples can be brought to
prove fuch good Effects from it. lf the
manifold Inconveniencies of Poverty, after
experiencing better Circumfiances, will not
fpur them to Induftry, fmall Hopes remain
that any thing elfe will t however idle they
D are.


are, they muft certainly be of more Ufe to
the Community when at large, than they
can poflibly be when fhut up in Confine-
ment.
It may not be improper, or foreign to
our purpofe, juft to take a curfory View of
of the feveral fteps, by which a Man be-
comes qualified for Imprifonment, and, of
courfe, is ufhered into it.
To fpeak of the Debtor, othewife than
as a Rogue, would appear, to the Majority
of the World, as an Impeachment of their
Underftandings. As, to be fure, all honeft
Men punctually difcharge their Debts; and
he that will not pay his without being arreft-
ed, is certainly a Rogue in grain. So far
the World: But let us examine this Afler-
tion a little clofer; and, perhaps, we may
find fome Reafon to fhew, that it is not al-
together orthodox. We will, for that pur-
pofe, fet out with this Rogue, as he is call-
ed, and trace him through his various cheat-
ing Turns and Windings, till we have pur-
fued him to the End of his Villainies. In
the firft Place then, this Boy ferved out his
Apprenticeftiip with the ftriCleft Honefty
and Sobriety, to the entire Satisfaction of his
Mafter


Matter, as well as every Body elfe concern-
ed. When he was out of his Time, his
Friends fet him up with what came to his
Share. He minded his Bufinefs, and did
not fail to work hard at it himfelf; this way
of Life gave him but little Opportunity of
looking into the World. He found he want-
ed a Help-mate, and happened to fix his
Eyes on his Maid Sally, who, befides her
natural Induftry, (which was no fmall Re-
commendation to Atkins) Ihe had Charms
enough for any Man. Be that as it will,
he faw nothing deficient in her : He was
not conceited enough to think he merited a
Girl with a Fortune j and therefore con-
cluded he could not do better than to make
himfelf happy with Sally. When his
Friends came to underttand he was mar-
ried, the Womens Curiofity naturally led
them to pay the Bride a Vifit $ when, in
the Courfe of their Tea-table-chat, great
Fault was found with this and with that
Part of the Furniture; then Madams
Cloaths were not thought falhionable, or
good enough, together with abundance of
other Faults of this kind, which Mrs. At-
kins thought, to be lure, were abfolutely
neceflary to be repaired, in order to appear
like


like other People. In (hort, ffie was foon
metamorphofed from the Ample, innocent,
uleful Wife, to an expenfive Company-
keeping Gentlewoman j fhe had Children
apace, and the Lyings-inn were not the lead
extravagant. The good Man kept plod-
ding on, and though his Trade encreafed,
yet Caffi foon began to run ihort; he found
it difficult to pay Bills as they came round;
many of his Cuftomers were backward in
their Payments, and fome of them never
paid at all. The Truth is, he had unlucki-
ly fell in with a very indifferent Set of Cuf-
tomers, which put him, contrary to his In-
clinations, on difagreeable Shifts and Con-
trivances ; he would promife a Creditor his
"Money that Day feven-night; but when the
Creditor came, according to Appointment,
he was not at home.
Thele, and fuch like Evafions pradliled
more frequently, foon acquired him the
Character among them, of a Man not of
his Word, and, according to the trading
Phrafe, he was grown very long winded.\
Mr. Crofs , one of his Creditors, more impa-
tient than the reff, though he had Thou-
fands more than he employed in Trade, or
indeed had any real Occafion foiv applies to
C 2 an


an Attorney to have him arrefted. The
Man is perhaps hard at Work, or is other-
wife attending his Calling, and nothing en-
gross his Thoughts fo much, as how he
fhall raife the Money for Mr. Crqfs. He
has, but that Moment, been confulting his
Wife about it; he expeded, ere now, Seve-
ral of his Cuftomers would have paid him
their Billsj but they plead their Excufes.
He depended on Mr. Promije that very
Morning; but he is not come, as he faid
he would. What’s to be done ? Thus,
while the poor Man’s Brains are on the Rack,
he is all on a hidden feized by a couple of
Bailiffs. A mod; horrid Surprife !
Let us leave him a while, and take a Sur-
vey of the vile Principles, which brought
him into this wretched Situation, and why
he will not pay his Debts without being
arrefled, and carried to Prifon; though, up-
on fecond Thoughts, I fhall not flay to
make Obfervations on this Man’s cafe a-
lone, as there are Thoufands that occupy
the feveral Goals, equally as great Rogues
as himfelf. Yet I cannot help feeling the
Anguifh of Mind that mud: afdid a Man
juft feized by Bailiffs, though it mud: be
far fhort of what he really endures. I will
fuppofe


flippole him to have as brave a Heart, and
as bold a Courage as ever Englifhman had,
nor would he be afraid of twice-two Men
on any other Occafion; yet the Horrors of
being deprived of his Liberty, dragged from
his Habitation, with the Thoughts of what
his poor Wife mull fuffer, ftrikes fuch a
Damp on his Spirits, and fo deeply dejeds
him, that he is quite enervated ; it is not
improbable that he may feel the Impreffion
as long as he lives. Great Pity it is that
Man fhould be thus prey’d upon by his own
Species; and, what is ftill more aggravat-
ing, that he muft give himfelf up into the
Hands of thofe, who, of all Mankind, he
can but deleft. The unhappy Wretch is
hauled away to the Bailiff’s Dwelling, com-
monly, and very properly, called a Spunging-
houfe: Where, if he expeds to be ufed with
the leaft Civility, he muft bleed very free-
ly ; that is, muft treat the Family, efpeci-
cially Madam , with Plenty of Wine:
Should he fail to behave with the greateft
Extravagance, by them termed only gene~
rous, he will foon perceive his Miftake, by
the cold and imperious Behaviour of every
one of the Houfe towards him; his Bed
will be little better than one of Two-
pence,


pence, and his Room a lively Pidture of the
Original.
After having the Key turned on him,
and he is a little recovered, he afks for a
Porter, to fend to his Friends, and acquaint
them with his Misfortune, in hopes of their
Affiftance, by coming to bail him out. He
is told, the Porter is not juft then in the
W aybut it will not be long before he
comes. A Bottle of Wine. Blefs me,
where can this Fellow of a Porter be ? Ma-
dam has fent all over the Town after him :
At laft, in about five Hours, he makes his
Appearance: —— Here, run away diredtly
with this Letter, and make what Haffe you
can back. Stay, take this Glafs of Wine
firff, fays Madam j and then, addreffing
herfelf to the Prifoner 5 for he is al-
ready honoured with that Epithet, let
him be whom he will. lf you will be
ruled by me, do not fend for your Friends
to-night; for it is ten to one if they are to
be found at this time •, befides, the Office
mufl be fearched before my Hufband can
take Bail j and the Office-hours are o-
ver, fo that if your Bail was here now, it
would be of no Ufe, till the Office opens
in the Morning. Thefe Reafons flop the
Letter


Letter to the intended Bail ; but his Wife
fhould know where he is, as flue will won-
der what is become of him. Here a Di-
lemma interpofes ; but Madam, with her
friendly Advice, yet with a fpunging View,
(for all Delays are fure Benefits to her, as
they contribute to keep him the longer)
tells him, that as he will be at home in the
Morning, fuppofe his Wife fhould be kept
ignorant of what has happened, fhe will be
lefs uneafy, than to be acquainted with it.
It is agreed : The Porter is difmifs’d with
a “ To be fure to be here betimes in the
Morning.”
The Evening containing nothing remark-
able, Atkins goes to Bed. You have feen
Garrick in Richard the Third, I prefume,
and, without doubt, have admired him on
the Couch : How exquifitely fine does he
reprefent the Agonies of a troubled Mind
in Sleep! Alas! Atkins as much out-did
him in the Fire and Spirit of his Adion, as
Garrick would you or I, were we to at-
tempt it. He wakes in ftarts, and longs
impatiently for Day-light; it at lafi: ap-
proaches, and ferves but to difcover more
and more liis difmal Situation; he is atten-
tentive to the leafl Noife, in hopes the Fa-
mily


mily is dining ; but they are not fb wake-
ful, their Evening Draughts operate in
found Sleep all the Morning ; if not, it is
not their Budnefs to rife too foon.
At lad: they are up, and he is down
flairs with them; the Porter is not come
yet, but is expected every Minute 5 the ne-
gligent Rafcal arrives, in a great budle, a-
bout Noon, w r ould have been here before,
but a Mailer of his fetched him out of Bed
to a Job that mud then be done ; however,
he goes away immediately with the Letters
to the Friends. Ido not think there is the
utmoft Neceffity for relating the Condition
of Mrs. Atkins all this while, how ihe ipent
the Night, &c. as all that may be pretty
cafily imagined; befides, it may fave us an
aking Heart.
The Porter returns about three; Mr. Broa-
dy is not at home ; but Mr. Slow will come
prefently, he is about a little Bufinefs, but
will come as foon as he can. Between five
and iix arrives his intimate Friend Mr. Slow ;
but with a Coolnefs in his Countenance
poor Atkins had never obferved before. I
fent for you, Friend Slow , to lend rpe your
Hand to help me out of this Trouble. I
likewife fent for Mr. Broady , who, lam
E fure,


fore, will do any thing to ferve me; but, it
lecms, he was not at home. Brcady y re-
plies Slow , to my Knowledge was at home;
for he had, but juft before, been telling
me about you. About me, fays Atkins ,
how was it poffible he ftiould know any
thing of it, when I did not fend to any one
Soul before the Porter went to him. How
he came to know it, anfwered the other,
was by a ftrange Man coming to tell him,
that, if you owed him any Money, now
was the Time to get it; for that you was
at the Spungi?2g-houfe , and about to bail this
Adion ; and then your Defign was, to dif-
pofe of your Stock, and make off. I have
not that Opinion of the Man neither, faid
Broady: Well, if it was my Cafe, faid the
Stranger, I would enter an Adion againft
him, and fecure myfelf. Broady made no
Reply, and the Man went away. Who
could it be, I wonder, that fhould owe me
fo much Spite and 111-will, fays Atkins: I
do not know, that ever I attempted fo much
Differvice to any Man in my Life.
Whoever he was, you may be fore he
was no Friend ol yours, fays the other;
and he might have faid, with equal Truth,
th at he was no Friend to any Man living,
being


being nothing elfe but a Runner to the Bai-
liffs. Then he was a Friend of theirs.
—Far from it; he would cut all their
Throats for a Shilling. What Service
could it be to him to tell thole unnecellary
Lies, only to take away a Man’s Character
and ruin him ?—The Bailiff gave him Half
a Crown for that Job. —What Advantage to
the Bailiff? He had the Man already at his
Houfe.—The Bailiff was fearful of his get-
ting Bail to this Adion, and being dif-
charged ; whereas, if more Writs were
lodged againft then the Difficulty of
procuring Bail might prove fo great, that he
would Hand a likely Chance of having him
fbme Weeks for a Boarder; for, however
difagreeable and expenfive it may be to live
in a Spunging-houfe, the Thoughts of a
Goal is fo dreadful, that nothing but the
forlorn Hope bears it any Refemblance.—ln-
deed, fays Atkins , I could never have
thought Mr. Broady would have turned his
Back on me in the manner he does; he for-
gets what a Friend I was to him at his firff
fetting out in the World ; but that’s paff,
and 1 mud: now rely on your Goodnefs, my
worthy Friend Slow, to get me releafed as
E 2 foon


fpon as you can : Suppofe you was to go to
Mr. Crofs, perhaps, by your Perfuafion, he
would give me a little Time. I know Mr.
Crofs too well for that, replies Slow , {baking
his Head, he fent a Man to Goal the other
Pay, and would not fo much as ftay a
Month for his Money, though he was of-
fered Security; then we mu ft give Bail,
fays Atkins ; but lam thinking who we can
have befides yourfelf, for there muftbetwo.
I can fay nothing to it, Mr. Atkins ; for my
part, if I had not made a Vow never to be
bound for any Man, even if he was my
own Brother, I would be one with all my
Pleart: Thefe Words {truck poor Atkins
fenfelefs, and a profound Silence enfued for
feveral Minutes, which at laft the poor fpr-
faken Wretch broke with as deep a Sigh as
ever came from the Heart of a Lover; but
whether through the fame identical Organs
I leave to the Decihon of the Learned. Mr.
Slow wifhed him well, and took his Leave.
It was now thought time to fend for his
Wife, who came with the youngeft Child
at her Breaft, and her Eyes fwelled almoft
out of her Head. Ye married People, who
inuft have a much livelier Idea of this tragi-
cal


cal Meeting than Language can exprefs, to
you I leave the Defcription of it ; yet one
Obfervation I muft make to you, that they
were both in the Prime and Vigour of Life,
and, confequently, their Paffions warm.
After flaying with him fome convenient time,
fhe returned home to leave her Child, in or-
der to go round among his Acquaintance to
try what could be done 5 but they had all
their Excufes, and fhe could not fucceed ;
fo came back with a heavy Heart to her Huf-
band, who had paffed the intermediate
Time much more at eafe than any of the
former, in Hopes of his Wife bringing him
fome good News. How gladly he received
her, the Tranfition of Sorrow at the Dif-
appointment, and what elfe paffed at this
interview, I fhall forbear relating, and only
inform you, that after this moving Scene,
he went to Goal. To defcribe him there,
would be a Talk too deep for my Pen, fo I
decline it.
An Apology.
That the Character of Atkins is low, lam
not only aware of, but it is the very Reafon
of making Ufe of it, as fuch is the Sort of
People


People which fhould be more Immediately
under the Care and Protection of the Le-
giflature, not only as being of more Ufe to
the Community by the Produce of their La-
bour, but as being lefs capable of reprefent-
ing their Sufferings, than thofe in a more
elevated Sphere. The honeftefi: Men are
not always endued with the brighteft Fa-
culties ; nor are thofe that acquire the moft
Money always of the bed: Principles.
That every body may have their Hands
at Liberty, I fhall propofe a Method in the
following Pages, which., for aught I fee to
the contrary, will anfwer all the Purpofes
of thofe crying Evils, Goals and Bailiffs.
As the former is indebted to the latter for
a very confiderable Number of its Students,
either mediately, or immediately, it will be
proper to enquire how this great Friend to
Confinement came into Being.
How long Arrefls for Debt have been in
Practice, and the Caufe of their firft Infti-
tution, I am not informed , be it when it
will, without Doubt the State of the Times
made them neceffary, or fuch a barbarous
Cuftom would never have made its Ap-
pearance


p Y arance in a Country famed for Liberty i
p. ihaps the Conqueror might bring it over
vsSth him; or whether it exifted here be-
fore his Time, I know not; nor is it very
material to know precifely the Century; it
is fufficient for us that it is fo long fince, as
not to be chargeable on the more en-
lightened Generations, unlefs the continuing
an inhuman Cuftom be equal to the hrft
Eftabhfhment of it. It favours very much
of Popery, as it is not improbable but fuch
Oppreffions might be encouraged to difpirit
the People, and adapt them to bear the
Yoke the better.—Old Cuftoms, while they
don’t feelingly annoy the Wealthy and
Great, but, inflead of which, give them a
Power over their Inferiors, are with great
Reluctance abolifhed 3 efpecially in fuch a one
as this, which, it is very probable, they
have no Idea of.
Leaving the Antiquity of this Cuftom to
the more Curious, let us apply to the Rea-
fons for making Ufe of it j and fir ft to that
of the Original.
The fecuring the Body of a Man for
Debt, perhaps, was only defigned for real
Debtors; I mean fuch who had been un-
doubtedly


doubtedly proved fo ; or where it was aj>
prehended a Perfon was about to abfcofid
with his Creditors Money; in thefe tvfo
cafes many at prefent think Arrefts not im-
proper j for the former, the Legiflaturfc has
wifely provided a Relief but then the Man
is liable to be arrefted, carried to Goal, and
and muft there lie a confiderable Time be-
fore he can be benefited by this good Law :
whereas all thefe Inconveniencies, as well as
Creditors Money, might be faved, by fum-
moning the Debtor to appear, or by giving
public Notice in the Gazette, as is to Bank-
rupts } but where a Debtor is defirous of
taking the Benefit of the Claufe in the Adi
of Insolvency, why may he not be permit-
ted to give in a Schedule, and be fubjedt to
attend, and be examined, as Bankrupts are,
without the hurtful and expenfive Method
of going through the prefent Form of Im-
prifonment, &c. There are not wanting
plaufible Reafons againfi; this Argument }
but whether when duly confidered with the
imprifoning a Man of untainted Morals and
unwearied Confcience, the fpending in
this Ceremony what fbould be divided
among his Creditors, befides, perhaps,
de-


depriving the Debtor of the great Advantages
of his future Welfare, by tearing him from
his Bufinefs, by which he might live and
fupport his Family comfortably hereafter j
and poflibly in Time pay his Creditors the
full twenty Shillings, for an honeft Man
will not fail to do this. They muft be fub-
ftantial Reafons indeed that can ballance
thefe and more Inconveniences. As to Perfons
about to abfcond, again ft whom no Debt
has been legally proved, doubtlefs they
have a Claim to Liberty till fuch Proof be
made, efpecially if we can point out a Way
in which the Creditor may as effectually get
his Money as by having him arrefted ; but
this is become fo favourite a Pradice with
Creditors and their Attorneys, that they
muft not be expeded to relign it very
readily.
I muft do them the Juftice to acquit them
of the Charge of wantonly purfuing this
Method without any other Reafon but Cru-
elty ; it has its Advantages to them attend-
ing it, which are thefe: In the firft Place,
a Creditor, by having his Debtor in Cuftody,
gets this Preference of all the Many other
Creditors, that if he has as much Cafh by
him as will pay the Debt, he readily dif-
F charges


charges it, in order to obtain his Liberty j
or if not the whole Debt, he may probably,
if the Creditor will agree to it, pay all he
has in Part, and comply with the Creditor’s
Terms for the Remaining, which other*
wife he would not have done; then fays
you it has its Ufe, for it makes the Debtor
honefter than he would elfe have been :
Not at all, this Money which is now paid,
and the Remainder agreed on, is as much
the Property of the Man’s othei Creditors,
as it is of this ; and the pre r ent Creditor has,
by taking this Advantage, not only Iqueez’d
the Debtor to his great Prejudice, but to the
unfair Injury of all the other Creditors.
If he fhould have no Cafli by him, the
Creditor hill gets fome Advantage by a better
Security in the Bail, whom the Debtor, by
fometimes deferting, though he might ne-
ver have been able to pay the Debt, leaves
liable to pay it themfelves. Thefe are
the chief Motives of Arrefts to a Cre-
ditor ; the Attorney has his Intereh in it
alfo, by its being more expenfive to the
Debtor, and confequently more profitable
to him than that of Copies. Are thefe
Views ftridtly generous ? TheirHonefty muff
not be queflioned, becaufe they have the
San&ion


Sandion of the Law, which is often made
ufe of contrary to the Intent, to bad purpofes.
Were it not to get undue Preferences, and
the Hopes of the Debtor abfeonding, that
the innocent Bail muft pay the Debt,
with the Attorney’s good private Reafons,
there would remain but one Inducement
to countenance this cruel Method, and that
is, fecuring the Body of the Debtor, that he
may be imprifoned, if he does not pay the
Debt, or abide by the IlTue of the Trial at
Law: As a valuable Conlideration of which,
I here propofe to the Creditor a better Secu-
rity than the Body of the Man, which is
his Goods and Chattels: How to obtain this
Security, the following is a Propofal.
If a Creditor has Reafon to think, that his
Debtor has Intentions to abfeond, in which
Cafe only there can be any fair Excufe for
an Arreft, let him apply at the Sheriff’s
Office, which may be properly authorized
for this purpofe, where he is to make Affi-
davit, that he has juft and real Caufe to
believe, that the Debtor will abfeond with
a Defign to defraud him of his Debt, before
the Time of the Retun) of a King’s-Bench
Writ j which Oath being adminifter’d, with
F 2 Affida-


Affidavit to the Debt, as ufual, which muff
be Ten Pounds, or upwards, a Summons
to be granted, worded in the plained Lan-
guage, with which let the Debtor be per-
fonally ferved, to appear at the Office afore-;
faid, on the next Day by Eleven-of the
Clock in the Forenoon, then and there to
confefs a Judgment to the Plaintiff, with
Stay of Execution till the firft Return of
Writs in the Court of King’s-Bench, pro-
vided there be a Fortnight’s Time between
the Day of the Date of the Summons and
the Return of the Writ j then the Judgment
to be void, on Payment of Debt and Cofts,
or finding gcod Security, that the Defend-
ant try the Caufe, and abide by the Iffue
thereof, or elfe to remain in full Force and
Virtue.
When the Plaintiff enters into Poffeffion
of the Defendant’s Goods and Chattels, and
it appears to him, that there is not fufficicnt
to anfwer his Debt and Cofts, the Landlord
being firft paid, as ufual, then the Plaintiff
may employ the next two inhabiting Bro-
kets, who are to take an Inventory, and
make a Valuation upon Oath ; if it fiiall
appear on fuch Valuation, that there is not
fufficient to pay the Debt and Cofts, a Sum-
mons


mons to be ferved on the Defendant, or, in
his Abfence, left with the Office in Poffef-
iion, to appear, on the next Day, at the
Time and Office aforefaid, in order to the
furrendring his Effeds to the Ufe of his Cre-
ditors, in the fame Manner, and under the
feme Penalties, as Perlbns taking the Bene-
fit of the Aft of Infohency. But if he fhould
not appear to the firft Summons, Affidavit
muft be made of the Service, and then
public Notice given in the Gazette , for his
Appearance, and furrendring his Effeds, as
aforefaid 5 and, if he appears not to the laft,
the fame Steps to be taken, as in the firft.
Why he fhould give in a Schedule as a
Perfon taking the Benefit of the Aft of ln~
Johency , rather than as a Bankrupt , is to fave
the Expence that would attend the Method
of Bankruptcy , when perhaps all this Deb-
tor may owe, is not more than would de-
fray the Cofts of fuch Proceedings.
Thus the Plaintiff has a much fpeedier
Recovery of his Debt, or a better Profped
of being paid by Virtue of his Judgment,
than by an Arreft.
Debts under Ten Pounds, down to Forty
Shillings, may be recovered in another
County-Court, eftabliffied for that purpofe;
that


that Forty Shillings is too fmall a Sum for
the Cognizance of a fuperior Court, the
Conduct of our Anceftors, which we have
fo religioufly attended to in this Article, will
plainly demonftrate. How long Arfefts for
Forty Shillings may have fubfifted, I do not
know; but one may reafonably imagine it
to be fo early, that the Value of that Sum,
at that Time, might perhaps be equal in Va-
lue to Ten Pounds of our prefent Currency.
By continuing an antient Cuftom, the Mar-
jhaljea contains, for thefe fmall Sums under
Ten Pounds, the moft valuable People of
the Community, the Labourers.
There is no doubt but many weighty Ob-
jections may be made to what is herein
Vaid, and propofed, and many Amendments
made; however that may be, they do not
at prefent occurr to the Author, who has
publifhed his Sentiments as a private Sub-
ied, with a View of the public Good.
F I N I S,
