

PRICE THREEPENCE.
The British Empire
and Her Great War
WITH REPLY TO THE
MANNIX SECTARIAN CAMPAIGN
By PROFESSOR RENTOUL, M.A., D.D.
EMPIRE
SUNDAY
..1917..
PROCEEDS FOR RED CROSS
Reprinted from “The Messenger”
by
ARBUCKLE, WADDELL & FAWCKNER, PRINTERS
20-22 McKillop Street, Melbourne.


CHAPLAIN - GENERAL RENTOUL


The British Empire
and Her Great War
With Reply to the
Mannix Sectarian Campaign.
By PROFESSOR RENTOUL, M.A., D.D.
(Spoken at the Empire Service, Protestant
Alliance P'riendly Society of Australasia,
Assembly Hall, Melbourne, 20th May, 1917.)
“Do the duties of citizenship worthily of the
gospel of Christ.”—Phil. 1; 27.
“Free, and not using your freedom as a cloke
of wickedness, but as bond-servants of God.
Honour all men, love the brotherhood, reverence
God, honour the king.”—l Peter 11 : 16, 17.
Those are words of the two greatest of our
Lord’s Apostles, St. Paul and St. Peter.
A Christian’s Two Spheres of Citizenship.
A Christian man owes duty and service to the
“heavenly Kingdom,” that “Commonwealth”
(as Paul calls it) which is centred in Heaven,
of which God the Father is Sovereign and King.
Its spiritual love and laws come down from God,
and rule in our hearts, and shape the conduct
of our lives. “Act as citizens of the Kingdom of
God, in a manner worthy of the Gospel of
Christ,” who makes men free—free from con-
demnation, free from fear of man or death, free
from sin’s power, free from false religion and
its threats here or hereafter, free from priest-
craft and ecclesiastical despotism, free from the
plots and trickery of disloyal men. “Free,” but.


adds the Apostle Peter, “not using: your freedom
as a cloke of wickedness.” Prove your spiritual
citizenship by your citizenship in the civil
State, amongst your fellow-citizens, your duty
and service to your country which gives you
bread, and safety, and protection, and the sac-
red rights of civic liberty. “Honour all men;
love the brotherhood; fear God; honour the
King”—symbol of law and national life! If we
were citizens of a “Republic,” we should
equally be bound to honour its law and its civil
authority.
Reasons for Speaking.
I have come, at the request of your Society,
for three reasons. First, you are a Mutual
Benefit or “Friendly” brotherhood, organised
for sympathy and succour towards your mem-
bers when in evil fortune. That was the ground
•on which “Trade Unions” were first founded,
before they lost that noble claim on man’s re-
gard by changing into war-engines of political
.tyranny and civil strife.
Meaning of the Word “Protestant.”
Secondly, I come because of the great name
“Protestant,” by which your Alliance is called.
The kindred word “Reformation” is an earlier
and yet greater word. But the word “Protes-
tant,” interwoven, as it has been in history,
with the progress of all free learning, and with
the world’s scientific advance, and with the civic
and industrial life of the most enlightened mo-
dern nations, is a noble word, bright with splen-
did suffering and heroism.
It was first used as the name of the men who,
in a great “Diet” (1629), protested against a
Romanist decree forbidding national indepen-
dence in matters of religion, and prohibiting the
advance of the Reformation. That famous
“Protest” was based on three grounds—the
Word of God in Holy Scripture, the rights of
individual conscience in man, and the rights of
the civil State, formerly guaranteed, but after-
wards denied. (You see it was an old trick in


Germany to tear up “scraps of paper” which
had been deemed sacred and binding- docu-
ments.)
Those three truths, then, are meant by this
great name “Protestant” —(1) the affirmation
that God’s word and God’s Christ are higher
than dogmas of priests and ecclesiastics, or of
tyrant rulers ; (2) that the voice of man’s free
conscience in the light of God’s word is man’s
individual birth-right and highest rule of faith;
(3) that the civil State is free from the autho-
rity of Rome or of any external ecclesiastic
power, and that its citizens owe the State loyalty
and unselfish obedience in all civil affairs, and
ought, if need be, to dgje and die for it in hours
of danger. Those are three great things—meant
by this name “Protestant”—for the making and
defending of modern nations and of human
liberty. (I notice upon your programme two of
those three great truths, symbolical— God’s Word,
man’s spiritual claim of right, and the Crown
—the claim of country and nationhood, and the
flag of the British Empire and the flag of Aus-
tralia conjoined, with the faces of the British
King and Queen of this free British people,
keeping guard. And then in our hearts is the
third truth meant by the great word “Protest-
ant,” the voice and thrill of freedom, the free,
unchained, unfettered conscience of man, con-
senting to no spiritual authority save God.) So
that brings me to my third reason for coming
here, viz., because it is to commemorate “Em-
pire Day.”
The British Empire.
The word “Empire,” in its old Latin force,
had a tone of despotic sound. It has no such
force within British lands. It was first spoken
of England by the poet Edmund Spenser in
the great Elizabethan day, even before Scotland
was united with England in a broader Britain
under the Union Jack. It was the time when
England’s sea-rovers, Drake and Frobisher,
Raleigh and his half-brother Humphrey Gil-
bert, fared forth into the far seas, and began to


found the over-sea Dominions of the English-
speaking peoples—that wide-spreading Empire
of the British race by sea and land, which has
at last resulted in the politically strangest and
most beneficent, most splendid thing the world
has ever known—this far-flung sisterhood of
free, self-governing nations under the British
Hag, Canada, Australia, South Africa, New Zea-
land, thrilled with one young virile pulse-beat
and heart-beat of hopeful life, unified by one
always-strengthening bond of loving memory
and of unfaltering loyalty to the great, old,
heroic Motherland, Old she is in years, but
ever young in unshaken power and hope. Her
law and freedom and untarnished honour and
outstretched protecting arm across the ocean
and her watchful fleet are the safety and the
pride and confidence of us all. That blood of
British freemen runs deep and far. Even, if
the English-speaking Republic of the U.S.A..
sundered herself from the sway of the British
flag (when once there was a foolish king),
nevertheless America, that “chainless child” of
Puritan England, has inherited from Britain ‘all
her great memories of freedom, all her Parlia-
mentary and civic habits and passionate love
of liberty. To-day, in the most tragic struggle
the world has ever known for freedom, and for
the rights of man and of nationhoods—freedom
dearer than life—the United States of America,
once led on to liberty by the Englishman George
Washington, is standing beside the British
Empire in the one great cause —for conscience,
freedom, nationhood, God ! And even our once-
conquered vast dependency of India is gladly
sharing in the cost and pain of the Titanic con-
flict.
So Edmund Spenser, first poet of England’s
“Empire,” as his friend Raleigh was its first
colonist, sang of England’s “Empery,” wider
than the land and shores of England, and her
“hills and new pastures” and heritage the
“surges high” and her new “flocks and herds,’ 7
the “thousand fishes” and produce of the sea,
and the white-sailed ships of England that


wandered far across the ocean-fields which
Drake and Fobisher and Hawkins and Raleigh
and Gilbert and Sir Richard Grenville laid open
for the oncoming race of British men. And a
yet greater poet after Scotland was joined with
England sang that England’s destiny in the
world was to live and “make new nations.” Just,
in that same age, only a little earlier, William
Tyndale. with the charm and music of his
“rhythmic English speech,” had “done” God’s
Hebrew and Greek Bible into the language of
the English people, that even every plough-boy
in England might be able to read God’s word
for himself in his native tongue. They burned
him to death for that—the Ecclesiastics did—
but his dream came true. That also has gone
into the making of the freedoms and the great-
ness of the British peoples and Empire.
Britain the Maker of New Nations.
Now, on this “Empire Sunday,” that is the
central truth I wish to emphasise, viz., Britain
lives, and wherever the life of the British Em-
pire goes and spreads, she “makes new na-
tions.”
There is no time, nor is there need, to trace
the reasons for this in the past history of
England, and of the British lands and People.
The fact is enough for us. The parliamentary
and municipal liberties, the habits and customs
of self-government, the long struggle of town,
and burgess, and scholar, and patriot, and
martyr for freedom, aghinst the tyranny of
baron, and King and prelate, and, at a later
time, against Star-Chamber, and Act of Uni-
formity, and Stuart misrule, the long fight for
enfranchisement of the people and for just
laws—ever from Magna Charta onward, the
heroic suffering for civil and religious liberty,
all these forces and memories, borne across
the sea into the new lands, have created, wher-
ever the British People have come—a faculty
for “colonisation,” a capacity for self-rule, and
just law, and free self-government, such as no
other People have ever been able to learn or to
display.


No other people had the scope, the sea-going
skill and ocean-path for doing it. But, still
more, no other people seems to have the qual-
ities fitting them to do it. Wherever Germany
goes she must rule by brute force. She makes
no self-ruling colonies. Wherever Britons go,
they can found new nationhoods able to rule
themselves, guiding their own new destinies,
and all the time remembering the old Home-
lands from whose bosom, and freedom, and fos-
tering faith, and heroic struggle they came
forth.
Conversely, these new Dominions could never
have risen into such unhindered, wisely bal-
anced freedom of self-rule, but for the tolerant,
kindly, almost careless freedom of action
yielded so generously by the great mother to
her daughter-Colonies and States. Her daugh-
ter-lands are free, free in all their internal
affairs to rule themselves—free to go their own
way. Yet in heart and soul they are one with
the Motherland—the same weal or danger, the
same doom or victory, the same flag, the same
fleet, the same common destiny and fate. Great
Britain “makes new nations,” and she wins
them to herself. We speak of her as “Home.”
The Empire’s Reward.
She has her great reward. Her hour of dan-
ger, or of sorrow and heart-break finds the
Daughter-lands along with her. The heart’s
blood is one, and the cost and pain are one.
Look at the striking example to-day. Bri-
tain, or some British Government, has made
blunders in the past: for that is human, and
inevitable. She has had wars waged by one
party in power, and where a vast number, even
the majority, of her People disapproved. The
Motherland’s life and ocean-way were not then
at stake as now. Sixteen years ago, for ex-
ample, the political party then in power made
a war against two Christian republics. But,
even then, look at the wondrous, noble result.
Britain, the Conqueror, atoned for that act,


whether it was wrong- or right. The party of
Liberalism coming into power bestowed upon
all those peoples of South Africa (the people
who had fought for their freedom against Bri-
tain) complete self-government, the full powers
of self-rule, and unhindered freedom. Look
at the noble fruit so soon gathered I The
very men, Lloyd George, Viscount Bryce, and
the rest who opposed that war, are to-day in
England, the men inspiring and guiding our
Empire’s heart, and soul, and thought in this
titanic war, where the Empire’s life, and hu-
man liberty, and the ocean pathway are at
stake. And the men who fought against us are
by our side.
General Smuts, that great soldier and great
Statesman, said the other day in Britain that
he and the men who 16 years ago “fought for
freedom against England are to-day fighting
for freedom along with England,” under
Britain’s flag. General Botha, ( General Smuts
—so grandly trusted by Britain, have nobly
repaid the trust. They have driven the Ger-
man mis-rule out of South-West Africa, out of
East Africa. They have made the great new
Union of South Africa, a loyal and stable Domi-
nion of the British Empire. No man, at this
moment, more powerfully moves the reason and
heart of the People of Britain, by his wise,
thrilling vindication of the British Empire, and
its “crowned Republic” as the central safe-
guard of human liberty, than does General
Smuts.
That is but one illustration of what is seen
all round in this world conflict. Prus-
sia’s historian for long years before the war
kept telling the German people that “England”
must be crushed by Germany; there was “no
room for England any more in a world ruled
by valour,” by military force—“the will to
power.”
At the first shock of war, he declared, Bri-
tain’s over-sea dominions would desert her.
India would rebel. Canada, Australia, South
Africa would cut the painter. England would


be left alone in her ruin. Within her own gates
Ireland would rise in rebellion, and separate.
That is the only point at which the mad pro-
phecy has had any smallest fragments of truth.
The Hun, amid the other dastard treacheries,
tried even that! And a heap of ruins in Dublin’s
central street, and a German-commissioned
traitor, hanged on a traitor’s gallows, are the
miserable result.
I, who have been lately in Ireland, can say
that thousands and thousands of Ireland’s
Roman Catholic young manhood would gladly
enlist in the common struggle of all the Bri-
tish Empire and Peoples, were they not held
back by ecclesiastics of a certain type, and by
political wire-pullers for their own party ends.
But, over against this small, contemptible,
local thing, look at that far-reaching line of
young, heroic freemen, who have sprung to
their feet around Britain’s banner, and gone
from every quarter of the world—Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India,
the Islands of the Sea—from every region of
this wider Britain, daring and suffering and
dying in the one long battle-line of splendid
valour, along with young Englishmen, young
Scotsmen, young Welshmen, young Irishmen,
for the one great cause, their arms and their
hearts nerved by the same unfaltering loyalty
to the one flag. It is the British flag and the
Union-flag of the British “Empire” and People.
The Mannix Propaganda.
I am aware, and I deeply regret it, that a
man lately come into our midst, and received
at first by all people with kindly courtesy, has
called this great war for freedom and the rights
of nationhood “a sordid trade war” !
John Redmond, himself, the Home Rule
leader, gives the lie to all such black and base-
less falsehood. John Redmond declares that
this war of the Allies is a war “for freedom
and humanity.” His further recent statement
is very emphatic: “From the very commence


ment of the war very many of my colleagues
and I myself, on scores of public platforms,
declared that Ireland’s highest interest was in
the speedy and victorious ending of the war;
and I myself have never ceased from that day
to this in pointing out where Ireland’s interest,
honour, and duty lie in this struggle in defence
of civilisation and liberty.”
Sir Wm. Robertson, Chief of the British
Military Staff, said, in London, a few days
ago, that only “a few cranks” and some other
people with baser motives can take any other
view. And William Redmond, who is fighting
in the Western battle-line for Britain and the
Allies, wrote his noble, passionate appeal to
young Irishmen to fill up the gaps in the gal-
lant Irish regiments, and not permit “a be-
trayal of Ireland’s heroic dead.”
So, in that great embattled brotherhood of
the Allied Nations, you find, standing, side
by side along with-Greatf Britain, all her young
daughter-lands, and France, and enfranchised
Italy, and the emancipated Russian people, and
outraged Belgium, and Serbia, and Roumania;
and now the great Republic of America flings
her mighty strength into this common struggle
for liberty, for the right to live—one splendid
world-wide protest for freedom against the
most ruthless, and impious, and inhuman
military despotism.
Motive of the Propaganda.
The motive behind Dr. Mannix’s strange and
un-British course of action, if we may judge
from his own reiterated attacks and language,
is obvious. It is two-fold. It displays a fierce
dislike of what is British. It is also part of a
concerted campaign to shatter the central prin-
ciple of the State-School system in Australia,
and to obtain State-Establishment for separatist
Roman Catholic Schools, with State-School
teaching under Romanist clerical control. To
effect any hope of such result, it would seem
there must be a stirring-up of strong sectarian
and racial feeling in the minds and hearts of


his co-religionists. Hence, also, the fierce rage
against France, whose Statesmen had put an
end to clerical control and teaching in the Na-
tional Schools.
Soon after his arrival Dr. Mannix tried
to induce the belief that in earlier Austra-
lian life Roman Catholics had been
persecuted. That failed. 1 hen he
reiterated, but more fiercely, the thread-
bare attack upon our State School sys-
tem. “Here in Australia” (he exclaimed to the
“Catholic Federation”) “we had those God-less
schools, and were going perhaps where France
had gone, which was once the glory of Chris-
tendom. That country had torn the crucifix
from its place, and banished the name of God
and His servants” ! And so forth! And he
urged upon that politico-sectarian I 4 ederation,
as their first duty, “Let them beforehand try
and regain the schools.”
Well now, if France is “godless,” the ques-
tion naturally arises, how did she become
“Godless”? The Roman Catholic Church had
France and her schools in the complete grip
of Rome’s ecclestistics once, and crushed out
the Protestants. France “was once the glory
of Christendom,” says Dr. Mannix. Why could
Rome and her clerical schools not keep
France ? Why is it that, as an eminent Ro-
man Catholic dignitary confesses, , “For the
interests of Holy Church, the Latin Nations
are a negligible quantity”? There could be no
weightier condemnation of the Roman ecclesi-
astical influence and method in national life
than this fact that, where that clerical influ-
ence gets hold of the nation’s schools the na-
tion by and by, casts it out. Why is the read-
ing of the Bible that tells about God and His
love, free from all sectarianism, excluded from
our Victorian State Schools?
The answer is, because Dr. Mannix and his
clergy will not have it. .
Also, the most rabid of the ecclestical organs
that applaud Dr. Mannix’s utterances with a
parrot-like voice has declared—“lf we consider


the present war from the point of view of Cath-
olic sympathy alone, few of us will wish other
than that the Kaiser might blot out for ever
the present government of France.” The
meaning of that vicious lunge is plain enough,
and the motive behind it. If these utterances
were spoken by a poor citizen in ordinary life,
we know how he would probably be dealt with
—this outspoken hate against our brave ally !
It is M. Viviani, the French Vice-President, who
specially attacked —he or M. Briand. Yet it
is that Statesman, Viviani, who at present,
along with Field Marshal Joffre, is the hon-
oured and applauded guest of the great Re-
public of America. We cordially respect the
liberty of our Roman Catholic fellow-citizens
to have “the crucifix” and all their other modes
of teaching by sense-impressionism in their
schools. But those clerical methods are not
going to be part of our national svstem of
education.
Dr. Mannix and the Sinn Fein Rebellion.
Still worse is Dr. Mannix’s attempt to gloze
over the crime of the disastrous Irish rebel-
lion, and to lay the guilt on Ulster, and on
the British Government’s “truckling with trea-
son” in Ulster. His attempt to palliate that
cruel and treacherous rising, and his reported
words regarding its suppression as marked by
“barbarism and horrors never surpassed in any
theatre of the present war,” display a fierce
recklessness of thought and language and a
warp of moral judgment not to be easily toler-
ated in a truth-respecting community. The
ecclesiastical organ similarly pictures the Bri-
tish action in putting down that rebellion as if
it were as wicked and horrible as the action
of the Germans in Belgium !
Ido not need to answ r er at any length these
wild utterances. The secular press has, at each
point, impressively condemned Dr, Mannix’s
entire attitude and has disproven his asser-
tions. Take a single instance: no rebellion
with such elements of danger and ruin to life


and property, and even to national existence,
was ever quieted with so little execution of
rebels as that dark and dastardly Sinn Fein ris-
ing. Fourteen ring-leaders, tried by careful
process of martial law, suffered the death pen-
alty. By the law of all civilised nations the
verdict could be no other. Yet the rebels had
ruthlessly shot down soldiers, police, civilians,
even women. The impartial outside represen-
tative, chosen by the Canadian press to re-
port, and himself very favourable to the “Irish,”
states: “Over 500 soldiers and police
had been killed or wounded. The killed or
severely wounded among the civilians cer-
tainly ran to many hundreds.” The ruin to
property was terrible. Fortunately for Ireland,
far and near, the rebellion was so crushed in
Dublin it had not time to spread.
Dr. Carr versus Dr. Mannix.
Now set the verdict of the late Archbishop
Carr over against those dreadful assertions of
Dr. Mannix: —
“When the secret history of this movement,”
said Dr. Carr, “comes to be written, it will
be found that it is the result of German in-
trigue, of support from some Irish Americans,
and of the role assumed by a small knot of
desperate irreconcilables. From every point of
view I regard it as an outburst of madness,
an anachronism, and a crime.” John Red-
mond said the same in yet stronger terms:
“This wicked move,” he declared, “has been
plotted, organised, and paid for by Germany.”
I am aware that three rebels were shot with-
out trial, by a British officer. For that mad
act, that officer, who had suffered from nerve-
shock in the British trenches, was tried by
process of British law, and would, probably,
have suffered the extreme penalty but that
he was found to be insane. I suppose that is
a doom worse than the doom of mere death.


But contrast with all this the indescribable
German atrocities in Belgium and North-
Eastern France, on unarmed civilians, priests,
women, girlhood, childhood !
In the Irish rebellion, no civilian, no girl, no
woman, no child w T as injured or insulted by
the British troops. No priest was dealt with,
although Mr. Birrell himself, that gentle-souled
lover of “the Irish,” was roused at last to
declare, “I am not surprised that there is dis-
loyalty when head-strong priests and crack-
brained people make speeches which, if they
were made in England, would not bring the
speakers only within the terror of the law, but
within the rage of the mob.”
But look at the terrible contrast in Belgium !
Cardinal Mercier, in his pathetic appeal, gives
the names of more than 50 Catholic Belgian
priests done to death by the German officers
and soldiers, in his own parishes of Belgium,
and for no proven crime, and without any
charge or process of law. And then, think of
the long list of unspeakable things done in
town and village, after town and village, to
the womanhood, girlhood, childhood, helpless
age and helpless youth, by those German
hordes —the ruin, the outrage, the destruction
of churches and noble buildings, the deporta-
tions, the desolation, from Louvain onward.
Has not one of the strongest of our Australian
poets—himself born of Irish Roman Catholic
parents —cried out in passionate indignation
against
“The fiends who turned the sluice of hell upon
Louvain, ah, Louvain” ?
How can even ecclesiasticism so pervert the
human judgment and its natural pity that any
man can venture to compare the suppression
of the rebellion in Dublin with those fiendish
acts of lawless lust, rapine, and cruelty in-
flicted upon the Roman Catholic populations
of Belgium and North-Eastern France?


Demand for Cessation of Sectarian Strife.
I ask to-day, therefore, for a cessation of
such wild sectarian disloyal misrepresentation
and abuse. I ask for a cessation of the sec-
tarian strife which Dr. Mannix, ever since his
coming- to Australia, has been the means of
Stirring- up.
We who—millions of Protestants : —have given
and worked gladly and generously for Roman
Catholic Belgium, Roman Catholic France,
Roman Catholic Poland, have a right to de-
mand this. We have a right to demand the
observance of a mutually respectful, loyal Bri-
tish citizenship.
But Dr. Mannix’s programme does not give
much promise of peace. He tells his “Catholic
Federation’’ that “what is at the back of his
mind” is this—dt is of no use trying to “edu-
cate” the “non-Catholic people.” They “would
never get them to grant the Catholic claims
until by the clash of politics the time came
round when it would be their political interest
to grant them” (applause).
“The Back of Dr. Mannix’s Mind.”
So that is “what is at the back of Dr. Man-
nix’s mind,’’ and it explains a good deal in Dr.
Mannix’s truculent course of action. He has
set himself to capture “these non-Catholic
people’’ by political compulsion. He is in an-
tagonism to political compulsion, or even to
voluntary recruiting for the life and defence of
the Empire. But he is determined to set the
political forces a-working for compulsion to
secure the “Catholic claims.”
It is an ambitious programme. Nor does he
mean to be stopped by trifles. He had de-
clared early in his Australian mission, “The
Church vindicates for herself the right to teach
and appeal to outsiders without let or hind-
rance,” etc. . . “Nor will she admit that she
exceeded her right in having recourse to phv-
sical punishment so long as this is effective
to the end in view.”


Exactly! So, when Mr. Benjamin Hoare,
who has had beloved relatives that dared
wounds and at the British battle-front
“for civilisation and freedom,” made manful
“protest against his (Dr. Mannix’s) attacks on
Conscription and recruiting,” and also against
his assertion that the British Empire was en-
gaged in “a sordid trade war,” 10, “the
Church,” in the person of Dr. Mannix, put
into motion her mediaeval tour de force, and
Mr. Benjamin Hoare found himself the victim
of ecclesiastical “compulsion,” which is at all
times more vindictive and more narrow than
any military compulsion. I have been in con-
troversy with Mr. Hoare, and deem him the
ablest and most honourable journalist and lay
advocate the Roman Catholic Church in Vic-
toria possessed. But he too must be swept
down if he conflict with “what is at the back
of Dr. Mannix’s mind.”
The Statistical Outlook.
Dr. Mannix also lets his imagination run
loose about statistics, I am aware that, in
some quarters quite outside Melbourne, the
dark suggestion is whispered that the young
Protestant population will be “thinned off by
the war.” It is a hard and evil thing to sug-
gest. Nevertheless, it is right to know that
it is being said.
I know too well that the Church of England,
the Presbyterian Church, and other Protestant
Churches will suffer at the next census by
the splendid sacrifice their young manhood has
made for the Empire, for freedom, and human-
ity, and God. And I think the people of Aus-
tralia will know why they have suffered, and
will value the sacrifice accordingly !
But, when Dr. Mannix, basing himself on
statistics, declares: “More than a quarter of
the population was composed of Catholics, and
I suspect very much that more than a quarter
of the Labour Party is similarly composed of
Catholics,” I must check by facts both his
‘“statistics” and his “suspicions.”


The statistics of the last census, as tested
by Dr. Knibbs, are ; Out of a total population
for Australia, of 4,455,005, and out of a “Chris-
tian population” of 4,274,414, there were in the
year 1911, the following proportional num-
bers ;
Church of England 1,170,443
Presbyterian 558,336
Methodist 547,806
Congregational, Baptist, etc.,
and other “Protestants” .. .. 147,059
Total Protestants .. 2,963,644
Against this the Roman Catholics of Australia
are 921,425. (There is a separate category en-
titled “Catholic undefined,” amounting to
75,379. A number of these, I dare
say, are Anglicans. But, whichever
way they are counted, they do not affect
greatly the total proportion. It is clear that
the Presbyterian and Methodist Churches
alone, if united (as they probably will be by
and by) would be much larger in numbers
than the Roman Catholics.
And now I want frankly to say:—We, Protes-
tant citizens, do not want to “federate” or com-
bine for political pressure. We cannot consent
to “sell our votes to the highest bidder,” as
Dr. Mannix is reported to have declared him-
self ready to do. But, if we are forced "'to com-
bine against the plot that is “at the back of
Dr. Manmx’s mind,” then we can do so. And
we know what the result will be !
The Folly of the Mannix Method.
And I ask, what has Dr. Mannix made out of
his scheme of “political” pressure upon “these
non-Catholic people” ? What good has he got,
in this awesome hour of our Empire’s life, by
his attacks on Mr. W. M. Hughes, and by his
association in the same movement with the
forces of the 1.W.W., and the extreme Caucus
fanatics, and the “Junta” extremists, and the


non-recruiting’ types of footballers, and the
rowdy crowds who hooted the National Anthem,
and howled down the “Win-fhe-War” speakers
at the election meetings? He has gained less
than nothing, and by his opposition to the
campaign to strengthen our gallant Australian
men and boys at the battle-front, he has affixed
to himself, I think, an indelible stigma which
he will never be able to remove. Too many
families have lost their best and dearest in the
splendid sacrifice to make that possible.
When I read the returns of the voting in the
General Election for the Senate and the House
of Representatives, and saw the verdict of the
•conscience and judgment of the Australian
people, in this crucial hour of our Empire s
life, making utter rout of the non-national,
and anti-patriotic parties, I could not but think
■of that shrewd judgment of the Scottish beadle,
in the amusing Scottish story.
John, the beadle, was deemed a great critic
of sermons, and judge of the “dividing of a
text” for the “heads” of a sermon. “Now,
John,” said the minister, “what would you
make of this text? —‘The wild ass from the wil-
derness snuffeth up the East wind’ ”? ‘Well,
answered John, “I wad divide it into twa
heades: (1) The wild ass frae the wilderness
wad snuff up the East wind a lang. while afore
gettin’ fat on it; (2) the wild ass is a foolish
ass for tryin’ to get fat snuffin’ up the wind.
I speak metaphorically. It is not the quad-
rupee!, it is the emptiness of the result 1 cull
attention to. Dr. Mannix’s wild political ad-
venture in association with people of a pai-
tisan, and ethical, and political atmosphere
diametrically opposed to his own, has ended
both for him and fojr them in wind and con-
fusion. They have not “grown fat on it.
The result for all coteries of party selfishness
and disloyalty is empty and ludicrous. The
rout and overthrow of party narrowness and
anti-British sectarianism mean a great national
advance, the victory of a large-minded British
•citizenship and of Australia’s honour and
righteousness.


And you must not be content with this mere
civic citizenship, or with mere negations and
refusals of despotism, political and ecclesiastic.
You must have in your hearts and in your
homes the living presence of God’s love and
Spirit,—the knowledge and study of God’s
Book.
You, Protestant young men, choose, for your
wives, Protestant girlhood, wise. Christ-loving,
God-reverencing, true, free from all influence
of priesthood. We must build the love of God
and the truth of the Scriptures of God into
the structure of our family life and of our
nationhood. In that motive alone it can stand
strong and free, ready to make sacrifice for
God and National liberty.
The Publishers issue this
at their own expense, so
that entire proceeds may
go to the Red Cross Fund
