

SECOND EDITION.
The Soldi er's Guide.
CONTAINING FULL INFORMATION AS TO THE PRIVILEGES
AND CONCESSIONS AVAILABLE TO SOLDIERS
OVERSEAS
AND IN NEW ZEALAND
BEFORE DISCHARGE
AND
AFTER DISCHARGE.
WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND.
TO THE SOLDIER.
This handbook is designed to aid you in taking
up your civilian position. It will be useful for some
time to come. KEEP IT.
Published under the Authority of the Minister of Defence.




THE SOLDIER’S GUIDE.
INTRODUCTION.
In these pages the concessions and privileges granted
by the State to the soldier are set out in plain terms.
So extensive are the organizations of the State set
up to assist the soldier while on service and to re-
enter civilian life upon being discharged that it has
been found necessary to group the information under
one cover, arranged for ready reference.
The matter is arranged under three main headings
corresponding to the stages of demobilization, and
the soldier, by reference to these sections or to the
index, will readily find information applying to his
own category. The three main divisions are, —
OVERSEAS.
BEFORE DISCHARGE.
AFTER DISCHARGE.
As this booklet contains information which may
have to be turned to account many months after
the return of the soldier to New Zealand, it is hoped
that he will retain it permanently.
Where more information is required on important
matters the booklet gives an address at which
details will be furnished.
Though the soldiers’ financial - assistance scheme
has by this time largely served its useful purpose,
some particulars have been inserted, as they have
an important bearing on the general aspect of what
is being done for the soldier. When the whole of
these activities are realized it is to be hoped that a
perusal of this necessarily brief summary will lead
to a realization that a tremendous amount of work
has been done to lighten the material sacrifices of
our men, and that the end of the war does not by
any means mark the cessation of the State’s interest
in the welfare of its soldiers.
[New matter which appears in this edition is indicated
by a marginal line.]


BASE RECORDS.
The Soldier’s Inquiry Office.
Before and after discharge the soldier is advised
to keep in touch with Base Records, Wellington.
He should refer all his difficulties to Director, Base
Records, and it is particularly important that this
office should have his correct address. When there
is any permanent change of address this should be
notified to Base Records.
Neglect of this precaution in regard to address
may lead to difficulty in obtaining medals, war gra-
tuity, &c.
All matters relating to pay should be addressed
to Officer in Charge of War Expenses, Wellington ;
those relating to pensions to the local Registrar of
Pensions, or the Commissioner of Pensions, Wel-
lington ; applications for medical treatment to the
nearest Defence Office. All other matters should be
referred to Base Records.
OVERSEAS.
Discharge in Sequence.
The order of return of the troops to New Zealand
is according to length of service overseas, those with
the longest service returning first.
Married men will be given preference in their
class (thus married men who left New Zealand in
1914 will be returned before single men who left New
Zealand in 1914, and similarly for other years ; but
all the men who left New Zealand in 1914 will be
returned before those who left New Zealand in 1915).
Discharge Abroad or return to New Zealand out ot Sequence.
Applications for discharge abroad or return
New Zealand out of normal sequence, for urgent
business and domestic reasons, are cabled to New
Zealand so that official inquiry into the bona fides
of the application may be made before the discharge


is approved. The following classes are being given
priority in order of return ;
(i.) Prisoners of war.
(ii.) Medical and dental students.
(iii.) Apprentices.
(iv.) Public Works employees.
(v.) School-teachers and Railway-men in their
class.
Leave in England.
Leave before embarkation is granted in the fol-
lowing cases: —
Ordinary privilege leave, when entitled to same,
if railway and shipping facilities permit—fourteen
days.
Sick-leave, if recommended by the Medical Officer,
on discharge from hospital—fourteen days, with
ration allowance.
Special leave for repatriated prisoners of war—
twenty-eight days, with ration allowance ; to be ex-
tended to two months, if required.
Special business or educational leave—twenty-
eight days. Any additional leave under
this head will be without pay.
Patients in hospital will, if possible, be given leave
before embarkation ; but if they are unable, owing
to their medical condition, to travel before required
for embarkation, their relatives will be grantedja
free railway warrant to visit them in hospital.
No leave is granted which would delay demobiliza-
tion.
Discharge in England.
Where the soldier desires to be discharged in
England, the application is cabled to New Zealand,
aiid a written approval is required from the soldier’s
next-of-kin.


Return to New Zealand.
A soldier discharged in England who returns to
New Zealand within twelve months of the date of
discharge is entitled to have refunded to him an
amount equal to that which would have been paid
for transport to New Zealand with a returning draft.
This privilege dated from the 6th September, 1918,
but has since been made retrospective. Therefore
a man discharged in England before the 6th Septem-
ber, 1918, who returned to New Zealand before the
6th September, 1919, is eligible for the refund at
rates existing at time of discharge.
A married soldier who returns with his wife and
is eligible for the above concession may claim a
refund of the amount which would have been con-
tributed by the Government towards the wife’s
passage to New Zealand. This, in the case of a
private, is £l6. Claims should be addressed to the
Officer in Charge of War Expenses, Brandon Street,
Wellington.
Assisted Passages to New Zealand.
The Defence Department in conjunction with the
New Zealand Department of Immigration provides
the following concessions to members of the New
Zealand Expeditionary Force.
For all New Zealand soldiers’ wives and their de-
pendants, except those who have reached England
or Egypt subsequent to the 31st December, 1917,
assisted passages are granted. The New Zealand
Government contributes the following to such pas-
sages :
From United Kingdom—
towards third-class passages.
•£26 towards first- and second-class passages.
From Egypt—
towards third-class passages.
£\b towards first- and second-class passages.


Soldiers’ Fiancees.
In the case of intended wives of New Zealand
soldiers, the Immigration Department accepts nomi-
nations for their assisted passage, and makes a
contribution of towards the cost of either second-
er third-class passage.
Applications for assisted passages should be made
to the Secretary, Immigration Department, Union
Chambers, Customhouse Quay, Wellington, or (if
the applicant is in England) to the Immigration
Department of the High Commissioner for New
Zealand, London.
Soldiers’ Wives.
An officer of the Immigration Department meets
all ships arriving with soldiers’ wives on board,
assists them in obtaining accommodation if required,
supplies all information, and renders them the same
assistance as if they were ordinary immigrants. The
Defence Department issues travelling-warrants to
soldiers wives and children to the same destination
as the soldier.
Baggage Allowance.
Officers, non-commissioned officers, and other ranks,
and all other details returning to New Zealand at
Government expense, are entitled to have the fol-
lowing quantity of baggage carried free of charge ;
First-class passengers, 40 cubic feet; second-class
passengers, 20 cubic feet; third-class passengers,
x 5 cubic feet. Children over three years, one-half
of the above. Children under three years, one-
quarter of the above. All baggage in excess of the
above quantities will be charged at ordinary rates.
This applies only to the voyage to New Zealand.
On train services within the Dominion 1 cwt. of
baggage will be allowed free for each passenger irre-
spective of rank. All excess baggage must be paid
for by the owners.


The Defence Department does not accept re-
sponsibility for the transport of household furniture,
motor-cars, pianos, &c.
Flight Cadets in England.
All pupils who passed through the flying schools in
New Zealand and who were sent to England for
final training are entitled to twenty-eight days
furlough (whether graduated or not) before being
returned to country of origin. Officers travel first
class, and Cadets second class. As C adets recei\e
only is. 6d. per day from the Imperial Government,
the New Zealand Defence Department, to relieve
any financial difficulty, makes up their pay to ss.
per day.
Educational Scheme for New Zealand Expeditionary Force in
England.
A general scheme of education is in force in Eng-
land and France in camps, and also to a limited
extent in hospitals.
In camps a wide range of educational subjects is
taught, including primary and secondary education,
commercial courses, economics, civics, and personal
hygiene. This education is compulsory for all ranks.
In hospitals a modified educational scheme is
carried out adapted to the requirements of soldiers
under medical treatment. For soldiers whose health
permits, education in hospitals is compulsory for one
hour daily. Soldiers are also given occupational
work, such as basketmaking, leather-work, weaving,
and embroidery, which does much to relieve the
tedium of convalescence. The workshops are also
of great value for curative exercises, which are given
under the direction of medical officers.
Vocational Training.
Disabled soldiers awaiting return to New Zealand
are taught trades which will enable them to earn a
livelihood when they are discharged as no longer


needing medical treatment. A number of these
soldiers have been placed in factories and in business
offices in England with this object.
The blind are specially cared for at St. Dunstan’s,
where a number of suitable trades are taught.
Fit soldiers awaiting demobilization are also en-
abled to attend vocational classes, and are given
opportunities to keep in touch with the latest de-
velopments in their trades.
Short intensive courses are given which enable a
great deal of knowledge to be acquired in a short
time.
Instruction for farmers is given at several farms
which have been acquired, and every encourage-
ment is given to soldiers to learn farming, with a
view to their taking up land on their return to New
Zealand.
University Education Scholarships.
A number of scholarships are provided by the
Government for members of the New Zealand Expe-
ditionary Force in England. They range from
to are tenable for three years (extensions are
allowed in certain cases), and the scholars are
usually allowed to choose the universities which they
desire to attend. The military education authorities
are endeavouring to place at universities and colleges
in Great Britain any men who desire to remain in
England.
Applications for university training in England
during demobilization should be made by the soldier
to the Director of Education, Headquarters, N.Z.E.F.,
London, on Z.Ed. Form 1.
New Zealand University Scholars.
Upon application to the Senate of the University
of New Zealand, permission may be given to scholars
of the New Zealand University detained in England
to hold their scholarship at a British university.


A number of medical and dental students who were
unable to return to New Zealand in time for the
college year are carrying on their studies in England,
and the Senate has resolved that this shall count as
part of their course in New Zealand.
On the Return Voyage.
The education given in England is continued
during the return voyage. On the whole the lectures
have been well attended, and much useful instruc-
tion has been given. The lectures on economics and
farming have been especially popular.
BEFORE DISCHARGE.
Demobilization Procedure.
New Zealand has adopted the system of com-
pleting the arrangements for demobilization of the
soldier before disembarkation. T. his enables the fit
soldier, once clear of the transport, to be absolutely
free to take up his civilian life. He need not go near
a Defence Office again unless he chooses to person-
ally return his military greatcoat and draw the
mufti allowance rather than do it by post. Thus the
boarding procedure on transports is highly important
to the soldier, as it enables him to know before
landing what are his privileges, where he will receive
medical treatment, and how he will proceed if it is
necessary to claim a pension.
Leave on Disembarkation.
Men not requiring further medical treatment are
despatched to their homes direct from the ship at
the Department’s expense, and are granted twenty-
eight days’ leave, at the expiration of which they are
discharged. The soldier may, if he desire, take civil
employment during this period of leave, and may
wear plain clothes if he wishes.
Sick men, if able to proceed to their homes, are
given one week’s sick-leave and ordered to report


at its expiration to a hospital, where they will con-
tinue to receive free medical attention from the
Defence Department. The soldier is provided with
travelling-warrants to his home and to hospital, with
free meal tickets and accommodation warrants.
Four-weeks Railway Pass.
Before he leaves the returned transport the soldier
receives a warrant which entitles him to secure from
a Defence Group office a four-weeks free railway
pass, entitling him to travel on any part of the New
Zealand railway system. He receives twenty-eight
days’ leave prior to discharge, and may commence
to use the ticket immediately, or he may do so later
so long as the privilege is used within three months
of the commencement of the leave period prior to
discharge. On certain days during the Easter and
Christmas holidays, which are set out on the pass,
the ticket cannot be used owing to the congestion
of traffic, but the prohibited days are allowed for in
calculating the twenty-eight days’ currency of this
privilege. Uniform must be worn when using this
pass prior to discharge, and either the leave certificate
or the discharge certificate must be shown when
demanded by the railway authorities.
The soldier travelling on the pass will, when travel-
ling by train, be provided free of cost with breakfast,
dinner, or tea at the station dining-room where the
train stops for this purpose, provided that the meal
is necessary for the journey undertaken, and that
he shows his pass to the proprietor of the railway
dining-room, and signs a receipt for the meal supplied.
If he is in mufti he must claim a free meal ticket
from the attendant whilst the meal is being served.
If the ordinary meal ticket is accepted the soldier
will have to pay for his meal.
Steamer Concessions.
During the currency of the privilege rail pass a
number of shipping companies grant return passages


by their coastal or inter-island services on payment
of single fare only. The conditions on which these
are issued may be obtained from the shipping com-
panies, from Base Records, or from any Defence Office.
Mufti Allowance.
A mufti allowance of £5 5 s - payable to the
soldier upon the return of his greatcoat to the nearest
Defence Group Office in his district. This must be
done within five weeks of the date on which he
received notice of discharge, and the warrant must
be cashed within four weeks. If the greatcoat is
not returned, a deduction of £2 os. 6d. is made from
the mufti allowance. Soldiers on returning their great-
coat by post should forward their discharge and clearly
indicate their name and address on the parcel.
Medical Treatment.
A soldier of the Expeditionary Force injured or
sick on service is first treated in the hospitals attached
to or belonging to his division. He is medically
boarded periodically. Ultimately he is returned to
New Zealand, and his papers come with him. On
the voyage home he is again medically boarded, so
that when he lands a full history of his case from the
date of his injury or disability is available for reference.
On landing he is dealt with according to his con-
dition. He is either sent as an in-patient to a hos-
pital or convalescent home, or as an out-patient to
hospital, or to be under the care of the Assistant
Director of Medical Services of his district, or he is
discharged. Up to discharge he is continually under
the care of the Defence Department,
Out-patients’ Allowance.
Soldiers who are not provided with board and
lodgings while undergoing hospital treatment are
granted 'an lallowance of 4s. per day, subject to
observance of the regulations and to good behaviour.


They are required to wear the proper badges indi-
cating that they are undergoing medical treatment,
and are liable to stoppages of pay for neglect of this
regulation, or for other offences which are prejudicial
to their successful treatment or recovery.
Artificial Appliances.
Soldiers entitled to artificial limbs, artificial eyes,
surgical boots, trusses, splints, elastic stockings, or
other surgical appliances, or who require them to be
replaced, should apply in writing to the nearest
Assistant Director of Medical Services of the district,
who will investigate the claim and make arrange-
ments to supply the article. A fully equipped
artificial-limb factory has been established in Wel-
lington, and arrangements have been made for repairs
and renewals in all the four centres.
Trusses, splints, and elastic stockings will be sup-
plied free of charge for one year after the soldier’s
discharge. The soldier’s travelling-expenses are paid
if it is necessary for him to travel in order to be
fitted with any appliance.
Surgical boots are made, adjusted, and repaired at
the principal orthopaedic hospitals.
Soldier made dentally fit.
The Government undertakes to make good any
dental deficiencies caused through the soldier’s service.
He is dentally treated in hospital in England, and
often on the voyage out. If the treatment is not
completed on arrival the soldier is instructed by
post, by the Deputy Assistant Director of Dental
Services of the district to which he belongs, where
to apply for the completion of such treatment.
Any soldier who arrives in New Zealand without
having been examined prior to or subsequent to
embarkation will forward his address to the Director
of Dental Services, Headquarters, Wellington, who
will arrange for his examination and any treatment


he is entitled to under the following regulation :
“ A soldier who, as the result of injury, wound, or
disease directly traceable to active service, incurs
loss or disease of teeth, fracture of either jaw, fracture
of artificial plates, crowns, or bridges, will be entitled
to receive such dental treatment as may be deemed
necessary to enable him to follow his ordinary civil
vocation.”
Relatives visiting Hospitals.
When a soldier upon landing is found to require
in-patient treatment at a hospital, but is well enough
to first visit his relatives, he obtains one week’s
sick-leave for this purpose, but if his condition makes
the granting of this privilege unwise in his own in-
terests he goes straight to hospital, and free railway
return warrants from their homes to the railway-
station nearest to the hospital of the class to which
the soldier is entitled will be issued to the soldier’s
wife and parents on application to Base Records.
Where the soldier has no wife or parents one warrant
will be issued to the next-of-kin. In addition, should
the soldier patient’s condition be critical, the next-
of-kin or one other relative will be granted an addi-
tional privilege of one-half fare once each month so
long as the soldier’s condition remains critical.
Soldiers’ Dependants—Medical Treatment.
The Department of Public Health, Hospitals, and
Charitable Aid provides free hospital treatment for
the wives and children of soldiers on active service,
and the wives and children of returned soldiers who
are still undischarged. It also provides free treat-
ment for the parents, sisters, or brothers of soldiers
on active service, and also of returned undischarged
soldiers, if such relatives are solely dependent upon
the soldier for support.
If a treatment of a soldier’s dependant
is commenced, it will not be discontinued because
of the soldier’s discharge, but will be completed.


All cases not covered by the above are dealt with
on their merits by Hospital Boards, which have full
power to give free treatment, or treatment at reduced
rates, to those who are unable to pay the ordinary
maintenance fees.
Maternity Treatment.
The Department has also during the war extended
the concession of free treatment at the St. Helens
Hospitals for maternity, or maternity wards or hos-
pitals controlled by Hospital Boards, to wives of
soldiers on active service ; wives of returned soldiers
who have been discharged as medically unfit (whether
married before the outbreak of the war or after-
wards) ; and wives of men in the Navy who were
married expecting to be discharged about the begin-
ning of the war, but were required to remain in the
service. Free maternity treatment is available at
the St. Helens Hospitals until twelve months after
the return of the soldier or sailor to New Zealand.
Hospitals and Convalescent Homes.
There are cases necessitating special treatment —
orthopaedic or medical —and these are preferably
taken at the special institutions organized for the
purpose. There are also convalescent homes which
are of great value in helping the sick soldier to re-
establish himself in good health.
The institutions under the control of the Defence
Department are as follows :
Auckland Military District.
General and Orthopaedic : The military annexe to
Auckland Hospital is situated in the Domain, in good
surroundings. It has accommodation for about two
hundred cases, and is provided with very complete
orthopaedic, massage, and electrical department.


General : The special military ward at Whangarei
Hospital has a good massage and electrical depart-
ment.
General : There is a military ward for general
cases attached to Hamilton Hospital.
Kamo Springs : The well-known springs at Kamo,
near Whangarei, are extremely efficacious in the cure
of nervous and neurasthenic cases. Accommodation
for about twenty soldiers is provided here.
Orthopaedic : King George V Orthopaedic Hospital,
Rotorua, takes cases requiring special orthopaedic
treatment, and accommodates about 160. Exten-
sions will enable a total of 300 beds to be provided.
Patients at these Rotorua institutions are able to
take full advantage of the facilities for baths, douches,
aix massage, electrical treatment, and X rays.
Convalescent Home, Epsom, near the City of
Auckland, is controlled by the Auckland Hospital
Board and is under the St. John Ambulance Asso-
ciation. Used for suitable cases transferred from
Auckland Hospital only. Accommodation for about
twenty.
Convalescent Home for Nurses : Near Fort Caut-
ley, at Devonport, Auckland. Is in charge of a
Matron and staffed by V.A.D.s. There is accom-
modation for about twenty-four convalescent cases.
Wellington Military District.
General: There is a military annexe to Napier
Hospital, almost in the grounds of that institution,
capable of accommodating forty general cases.
General ; A special ward for general military cases
is being built at the Masterton Hospital.
Chest Cases, &c. : Featherston Military Hospital
is being devoted to cases of chest trouble, and will
also be utilized for suitable neurasthenic and heart
cases. It has a separate department for infectious


diseases. The wards accommodate 400 patients, but
are capable of large extension by utilizing hutments.
Orthopsedic and General: Trentham Mi itary os
pital is a large centre for orthopaedic treatment and
General, accommodating about a thousand patients.
b Consumptive Sanatorium: Pukeora Sanatorium,
near Waipukurau, Hawke’s Bay, is a sanatorium for
consumptives, with accommodation for 150 Patients.
It is situated on an elevated site, surrounded by
,26 acres of land, which will afford opportunities of
useful open-air occupation under skilled instructors.
Convalescent Home: At Gonville, Wanganui, ad-
joining the public hospital. Is controlled by the
Patriotic Association, and has accommodation for
about twenty. Matron in charge.
Convalescent Home, Miramar, Wellington, formerly
the Lahmann Home. To be largely used as a hostel
for artificial-limb cases. Accommodation for about
forty. Matron in charge. Managed by Defence De-
partment.
Canterbury Military District.
General : The St. Saviour’s Orphanage, about a
mile and a half from Timaru, has been converted
into a general military hospital, where some classes
of orthopaedic cases may also be treated It is staffed
with Nursing Sisters, V.A.D.s, and orderlies, under
the control of a military Medical Officer and has
accommodation for about seventy cases. The build-
ing is up to date, and has an adequate area of land.
Orthopaedic : Chalmers Orthopaedic Hospital, Christ-
church, comprises a block built as a home for incur-
ables bv Miss Chalmers, of Ashburton, and now made
available for the treatment of soldiers, 120 of whom
can be accommodated in three fine wards, while an
extension to take eighty patients is being built. This
institution is conducted by a complete orthopsedi
unit trained in England. It provides electrical and
massage treatment, physio-therapeutics, and under


takes the manufacture of splint and surgical appli-
ances required for special cases. The Defence De-
partment has arranged to pay for the board of fifty
out-patients with the Y.M.C.A. who receive treat-
ment at this hospital.
Consumptive Sanatorium, Cashmere Hills, an
extension of the Canterbury Hospital Board’s sana-
torium (where consumptive soldiers are treated), pro-
vides additional accommodation for one hundred
patients.
Shell-shock, Gas, and Convalescent Cases : Queen
Mary Hospital, situated at Hanmer Springs, is
conducted by the Defence Department. Accom-
modation for about 160 patients, who may obtain
hot baths and massage treatment. This institution
is particularly suitable for shell-shock cases and some
classes of patients suffering from the effects of
poisonous gas.
Otago Military District.
Orthopaedic : Dunedin Public Hospital provides
special orthopaedic treatment for soldiers, a specialist
in this branch being attached to the staff. There is
an up-to-date massage and electrical department,
physio-theuraphy department, and gymnasium for
medical gymnastics.
Jaw and Facial Injuries : A special hospital for the
treatment of jaw and facial injuries has been esta-
blished near the General Hospital, Dunedin. The
staff has been trained at the New Zealand Jaw
Hospital in England, and about forty patients can
be accommodated.
Nervous Cases: Karitane, near Puketeraki, is
designed to provide a pleasant open-air life for
soldiers who are suffering from nervous breakdown
as a result of shell-shock. The patients live in
boarded tents, and have a central dining and sitting
room. A specialist in nervous diseases has charge of
the medical arrangements.


Convalescent Home, Montecillo, situated at Eglin-
ton Road, Dunedin, is conducted by the Red Cross
Society with V.A.D. workers. Accommodation for
about twenty-four. Matron in charge.
' Convalescent Home : Invercargill Convalescent
Home, at North Invercargill, is conducted by Patriotic
and Red Cross Associations. There is accommodation
for about twenty-five recuperating soldiers.
Education and Vocational Training.
Soldiers who return fit and are discharged are
cared for by the Repatriation Board, but soldiers in
hospital and out-patients remain under the care of
the Defence Department. During their convales-
cence every facility is given them to improve their
education and to acquire a knowledge of useful
trades.
The address of the Director of Vocational Train-
ing in New Zealand is Base Records, Wellington.
Vocation Officers, who are all returned soldiers, have
been appointed at the following centres: —
Auckland .. Kitchener Street, Auckland.
Wellington . . 39 Johnston Street, Wellington.
Christchurch District Headquarters (Medical),
Christchurch.
Dunedin .. District Headquarters (Medical),
Dunedin.
It is the duty of these officers to get in touch with
returned soldiers in hospital and out-patients, to
explain to them the educational advantages obtain-
able, and to give them encouragement and assistance
in learning trades which will enable them to earn
their living after their discharge.
Vocation Officers will be glad to give full informa-
tion on all subjects relating to the educational and
vocational training of soldiers prior to discharge.
Among the subjects taught under this scheme in
New Zealand are those included under primary and


secondary education, economics, personal hygiene,
typing shorthand and commercial training, architec-
ture and building-construction, carpentry, engineer-
ing wool-classing and all branches of farming, tailor-
ing’ and book-keeping. The instructors appointed
are in nearly all cases returned soldiers.
Technical schools are taken advantage of, espe-
cially in the case of out-patients, and special classes
for returned soldiers only are established w ere e
numbers warrant them being formed. All instruction
is provided free of cost to the soldier.
Workshops at Hospitals.
Workshops have been built in connection with
the hospitals and convalescent homes at Auckland
Annexe ; Epsom ; Devonport ; King George V Ro-
torua ; Rotorua Sanatorium ; Napier ;Trentham ,
Chalmers Military Orthopaedic Hospital, Christchurch ,
Hanmer; Cashmere Hills Consumptive Hospital;
Timaru ; Dunedin Hospital; Invercargill; and others
are in course of erection. These workshops are pro-
vided by the New Zealand Branch of the Red Cross,
who also supply the equipment used. ...
In hospital workshops special curative instruction
is also given in basketmaking, leather-work, toy-
making, spinning and weaving. “ d
needlework —in most cases by ladies who had volun
tardy undertaken this work during the war, and
were therefore well known to the soldiers.
Where articles made by soldiers are sold to tie
nublic the proceeds, without any deduction lor
material, are set aside for the benefit of the recrea-
tion fund of the hospital.
Farms.
Farms are established at Hanmer and Waipukurau,
where practical and theoretical instruction is given


in farming, with a view to encouraging soldiers to
settle on the land.
Libraries.
Libraries of technical works have been established
at hospitals, in order that soldiers may have access
to books dealing with the trades and occupations
in which they will be engaged after discharge.
University Fees.
The Defence Department pays the fees of soldiers
attending University classes before discharge.
Pay and Allowances.
It is unnecessary to go into the details of the
whole schedule of pay and allowances to members
of the Expeditionary Force at this stage, when they
are reaching the point of ceasing to draw them, but
it is important to state the position in regard to
allowances to soldiers’ dependants, as these have
been constantly developed and liberalized during the
war period.
The Defence Department, in case of death, con-
tinues its allowances and the soldier’s voluntary
allotments of pay to actual dependants after the
date on which the member of the Forces died or
was reported missing, until such time as the War
Pensions Board determines the right to a pension
of the person receiving such pay, but not longer
than thirteen weeks.
Cases have arisen where New-Zealanders in the
Imperial service who have been paid the difference
between the New Zealand and Imperial rates have
died on active service. In such an event the Minister
of Defence has authorized the continuance of this
payment up to six months from the date of notifi-
cation of death, so as to prevent hardship to the
dependants pending the grant of a pension by the
Imperial authorities.


Allowances are payable from the date of applica-
tion, and the current scale is as follows :
Warrant Officers, Non-commissioned Officers, and Men.
Wife or guardian of motherless children, 3s. per
day.
Child under sixteen years of age, is. 6d. per
day.
Widowed mother dependent on soldier, if total
income apart .rom allotment does not exceed 15s. a
week or she does not possess capital in excess of
£SOO, is. 6d. per day. This allowance is payable
to a widowed mother who is solely or partially
dependent on one son in the New Zealand
Expeditionary Force, provided he makes an allot-
ment in her favour of not less than 3s. a day.
This provision, however, may be proportionately re-
laxed in particular cases where a soldier establishes
that he is unable to make such an allotment or can
only make a smaller allotment by reason of having
to provide for the maintenance of his wife or other
dependants. In this respect each case will be dealt
with on its merits. In the case of a married soldier
who had made an allotment for his wife and family,
the allowance to his widowed mother may be increased
to the amount of the assistance given to her by the
soldier for twelve months prior to his enlistment,
up to a maximum of 3s. per day.
The general principle is that the allowance is
given to supplement the soldier’s allotment which
the widowed mother finds is in itself insufficient
for her support.
The condition permitting an income apart from
allotment of 15s. per week enables those receiving
the old-age pension, including the war bonus, or
the widow’s pension, to receive the full benefit
of the widowed mother’s allowance. In carrying
out the provisions of this section the Pay Branch
of the Defence Department took the broad view


that the widow’s pension is not a direct or separate
benefit to the mother, but is a payment in respect
of her children only.
Other dependants, being relatives, provided they
were in receipt of assistance from the soldier for
twelve months prior to enlistment, amount equiva-
lent to pre-enlistment support by soldier, with a
maximum of ios. 6d. a week.
Military Prisoners’ Dependants.
Payment of allowances is continued to the de-
pendants of military prisoners who accepted active
service and subsequently committed offences against
discipline, providing that it is shown that real de-
pendency existed, and that an allotment was payable
prior to the commission of the offence.
In the case of men who committed offences in order
to avoid active service, the payment of allowances
is made only under the most exceptional circum-
stances, such as proved destitution of a degree which
would normally entitle the dependants to obtain
charitable aid.
Separation Allowance Retrospective.
The allowance to wives and guardians of motherless
children has been increased from time to time, and
the Government has decided to pay the full rate of
3s. per day as from the date of embarkation for all
married men from the beginning of the war.
In the case of soldiers deceased prior to the 31st
December, 1917, payment will be made up to the
date of decease or to the date separation allowance
was paid, if later.
It will not be necessary for application to be made
in respect of married soldiers undischarged on the
30th April, 1919, but in the case of married soldiers
deceased or discharged prior to that date applica-
tions will be required before payments are issued.


These applications should be sent by letter to the
Officer in Charge War Expenses, Wellington, and
should contain the following particulars :
Regimental number, rank, and full name of
soldier.
Reinforcement to which attached.
Date of discharge or decease.
Full name and address of applicant.
Soldiers’ Financial Assistance.
New Zealand’s initial efforts in connection with
the war drew into the Expeditionary Force men who
as a rule had small obligations, but the widening of
the call eventually resulted in the enlistment of those
who had regular obligations which could not be met
out of their pay as a soldier. To meet this class —
to bridge this gap between the soldier’s pay and his
obligations to his family so as to avoid undue hard-
ship caused by military service—the Soldiers’ Finan-
cial Assistance Board was set up, and the Govern-
ment undertook to make grants as a free gift, with
no obligation to refund the money.
The regulations were extended, after experience
of the working of the system, to permit of pay-
ment of such obligations as interest and insurance
covering a longer period than that actually served
by the soldier. A half-year’s interest, for instance,
may be paid by the Board if it falls due during the
soldier’s service, in spite of the fact that he might
only have served a few months before obtaining
his discharge. There has been no attempt to cut
down the assistance by adopting a strictly propor-
tionate system of payment to length of service, the
Board always interpreting the regulations in a liberal
spirit.
In the case of the soldier’s death, financial assist-
ance is continued for a period not exceeding twenty-
six weeks.


Retrospective Applications. —As a general rule
financial assistance is only payable to a soldier,
but as experience has shown that many men be-
longing to the Main Body and earlier drafts of
Reinforcements were not aware, until their return
to the Dominion, that grants could be received
to meet the special obligations set out later, the
Soldiers’ Financial Assistance Board has been autho-
rized to consider applications which were not covered
by the earlier regulations, and to make such retro-
spective grants as in its opinion the merits of each
case warrant.
As applications cannot be received indefinitely, the
new regulations provide that the soldier already re-
turned to New Zealand must apply within three
months of the date of their gazetting —viz., 10th June,
1919; and, in the case of men still to be returned,
within three months of the date of their arrival in the
Dominion. It should be noted that whatever assist-
ance is granted can only be in respect of liabilities
incurred since the inception of the financial-assist-
ance scheme on the 16th January, 1917-
The Soldiers’ Financial Assistance Board has further
been authorized, in approved cases, to grant financial
assistance for a period of six months after the date
of discharge.
Applications for financial assistance should be made
to the Secretary, Soldiers’ hinancial Assistance
Board, Sussex Chambers, Wellington. Grants are
made for the following purposes :
[a.) Rent (House or Rooms) .—The term “ rent
applies to furnished or unfurnished houses, or to
furnished or unfurnished rooms.
Storage of Furniture— Special rents will be taken
into consideration according to the merits of the case.
Board and Lodgings.— Where the applicant pays an
amount for board and lodgings only, the item will
be considered according to the merits of the case.
(b.) Interest payable in respect of Loans or
Mortgages, or in respect of Agreements for ihe


Purchase of a Dwellinghouse or Business Pre-
mises.—This does not include repayment of principal.
Where payments are on table rates, which include
repayments of principal, arrangements should be
made for payment of interest on a flat rate, and for
a cessation of that portion of the payment represent-
ing a refund of the loan. The State Advances to
Settlers Department and many building and loan
companies will readily agree to this course, as the
mortgagee is debarred (under War Regulations for
the Protection of Soldiers’ Property, dated ist
October, 1917 — New Zealand Gazette, 1917, p. 3710)
from exercising any power of sale without the leave
of the Attorney-General, and in this respect there
is no distinction made between mortgages under a
table for the reduction of principal and mortgage
at a flat rate of interest; but the arrangement had
best be put on record.
( c .) Interest and Instalments payable in re-
spect of Agreements for the Purchase of Furni-
ture or other Chattels. —This includes also pianos,
organs, sewing-machines, &c. The Board has power
to continue payment of instalments due under a hire-
purchase agreement, but does not include outstanding
debts owing on goods purchased in the ordinary way,
and will not consider any application for payment in
respect of clothing, groceries, or other like matters.
New liabilities incurred under this heading will not
under any circumstances be entertained by the Board.
{d.) Rates and Taxes. —The full demand for
rates and taxes will be paid, even though such
amounts vary from time to time.
{e.) Insurance Premiums. — Life insurance on the
soldier and his dependants according to the merits
of the case. The Board will consider payment of
insurance and war loading (if any) on the full sum
assured under policies taken out some time prior to
the date of enlistment, or prior to the date of being
called in the ballot, subject always to circumstances


warranting a grant; and, in the case of new policies,
will consider payment of ordinary premiums and war
loading, where there is no existing policy, up to a
sum of should the circumstances warrant such
a grant.
In the case of new policies the policy must be
actually taken out — i.e., the first premium must be
paid by the soldier —so as to enable the policy to be
issued and the number of same to be supplied to the
Soldiers’ Financial Assistance Board, The new policy
should be a life one, and war loading should not
exceed £7 10s. per cent. If, however, the soldier
prefers to insure in an insurance office where the war
loading is in excess of £7 10s. per cent, he will have
to make his own arrangements to meet such excess
war loading.
Fire insurance includes policies on house, furniture,
personal effects, business premises, stock, &c.
Lodge Fees. —The actual fees to be paid by the
soldier during his military service will be considered.
National Provident Fund. —Every soldier contri-
butor is entitled to a rebate of one-half of his con-
tributions during the time he is serving with the
Forces. The Soldiers’ Financial Assistance Board
will consider the other half of the fees according to
the merits of the case.
(/.) Other Necessary or Reasonable Expenses
not being Expenses incurred in the Purchase
of Property. —Under this heading may be included
management of businesses, farms, &c., domestic help,
attendant, and other special expenses where the state
of health of the dependant necessitates special ex-
penditure.
Confinements. —The Board has authority to grant
financial assistance to the extent of £$ towards con-
finement expenses. The Public Health Department
has made arrangements under which wives of soldiers
who are absent from New Zealand on active service
may receive free attention at a St. Helens Hospital


during the period of their confinements,, and it is
open to each soldier’s wife to make application
accordingly should she so desire.
Surgical Operations. —The Board has authority to
grant financial assistance to the extent of pound for
pound up to a maximum amount of Hospital
Boards have been informed that the Public Health
Department will pay the cost of treatment in hospitals
of the wives and children of all soldiers on active
service, irrespective of the military or civil status of
the soldier.
The soldier desiring financial assistance for other
purposes should see the paragraphs relating to re-
patriation and land.
Soldiers’ Farms and Businesses.
During the war the National Efficiency Board,
through its organization of Committees of Local
Trustees, has performed valuable work for absent
soldiers, particularly in connection with farming
properties. Upon the recommendation of the Board
the Government gazetted regulations on the sth April,
1917, empowering the Board to undertake the super-
vision of soldiers’ properties. Under these regula-
tions the Board accepted powers of attorney from
soldiers proceeding on active service, and in each case
appointed a Soldiers’ Property Board of Trustees,
consisting of local farmers where the property was a
farm (including, if necessary, a representative of the
absent soldier) to supervise the management of the
soldier’s farm during his absence. Most of the trusts
accepted by the Board from soldiers related to farm
properties, a class of business that is particularly
suitable for being handled by local trustees. Many
of these trusts have now been cancelled as the result
of the return of the soldiers, who have taken over
their properties again, and the Board has been
gratified to receive the thanks of the returned men
for looking after their properties during their absence.


These trusts do not by any means represent the total
extent of the assistance rendered to soldiers by the
Board’s organization in connection with the manage-
ment of their properties and businesses. In numerous
cases the Boards of Trustees and Committees of
Advice under the National Efficiency Board have
made local arrangements for the work of the soldier
to be carried on without the necessity for the consti-
tution of a formal trust under the regulations.
Another phase of the Board’s activities in .the
interests of absent soldiers was the protection of
soldiers’ businesses. For a time the Board was dis-
satisfied with the limited amount of practical assist
ance which could be rendered by it to business men
I (other than farmers) called up for military service.
So many of the businesses were personal in their
character that the difficulty of carrying on the
undertaking successfully in the absence of the prin-
cipals and under the supervision of amateurs —no
matter how willing and anxious to assist—was soon
apparent. This inability to assist arose largely from
insufficiency in the Board’s powers, and because it
could not compel those who would benefit by any
reduction of competition to contribute towards the
business affected by the absence on military service
of the principals. The Board at an early date laid
down the principle that those likely to benefit
remaining undisturbed in business should contribute
to an extent proportionate to such benefit for the
upkeep of those who. through the circumstances of
age or of more robust health, had the onus of military
duty thrown upon them. As long as enlistment was
voluntary the matter was not of much moment, but
with compulsory enlistment the injustice of the posi-
tion rapidly appeared, and upon the advice of the
National Efficiency Board the Government gazetted
regulations on the 27th August, 1918, with the object
of affording protection for soldiers businesses. Under
these regulations it is illegal for a person to establish


or carry on any new business without the permission
of the National Efficiency Board, and the Board is
thus able to control the opening of businesses likely
to compete with those of absent soldiers. Where a
proposed new business does not affect any existing
soldier’s business the permit is granted as a matter
of course, but where the new business will compete
with the protected business of a soldier the license is
issued subject to such conditions as the Board may
consider necessary to ensure that the person starting
the new business will not profit by the absence of the
soldier on military service.
AFTER DISCHARGE.
War Gratuities.
The Government has decided to pay a war gratuity
to soldiers of the Expeditionary Force, or to their
dependants in case of death. As final arrangements
had not been made at the time of publication it was
impossible to include details in this edition.
War Pensions —Eligibility.
By the War Pensions Act, 1915, and subsequent
amendments, provision is made for the payment of
pensions to the following ;
(1.) Any disabled member of the New Zealand
Forces.
(2.) Any dependant of a disabled, deceased, or
missing member of the New Zealand Forces.
Members of the Forces ” may include—
(a.) A member of any New Zealand Expeditionary
Force raised for service beyond New Zea-
land in the present war.
(b.) A member of any New Zealand Naval Force
raised for service beyond New Zealand in
the present war.


(c.) A member of the New Zealand, Army Nursing
Service who, while domiciled in New Zea-
land, has served beyond New Zealand in
the present war and was in the pay of the
New Zealand Government.
(rf.) A member of the New Zealand Defence or
Naval Forces temporarily attached to any
other portion of His Majesty’s Forces who
has served beyond New Zealand in the
present war and was in receipt of pay from
the Imperial Government.
( e .) Any person, not being a member of any New
Zealand Expeditionary or Naval Force,
who, while domiciled in New Zealand, has
served beyond New Zealand in the present
war and was in receipt of pay. from the
New Zealand Government; and
(/.) Any person in the pay of the New Zealand
Government who has been engaged on active
military service in any capacity in New
Zealand in connection with the present war.
The war-pensions scheme may, by Order in Council,
be extended to apply to the officers and men of
transports, mine-sweepers, and other vessels con-
trolled by the New Zealand Government for the
purpose of carrying on the war.
Applications.
Forms of application for pensions may be obtained
from the local Registrar of Pensions, or from the
Commissioner of Pensions at Wellington.
Dependants.
In the case of dependants the definition is a wide
one, including, in addition to wife, child, parent, step-
parent, grandparent, brother, sister, and mother-in-
law, the cases of those persons, not necessarily rela-
tives, who satisfy the War Pensions Board that they
have suffered material loss of income or property by


reason of the death or disablement of a member of
the Forces and that they have not adequate means
of support.
Wives.
Wives entitled to claim pensions may include
those who were married in New Zealand within two
years after discharge of husband, but marriages out-
side of New Zealand after disablement are not re-
cognized without proof of engagement before hus-
band’s departure. Pensions to wives are at the
discretion of the War Pensions Board, having regard
to the extent of the husband’s disablement and his
ability to support his family. To ensure widows’
benefits in the event of husband’s death from war
service after discharge, a wife must have been mar-
ried at date of disablement or produce evidence of
engagement before husband’s departure from New
Zealand. Pensions are granted to widows and
children for death from war service by right, without
regard to income and property.
Widowed Mother.
The pension of a widowed mother whose son was
her sole support is not less than the pension which
would have been payable to a wife.
Advance Payments.
To facilitate the dealing with original claims a
system has been instituted whereby the Pensions
Department has been authorized, immediately upon
receipt of a claim from a soldier whose medical
papers show that his earning-capacityjwas affected
by a war disability, to pay a flat-rate allowance of
£1 ios. a week pending the Board’s decision being
obtained, a provisional certificate being issued to
enable the soldier to collect an initial instalment of
£6 ios. on the 23rd day of the month in which he


is discharged. If the pension eventually by
the Board is greater than that provisionally paid the
balance is made up to the soldier, and if the grant is
less no refund is asked for.
Pensions payable outside New Zealand.
Pensions may be paid outside New Zealand to
members of the Forces, their wives, children, and
parents, but not to any other dependants.
Supplementary Pensions.
In addition to the scale of pension for disable-
ment the Pensions Board has power to award a
supplementary pension up to £1 weekly to disabled
soldiers where earning-capacity precludes the enjoy-
ment of pre-war standard of living, with a limit of
£5 per week to all the pensions payable in respect of
his disablement; and a supplementary pension up
to 15s. weekly to widows if this is necessary to main-
tain' their pre-war standard of living, with a limit of
per week.
If a disabled soldier requires an attendant, a pay-
ment up to £1 weekly may be made for this purpose.
Income Exemption for Old-age and Widows’ Pensions.
Any pension payable under the War Pensions Act
is exempted as income in the computation of old-age
and widows’ pensions under the Pensions Act, 1913.
Imperial Pensions.
The Pensions Board is empowered to pay the
difference between Imperial pensions and the New
Zealand rates in the case of bona fide residents of
New Zealand who, as Imperial Reservists, were
mobilized in New Zealand or who enlisted in New
Zealand for service in the Imperial Forces.


The New Zealand pension schedules are as follow : —
Rates of Pension in case of Death.
Weekly Pension.
Rank or Rating.
To the Wife
without
a Child.
To Wife
with
a Child or
Children.
1 To
each
Child.
Private, bombardier, lance-corporal,
gunner, driver, sapper, trumpeter,
bugler
Able seaman and equivalent ratings ..
Corporal
Farrier, shoeing-smith, saddler, or fitter
(If bombardier, lance-corporal, gun-
I £ s. d.
1 r
£ s. d.
• s.
J
T
Li ii o
10
ner, or private)
Lance-sergeant (not paid as such)
Leading seaman and equivalent ratings
Sergeant, farrier-corporal, shoeing-smith
corporal, saddler-corporal, corporal-
fitter, farrier-sergeant, saddler-ser-
geant, armourer-sergeant, sergeant-
fitter
Lance-sergeant (paid as such)
Petty officer and equivalent ratings ..
Squadron, battery, or company sergeant-
major, quartermaster-sergeant, colour-
*1 12 O
2 2 0
10
sergeant, staff sergeant, pay-clerk
Chief petty officer and equivalent ratings
Regimental sergeant-major, regimental
quartermaster-sergeant
■ I 14 0
240
10
Warrant officer and equivalent ranks
(Navy)
2nd Lieutenant, Lieutenant (Army) ..
Commissioned warrant officer and
1 1 15 0
) , „
equivalent ranks ; sub-lieutenant
and equivalent ranks (Navy)
Captain (Army)
1
2 15 0
10
Lieutenant under eight years’ seniority
and equivalent ranks (Navy)
Major
L2 IO O
300
10
Lieutenant of eight years’ seniority and
equivalent ranks (Navy)
Lieut.-Colonel
Captain under three years’ seniority and
1.2 17 O
370
3 16 0
•
10
equivalent ranks ; Commanders and
equivalent ranks (Navy)
Colonel
Captain of three years’ seniority and
equivalent ranks (Navy)
Brigadier-General, Major-General
Commodores, first and second class ;
f 3 8 0
3 18 0
10
Rear-Admiral and other equivalent
ranks i
1 3 10 0
1 1
1


Rates of Pension in case of Disablement.
Maximum Weekly Pension.
Rank or Rating.
To the
Member.
To the Wife.
To
each
Child.
Private, bombardier, lance - corporal,
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
s.
trooper, gunner, driver, sapper,
trumpeter, bugler
Able seaman and equivalent ratings ..
Corporal .. . • • •
Farrier, shoeing-smith, saddler, or fitter
•2 O O
IOO
10
(If bombardier, lance-corporal, gun-
ner, or private)
Lance-sergeant (not paid as such)
Leading seaman and equivalent ratings
Sergeant, farrier-corporal, shoeing-smith
corporal, saddler-corporal, corporal-
fitter, farrier-sergeant, saddler-ser-
f 2 0 O
IOO
10
geant, armourer-sergeant, sergeant-
fitter
Lance-sergeant (paid as such)
Petty officer and equivalent ratings ..
Squadron, battery, or company sergeant-
-2 0 0
|
IOO
major, quartermaster-sergeant, colour-
sergeant, staff sergeant, pay-clerk
Chief petty officer and equivalent ratings
Regimental sergeant-major, regimental
f 2 O O
|
IOO
10
quartermaster-sergeant
Warrant officer and equivalent ranks
(Navy)
and Lieutenant, Lieutenant (Army) ..
(200
IOO
10
Commissioned warrant officer and
equivalent ranks; Sub-Lieutenant
and equivalent ranks (Navy)
Captain (Army)
f 2 2 6
I 1 3
10
Lieutenant under eight years’ seniority
and equivalent ranks (Navy)
Major
U 5 o
Lieutenant of eight years’ seniority and
equivalent ranks (Navy)
Lieut.-Colonel
> 2 12 0
160
Captain under three years’ seniority and
equivalent ranks ; superiors (Navy)
Colonel
>3 1 0
I 10 6
Captain of three years’ seniority and
equivalent ranks (Navy)
Brigadier-General, Major-General
U 3 °
in 6
Commodores, first and second class ;
Rear-Admiral and other equivalent
ranks
[3 5 0
I 12 6
10
2 —Soldier’s Guide.


Medical Treatment.
The Defence Department will provide medical
treatment for discharged soldiers who are suffering
from a recurrence of illness arising out of and directly
caused by their service in the Forces, such as the re-
opening of a wound, muscular rheumatism, neuras-
thenia, pneumonia, or any other ailment which
renders them unfit to follow their daily avocations.
Application for such treatment may be made per-
sonally to the nearest Defence Office, to the nearest
Hospital Superintendent, or to the Assistant Director
of Medical Services of the district. Application
may also be made by letter or telephone to the
Assistant Director of Medical Services in Auckland,
Wellington, Christchurch, or Dunedin, or to the
Director-General of Medical Services at Wellington.
Private treatment at the Government expense is not
allowed.
Repatriation Board’s Organization.
What is being done to assist the disabled soldier
while in hospital to prepare himself for civilian life
is described in a separate article. The fit soldier
will, as a rule, show the spirit of initiative and
enterprise which won such a good opinion for New
Zealand troops during the war. He will, however,
in many cases require help to quickly re-establish
himself in an occupation or profession, and in this
effort he is entitled to secure the assistance of the
State, associated with helpers well acquainted with
business conditions.
This form of help for the soldier is organized by
the Repatriation Board. The central body com-
prises the following Ministers of the Crown : The
Hon. W. H. Herries (Minister of Railways), who is
Chairman during the absence of the Right Hon.
W. F. Massey (Prime Minister) at the Peace Con-
ference ; the Hon. W. D. S. MacDonald (Minister
of Agriculture) ; the Hon. J. A. Hanan (Minister of


Education) ; and the Hon. D. H. Guthrie (Minister
of Lands). The Secretary of the Board is Mr. J. D.
Gray, Old Parliament Buildings, Wellington.
The Director of Repatriation is Mr. J. R. Samson,
Aitken Street, Wellington ; and there are the fol-
lowing District Repatriation Officers associated with
the District Repatriation Boards in the four chief
centres —
Auckland District Repatriation Officer: New
Zealand Insurance Building, Queen Street,
Auckland.
Wellington District Repatriation Officer : Nathan’s
Building, opposite General Post Office, Wel-
lington.
Christchurch District Repatriation Officer : Na-
tional Mutual Building, Hereford Street,
Christchurch.
Dunedin District Repatriation Officer : Water
Street, Dunedin.
The Repatriation Department also has offices and
a paid staff at the following centres :
Hamilton. Nelson.
Gisborne. Blenheim.
Napier. Greymouth.
New Plymouth. iimaru.
Wanganui. Oamaru.
Palmerston North. Invercargill.
Masterton.
To make the organization easily accessible to the
soldier throughout the Dominion a further series of
Committees of honorary members is being established
in the following towns and such other centres as may
be recommended by District Boards :
Kaitaia. Morrinsville.
Whangarei. Thames.
Dargaville. Coromandel.
Helensville. Paeroa.
Cambridge. Te Aroha.


Waihi.
Tauranga.
Opotiki.
Rotorua.
Te Awamutu.
Te Kuiti.
Ohura.
Taumarunui.
Ohakune.
Taihape.
Hunterville.
Marton.
Bull’s.
Feilding.
Levin.
Stratford.
Eltham.
Hawera.
Patea.
Wairoa.
Hastings.
Waipawa.
Waipukurau.
Dannevirke„
Woodville.
Pahiatua.
Motueka.
Westport.
Reefton.
Hokitika.
Kaikoura.
Rangiora.
Ashburton.
Geraldine.
Temuka.
Fairlie.
Waimate.
Balclutha.
Gore.
Clyde.
Roxburgh.
' These honorary Committees will exercise the same
functions as the Boards, and their recommendations
for expenditure will be dealt with by the most con-
veniently situated Repatriation Board Officer.
Maori Soldiers.
Applications from Maori soldiers of the New Zea-
land Expeditionary Force come before the same
Boards and Committees as those from pakeha soldiers,
and will be treated in exactly the same way ; but
where it is likely that applications will be received
from Maoris, their special interests are safeguarded
by the appointment to the Board or Committee of a
Maori member (in most cases a returned soldier).
The wide range of assistance which may be given
to the soldier is summarized in the following extracts
from the draft regulations.


Sustenance during Unemployment.
Grants to an unemployed soldier for sustenance up
to such an amount as will ensure—
[a.) To a soldier a weekly income, inclusive of
pension, of £7 2s. :
(6.) To a soldier with a wife, a weekly income, inclu-
sive of their combined pensions, of £7 125.;
(c.) To a soldier with a wife and one child, a weekly
income, inclusive of their combined pen-
sions, of £7 15s. 6d. :
( d■) To a soldier with a wife and two children,
a weekly income, inclusive of their combined
pensions, of £7 195.;
(e.) To a soldier with a wife and three children, a
weekly income, inclusive of their combined
pensions, of £3 2s. 6d.
(f.) To a soldier with a wife and four children or
more, a weekly income (inclusive of their
combined pensions payable to a soldier, his
wife, and four children) of £3 6s.
A widower with children is entitled to the same
sustenance allowance as if his wife were living.
It has also been decided to pay sustenance at the
above rates to any dependant of a soldier who can
establish pre-war dependency, and was thus qualified
to receive the separation allowance payable by the
Defence Department while the soldier was on active
service.
Educational and Vocational Training.
Free tuition and sustenance at the rate set forth
m the foregoing paragraph may be granted, together
with a tuition allowance of Bs. per week, in the fol-
lowing cases:—
(a.) For applicants entered for education and train-
ing in technical schools or other State educa-
tional institutions.
(fe.) For applicants entered as students for training
in commercial or professional occupations.


Special Vocational Training Classes.
Separate vocational training classes have been
established by the Repatriation Department in
connection with the technical colleges at Auckland
Wellington, Christchurch, and Dunedin. Discharge
soldiers will receive there intensive training of from
five to seven hours per day, and sustenance willbe
paid to the trainees. The classes are well equipped
with machinery, tools, motor-cars, &c. and special
attention is being given to the practical part of the
work. The principal subjects being taught are com-
mercial (book-keeping, correspondence and general
office practice), engineering (mechanical motor me-
chanics, and electrical), and woodwork (cabinet-
making and carpentering).
Boot-factory. , . .-i
Arrangements have been completed by the Re-
patriation Department for the establishment of a
model boot-factory at Auckland, where discharged
soldiers (including disabled men) will receive practical
training in every branch of the boot- and shoe-
making industry. A very complete plant of up-to
date machinery is being installed, and competent
tradesmen engaged as instructors. It is anticipated
that after say, six months’ training men will be
qutte competent to earn the full wage as laid down
under the Arbitration Court award. In connection
with this factory a room has been provided where
lectures will be given on the theory of boot and shoe
making, anatomy of the foot, &c.
Text-books.
District Repatriation Boards and Local Commi -
tees are authorized to make a grant up to a maxi-
mum of A ss. to discharged soldiers who have been
approved for educational training, for the purpose of
purchasing text-books actually necessary for their
studies.


Apprenticeship.
In the case of an apprentice whose training has
been interrupted by war service, sustenance during
the time the apprentice is completing his apprentice-
ship at a rate which will bring his income, inclusive
of any pensions, up to £3 per week. Any member of
the Military or Naval Forces has a statutory right
to revive his contract of apprenticeship so as to
complete his term.
Vocational Training in Workshops, &c.
Financial assistance in the case of applicants ap-
proved by an Industrial Committee and receiving
training in private workshops, &c.
Other Training.
Payment of such fees as are necessary in order to
provide for the vocational or professional training
of a discharged soldier.
Soldiers* Widows.
Training facilities in useful occupations for soldiers’
widows without child, and sustenance whilst under-
going such training at such rate as will bring their
income (inclusive of pensions) up to £1 15s. per week.
Purchase of Business and Plant.
Soldiers who desire financial assistance for the pur-
chase or establishment of a business, or the purchase
of plant and equipment, should apply in writing
to the District Repatriation Officer or Secretary of
Local Committee, as the case may be.
Assistance by way of loans not exceeding
may be granted with or without security for a term
not exceeding ten years. No interest is chargeable
on the first £5O, but the remainder will be subject
to 5 per cent, interest per annum.


Purchase of Furniture, Tools, Equipment, &c.
The Department may grant a discharged soldier
or soldier’s widow financial assistance by way of loan
(without interest) of an amount not exceeding £5O
in each case for the purchase of furniture, tools of
trade, and professional instruments, or such other
articles of personal equipment as is deemed necessary
to the applicant in exercising his calling.
Vocational Training of Disabled Soldiers.
The Repatriation Department makes full provision
for the training in new trades and industries of
discharged soldiers who, by reason of physical dis-
abilities due to active service, are unable to follow
their pre-war occupations. Particulars of the finan-
cial assistance granted during this period of training
are set out in the preceding paragraphs. Any dis-
charged soldier who is in need of retraining should
state his case to the Repatriation Committee nearest
to his home.
Public Service Medical Examination.
Fees for medical examination of returned soldiers
accepted for Public Service appointments are paid
by the Repatriation Department.
Obtaining Employment.
An important function of the Repatriation Board
is the finding of employment for soldiers. Every
District Board and Local Committee is an employ-
ment agency, which will always use every endeavour
to find a suitable opening for any unemployed soldier
who applies for work. If the soldier has to travel to
his employment second-class fare is paid.
Transportation.
The Department may also grant a free passage
beyond New Zealand to an incapacitated soldier, or
the widow of a deceased soldier, if satisfied that such
a change of location is desirable or necessary.


EDUCATION IN FARMING.
Courses at State Farms.
Many returned soldiers seek a change of occupation
on resuming civil life, and the most important new
sphere for their activities is on the land; but know-
ledge is necessary for success, and the Agricultural
Department is placing its resources at their disposal.
It will provide, free of charge, instruction in the
following subjects ;
Stock breeding and management.
Fattening of stock for butchering.
Management of dairy herds, and - the routine
work of dairy-farming.
Sheep-breeding and sheep-farming.
Horse breeding and management.
Pig breeding and management.
General principles of agriculture.
Preparation of land for crops.
Sowing procedure and harvesting of grain crops.
Preparation of land for pasture, laying down
pasture, and management.
Selection and application of manures suitable
for various classes of soil.
Practical farming generally.
Instruction is obtained by staying on the Depart-
ment’s farms at either Ruakura, near Hamilton, in
the Waikato, or at Weraroa, in the Manawatu. The
soldier pupil is maintained free while on the farm,
or a grant towards his maintenance may be made
if he has to board away from the farm. This subject
of grants while learning a new occupation is dealt
with more fully under the chapter dealing with the
facilities offered by the Repatriation Board.
Accommodation at Ruakura is specially reserved
for soldiers who through wounds, sickness, &c., are
unable to undertake the hardest manual labour.
They have facilities for learning the lighter occupa-
3 —Soldier’s Guide.


tions of poultry-farming, fruitgrowing, and horti-
culture.
Opportunities of learning the principles of fish-
farming are also available, if required, to the returned
soldier at other horticultural farms operated by the
Department if the accommodation for living at Rua-
kura is found to be inadequate.
Fit men can be taken at the Weraroa Farm, where
all branches of farm-work proper are carried out.
No definite time is laid down for the duration of
the course of instruction at these farms, but it is
considered that a fair knowledge may be obtained
in six months. This time may be extended in special
cases, and it is also competent for the soldier to
arrange for a course of less than six months if he
so desires.
Tauherenikau Farm.
This farm, operated in connection with the Defence
Department, is available for instruction in pastoral
work, pig-farming, and also for a limited amount of
agricultural work. The operations at this farm are
carried out on strictly practical lines. It is proposed
to utilize this farm for soldiers whose condition of
health renders an open-air life in the specially healthy
climate of the Wairarapa desirable.
Penrose Gift Farm.
Further facilities for training returned soldiers in
farming on a comprehensive scale will be shortly
available at Penrose Gift Farm, near Masterton.
This farm, of 730 acres, has been generously given
to the Government for soldiers’ use by settlers of
the Wairarapa, who have also given sufficient stock
and contributed a good deal of the capital required
for the establishment of the farm.


The Government has made a large grant for the
erection of the necessary farm buildings and com-
fortable quarters to accommodate soldiers desiring
to learn farming, and also to assist the financing of
the farm for the first year or so, until it becomes, as
is anticipated, self-supporting.
A thoroughly practical man will be placed in charge,
and soldiers given full opportunities of learning
practical farming, including grain-growing, stock
breeding and management, and dairy-farming. In-
struction will be given by experts in various branches
of farming knowledge, and the aim will be to train
soldiers to become thoroughly sound practical farmers.
Expert Advice available.
Apart from the system of teaching farming on the
various farms, the Agriculture Department has or-
ganized a complete system of giving advice to any
returned soldier, wherever he may be engaged on
the land. He can submit his problem by post, and
an expert will advise him promptly. The Depart-
ment has a large number of printed pamphlets on
various phases of production from the land, which
are available to the soldier on application to the
Head Office, Wellington.
A special section of the Department has been
organized for the purpose of assisting farmers with
advice, given on their own farms, by experts of the
Department.
Training on Private Farms.
Discharged soldiers may also receive training on
private farms, and while doing so, in approved cases,
will be entitled to a subsidy upon their wages (to
be paid by the Repatriation Department) so as to
bring the total up to the minimum wage ruling in
the district.


LAND-SETTLEMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
Apply to the Lands Department.
The discharged soldier not only has the advantage
of facilities for obtaining land under the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915. but he has special
privileges under the ordinary land-settlement legis-
lation. Thus he is afforded a very wide range of
opportunity. To take advantage of the facilities he
should read this summary of them, make up his
mind which system will best suit his need and quali-
fications, and get into direct touch with the Land
Department’s offices in his own district. There are
land offices at Auckland, Napier, Gisborne, New
Plymouth, Wellington, Nelson, Blenheim, Hokitika,
Christchurch, Dunedin, and Invercargill. All appli-
cations and correspondence should be addressed to the
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district in which
the land is desired.
Who are eligible.
Any person is eligible who has been a member of
a New Zealand Naval or Expeditionary Force, has
served beyond New Zealand in connection with the
present war, has returned to New Zealand, and has
received an honourable discharge, together with any
person who immediately prior to the commencement
of the present war was a bona fide resident of New
Zealand, and has also served during the present war
with some portion of His Majesty’s Naval or Military
Forces (not being Forces raised in New Zealand), and
has received an honourable discharge therefrom.
In addition, all discharged soldiers of an Expedi-
tionary Force who, having been classed as medically
fit for service beyond the seas, have served as mem-
bers of that Force in a camp of military training
and remained attached to that camp on the 12th
November, 1918 (being the date of the cessation of
hostilities with Germany), are entitled to apply for


advances or private land under sections 2 and 3 of
the Discharged Soldiers Settlement Amendment Act,
1917- (See paragraphs headed “ Private Land ” and
“ Financial Assistance.”)
Soldiers’ Dwellings.
The Minister of Lands may set apart land, urban
or suburban, for the erection of suitable dwellings
under the system followed by the Labour Depart-
ment s Workers’ Dwellings Branch. The principal
and interest is repayable over a period of 25J years
in weekly instalments.
There are alternatives to this system at the dis-
posal of the discharged soldier. If he requires assist-
ance to purchase a site with dwelling already erected,
an advance not exceeding may be made, or,
in the event of the site being owned by the applicant,
an advance not exceeding may be made towards
the erection of a dwelling. Repayment of advances
may be secured by flat mortgage for ten years, with
interest at 5 per cent., or by instalment mortgage
extending over a period of 251 years, with an annual
charge of 7 per cent., which includes interest and
sinking fund.
How to apply for Land.
Any discharged soldier wishing to take up land
should obtain a provisional application form, answer
the questions thereon, and forward it to the Com-
missioner of Crown Lands for the land district in
which he desires to settle. Provisional application
forms may be obtained at any land office or from
any office of the Repatriation Department. On
receipt of a provisional application the Commissioner
will supply the applicant with information regarding
all available Crown lands in his land district, and the
Land Board will endeavour to place the applicant
on a suitable holding.
4 —Soldier’s Guide.


Tenures under which Land may be selected.
There is power to dispose of land under the ordinary
tenures of the Land Act, 1908, and the Land for Settle- •
ments Act, 1908 — i.e., for cash, or occupation with
right of purchase, or on renewable lease under the
former Act, and renewable lease under the latter Act
also under the “ special tenures ” of the Discharged
Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915. which are cash, de-
ferred payment, or a renewable lease with a pur-
chasing clause. The various tenures mentioned may
be explained as under, and are given under two
headings—viz., “Ordinary Tenures” and “Special
Tenures.”
Ordinary Tenures.
Cash. —In all cases of purchase of land for cash
the applicant is required to pay one-fifth of the
purchase-money at the date of the sale, and the
balance, with the Crown-grant fee, within thirty
days from the date of the approval of the applica-
tion. _ , ,
Occupation with Right of Purchase.— Term, twenty-
five years ; rental, 5 per cent, on the capital value
of the land ; right of purchase after the license has
been held six years, provided the residence and im-
provement conditions have been complied with. If
the licensee does not acquire the freehold prior to
the ex iration of the term of twenty-five years he
has a prior right to a renewable lease.
Renewable Lease under the Land Act. Term, sixty-
six years, with a perpetual right of renewal at a
rental based on revaluation; rental, 4 per cent, on
the capital value of the land. Land selected under
this tenure immediately becomes national endow-
ment. and there is no right to the freehold
Renewable Lease under the Land for Settlements
Act Term thirty-three years, with perpetual right
of renewalrental, per cent, on the capital value
of the land. Right of purchase at any time during


the currency of the lease. Purchase of the freehold
may be made on the deferred-payment system il
desired.
Special Tenures.
Cash. —The remarks already made under “ Cash ”
heading apply to cash selections under “ Special
Tenures.”
Deferred Payment under Special Tenures. —Term,
twenty years ; licensee to deposit 5 per cent, of the
purchase-money, and thereafter to pay the balance
°f 95 P er cent, by equal annual payments, together
with interest at 5 per cent, payable half-yearly on
all outstanding balances. The licensee has the right
to pay off the whole or any part of the outstanding
money at any time during the currency of the license.
Renewable Lease with Purchasing Clause under
Special Tenures. —Term may be for any period not
exceeding thirty-three years in the case of settlement
land and sixty-six years in the case of Crown land,
with perpetual rights of renewal for thirty-three years
or sixty-six years as the case may be. Freehold may
be acquired, with the approval of the Crown Land
Board and the consent ol the Minister, at the original
capital value or price of the land, at any time during
the currency of the lease. Purchase of the freehold
may be made on the deferred-payment system if
desired.
Private Land.
Under section 3 of the Discharged Soldiers Settle-
ment Amendment Act, 1917, one or more discharged
soldiers may apply to the Land Board with a view
to the acquisition by the Crown on their behalf of
any private land. The Land Board, however, can-
not deal with such application until an offer in
writing to sell the land to the Crown has been
submitted to the Board by the owner of the land.
It can then consider the application and offer and


forward them to the Minister of r.andswithsuc
recommendations as it thinks proper The
may thereupon refer the offer to the Land Purchase
Board for consideration, and if the land, or any
part thereof, is acquired by the Crown it may the
be disposed of under the Discharged S °ldie r s Settle-
ment Act to the applicant. (See also under head g
of “ Financial Assistance.”)
Land Purchase and Improvement.
Section 2 of the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Amendment Act, 1917. provides that financial assis -
ance may be given to discharged soldiers for the
following purposes : (a) The purchase of pnva eor
Native land with improvements thereon (6) the
acquisition by assignment or transfer of the le^ e °
any land administered by a Land Board ; and (c) the
discharge of any mortgage affecting any land owned
by a discharged soldier or held by him under hcen
or lease from a Land Board. The maximum amount
for any of these purposes that may be advanced to
any one person is Repayment of advances
may be secured by fiat mortgage for ten years with
interest at 5 per cent., or by instaiment mortgage
over a period of thirty-six years and a half, with an
annual charge of 6 per cent., which includes interest
and sinking fund. . .
In addition, financial assistance may be given to
discharged soldiers who own freehold land or are
the lessees or licensees of any land administered y
a Land Board for any of the following purposes .
The clearing, fencing, draining and general im-
provement (including erection of buildings) of the
kind, and the purchase of plant, stock, implements
seeds, trees, &c. Except in the case of a house to
be built on other than rural land, the maximum
total amount that may be advanced for all the fore-
going purposes is £ so° (not more than £ 5
being for a dwelling and other buildings) unless there


be special circumstances in which the amount would
be inadequate, when the Minister may authorize an
additional advance not exceeding : Provided,
however, that in the case of bush lands the Minister
of Lands may authorize an advance not exceeding
£I.OOO in ordinary cases, or £1,250 in cases where in
his opinion special circumstances warrant this amount
being advanced.
Advances are secured by a first mortgage over the
land, with the addition, at the option of the Minister,
of a bill of sale over the stock, implements, &c.
The rate of interest is 5 per cent.
Advances for improvements or buildings may be
made by progress payments up to 75 per cent, of
the value of any work done.
Option to purchase.
Before applying for assistance to purchase land it
is necessary for the soldier to secure an option to
purchase the property he desires to obtain. In the
case of town or suburban properties, or rural land
readily accessible, it is desirable that the period of
option be not less than four weeks. In the case of
land situated in isolated localities the option period
should be two months, in order that sufficient time
may be given for special inspection, valuations, &c.
How to obtain Advances.
Applications for assistance, giving full particulars,
must be made to the Land Board for the district in
which the land affected is situated. Before making
its recommendation the Board will require the ap-
plicant to appear personally before it or before
such person as it may appoint. No application for
an advance to assist in the purchase of land can be
considered unless accompanied by an option to pur-
chase the fee-simple, or lease, or license, as the
case may be. The Commissioner of Crown Lands
wilLgive all information and assistance.


Preference at Ballots.
In addition to the privileges extended by the Dis-
charged Soldiers Settlement Act, 1915. the land laws
of the Dominion have been amended so as to give
preference at ballots to discharged soldiers and
applies to all ballots, whether under the Land Act
or the Land for Settlements Act.
Facilities to inspect Lands.
A discharged soldier wishing to inspect land ope.,
for selection by discharged soldiers may obtain a
refund of railway fare (second-class return) paid by
him in going to inspect such land, provided that he
becomes an approved applicant for the land inspected.
Rebate of Rent.
Soldiers settled under the Discharged Soldiers
Settlement Act are entitled to the same rebate of
rent on prompt payment as are ordinary Crown
tenants.
EDUCATIONAL.
Soldiers’ Bursaries.
The National War Funds Council has decided to
utilize a large portion of its remaining funds, and to
ask the public to make further subscriptions, for the
purpose of providing educational bursaries for
matriculated returned soldiers who wish to con-
tinue their education. Sixty-eight bursaries have
already been granted to soldiers who had matri-
culated, and who now wish to continue their uni-
versity education. The bursaries are for per
annum, to be granted for either four or five years,
or such shorter period as may be necessary to enable
the soldier to complete his course. The renewal will
depend each year upon satisfactory reports as to
conduct, industry, and proficiency. Reports are re-
quired from the Registrar of the college to which


the student has attached himself, or, in the case
of men who have not been to college, from the head-
master of the primary or secondary school which
he has attended. Grants are not made to students
who can otherwise afford the cost of university
education. Applications for bursaries should be
made to the Secretary of the War Funds Council,
Internal Affairs Department, Wellington.
The War Funds Council proposes, if funds are
made available, to extend this system so as to benefit
men with Sixth Standard certificates who are de-
sirous of proceeding to matriculation or obtaining a
higher educational status at technical or other
colleges or evening classes, at the engineering school,
or in other ways. The bursaries in these cases would
vary in amount, the main object being to cover fees
and necessary books and equipment.
War Bursaries to Soldiers’ Dependants.
Bursaries are awarded to dependants of killed or
disabled members of the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force. To qualify for a war bursary a child must be
eligible for—
(a.) Free education at technical classes ; or
(b.) A free place at a secondary school, district
high school, or technical high school; or
(c.) A University or Education bursary at a uni-
versity college.
A bursary entitles the holder to an allowance in
addition to free tuition of £i ios., or £i per annum in
the case of those qualified under [a), £$ for those
under ( b ), or £lO for those under (c). Lodging-
allowance is also payable to bursars who are obliged
to live away from home to attend school at the rate
per annum under (a), and /30 under ( b) and
l c ) ; or, as an alternative, travelling-allowances
ranging from £5 to £lO per annum are given where
haveiling is necessary.


Application should be made through the principal
of the school at present attended, or of the school
in which tuition is desired.
Relaxing of Examination Conditions.
Members and ex-members of the New Zealand
Expeditionary Forces who are candidates for exami-
nations conducted by the Education Department
or the University of New Zealand receive specia
consideration of claims for relaxation of the regula-
tions governing these examinations if it is shown
that by reason of enlistment candidates have been
prevented from complying with any of the regulations
provided that they have attained such a standard of
proficiency that but for enlistment they would have
passed the examinations. In cases of this kind it is
naturally difficult for an examining body to satisfy
itself as to the candidates having reached any given
standard unless an examination test has been im-
posed, but full inquiry is made into the circumstances
of each case, and any evidence that a candidate can
produce is carefully considered with the object of
relieving him from any prejudicial effect which he
may have suffered through his enlistment. The Uni-
versity Senate is empowered by the New Zealand
University Act, 1915. in the <?ase of soldiers - to < r Ol | fer
and award degrees, diplomas, certificates, scholar-
ships, &c., without examination and without full
compliance with the usual conditions.
Soldiers’ Matriculation.
Soldiers who have been placed at a disadvantage
through service in the Expeditionary Force may be
exempted provisionally from the Matriculation Ex-
amination on presentation of—(1) A provisional cer-
tificate of a Joint Matriculation Board of English
Universities; or (2) a similar certificate from the
Professorial Board of a New Zealand University ;or


(3) a similar certificate from a competent military
authority.
If a student enters upon a course of study under
the terms of this concession the Professorial Board
of his college will advise the Senate, at the end of
his first year, whether the matriculation should be
confirmed, and, if so, whether it should date from
the time of entrance or from the end of the first year.
Soldier Teachers who are uncertificated.
The rule under which an uncertificated teacher
suffers a reduction in his salary of 10 per cent, does
not apply to soldier teachers for a period of two
years after their discharge from active service.
Grading of Teachers.
Active service is reckoned as teaching service for
grading purposes, and, as far as circumstances warrant,
allowances are made in the case of soldiers in such a
way that their positions on the grading-lists are not
prejudicially affected by their enlistment.
Ex Training-College Students appointed as Teachers.
An ex training-college student returning from
active service and receiving an appointment as a
teacher will receive as his commencing salary the
minimum salary usually paid to new appointees,
plus a sum of per annum for each year of active
service, provided that the salary shall not be greater
than the maximum for the position.
Free Tuition in Technical Schools.
Free admission to technical schools is granted to
discharged soldiers duly certified by the Repatria-
tion Department to be (a) unfitted to re-enter on
their previous occupations, (6) likely to benefit by
attendance at courses of instruction. Free tuition
is given for one year, and for an extension for one


year or more on the recommendation of the control-
ling authority of the school and the Repatriation
Department. Free railway tickets are granted where
necessary to enable discharged soldiers to avail them-
selves of these concessions.
University Fees to Wounded Soldiers.
Wounded soldiers are admitted to University ex-
aminations at half the ordinary fees.
Inquiries.
Inquiries regarding university-education conces-
sions to soldiers should be addressed to the
Registrar, New Zealand University, P.O. Box 1524,
Wellington.
Repatriation to Other Countries.
Persons who arrived in New Zealand or the United
Kingdom on or after Ist January, 1914, and sub-
sequently joined or enlisted in the New Zealand
Expeditionary Force, will be entitled to be repatriated
to the country they came from at the public expense,
subject to the following conditions :
Applications from troops who left the United
Kingdom or Egypt after the 30th April, 1919,
will not be entertained in New Zealand unless
accompanied by a recommendation from the
General Officer Commanding New Zealand
Expeditionary Force in United Kingdom or
Egypt respectively, the reason being that by
the 30th April, 1919, sufficient notice had
been given to troops still abroad to make
their applications before embarkation for New
Zealand.
Applications made in New Zealand will be ad-
dressed to the Director of Base Records, and
must be accompanied by proofs of evidence of
the fact that the applicant arrived in New
Zealand on or after the Ist January, 1914, and
subsequently joined the New Zealand Expedi-
tionary Force.


Applications from those discharged or struck off
the strength of the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force before the 30th June, 1919. will not be
entertained unless lodged by the 31st July,
1 9 1 9-
Applications from those arriving in New Zealand
after the 30th June, 1919, must be made
before date of discharge.
PUBLIC SERVANTS IN THE EXPEDITIONARY
FORCE.
Positions kept open.
At the outbreak of hostilities it was decided that
leave of absence should be given to any member of
the Public Service who desired to enlist in the Ex-
peditionary Forces, and, further, that the position
he had held would be kept open for him until his
discharge from the Forces. The same arrangements
were made with respect to temporary employees
who had been continuously employed since the 31st
March, 1913.
Superannuation and Sick-leave.
The superannuation contributions of public ser-
vants who have joined the New Zealand Expedi-
tionary Force, the Motor-boat Patrol Corps, or the
Royal Air Force are paid by the New Zealand
Government until the date of discharge from active
service or the taking-up of home-service duties.
Public servants who have been discharged from
either of the above branches of the Military Forces,
and who may be medically unfit for civil duty,
should report to their respective Departments for
duty without delay. They will then be entitled to
the sick-leave allowed by the Public Service Regu-
lations. Should the breakdown of health be per-
manent, or threaten to become so, the contributor
may be retired from the Public Service as medically


unfit, on such annual allowance as his average salary
and length of service may entitle him to. Retiring-
allowances paid out of the Superannuation Fund are
not taken into account by the Military Pensions
Board in determining the amount of military pensions.
If a discharged soldier contributor resigns his
position in the Public Service he is entitled to receive
a refund of his total contributions, including any
amount paid into the fund by the Government on
his behalf.
If a married soldier contributor be killed in action,
or die of wounds, sickness, or from any other cause
during his military service, his widow and children
(if any) are entitled to the benefits of the Super-
annuation Fund in addition to the full military
pension.
Annual Increments of Salary.
It was decided that employees absent with the
Expeditionary Force should be granted the regular
scale increments of salary which would have accrued
had they remained in New Zealand. In cases where
increments were dependent on a satisfactory report
as to work and conduct during the preceding period,
service with the Expeditionary Forces was deemed
sufficient to meet these requirements.
In those cases where certain qualifying examina-
tions were required to be passed before the granting
of increments, it was decided to provide the incre-
ment and to grant same, provided the officer com-
pleted the examination test within a reasonable
period after his discharge.
Promotion during Absence.
An employee’s right to promotion has been pre-
served during his absence. Where a vacancy has
occurred he has been considered for any position
involving promotion for which, taking into account
his seniority and fitness, he was regarded as suitable.


In cases where an employee considers his claims to
promotion to any position have been overlooked,
it has been arranged that he will be given the right
of appeal in respect to such matter, provided he
exercises it within thirty days after resuming duty.
Where an appeal under these circumstances succeeds
an equivalent position will be found.
This really means that the Public Service Com-
missioner is prepared to waive raising any objection
to an appeal lodged after the statutory period of
thirty days from when the decision was given and
adjudicated on by the Appeal Board.
Annual Leave due on Enlistment.
An officer of the Public Service prior to joining the
Expeditionary Force was permitted to take any
annual leave that may have been due to him. It
was also arranged that he would be allowed to
accept both civil and Defence pay during the period
of such annual leave.
Annual Leave on Discharge.
On his return an employee is granted any annual
leave which may have accrued due whilst he was on
active service —&•§■, if absent for four years, he would
be granted the equivalent of four years’ annual leave
on his return.
In the case of an officer of the Public Service
dying whilst on active service, the payment for the
number of days accumulated anhual leave due to
him is made to his estate.
In the case of sick-leave granted to an employee
on his discharge from the Forces, the Public Service
Commissioner has decided that such special leave
shall not count as debarring the employee from
participating in the annual leave which would have
been granted to him if he had received no special
leave. This amounts to a waiver of the regulation
providing that a public servant will not be granted


annual leave where sick-leave during the preceding
year has exceeded fourteen days.
Where an employee on his discharge from the
Forces is still unable to resume duty owing to illness
or wounds he is, wherever necessary, specially treated
m regard to sick-leave in excess of the ordinary
period allowed by the Public Service Regulations.
Preference to Soldiers.
Government Departments, including the Railways,
Public Works, and Post and Telegraph Departments,
have followed the policy that when engaging men for
employment, wherever practicable, preference is to
be given to returned soldiers, and that wherever pos-
sible, subject to the approval of the Minister, general
conditions are to be modified so as to admit of
preferential treatment being accorded to returned
soldiers.
War Medal and Certificate.
The Imperial authorities have not yet authorized
the issue of a general war medal, but in the ordinary
course of events it may be anticipated that this will
be done immediately after the declaration of peace
Meanwhile the New Zealand Defence Department is
preparing rolls of recipients, and making all arrange-
ments for the distribution of the medal. In New
Zealand also it is proposed to issue to all members of
the New Zealamd Expeditionary Force an illuminated
certificate which will show a record of each man’s
service. There will be two classes of certificate, which
will be issued to—
(a.) Soldiers who have had oversea service; and to
( b •) Soldiers with not less than twelve months’
home service.
The Defence Department is now calling for com-
petitive designs from New Zealand artists, and is offer-
ing prizes to the extent of £IOO for the three best


oversea designs and of f° r three best home
service designs.
King’s Certificate on Discharge.
In addition to the New Zealand certificate referred
to above there will be issued to members of the
New Zealand Expeditionary Force the King’s Cer-
tificate on Discharge, a handsome document suitable
for framing. The British War Office has sent to
New Zealand supplies of this certificate for issue
to those who were discharged on account of dis-
ablement rendering them unfit for further service.
A certain number of certificates have been distributed
to men discharged on account of disablement, but in
order to ensure the correct delivery of the remainder
those who are entitled to the certificate but have not
received it should make written application to Base
Records, Wellington.
A further announcement will be made regarding
the issue of the King’s Certificate on Discharge to
those who were discharged not through disablement.
The “ 1914-1915 Star.”
His Majesty the King has been graciously pleased
to approve the issue of a decoration, designated as
above, to all officers, warrant officers, non-commis-
sioned officers, and men of the British, Dominion,
Colonial, and Indian Forces, including civilian medi-
cal practitioners, nursing sisters, nurses, and others
employed with military hospitals, who actually served
on the establishment of a unit in a theatre of war
as defined hereunder, between the sth August, 1914,
and the 31st December, 1915, both dates inclusive.
The decoration will be a Star in bronze.
No clasp will be issued with the Star.
The riband will be red, white, and blue, shaded
and watered.


Those entitled to the “ 1914 Star ” will not be
eligible for the “ 1914-1915 Star.”
All claims will be subject to the approval of the
Army Council. For the purpose of this decoration
the theatres of war are as follows :
[a.) Western European theatre : To include all
operations in France and Belgium from midnight,
22nd-23rd November, 19x4.
(h.) Balkan theatre ; lo include all operations in—
(l.) Greek Macedonia, Servia, and Bulgaria, from
sth October, 1915 ; and
(2.) Gallipoli, the Islands, from 25th April
1915-
(c.) theatre : To include all operations
against lurco-German Forces from sth November,
1914 : also operations against Senussite Forces in
western Egypt and on borders of Cyrenaica from
3rd November, 1915. but excluding operations for
which the Sultan s Sudan Medal has been awarded.
( d • ) African theatre : lo include all operations set
forth below, but excluding local military operations
against Native tribes or rebels :
(1.) In British East Africa, German East Africa,
Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Uganda, and African
Lakes, from 20th August, 1914 ;
(2.) In German South-west Africa and on adjacent
borders of Union of South Africa, from
20th August, 1914, to 9th July, 1915 ;
(3.) In Kamerun and on eastern and northern
frontiers of Nigeria, from 24th August,
1914; and
(4.) In Togoland, from 7th August, 1914, to 26th
August, 1914.
(' e •) Asiatic theatre : To include all operations—
(l.) In Mesopotamia, from 6th November, 1914,
and the various smaller operations specified
in the order ; and
(2.) Tsing-tau, from 23rd September, 1914,' to
7th November, 1914.


(/.) Australasian theatre : To include all opera-
tions in—
(i.) German New Guinea and Bismarck Archi-
pelago, as follows: —
(a.) New Britain, from nth September,
1914, to 21st September, 1914.
( b .) New Ireland, from 16th September,
1914, to 18th October, 1914.
(c.) Kaiser Wilhelm Land, on 24th Sep-
tember, 1914.
( d .) Admiralty Islands, on 21st Novem-
ber, 1914.
(2.) Nauru, on 6th September, 1914.
(3.) German Samoa, on 29th August, 1914-
Rolls showing the names of all members of the
New Zealand Expeditionary Forces entitled to receive
this decoration are in course of preparation.
Authority is given for all officers, warrant officers,
non-commissioned officers, and men of the New
Zealand Expeditionary Forces who are entitled to
the above decoration to wear the riband, if they
choose to purchase the same, as some time must
necessarily elapse before the star and riband will be
available for presentation.
Deceased Soldiers’ Medals.
In the case of deceased officers and other ranks,
applications from their legatees or next-of-kin should,
in the former case, be addressed to General Head-
quarters, New Zealand Military Forces (A.A.G.), and,
in the latter case, to the Director of Base Records,
Wellington, New Zealand.
The claims of next-of-kin take precedence in the
following order of relationship : Widow, eldest sur-
viving son, eldest surviving daughter, father, mother,
eldest surviving brother, eldest surviving sister, eldest
surviving half-brother, eldest surviving half-sister.


Customs.
Soldiers’ used personal baggage and effects are
admitted free of Customs duty whether accom-
panied by their owners or not.
Presents sent by soldiers to New Zealand, and new
goods included in soldiers’ baggage, whether accom-
panied by their owners or not, are admitted without
payment of Customs duty provided the amount due
does not exceed £3. This amount is deducted before
any claim is made.
The concession with respect to presents applies
only to members of the New Zealand Expeditionary
Force, and is liable to be withdrawn in any case
where the Collector of Customs is satisfied that it is
being abused, as, for instance, where a soldier sends
by one mail goods the duty of which approaches the
£3 limit, and continues to forward goods of consider-
able value by subsequent mails. The other con-
cessions apply to all British soldiers whether from
New Zealand or not.
Exemption from Income-tax.
Provision was made in the Finance Act exempting
from income-tax the pay earned beyond New Zealand,
as members of the Expeditionary Forces, by all
persons resident in New Zealand and engaged beyond
New Zealand in any of His Majesty’s Naval or Military
Forces in connection with the war.
Exemption from Absentee-tax.
In addition to this, provision was also made under
the Act to exempt from absentee-tax all persons
serving out of New Zealand during the war in any
of His Majesty’s Naval or Military Forces or in any
capacity in connection with those Forces.
National Provident Fund Benefits.
Contributors to the National Provident Fund
who are members of the Expeditionary Force are


entitled to be exempt from the disability imposed on
contributors through absence from New Zealand, as
the Act provides that absence on military service
shall not be deemed to be absence from New Zealand.
During the time a contributor is so absent on
military service his contributions to the fund shall
be reducible to one-half.
The Department also established a deduction-
from-pay system whereby the moiety of the con-
tributions due from contributors themselves could be
automatically deducted from military pay.
In cases where contributors left with the Forces
without advising the fund special arrangements are
made to secure their rights and membership on
return.
Assistance to Friendly Societies.
The Friendly Societies Department has subsidized
half the cost of the death benefits of soldier members
of friendly societies who have lost their lives whilst
on service.
The same Department is also subsidizing the con-
tributions of soldier members to the Sick and Funeral
Funds of friendly societies during the period they
are on military, service, while the Soldiers’ Financial
Assistance Board has also made a large number of
grants to soldiers for the payment of their friendly-
society dues.
As it is anticipated that friendly societies may
have to withstand an abnormal rate of sickness
among their members who have seen active service,
arrangements are being made to separate the sick-
pay accounts of ordinary members from those of
discharged soldiers, with the object of ascertaining
approximately the extra liability in respect of “ after-
discharge ” sickness. The Government has under-
taken, through the Friendly Societies Department,
to subsidize friendly societies for any extra expendi-
ture indicated in this special account to the extent
of 50 per cent.


Exchange on New Zealand Notes.
The Government has arranged through the Bank
of New Zealand that New Zealand soldiers may
exchange New Zealand bank-notes at the Interna-
tional Banking Corporation’s Bank at Colon at a
fixed rate of 4 dollars 80 cents to the pound sterling,
the difference in exchange being met by the New
Zealand Government. Similar arrangements have
also been made for cashing New Zealand bank-notes
at par at Cairo, Capetown, and in Australia.
State Fire Insurance.
The State Fire Insurance Department undertook
during the war to waive its rule regarding non-
occupancy in respect to all risks owned by soldiers,
and no risk owned by a soldier was allowed to lapse
on account of its being unoccupied.
Furthermore, the Department made every effort
to protect the interest of soldiers before allowing any
policy in a soldier’s name to lapse, and no policy was
allowed to lapse by reason of non-payment of the
premium until it was ascertained that the position
was satisfactory from the soldier’s point of view.
Mining Privileges protected.
Special provision has been made by the Mines
Department in the interests of soldiers, in that a
mining privilege held under the Mining Act, 1908,
shall not be liable to forfeiture at any time after
the holder thereof shall have been accepted for
service in the war, or until six months after the
termination of such service.
In all cases when application has been made, the
rents upon mining privileges held by soldiers upon
active service have been treated as non-recoverable.
The Public Trustee.
Although the Public Trust Office has not been able
to offer specific concessions to soldiers, owing to the


nature of its business, it has, however, administered
estates of deceased soldiers at extremely low rates of
commission at a cost of many thousands of pounds
to the Office; and has also accepted, at purely
nominal fees, agencies on behalf of soldiers who are
absent on military service.
Protection from Legal Action.
Regulations which were current during the war
giving the soldier protection against civil processes
of the Courts have been revised, and the period of
operation extended. The current regulations for
this purpose are as follows :
1. These regulations may be cited as the Soldiers’
Protection Regulations, 1919.
2. In these regulations—
“ Soldier ” means a member of an Expeditionary
Force under the Expeditionary Forces Act,
1915, who is in receipt of military pay as
such, or who is on leave without pay after
his return to New Zealand from military
service beyond the seas :
“ Discharged soldier ” means a person who has
in any manner ceased to be a member of
any such Expeditionary Force after military
service as such beyond the seas :
“ Recently discharged soldier ” means a dis-
charged soldier at any time within the
twelve months immediately succeeding his
return to New Zealand after military
service beyond the seas:
“ Assisted discharged soldier ” means a dis-
charged soldier who is for the time being
indebted to the Crown in respect of any loan
granted to him, with or without security,
under the Discharged Soldiers Settlement
Act, 1915, or the Repatriation Act, 1918.
3. Without the previous consent in writing of the
Attorney-General granted on the recommendation of


a Stipendiary Magistrate it shall not be lawful for
any person —
(a.) To issue any process of execution against the
property of a soldier, or recently discharged
soldier, or assisted discharged soldier in
pursuance of any judgment, decree, or order
of any Court in its civil jurisdiction, whether
obtained before or after the making of these
regulations ; or
(b.) To seize or sell the property of any soldier,
recently discharged soldier, or assisted dis-
charged soldier by way of distress for rent ;
or
(c.) To file a bankruptcy petition against a soldier,
recently discharged soldier, or assisted dis-
charged soldier ; or
(. d .) To exercise (otherwise than with the leave of
the Supreme Court under the Mortgages
Extension Act, 1914) any power of sale
conferred by any mortgage, bill of sale, or
other security over the property of a soldier,
recently discharged soldier, or assisted dis-
charged soldier, whether that mortgage, bill
of sale, or security was given before or after
the making of these regulations, and whether
the person whose property is subject thereto
became a soldier, recently discharged soldier,
or assisted discharged soldier before or after
the date of the mortgage, bill of sale, or
security.
As it was suggested that clause 3 might act pre-
judicially to a discharged soldier by preventing him
from getting necessary credit from merchants and
others, its operation has been qualified by an amend-
ment which has been gazetted as follows :
(1.) Nothing in clause 3 of the regulations herein-
before referred to shall apply to proceedings taken
with respect to the balance for the time being of
an account current of any soldier or discharged


soldier with any bank or approved trading com-
pany or approved merchant, or with respect to any
mortgage, bill of sale, or other security securing
such account current, and all such proceedings may
be taken accordingly without the consent of the
Attorney-General.
(2.) For the purposes of this clause an “ approved
trading company ” or “ approved merchant ” means
any company, firm, or person approved in that
behalf by the Attorney-General.
Instalment Mortgages.
It was the policy of the Financial Assistance
Board to pay interest only on all mortgages, the
Board arranging with the mortgagors for postpone-
ment of principal payments in cases where the
money was loaned under the system of table mort-
gages. As most soldiers on their return to civil life
are not able to pay these accumulated instalments,
the Government has decided to introduce legislation
during the next ensuing session to afford the neces-
sary relief.


INDEX.
[New matter which appears in this edition is indicated by a
marginal line.]
A.
Absentee-tax, soldier’s exemption from, 62.
Advances for land-purchase, 49.
Allowance, hospital out-patients’, 10.
Allowance, mufti, 10.
Allowance to dependants of military prisoners, 21.
Allowances and pay, 19-22.
Allowances, separation, retrospective, 21.
Apprentices, right to complete term, 39.
Apprentices, Repatriation Board’s payment to, 39.
Apprentices, return of, to New Zealand, 3.
Articles made by soldiers, 18.
Artificial appliances, provision of, n.
Assisted discharged soldier protected from legal action,
65-67.
Assisted passages to New Zealand, 4.
B.
Baggage allowance, 5.
Ballots, land, preference to soldiers, 50.
Base Records, inquiries of, 2.
Board and lodgings (see also Financial assistance), 22—26.
Boot-factory, training, 38.
Boots, surgical, n.
Bursaries to soldiers, 50.
Bursaries to soldiers’ dependants, 51.
Bush lands, advances in respect of, 49.
Business leave in England, 3.
Businesses, soldiers’, management of, 26.
Businesses, assistance to purchase, 39.
C.
Certificate, King’s, on Discharge, 59.
Certificate, war medal and, 58.
Chest cases, hospital for, 14.
Children, soldiers’, travelling- warrants for, 5.
Confinements, grants (see also Financial assistance), 25.


Confinements, free treatment in St. Helens Hospital, 13.
Consumption sanatoria, 13-17.
Convalescent homes, list of, 13-17.
Curative instruction at hospitals, 17.
Customs duties, concessions to soldiers, 62.
D.
Death benefits, friendly societies’, subsidized, 63.
Death, payment of allowances after, 19.
Death, pension in case of, 32.
Deceased soldiers’ medals, 61.
Demobilization. (See Discharge.)
Dental, soldiers’, treatment, n.
Dental students’ courses in England, 8.
Dental students, return to New Zealand, 3.
Dependants, military prisoners’, allowance to, 19.
Dependants, soldiers’ —
Allowance to, 20.
Assisted passages to New Zealand, 4.
Education bursaries, 51.
Pensions, 28-33.
Sustenance allowance, 37.
Treatment in public hospitals, 12.
Disabled soldiers, vocational training, 6.
After discharge, 40.
Disablement, pension in case of, 33.
Discharge abroad, 2, 3.
Discharge, King's Certificate on, 59.
Discharged soldier protected from legal action, 65—67*
Discharge, order of, 2.
Discharge, procedure on arrival, 8.
Dwellings, soldiers’. 45.
E.
Education —
Farming, 41-43-
General scheme in England and France, 6.
Occupational, in hospitals, 6.
On return voyage, 8.
University, New Zealand, scholars in England, 7-
University scholarships, 7.


Educationaljand vocational training, 17, 18.
After discharge, 36-40.
5O, 51.
in England, 3.
Embarkation, leave before, 3.
Employment (see also i ßepatriation Board), 34-40.
Examination conditions, relaxation of, 52.
Exchange on New Zealand notes, 64.
Eyes, artificial, provision of, n.
F.
Farming, expert advice for soldiers, 43.
Farming, instruction in, 7, 18, 41-43.
Farms for training soldiers, 41-43.
Farms, private, training on, 43.
Farms, soldiers’, management of, 2b.
Fiancees, soldiers’, assisted passages, 5.
Financial assistance to soldiers, 22-26.
Fire insurance. State Department’s concession, 64.
Flight Officers and Cadets, allowance to, 6.
Four-weeks free railway pass, g.
Friendly societies, assistance to, 63.
Furniture, assistance to purchase, 40.
Furniture, payment of instalments of purchase-money, 24.
G.
Gas cases, hospital for, 16.
General hospitals, list of, 13-17.
Gratuity, war, 28.
Guardian of soldier’s children, allowance to, 20.
H.
Heart cases, hospital for, 14.
Hospitals—
Defence, list of, 13—17.
Education in, 6, 7.
Relatives visiting, 12.
Soldiers’ dependants’ treatment in, 12, 13.
Workshops at, 18.
Household fumiture|not in baggage allowance, 5.
Houses, purchase and building of, 45.


I.
Immigration Department, assistance to soldiers’ families, 5.
imperial pensions and New Zealand rates, 31.
Income-tax, soldiers’ exemption, 62.
Infectious diseases hospital, 14.
Inquiries at Base Records, &c., 2.
Insurance premiums, 24.
Interest on mortgages, &c. (see also Financial assistance),
22-26.
Introduction, 1.
J.
Jaw injuries, hospital for, 15.
K.
King’s Certificate on Discharge, 59. .
L.
Land—
Applications for, 44.
Ballots, preference to soldiers, 50.
Facilities to inspect, 50.
Option to purchase, 49.
Private, for discharged soldiers, 47.
Purchase and improvement, 48.
Settlement opportunities, 44-50.
Leave —
Before embarkation, 3.
Sick, on disembarkation, 8.
Prior to discharge, 8.
Public servants’, 55-58.
Special, for prisoners of war, 3.
Legal action, soldiers’ protection from, 65-67.
Libraries, technical, at hospitals, 19.
Limbs, artificial, n.
Lodge fees (see also Financial assistance). 25.
M.
Maori soldiers’ repatriation, 36.
Married men, preference in discharge, 2.
Maternity, free treatment for soldiers’ and sailors’ wives, 13.
Matriculation, soldiers’, 52.


Meals, free, when travelling on pass, 9.
Medals, war, 58-61.
Medals, war, deceased soldiers’, 61.
Medical examination, Public Service, fees paid, 40.
Medical students’ courses in England, 8.
Medical students, return to New Zealand, 3.
Medical treatment before discharge, 10.
Medical treatment after discharge, 34.
Medical treatment, soldiers’ dependants, 12.
Military prisoners’ dependants, 21.
Mine-sweepers, pensions to employees on, 27.
Mining privileges protected, 64.
Mortgages, instalment, accumulations of principal, 67.
Mother, widowed, allowance, 20.
Mufti allowance, 10.
N.
National Efficiency Board and soldiers’ farms and busi-
nesses, 26-28.
National Provident Fund benefits, 62.
National Provident Fund (see also Financial assistance), 25.
Naval ratings, maternity treatment for wives of, 13.
Neurasthenic cases, hospitals for, 14-16.
New Zealand notes, exchange on, 64.
Nurses, convalescent home for, 13.
Nurses’ pensions, 28-33.
O.
Occupational education in hospitals, 6.
Old-age pension, income exemption, 31.
Orthopaedic hospitals, list of, 13-17.
Out-patients’ allowance, xo.
P.
Passage-money, refund of, 4.
Passages, assisted, to New Zealand, 4.
Pay and allowances, 19-22.
Pay inquiries at War Expenses Branch, 2.
Pensions inquiries, 2.
Pensions, war—
Advance payments of, 30.
Details of, 28-33.
Imperial, 31.
Payable outside New Zealand, 31.
Supplementary, 31.
72
INDEX,


Plant and businesses, assistance to purchase, 39.
Preference to soldiers in Public Service, 58.
Prisoners, military, allowance to dependants, 21.
Prisoners of war, return to New Zealand, 3.
Prisoners of war, special leave, 3.
Promotion, public servants’, during absence, 56.
Public Service medical examination fees, 40.
Public servants in Expeditionary Force, 55-58-
Public servants' annual leave due on enlistment, 57.
Public servants’ annual leave on discharge, 57.
Public Trustee and soldiers’ estates, 64.
Public Works employees, return of, 3.
R.
Railway-men, return of, to New Zealand, 3-
Railway warrant, four-weeks, 9.
Refunds of passage-money, 4.
Relatives, soldiers’, visiting hospitals, 12.
Rent (see also Financial assistance), 22-26.
Rent, rebate of, 50.
Repatriation Board’s organization, 34.
Repatriation, soldiers’, to other countries, 54-
Retrospective financial assistance, 23.
Retrospective separation allowance, 21.
S.
Salary, public servants’, increments of, 56.
School-teachers, return of, to New Zealand, 3.
Separation allowance retrospective, 21.
Shell-shock, hospital for, 16.
Sick-leave on disembarkation, 8,
Sick-leave, public servants’, 55.
Soldief protected from legal action, 65-67.
Soldiers’ businesses, 26.
Soldiers’ dependants, free medical treatment, 12.
Soldiers’ dependants, sustenance allowance, 37.
Soldiers' dwellings, 45.
Soldiers’ estates, 64.
Soldiers' farms, 26.
Soldiers' financial assistance, 22-26.
Soldiers’ repatriation to other countries, 54.
Soldiers’ widows, training facilities, 39.


Splints, provision of, n.
Star, the 1914-15, 59-61.
State farms, instruction at, 41.
State fire insurance concession, 64.
Steamer concessions during privilege pass, 9.
St. Helens Hospitals, soldiers’ and sailors’ wives’ treat-
ment in, 13..
Stockings, elastic, provision of, 11.
Superannuation, public servants', 55.
Supplementary war pensions, 31.
Surgical appliances, provision of, 11.
Surgical operations, grants (see also Financial assistance),
26.
Sustenance allowance to soldiers’ dependants, 37.
Sustenance during unemployment, 37.
T.
Teacher soldiers, uncertificated; 53.
Teachers, grading of, 53.
Teachers, return of, to New Zealand, 3.
Technical education of soldiers, 18, 37-39, 53.
Technical libraries at hospitals, 19.
Text-books, grant for, 38.
Tools, trade, assistance to purchase, 40.
Training on private farms, 43.
Training college ex-students returning, 53.
Transportation, Repatriation Board grants, 40.
Transports, pensions to employees on, 29.
Travelling by steamer, concessions, 9.
Travelling, four-weeks free, on arrival, 9.
Travelling to employment, 40.
Travelling-warrants for soldiers’ wives, 5.
Trusses, provision of, n.
U.
Unemployment, sustenance during, 37.
Uniform, when worn prior to discharge, g.
University—
Education, inquiries re, 54.
Examination fees, rebate on, 54.
Fees paid by Defence Department, 19.
Scholars in England, 7.
Scholarships, 7.


V.
Vocational training—
After discharge, 36-40.
Of disabled soldiers, 6, 17, 18, 37, 38, 40.
Officers’, 16.
While awaiting demobilization, 6, 7.
W.
War gratuity, 28.
War medal and certificate, 58.
War medal, deceased soldiers’, 61.
War pensions, 28-33.
Widowed mother, allowance, 20.
Widowed mother, pension, 30.
Widows’ pension, income exemption, 31-
Widows, soldiers’, training, 39.
Widows’, soldiers’,, assistance while training, 39.
Wives, soldiers’ —
Allowances to, 20.
Assistance on arrival, 5.
Assisted passages to New Zealand, 4.
Eligibility for pensions, 30.
Free maternity treatment, 13.
Workshops at hospitals, 18.
Workshops, private, assistance while training in, 39.
By Authority; Marcus F. Marks, Government Printer, Wellington.
[3,000/5/19 —8293
