

The Neotsfitld Estate.
The Property of Mr. R. H. Dangar.
NEOTSFIELD, the property of Mr. R. FI. Dangar, is one of the well-known estates
on the famous Hunter River. It is always well before the public eye cn account
of the notable horses bred there. The Neotsfield stud of Suffolk Punches is now
so well known in the various States of Australia that the estate well deserves inclusion as
one of the leading pastoral homes.
THE LODGE GATES.
The Hunter River district is one of the oldest settlements in the State; it was wild, rug-
ged country when the early pioneers spread out over the Bulga Mountains, and founded
Singleton, Maitland, Newcastle, and other towns on the river. The name of Dan gar is en-
twined with the history of the district, for Mr. Henry Dangar, grandfather of the present
owner of Neotsfield, was one of the first to venture up there. He was one of the leading
surveyors of that period, and he laid out the present town of Newcastle, besides doing other
important work in that and other parts of the State, which will stand for all time. In


several old works on the old days of Aus-
tralia Mr, Henry Hangar’s name is mention-
ed, and Judge Therry, in his 'Thirty Years’
Reminiscences of New South Wales and
Victoria,” published in 1863, frequently
makes reference to him. According to an
ancient little volume called “The Hand-
book for Australian Immigrants,” written
by Samuel Butler, Esq., in the year 1839,
Mr. Dangar took a prominent part in the
efforts to settle the country. In the year-
-1826, when surveyor to the Australian Agri-
cultural Company, he published a large map
of the Hunter River district, with a descrip-
tion for intending immigrants.
A portion of Neotsfield was granted to
Mr. Henry Dangar in those early days, and
it was added to by him, and later on by his
son, the late Mr. W. J. Dangar, on whose
THE HON. H. C. DANGAR, M.L.C.
death it came into the possession of the Hon. H. C. Dangar, now of Grantham, Potts
Point, Sydney. Neotsfreld now comprises about 8000 acres, situated about four miles front
Singleton and about 150 miles from Sydney, on the northern railway line. It came into
the possession of the
present owner in 1895,
though previous to that
he managed the estate
for his father for seve-
ral years. About half
the run is river flat, wa-
tered by the liunter,
which runs through the
centre of the property,
and artificial supplies
are obtained, where
needed, by wells pump-
ed by windmills. The
other half of the land is
INDIAN BLACK BUCK, BRED AT NEOTSFIELD.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Mrs. R. H. DANGAR.
3 ft. above ground, had the water through
it to a depth of several inches. The lowest
year for rainfall was 1902, the big drought
year, when the total was only 13.55 in.
The Homestead
The Neotsfield house is a two-storied
brick building with a slate roof, and in de-
sign it resembles an English house. It was
built by Mr. Henry Dangar when the land
was first granted, but it was added to by
Mr. W. J. Dangar, and further additions
have been made by the present owner.
The garden is in front and on two sides
of the house, and is about two acres in ex-
tent. It includes an orchard and kitchen
garden, a vinery of table grapes enclosed
in netting, and a glass house, in which
of an undulating nature, heavily timbered
with ironbark and spotted gum. The soil is
of a clayey nature, with ironstone cropping
up, and this part of the estate is watered
by a creek and eight dams. The river flats
were originally heavily timbered, but now
only ornamental trees exist. They have been
planted all over the flats in clumps for
shade and shelter purposes. They give the
country a charming park-like appearance,
so much so that one wonders why more
landowners do not so beautify their estates.
The rainfall for the district for the pas
twenty years has averaged 25.68 in., the
highest during that time being 46.11 in. in
1893, In that year there was the highest
flood ever known in that part of the coun-
try, when the house, which is raised about
MR. R. H. DANGAR.
The NeotsTield Estate, New South Wales.


THE HOUSE FROM THE FRONT GATE.
THE GARDEN LOOKING SOUTH WEST.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE FROM THE SOUTH WEST.
The Neotsfleld Estate, New South Wafes*


ferns and palms are chiefly raised. The ornamental portion of the garden is laid out in
lawns, shrubs, and flower-beds. The house is lighted with acetylene gas throughout, and
water is laid on to it and to the garden from an elevated tank, which is fdled by a wind-
mill from a well near the garden.
The Stock.
Though Mr. Dangar has disposed of his thoroughbred stud, reference must be made
to the great horses that once roamed in the Neotsfield paddocks.
The late Mr. W. J. Dangar, a great friend and crony of the late Mr. Bruce Lowe, the
gifted discoverer of “The Figure System,” was the first to introduce high quality into
A GROUP OF POLLED JERSEYS.
Neotsfield stud in respect to the thoroughbred, as well as the Arab, and for many years
he laboured with brains and money to prove the value of the Arab as a cross with the
thoroughbred or as an improver to the same, but the fame of Neotsfield depended in the
end on the latter. Mr. Dangar imported some high-class stock Arabs and thoroughbreds
to the famous Hunter River stud, and among his importations was that pillar of the Aus-
tralian stud book, the immortal Algeria, who was foaled iByi, was a member of Bruce
Lowe’s No. i family, and was by Blinkhoolie from Adrastia, by St. Albans from Nemesis,
by Newminster. Though she was the dam of Algerian and Anglesey, fine racehorses, her
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A GROUP OF UTILITY MARKS.
greatest son was Gibraltar, who in the colours of the Hon. H. C. Dan gar won the A.J.C.
Derby and the V.R.C. St. Leger. Through her female descendants Algeria reached her
greatest glory, for her daughters and granddaughters have been prolific in the production
of racehorses, and in proof of that contention need only be mentioned such racehorses
and producers as Le Var, May King, Mother Goose, Welcome Trist, Regio, Barbarossa,
Massinissa, Lady Metallist, Saida, &c. Another of Mr. W. J. Dangar’s importations that
left her mark on the stud book records of Australia was Signora, a mare by Newcastle
from Actress, by Stockwell from Himalaya, by Bay Middleton. In Cardigan, by Golds-
borough, Signora produced a racehorse of great quality and stamina, a winner of many
first-class races, including the Summer Cup under g st. Signora had two daughters—■
Duenna and Mantilla. From the first
descend, among other winners, Amber-
ite (winner of the Derby, Champion
Stakes, and Caulfield Cup), Spinaway
(Adelaide Cup), and Flintlock (Perth
Cup). Among others descending in the
female line from Signora were Acetine,
Pellisier, Watchfire, and Kilt. To Secu-
rity, a mare by Lord Clifden from All’s
Well, by The Cure from Little Casino,
who was imported in the seventies by
Mr. Dan gar, Neotsfield owed much of its
success as a nursery for thoroughbreds,
ARDON (TARTAR—ARDEA), USED WITH UTILITY MARES.
The Neats fie Id Estate, New South Wales,


A GROUP OF SUFFOLK PUNCH MARES.
as it did to Victorine, an English mare brought out at the same time. The latter was by
Victorious from Entremet, by Sweetmeat.
In Mr. W. J. Dangar’s time Hawthornclen, an English St. Leger winner, was at his
best as a stallion, but Grandmaster, another English importation, was freely and success-
fully used. Three famous sons of Grandmaster came out of Neotsfield paddocks—first,
Sussex, who is yet described as the greatest all-round racehorse Australia has produced,
tie won hurdle races, flat races, and steeplechases, and towards the close of his career
won the Grand National Steeplechase, carrying 13 st. 3 lbs. Highborn, by Grandmaster,
left Neotsfield for a Sydney stable, and began in a mild way, but he subsequently won the
Australian and Sydney Cups, besides running second to great Carbine in the Melbourne
Cup, and for three seasons he was the
undisputed champion of India, winning
the Viceroy’s Cup twice, where another
Neotsfield-bred one, Leonidas, by Gibral-
tar, won great fame. Gibraltar was con-
sidered the noblest Roman of them all,
and was retained for the stud as the head
of the harem. One of his best sons was
Rock Gun, whose dam Bangle was an
English mare by Barcaldine, imported to
Neotsfield, but it remained for the last
importation to the old stud, Positano,
to win the greatest honours for it.
SUFFOLK-PUNCH STALLION—RENDLESHAM SHAME (IMP.) 3431.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Positano was selected in
England for Mr. H. C.
Dangar by Mr. (now
Sir) William Cooper.
For a season Positano
earned his owner’s col-
ours successfully on the
Australian turf, and
was then presented to
Mr. R. PI. Dangar bj'
his father. Positano is
the sire of the Mel-
bourne Cup winners
Lord Cardigan, Posei-
don, and Lord Nolan,
A LUCERNE PADDOCK.
as well as Mooltan, twice the winner of the Metropolitan; Post Town, winner of the Perth
Cup; May King, winner of the Perth Cup ; Little Toy, winner of the Don-
caster Handicap ; Postulate, winner of the Hobart Cup ; Warroo, a fine per-
former ; and Postillion, Tattersall’s Cup. All these, with the exception
of Lord Cardigan, Postillion, Warroo, and Lord Nolan, were bred at Neotsfield.
Poseidon, the subsequent winner of over £19,000 in stakes, was sold as a foal beside his
dam at the break up of the stud to Messrs. W. and F. Moses, and Mooltan, winner of
over £7OOO in stakes, was sold with his dam to Mr. J. Noonan. Though only six years
have passed since Neotsfield stud was broken up such a collection of mares and foals to-
day would easily double, perhaps treble, the amount they fetched when dispersed. Po-
sitano was retained in the stud until 1908, when he was sold to Mr. S. Green, of Victoria,
for 4500 guineas. (V'-\
THE WELL AND MILL USED FOR IRRIGATING LUCERNE.
The Neats fie Id Estate, New South Waios,


LUCERNE IRRIGATED BY WINDMILL AND OIL ENGINE FROM WELL.
In addition to the thoroughbreds, Neotsfield has for over fifty years been the home of
pure Suffolk Punch horses. The stud now consists of about forty mares, all descended
from the purest stock. From time to time sires and mares have been imported from Eng-
land. The stallions at present in use are Rendlesham Shame (imp.) 3431, bred by Mr. A.
J. Smith, of Woodbridge, and Mooki Sultan, bred by Mr. A. A. Dangar. Every year Mr.
Dangar sends a draft of three-year-old Suffolk colts to Sydney, where they have met a
ready sale at auction.
The Neotsfield Suffolks
have been very suc-
cessful at the Royal
Sydney Show for many
years, and as gen-
erally useful farm
horses this fine old
breed is steadily in-
creasing in favour.
Mr. Dan gar breeds
a considerable number
of utility horses, get-
ting excellent results
from crossing a thor-
ENTRANCE TO STABLE YARD.
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia,


oughbred stallion with mares got by putting a Norfolk cob on to thoroughbred and Arab
mares, and the progeny again back to a thoroughbred, the stallion at present in use be-
ing Ardon (Tartar —Ardea), sire of winners in Queensland, where he was before bought
for the Neotsfield stud. Stallions are not housed, but are out all year in small paddocks,
with shelter sheds in them. Very useful van horses result from the cross of a thorough-
bred with Suffolk Punch mares, while Mr. Dangar has bred fine riding horses the same
way. One he rode for years, and he was an excellent jumper.
Reference must also be made to Mr. Dangar’s pure Jersey herd. These are all pe-
digree cattle, and for about forty years they have been bred at Neotsfield, A very inter-'
A CROSSING ON THE HUNTER RIVER NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
esting feature in connection with the Neotsfield Jerseys is that, because the herd has been
dehorned for a number of years, about 25 per cent, of the calves are now born
natural polies. In the illustration accompanying this article a group of these polled Jer-
seys is shown. Mr. Dangar does not breed these cattle for show purposes, but they are
large-bodied and big milkers.
There are about 70 acres under lucerne at Neotsfield, and this crop flourishes if the
season is at all suitable. Mr. Dangar uses it chiefly for hay, pressing and storing it as a
stand-by for droughts, though the first spring cut is usually made into ensilage. A portion
is irrigated from a well pumped by a windmill with an oil engine auxiliary, and some of the
The Neotsfield Estate, New South Wales,


A VIEW OT THE HUNTER RIVER ON THE ESTATE.
accompanying illustrations give an idea of the fine tank arrangements by which the sys-
tem is carried out. This is used principally for green food, any surplus going into the hay
supply.
A small herd of Indian Antelope (or Black Buck) has been raised by Mr. Dangar from
some brought to him from India about eight years ago; and seeing how this breed thrives
it seems a pity the authorities do not introduce it, or similar breeds, into the hot, dry
parts of Central and Northern Australia—which should suit it well—for game purposes.
The flesh is very good eating.
Personal.
Mr. Richard Halifax Dangar is the eldest son of Mr. H. C Dangar. He was born in
Sydney in 1868, and educated at All Saints' College, Bathurst. On leaving school he en-
tered pastoral pursuits, and gained a wide experience on the various stations owned by
Messrs. Dangar Bros. For several years previous to owning Neotslield he managed it for
his father. Mr. Dangar is a member of the Patrick Plains Shire Council, and a prominent
member of the Northern Agricultural Society, and he is a well-known exhibitor at the Royal
Sydney Show. In 1895 he married Ethel, the eldest daughter of the late Vincent J. Dow-
ling, of Lue, and his family consists of a son and a daughter.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.
