

THE
Point Lace Sampler:
CONTAINING
COMPLETE INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE STITCHES,
WITH
(IDrijginal
BY
MLLE. RIEGO DE LA BRANCHARDIERE.
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT AND UNDER THE IMMEDIATE PATRONAGE OF H.R.H. THE PRINCESS
OF WALES, THE ROYAL PRINCESSES, ETC., ETC.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
LONDON: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO.;
THE BERLIN WAREHOUSES} AND OF THE AUTHORESS, 238, OXFORD STREET.
1871.
Entered at Stationers’ Hall.] [The right of Translation is reserved.


Prize Medal, 1862
Prize Medal 1862.
Prize Medal 1855.
Prize Medal, 1851.
AWARDED
“W)R THE SKILL DISPLAYED IN THE IMITATION OF OLD SPANISH AND OTHER COSTLT LACES.”
su Jurors’ Rrpobt, Inxrenatioitai. exhibition


POINT LACE SAMPLER.
(For Description see page 11.)


Instructions for Preparing the Pattern.
To acquire a knowledge of Point Lace the enlarged sections of the following
stitches should be learnt first, and then practised by making a Sampler of them as
the frontispiece, directions for which are given at page 11. Any of the designs
which accompany this book can then be worked.
■ Copy the outline of the engraving on a light-coloured paper —that is, the broad
lines representing the Lacet or Tape ; gum at the back of the pattern a piece of
holland to make it firm. To save trouble, duplicate patterns of any of these
designs can be had ready for working, at a trifling expense, on application to the
Authoress.
Mile. Eiego’s Eegistered Point Lace Patterns, drawn on kid or cloth, for any
article made in lace, can be obtained of the full size ready for working, with a
sample of the work begun, if required.
To Braid the Pattern. —Use Walker’s sewing needle and Evans’s Boar’s-head cot-
ton No. 40, commence at the left, and run the Lacet on the lines of the drawing. The
stitches should be about one-eighth of an inch in length, and in a slanting direction
across the centre of the Lacet. In turning the ovals and rounds, press the Lacet
on the pattern until the edges are perfectly flat and easy; and at the angles sew
both the edges to the pattern; then fold the Lacet over to form the point; this
will prevent the Lacet from widening at the turn.
THE POINT LACE SAMPLER.


If broad Lacet or Guipure Tape be used, it should be first tacked nearer the
outer edge of the tape, allowing it to be full at the other edge, so that it can
afterwards be drawn in, which is done by running round the opposite side with a
finer needle and thread, taking care not to sew it to the pattern, as this second
running is to make it lie flat, and remains in the work.
MATEEIALS.
Mlle. Eiego’s Guipure Tape is made of linen. It is
in four widths, the above being the widest. French
Lacet or Braid is also used for the work, and is a less
expensive material. Tlie term “ Lacet ” is used in these directions to designate
the Braid or Tape which forms the outline of the patterns.
THE THREADS.
The Threads.— The Boar’s-head Crochet Cotton, manufactured by Messrs.
Walter Evans & Co., is the most suited for general work, as it produces a clear and
firm stitch; and it is advisable to use it for all the open lace stitches, even when
the rest of the materials are of linen. Nos. 16, 20, 24, 30, 36, 40, and 50 are the
sizes required, three or four different numbers being often used in one piece of Lace.
The Bars or lines oh over-cast, which connect the braids should always be worked
with Walter Evans & Co.’s Mecklenburgh Linen Thread, the most useful numbers
being 6,8, 10, and 12. Finer and coarser sizes can also be obtained.
THE NEEDLES.
The Needles. —Walker’s “ Queen’s Own” Sewing Needles, Nos. 7 or 8, are to
be used for tacking the braid on the pattern. If the design is formed of French
or Linen Lacet the stitches should be worked with Walker’s Elliptic Needles. For
the Guipure Tape the stitches are to be worked with Walker’s Egg-eyed Needles.


TEEMS OF THE STITCHES, AND RULES.
Point de Bruxelles. —-This stitch is the basis of all stitches used in British
and foreign points, known here as
over-cast, chain, or button-hole
stitch; the other stitches are com-
pounds and variations of it. Com-
mence at the left of the pattern on
the inner edge of the Laoet, and
turning the thread to the right,
insert the needle in the front of
the edge of the Laoet, and bring it
out at the back, inside the loop
formed by the thread, which finishes
the stitch. Repeat along the Lacet
neatly, yet sufficiently deep to prevent its fraying. These stitches should be worked
loosfiiy, and about one-twelfth of an inch apart.
A Reverse Stitch is worked from right to left, and to form the loop the
thread must be turned the contrary way; that is, towards the left.
A Bow —The length from left to right of a space, to be filled up by the same
stitch. A reverse Bow —The length from right to left.
To Commence —Make a small knot and run the needle along the centre of the
Lacet for a few stitches.
To fasten off —Work a stitch of Point de Bruxelles and run the needle along
the Lacet for a few stitches, pass it back again and cut it off. In passing from one
space to another, run the needle along the centre of the Lacet.
To join Stitches —Pass the needle in the opposite stitch after each stitch ; and in
filling a space the needle should be passed in the Lacet or work at the end of each
row, and in the last row, it must be joined after every stitch.


Point he Vbnise. —Tins stitch is always commenced at the left of the
pattern. Work a stitch of Point do
Bruxelles on the Lacet, and in this
stitch work four tight stitches. Re-
peat to the end, and fasten off.
Petit Point de Yenisk.— ls
formed by working only one tight
stitch instead of four in each stitch
of the Point de Bruxelles.
SPANISH POINT.
Commence on the Lacet, turn
the thread to the right; insert
the needle in the front edge of
the Lacet, and bring it out at
the back inside the loop formed
by the thread, as in Point de
Bruxelles or overcast stitch;
then take the thread in the right
hand, about three inches from
the eye of the needle; pass it
under the point of the needle,
and bring it in front; then draw
the needle through, which finishes
one stitch. Repeat. The stitches


should be the twelfth of an inch apart; they are always worked from left to right;
and to form the reverse row, pass the needle and thread through each of the loops
of the previous row, merely sewing over and over. In working another row upon
this, the needle should he inserted in each open stitch of the first row.
Commence on the Lacet and pass
the thread to the opposite side, work-
ing one stitch to secure it; then pass
the thread back to the same side,
twisting eight or ten times round the
first thread, forming a double twisted
thread ; then run the needle along
the Lacet, dividing the space into
six or eight compartments, and cross
and recross the threads until the last
is worked, which should be twisted
only four times, that is, to the centre
of all the crossings, and work one
ROSETTE OF POINT D’ANGLETERRE.
stitch in the centre to fasten them together six or eight threads will now cross
each other, one of which will be a single thread ; this forms the foundation.
Commence working round the centre, by passing the needle round one thread and
under the second; then pass it round the second and under the third. Repeat in
thin manner all round eight or ten times ; then twist the thread three times round
the single thread and fasten off.
A twisterl Thread —Cross the thread from right to left, and passing the thread
round the first thread four or five times, bring it back to the right, and fasten.


Point D’AnENgON, on Hem Stitch. —This stitch is used between two bars of
Point de Venise, or lines of Lacet to
connect them. Work one stitch of Point
de Bruxelles on the upper line, and
turning the thread to the outside, insert
the needle in the lower or opposite line,
and bring it out at the back, inside of
the thread, as in working a reverse row.
Repeat, working one stitch alternately
on each line.
A Dotted Bab.— Pass a thread across from left
to right and then back right to left, and on it work
a few overcast stitches ; then, to form the Dot, take
the thread which forms the left side of the loop,
and turn the loop six or eight times round the
needle; draw out the needle and thread, which
finishes the dot; then five close stitches on the
bar. The number of close stitches is varied according
to the pattern. In making large Dots it is advisable
to turn the right thread nearest the stitches round
the needle, and as many as twelve turns can be made.


Point Lace Sampler
EXPLANATION OF THE STITCHES.
(See Frontispiece.)
Commence by Braiding a piece of Eid or Toile Ciree in small squares, dividing
it so as to leave spaces for the Insertions. The stitches should be worked with
Walter Evans and Co.’s Boar’s-head Crochet Cotton, No. 20, and Walker’s Elliptic
Needles, No. 7.
Open Diamonds. —lst row—Commence at the left side and leaving a space so as
to form an open stitch; work a stitch of Point de Bruxelles ; then work four
Bruxelles stitches close together, and continue the same to the end.
2nd row—All these stitches are to be the Eeverse Bruxelles Point; work an open
stitch in the last open stitch, and then a close stitch in the same space; then on the
two centre spaces of the stitches close together of the last row, work an open stitch
and then a close one. Repeat.
3rd row—To form the five stitches which appear close together, work one open
and one close stitch in the open space, then a close stitch in the close stitch of last
row, and two close stitches in the next space. Then missing the next close stitch,
Repeat. Then work the second row.
Venetian Net.— lst row—Work one open Bruxelles stitch and then four close
stitches in it as directed for Point de Yenise, page 8; then on the Lacet, work an
open stitch and repeat the Point de Yenise and open stitch alternately to the end.
2nd row—Work a reverse stitch of the Bruxelles Point in each open stitch of the
last row. In working the 3rd row, commence with the Bruxelles stitch, and then
work the Point de Yenise alternately.


Vandyke Net. —Ist row —Commence at the left side, work an open Bruxelles
stitch and then two close stitches. Repeat to the end.
2nd row—All these stitches are to be the Reverse Bruxelles Point; on the two
close stitches of the last row, work an open stitch in the nearest, and a close stitch
in the next. Repeat.
The 3rd row is the same as the Ist row, missing the close stitch and working the
others in the open space of the last row.
Double Spanish Point; —lst row—Commence at the left and work an open Spanish
stitch, as page 8 ; then work a second stitch close to the last. Repeat, and at the
end, sew over these stitches from right to left.
In the next row, work the two Spanish stitches in the open space.
Spanish and Bjsdxelles. —lst row—Commence at the left and work a row of
open Spanish point, keeping the stitches about the eighth of an inch apart; at the
end, sew back these stitches from right to left.
2nd row—Work three close Bruxelles stitches in each open stitch of the Ist row.
At the end take the thread across from right to left, and secure it at the left side.
3rd row—Work a close Bruxelles stitch in each stitch of the last row, putting
the needle under the crossing thread. At the end sew back every stitch from right
to left; then work the open Spanish row as before, putting the needle into every
third stitch of the last row.
Roman Net. —lst row —Commence at the left side, work an open Bruxelles
stitch and then a close stitch ; repeat working the open stitches a quarter of an inch
apart.


2nd row—All these stitches are to be reverse Bruxelles. Work five close stitches
in the open stitch of last row, and then another close stitch in the close stitch of
last row. Repeat.
3rd row—ls worked as the Ist row, putting the needle into the two centre
stitches of those worked in the open space.
THE INSERTIONS.
Insertion No. I. —This is formed by making a row of open Bruxelles stitches
along each side of the Lacet. The stitches of one side are then to be sewed over,
but in sewing the other side, two Spanish Point stitches are to be worked on the
opposite side to connect them, working them both in one stitch, and sewing over a
stitch between.
Insertion No. 2.—ls worked as the above, then sew over both sides and join it
with Hem stitch instead of Spanish Point.
Insertion No. 3.—Commence at the left and work on the short side of the
Lacet two close Bruxelles stitches, then an open stitch and one close at the right
side. Attach it to the Lacet. To work back, make a Reverse open stitch and four
close, all in the first open stitch; attach it to the Lacet at the left side and repeat.
The .centre Insertion is formed the same, working only one close stitch in the
centre open stitch.
Insertion No. 4.—Commence at the left, work an open stitch and two close at
the right side. To work back, make an open stitch and two close ones in the first
open stitch. Repeat.
Insertions Nos. 5 and 6. —Are formed of Spanish Point stitches worked on. the
upper line of the Lacet; the needle is passed through the lower line after each stitch
to connect it.
NOTICE.—AII communications for Mile. Biego must contain a stamped envelops to
ensure a reply.


H. WALKUB,
PATIHTSI MB MiSfKTOSIK W TH* PIH.
Warehouse: 47, Gresham Street, London, E.C.; Manufactory: Alcester.
have long enjoyed great popularity
with those who value really good
Needles. They have recently been
greatly altered by Patented Improvements of a most important character,
and are superior to all others.
THE ‘'QUEEN’S OWN” NEEDLES
have Labels with embossed Heads of the Queen, and are so named by authority. The same
quality is sold with oil-colored labels of the Allies, and are called the ALLIANCE NEEDLES.
H. WALKER’S PATENT PENELOPE CROCHETS
have had so many imitations, it is necessary to repeat the request that all who wish for the true
Needle will see that the word “ Penelope ” is on the handle.
UNCOTOPIC. H WALKERS PATENT.^
THE UNCOTOPIC HANDLE
keeps the Needle at all times in the true position for work, and is invaluable alike to the beginner,
or to an accomplished worker.
H. WALKER’S TRICOT HOOKS
are all Ivory, Bone, or Wood, the Hooks being Penelope shape and perfectly smooth. They are
made of various sizes, some as large as 1£ inch round, and are all marked with his name—
“H. Walker.”
H. WALOR manufactures every description of Needles, Crochet Hooks, Knitting
Fins, Pins, Toilet Fins, Hair Fins, Hooks and. Eyes, Thimbles, Fens, Fish Hooks.
Machine Needles, &c.


WALTER EVANS & CO.,
(g@TT@IM B?MINiyFA(eT®RY.
DERBY,
MANUFACTURE THE FOLLOWING:—
Superior Six Cord Crochet Cotton, on Spools and in Skeins, for Sewing,
Knitting, and Crochet Work.
Superior Six Cord Sewings, on Spools, soft finish, for Sewing Machines, &c
Tatting Cotton, on Spools.
Patent Glace Thread, in White, Black, and Colors, on Spools and Cards.
Two and Three Cord Sewings, on Spools, soft finish.
Sewings in Balls.
Embroidering, Knitting, Mending, Cotton Cords, and Small Cords.
1862.
1867.
London Exhibition Prize Medal,
Awarded “ for very Strong &
most superior Thread.”
Paris Universal Exhibition Gold
Medal.


Iltt&ktoorh (SslaWisfrnwnf,
liiKl
31 1855
1862
BT APPOINTMENT
TO H.R.H.
TOE PRINCESS OP WALES.
238, Oxford Street, W.
Near the Marble Arch.
The onlt Establishment authorised hy Mile. Rieoo to use her name
for the sale of her Various Works, is at the above address.
Mlle. Eiego db la Branchardiere having reason to believe that
there has been a recent infringement and use of her name, she must
caution Ladies against purchasing any of her registered or copyright
Designs for point Lace unless they are signed with her surname in full,
as by law the purchaser is liable as well as the person infringing.
s. d.
The Instruction Tatting Book 1 0
The Exhibition Tatting Book 1 0
The Boyal Tatting Book .. 10
The Lace Tatting Book .. 10
The Etoile Tatting Book .. 10
The Pearl Tatting Book .. 10
The Baised Tatting Book .. 10
The Simple Tatting Book .. 0 6
The Complete Tatting Book 1 0
Tatting Edgings 0 6
The Useful Knitting Book .. 10
Winter Book for 1862.. .. 1 0
“ Melange de Laine ”.. .. 10
‘•A New Wool Book”.. ..10
s. d.
The Point Lace Sampler .. 10
Short-way Edgings .. 1 0
Coloured Antimacassars .. 10
La Mode Winter 0 6
The Book of Siberian Wool 0 6
The Child’s Winter Knitting 0 6
The Abergeldie Winter Book 1 0
The 18th Series Crochet Book 1 0
The 10th, 15th, & 17th Series 1 6
The 2nd, sth, and 6th Series 1 0
The 7th, 14th, and 16th Series 1 0
The Guipure Netting Book.. 1 0
The Point Lace Instructor.. 1(L,,6
Boyal Point Lace Instructor Sr 6
HUU. ptgo’s Jeto stgijps in Italian, an& Inman f flint ftott.
Applicable for Collars, Sleeves, Parasols, Handkerchiefs, Head-Dresses, Altars, Albs, Chalice
Veils, Flounces, Dress Trimmings, Baby’s Robes, Frocks, Square Bodices, Banners, Brackets,
Sachets, and every other article manufactured in Black or White Lace.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRAL- -
