





THE ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION


[Photo by F. A. Swaine.
Major-General Sir Archibald Paris, K.C.B.
[Frontispiece.


THE ROYAL
NAVAL DIVISION
By Dougl as Jerrold
With an Introduction by the Right
Hon . Winston S. Churchill
LONDON: HUTCHINSON & CO.
PATERNOSTER ROW
1923




AUTHOR’S PREFACE
THIS history of the Royal Naval Division does not claim to
record all the doings of the many separate units which
served in the Division. Selection is essential to the writing of
history, and the idea that the history of a division should provide
an exception to a very golden rule is one which I do not share,
and for the same reason as that for which I feel the terms
“ Divisional History,” and, still more, “ Divisional Historian,”
to be misconceived. A history of the evolution of the division
as an administrative and tactical unit might perhaps, for want
of a better epithet, be called “ divisional.” But there should
be nothing sui generis about the history of the officers and men
who go to make up a particular division at a particular time.
Their deeds must surely be weighed and judged by the same
standards as those of other men, by the quantity they achieved,
but most of all by the quality they touched.
And so I have endeavoured to see and to write of the Naval
Division from the standpoint of the historian rather than the
chronicler, and I have unhesitatingly selected for the most
detailed treatment those episodes which bear on the widest
issues.
By reason of its origin and its organization, of its prominent
share in two famous military operations, and because among
its officers was more than one famous personality, representative
of the culture of an age on which the future will look back at
least with interest, the name of the Royal Naval Division will
live in history. I have tried so to write this book that round
the name may linger some flavour of the quality of its exploits,
some reflection of the several tragic if splendid scenes among
which its lot was cast.
I am conscious of omissions and imperfections. This
book has been written in the intervals of a rather scanty
leisure, and it is. too much to hope that it contains no


inaccuracies. I can only trust that they will be brought to my
notice, and that there will be an opportunity of correcting them.
My main authorities have been the War Diaries of the
different units and, in particular, of the General Staff of the
Divisions. The detailed contemporary reports on operations
which these Diaries contain have made it unnecessary to
consult many to whom otherwise I should have had to refer
constantly. This is particularly true of the Divisional Com-
manders and their staffs. As regards some of the earlier
operations, however, even the General Staff Diaries are
incomplete, and in all cases the records of lower formations
are barren of much detail essential if the actual experiences
of the infantry battalions are to be understood. In these
circumstances my thanks are due to many for invaluable
assistance in supplementing the available written records.
In particular I must express my gratitude to Lieut.-General
Sir Herbert Blumberg, K.C.8., Major-General Sir Archibald
Paris, K.C.8., Brigadier-General A. M. Asquith, D. 5.0.,
Colonel Commandant H. C. du Free, C. 8., C.M.G., Captain
H. D. King, C.8.E., D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., M.P., Lt.-Colonel
Bernard Freyberg, V.C., C.M.G., D. 5.0., Commander A. W.
Buckle, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., Major H. D. Lough, D. 5.0.,
R.M.L.1., Lieut.-Commander R. Blackmore, M.C., R.N.V.R.,
and Lieut. F. W, Sowerby, R.N.V.R., for assistance in con-
nection with particular operations, and to Mr. Gordon H. N.
Inman, A.R.1.8.A., and Mr. G. M. C. Taylor, M.C., A.M.I.C.E.
(both of them former officers of the Division), for their help
with the maps. Finally, my especial thanks are due to
Brigadier-General J. E. Edmonds, C. 8., the official historian
of the Military Operations of the late war, and to his staff,
for their unfailing assistance in helping me to fill the gaps
in the Divisional War Diaries, to my mother for reading the
proofs, and to my wife for compiling the index.
Those who have helped me by lending me documents and
maps are so many that I cannot attempt here to thank them
individually. I hope to do so later.
February , 1923.
DOUGLAS JERROLD.
VI
AUTHOR’S PREFACE


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
Author’s Preface v
Introduction . . . . . . . xi
I.—The Formation of the Royal Naval Division . 1
ll.—Ostend, Dunkirk and Antwerp . . .13
111. —The Time of Preparation 40
IV. —The Voyage to the East . . . . .58
V.—The Gallipoli Landings 72
Vl.—The May Battles 96
Vll.—The Defence of Anzac ..... 114
VIII.—The Battles of June and July . . . 127
IX.—Anticlimax . . 152
X.—From the Eastern Mediterranean to the French
Front 168
Xl.—The Battle of the Ancre . . . . .183
XII. —The German Retreat ...... 208
XIII. —The Spring Offensive of 1917 . . . .. 223
XIV. —Oppy Wood, Passchendaele and Welsh Ridge . 245
XV.—The Allied Defensive of 1918 . . . . 272
XVl.—The Advance to Victory .... 298
XVll.—Conclusion . . . . . . . 327
Appendix A—Extracts from Minutes of the First Lord
of the Admiralty (The Right Hon. Winston S.
Churchill), dated 16th, 17th and 30th August,
1914, governing the formation of the Royal
Naval Division 333


PAGE
Appendix B—Composition of Staff of the Royal Naval
Division, 1914-1919 337
Appendix C—Summary Statement of Royal Naval
Division Casualties 338
Appendix D—Names of Officers of the Royal Naval
Division killed in the Engagement of June 4th-
6th, 1915 339
Appendix E—Names of Officers of the Royal Navy,
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and Royal
Marines killed :
(i) in the Engagement of November 13th-14th,
1916 . .340
(ii) in the Ist and 2nd Battles of Gavrelle,
April, 1917 841
(iii) IN THE CONCLUDING ENGAGEMENTS OF AUGUST,
September, October and November, 1918 . 342
Appendix F—Account of a Raid carried out by the
Drake Battalion, July 12th-13th, 1918 . . . 845
Index . 347


ILLUSTRATIONS
Major-General Sir Archibald Paris, K.C.B, . . Frontispiece
Men of the Naval Brigades in trenches near
Vieux Dieu, Antwerp, October 7th, 1914 . Facing page 25
Brig.-General Bernard Freyberg, V.C., C.M.G.,
D.S.O „ 80
“ V ” Beach Landing, seen from the River Clyde,
11 a.m., April 25th, 1915 .... „ 86
View from the bridge of the River Clyde, early
autumn, 1915 ...... „ 88
Howe Battalion Rest Camp, Gallipoli, June,
1915 ' . . „ 128
Inspection of the 2nd R.N. Brigade by General
Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., at Imbros, June,
1915 „ 138
Firing Line in R.N.D. Sector, mid-summer, 1915 „ 142
Gully Ravine, Gallipoli, September, 1915 . . „ 150
Bathing from the Beach between Cape Helles
and Sedd-el-bahr ..... „ 154
Horses picketed on the road made between
Cape Helles and Gully Ravine ... „ 164
2nd R.N. Field Ambulance at Stavros, March,
1916 „ 172
The Church, Bully-Grenay, August, 1916 . . „ 182
Brig.-General A. M. Asquith, D.S.O. . . ~ 200
Scene of the Hood Battalion advance in the
Ancre Valley, November 13th, 1916 . . „ 212
Railway Station at 'Beaumont Hamel,
November, 1916 ..... „ 220
German Barbed Wire at Beaucourt-sur-Ancre,
November, 1916 ..... „ 224
Major-General C. E. Lawrie, C. 8., C.M.G.,
D.S.O „ 230
Ruins of Gavrelle ...... „ 240


Passchendaele Facing page 260
Commander A. W. Buckle, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R.
(Anson Battalion) „ 268
Thiepval Ridge „ 290
The Church at Mesnil „ 300
Commander D. M. W. Beak, V.C., D. 5.0., M.C.,
R.N.V.R. (Drake Battalion) ... „ 322
The illustrations facing pages 212, 220, 224, 260 and 290, are from official
photographs and are reproduced by the courtesy of the Imperial War Museum.
The remaining illustrations, except the Frontispiece and those facing pages
86, 240 and 800, are from photographs taken by Surgeon A. H. Crook, R.N.,
who has kindly given his consent to their reproduction. The portraits are
reproduced by the kind permission of the Artist, Mr. Ambrose McEvoy.
MAPS ILLUSTRATING OPERATIONS OF ROYAL
NAVAL DIVISION
Operations around Antwerp, October, 1914 . Facing page 13
Gallipoli Operations, South of Achi Baba. . „ 97
The British Front, Northern France . . „ 169
Operations on the Ancre, October, 1916, to
February, 1917 „ 183
Operations at Gavrelle, April, 1917 . . „ 223
Operations at Passchendaele, October-Novem-
ber, 1917 „ 245
Operations during the retreat, March 21st-27th,
1918 „ 273
Operations during the final advance, August
21st-October 10th ..... „ 299


INTRODUCTION
THE foundations of the Royal Naval Division were laid
before the War began. It was perceived that on
mobilization there would be at least twenty or thirty thousand
men belonging to the Reserves of the Royal Navy for whom there
would not be room on any ship of war which went to sea. It had
already been proposed on the Committee of Imperial Defence to
form from these elements one Brigade of Marines and two
Naval Brigades to increase the Forces available for Home
Defence, or for any special purpose, such as the seizure of an
advanced naval base, for which they might be needed by the
Admiralty. On the outbreak of War these three Brigades
were assembled and formed into the Royal Naval Division. In
those August and September days our Military resources were
on a very small scale. Six regular Divisions were going to
France, two others were being collected from the garrisons of
the Empire, and only the first six Divisions of Lord Kitchener’s
new Army had yet been planned. The addition of another
Division of men of high quality, of prolonged if partial training,
and of considerable discipline, for whom weapons were available,
was, therefore, an appreciable factor. Lord Kitchener was
delighted to include the Division in our Military Forces. He
welcomed the Admiralty’s intention, and announced its creation
to the House of Lords in one of the earliest speeches which he
made as Secretary of State. Afterwards, when many hundreds
of thousands of eager volunteers had swarmed in to the recruit-
ing stations, and when over seventy British Divisions were being
organized and trained, the relative importance of the Naval
Division diminished proportionately, and by the time that it
was definitely incorporated with the Armies under the War
Office, it bulked much smaller than at its birth.
The three Brigades were formed with almost incredible
rapidity. Cadres were created from the Petty Officers of the Navy,
from the Instructors and Sergeants of the Royal Marines and


with a sprinkling of retired regular officers of high quality, mostly
belonging to the Brigade of Guards. On this structure it was
easy to build the men of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve,
of the Royal Naval Reserve and of the Royal Fleet Reserve,
and of the Royal Marines, In suitable proportions.
At a later stage several thousand recruits who could not at
that time be handled by the New Armies, mostly Tyneside
miners, were added to the Battalions and maintained con-
sistently the reputation of the North Country.
The method employed in forming the units may be studied
in detail by those who care to read the two or three operative
Minutes by which this process was regulated. These are re-
printed as an appendix to this history.
The Royal Naval Volunteer Reservists and many others
in the various elements of which the Division was composed
had set their hearts on serving afloat, and it was with much
disappointment and many heartburnings, but with boundless
and unflinching loyalty, that they devoted themselves to the
deadly work ashore. The pressure of the opening events of the
War was so intense that it was not easy to forecast or measure
what would happen after the first decisive battles on land;
whether the War would be long or short, or what character its
secondary phases would assume. The overwhelming numbers
of volunteers who joined the Army in the latter part of 1914
made this small Admiralty contribution seem superfluous.
On the other hand, the vast expansion of the flotillas and small
craft of the Navy, together with the need of increasing the
complements of the Grand Fleet caused by the conditions of
protracted War and by the German submarine campaign,
would have afforded five or six months later ample scope in
the Naval Service and afloat for all these keen and valiant
would-be sailors. Others were forthcoming when the time
came to take their places in the Navy, but the original elements
of the Royal Naval Division, who certainly had the first claim
to the coveted service afloat, were by that time locked in the
heart of the land grapple. All criticisms on these and kindred
grounds were, however, to be swept away by the extraordinary
achievements and almost incomparable prowess which this
small band of men continued to display in every theatre where
they fought during the whole course of the War.
By their conduct in the forefront of the battle, by their


character, and by the feats of arms which they performed, they
raised themselves into that glorious company of the seven or
eight most famous Divisions of the British Army in the Great
War. Their reputation was consistently maintained in spite
of losses of so awful a character as to sweep away three or four
times over the original personnel. Their memory is estab-
lished in history and their contribution will be identified and
recognized a hundred years hence from among the enormous
crowd of splendid efforts which were forthcoming in this terrible
period. Deriving as they did their nomenclature, their cere-
monial, their traditions, their inspiration from the Royal Navy,
they in their turn cast back a new lustre on that mighty parent
body of which it will ever be proud and for which it must ever
be grateful.
The chronicles which these pages unfold put on faithful
record the episodes by which all this work was accomplished.
From “ Dunkirk to Belgrade,” from Antwerp to Gallipoli, from
the Somme and Ancre in 1916 to the switch in
1918, through every bloody battle and in the brunt of it, they
marched and suffered. Again and again shot to pieces, always
rising anew unconquerable, never failing, never faltering, until
in the end their story stands out as an epic ineffaceable in
national gratitude and long fortified against the ravages of
time.
The great majority of the original Company are dead.
The gallant Guards Officers were among the first to fall. The
meteor brightness of Rupert Brooke was extinguished almost
as soon as his rays began to light the storm. Arnold Quilter,
Denis Browne, Charles Lister, of the Hood ; Tisdall and Grant of
the Anson; W. L. Maxwell and Frank Wilson, the Brigade-
Majors of the two Naval Brigades*; Evelegh of the Nelson,
Luard of the Portsmouth Marines, Spearman of the Collingwood, f
Barker and Lancelot Cherry of the Drake, were among those
cut down and swept away before a year of the War had run its
course. But their spirit lived on, their example was emu-
lated, their names and memories were cherished, and here and
there an Asquith or a Freyberg, a Hutchison, a Ramsay
♦ Lt.-Colonel W. L. Maxwell (Indian Army) and Major F. Wilson, H.M.L.1.,
killed on the 11th and 13th May, 1915, respectively.
t Commander A. Y. Spearman, R.N., was killed in action at Gallipoli on
June 4th, Lt.-Colonel E. G. Evelegh, R.M.L.1., on July 13th, and Lt.-Colonel
F. W. Luard, R.M.L.1., on July 14th, 1915.


Fairfax, a Beak, or a Buckle, salamanders born in the furnace,
survived to lead, to command, and to preserve the sacred
continuity. The long list of bright names grew with every
month that passed. Burge of the Nelson, Tetley of the Drake,*
Vere Harmsworth and William Ker of the Hawke, F. S. Kelly
of the Hood, were among the many officers of fine promise and
attainment who fell in the Ancre Valley. Cartwright tof the
Ist Marines was killed at Gavrelle and Sterndale Bennett was
mortally wounded at Passchendaele. Patrick Shaw Stewart
and Alan Campbell fell on Welsh Ridge, and Farquharson of
the 2nd Marines, Kirkpatrick of the Anson and Ellis of the
Hawke, % till then unscathed, in those resolute engagements in
which the Division stemmed the tide of the German advance in
March, 1918. Jones of the Hawke,§ Surgeon Pocock of the
Drake, Fish of the Hood, fell in the final and triumphant
advance.
When the Division went to France in the spring of 1916
a new set of difficulties began to assail it and even to menace
its existence. It was a Naval Division. It had different
rates of pay, different ranks, different customs, different
methods, different traditions, from those of the British
Expeditionary Army. Its officers and men used consistently
the Naval parlance on every possible occasion. To leave their
camps, in which the White Ensign flew and bells recorded the
passage of time, men requested “ leave to go ashore ; ” when
they returned they “ came aboard,” and when they did not
they were reported as “ adrift.” Men were “ rated ” and
“ disrated,” and for Sergeants and Lance-Corporals they had
Petty Officers and Leading Seamen. Anchors were stencilled
on their limbers and emblazoned on their Company flags, and
their regimental badges were in the form of the crests of the
Admirals whose names their Battalions bore. When ill or
wounded they attended “ Sick bay ; ” field kitchens were the
“ galley ; ” the King’s health was drunk sitting in the “ ward-
♦ Lt.-Colonel N. O. Burge, and Lt.-Colonel A. S. Tetley, R.M.L.1.,
were both killed on the morning of November 13th, 1916.
f Lt.-Colonel F. J. W. Cartwright, D. 5.0., R.M.L.1., died on April 80th, 1917,
of wounds received in the second battle of Gavrelle. Commander W. Sterndale
Bennett, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., died on November 7th, 1917.
X Lt.-Colonel C. G. Farquharson, M.C., R.M.L.1., was killed on the 23rd, and
Lt.-Colonel Kirkpatrick, D.S.O. (The Buffs), and Commander Bernard Ellis,
D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., on the 25th March, 1918.
§ Commander S. G. Jones, R.N.V.R., killed on August 25th, 1918.


room ” —where Officers wanting salt are even reported to
have been heard asking their neighbours to “ give it a fair
wind; ” all Wrights were “ Shiner,” and all Clarks were
“ Nobby.” Many of the men and some of the Officers re-
quested “ leave to grow,” and paraded creditable beards in
the faces of a clean-chinned Army.*
It need scarcely be said that these manifestations inspired
in a certain type of military mind feelings of the liveliest
alarm. To this type of mind anything which diverged in the
slightest degree from absolute uniformity according to the
sealed pattern was inexpressibly painful. Yet these very
peculiarities of the Naval Division, this consciousness they
had of partnership with the great traditions of the Royal
Navy, these odd forms and ceremonies, this special nomen-
clature, which were cherished and preserved so punctiliously
by officers and men, few of whom had ever been to sea, were
in fact the mainspring of their exceptional prowess. It is
strange how men deprived of everything that makes for
happiness and pleasure in human life, confronted with the
cruellest trials and under the constant menace amounting
almost to certainty of death, find comfort and revivifying
strength in little things which to others, freed from these
circumstances, living in an easy and exalted sphere, only
appear trivial and, perhaps, absurd.
Two remedies for the shocking spectacle which the Naval
Division presented to the eyes of martinets were alternately
and repeatedly proposed. The first was to break them into
uniformity, the second was to disband them. When at last
General Paris, whose proved sagacity had led the Division
from the outset, had fallen wounded, the first of these remedies
was tried. An Army officer with unexceptionable credentials
for the task was placed in command. For six months in 1916
he laboured to force the officers and men of the Royal Naval
Division to amend their ways, to drop their naval vogue, to
forget their naval tradition, and even to shave their beards.
Army officers selected for- this express purpose were placed
in command of many of the battalions over the heads of those
who had won their way to these situations by continued
* When going aboard the train which was to take them from Dunkirk to
Antwerp in 1914, the Anson and Hood Battalions were warned that in case the
train was attacked during the night the Anson Battalion was to fall out on the
“port” and the Hood on the “ starboard” side of the train.


promotion under the fire of the enemy. But so stubborn was
the resisting power which all ranks developed in a perfectly
obedient and respectful manner, and so high was their conduct
in action, that after six months the essential character of the
Division was unchanged. Under a new commander they re-
entered a period in which their only troubles were provided
by the Germans.
The second remedy, which would naturally occur to the
particular type of military mind which has been referred to,
was next attempted. A concerted and vigorous effort was
made in the spring of 1917 both by General Headquarters and
the War Office to disband the Division. The first remedy
had failed through the obstinacy of the troops and their fine
performances against the enemy. The second encountered
a not less effective opposition in the person of Sir Edward
Carson, then First Lord of the Admiralty. Wielding at that
time ample political influence and gifted with not less ample
controversial powers, he was able to repulse the attack in a
decisive fashion. The War Office and General Headquarters
accepted their defeat this time with good grace, and hence-
forward the Royal Naval Division, confirmed in all its pre-
rogatives, was permitted to go forward without molestation.
Neither to the enemy in their front, nor to their pedantic
friends in the rear, had they yielded in any respect. Even the
Artillery, purely military in their origin, who were attached to
the Division, adopted with the utmost punctilio its naval
customs, and so continued to the end of the War.
It would be impossible to pass from this aspect without
referring to those Army units who, with unfailing con-
stancy and comradeship shared the fortunes of the Division
throughout all the campaigns n France and Belgium. The
228 rd and 817th Brigades of the Royal Field Artillery
sustained the Division from midsummer, 1916, until the
Armistice under a succession of skilful and intrepid Com-
manders, and the exploits of the 190th Infantry Brigade,
which included the Honourable Artillery Company and the
4th Bedfords, were a shining part of the record of the Division.
It was a long road to tread. Few there were who survived
from first to last. Two, whose names have been mentioned.


Asquith and Freyberg, rose from Sub-Lieutenants to Brigadier-
Generals across a succession of battlefields on which they
gained every distinction prized by fighting men and sustained
between them more than a dozen wounds. For these and
others like them the story of the Royal Naval Division must
indeed seem a vivid panorama of changing scenes and un-
forgettable episodes. All is recounted in Mr. Douglas Jerrold’s
faithful and moving pages with the sincerity and accuracy of
one who saw and endured. Antwerp and its seething, cheering
crowds when these young soldiers arrived on their desperate
errand of succour; Antwerp under bombardment; Antwerp
evacuated, with its streams of refugees pouring over the bridges
and along the roads, huddled together, hurrying on, impelled
by the crash of the cannonade and lighted on their way by the
blaze of the great oil reserve flowing in rivers of fire along the
ditches. The retreat —the fateful moment at the Dutch
frontier; Sub-Lieutenant Grant under arrest for refusing to
cross into neutral territory; hanging back until his superior
officer, by himself crossing it, had forfeited authority, and
then, by byways, leading through the night thirty-five men to
safety and freedom. The retreat again : the train load of
refugees and Marines intercepted in the night by German
riflemen and machine guns: Colonel Luard and Major French
extricating their weary men who had already marched thirty-
five miles and breaking through. Such was their first
experience.
Then to the Mediterranean. On the scented Island of
Skyros the little band of friends, themselves nearly all marked
for death, gathered at the grave in which they buried Rupert
Brooke and his dawning genius. The landing on Gallipoli:
Freyberg’s midnight swimming exploit in the Gulf of Xeros;
TisdalTs repeated journeys to and from the River Clyde
saving the wounded on the terrible beach, surviving incredibly
the intense rifle fire only to perish a few days later, his life
no longer charmed. Warwick and other Anson officers
leading forward to the recapture of their positions Senegalese
troops, all of whose French officers were killed. The sunsets
behind Samothrace, seen from the front lines in the rising
heatherland of the peninsula, bathing the Troad in golden light;
night by the calm Aegean, illuminated by the red and green
lights of the hospital ships and the fitful flashing of artillery.
B


The fierce scenes of battle in the cruel, cramped positions
at Cape Helles; the awful midsummer of dust, flies, dysentery,
and the nausea of corruption ; the rigours of the November
blizzard ; the sorrow of the final evacuation. Then an inter-
lude of peace, unshelled, and the quiet beauty of early spring in
the Greek Islands.
The scene shifts to France. The November attack at
Beaucourt in the fog and mist of the Ancre Valley, when the
Royal Naval Division, at the cost of more than a third of its
strength, in the words of Sir Douglas Haig, “ advanced further
and took more prisoners than any Division had done in one
day.” Here Freyberg, twice wounded, but still continuing to
lead the attack, took every objective, and, pressing on beyond
the furthest, gained his immortal V.C. All this was but a
prelude to 1917, which brought a new series of bloody trials to
the inexhaustible Division : the night attack in the bitter frost
and brilliant moonlight of February 3rd. The storm of Gavrelle
after the Arras battle, Stemdale Bennett leading the Drake
in column of route between the only gap of wire on his front,
and Surgeon McCracken, in a mist of red brick dust and of
the yellow and black shell fumes, leading the survivors of his
own stretcher bearers and of captured German Red Cross
men to clear the village streets of wounded under withering
fire : the capture of the Gavrelle Windmill by Captain Newling
of the Marines and its brilliant defence.
Then Passchendaele, with its daily and nightly flounderings
through the swamp, and ghastly struggles in the dark for
enemy pill-boxes. Welsh Ridge after the Cambrai disaster,
with the German storm troops attacking white-clad across the
snow, securing a lodgment in the vital second line, hurled out
of it again by the Anson counter-attack.
At last 1918 is reached with its terrific 21st of March, its
difficult and exhausting retreat leading up to the brilliantly
sustained engagements of March 25th, when at Les Boeufs,
at High Wood and at Courcelette, the Naval Division stood
in the van of the Vth Corps and saved the line of the Ancre.
And so all through the long summer struggle till the victorious
advance. Still the Division is in the forefront—taking part in
the storming of the redoubtable Drocourt-Qu£ant switch of
the Hindenburg Line (September 3rd) with the Anson and the
Marines on the flank of the Canadian advance, and Beak, with


the dash and exploiting enterprise of the born leader, thrusting
forward to Pronville and opening the way to the banks of
the Canal du Nord. On September 30th, begins that astonish-
ing advance of the Division towards Cambrai, when, with Beak
and Buckle once more in the front of the battle, we see them
forcing the passage of the Canal du Nord, carrying Anneux
and Graincourt, storming the almost impassable defences of
the St. Quentin Canal, capturing the village of Niergnies and
repelling with a captured field gun and captured German
anti-tank rifles a German counter-attack made with captured
British tanks —an extraordinary inversion. They were fighting
still in the neighbourhood of Mons when 11 o’clock struck on
the morning of November 11th, and the annals of the Royal
Naval Division came in honour to a close.
Long may the record of their achievements be preserved,
and long may their memory be respected by those for whom
they fought.
April , 1923.
WINSTON S. CHURCHILL.




THE ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION
CHAPTER I
THE FORMATION OF THE ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION
LEGEND has been busy with the origin and the fortunes
of the Royal Naval Division. It tells us how it was
hurriedly formed by the Admiralty of a number of recruits, on
the outbreak of the war, and thrown into Antwerp without
any realization of its inadequacy. It returned from there,
after heavy losses, with an impaired moral, and was faultily
trained—so the legend goes—to take a premature share in
the Gallipoli campaign. After these misadventures the Naval
Division went to France, and was “ taken over by the Army ” !
If the legend were true, there would be little excuse at this
date for compiling the history. But' the truth about the Naval
Division is something different, and the respects in which it
differs from the legend bear upon important issues. It is not
the case that the Division was improvised to gratify the whim
of any statesman, or that, once it had been formed, it was used
by the Admiralty to enable them to dabble in matters left by
prescriptive custom to the Military authorities. Still less is
it the case that the successes achieved by the Naval Division in
France were due to any overhauling of its organization, or to
the fact that its individuality was lost.
A military history must not be allowed to degenerate into
a polemic, and as far as the criticisms which are still levelled
at the Naval Division have as their aim the scarification of
this or that statesman or soldier, they will find no answer in
this history—they have, indeed, long ago had the answer they
deserve. In so far, however, as public attention has been
i


called to the work of the Division as exemplifying the results
of an unsound policy, of faulty organization, of the miscalcula-
tion of the effective value of troops employed under specific
conditions, the historian, while remembering always that his
principal duty is to record the achievements of the Division, to
keep alive its traditions, and hand down to the future not only
a name but a memory, cannot stand wholly aside from political
or even military controversy.
The origin of the Naval Division is to be found in the plans
prepared some years before the outbreak of the war, at the
instance of the Committee of Imperial Defence, for the
formation on the outbreak of war of a force of Royal Marines
to operate under the direction of the Admiralty. This force
was to be called the “ Advanced Base Force,” and its object
was the seizure, fortification, or protection of any temporary
Naval Bases which might be necessary to the employment of
the Fleet, or the provisioning of an army in the field.
The plan provided for a Royal Marine Brigade of four
infantry battalions (one from each of the R.M.L.I. Divisions,
and one from the depot of the Royal Marine Artillery).
When war broke out, this Brigade was duly formed and was
the only land force at the disposal of the Admiralty till
August 16 th.
On that date the Admiralty decided to strengthen the
Advanced Base Force by adding two brigades of Naval
Reservists.* The measure was a tentative one. There was
no intention of expanding unnecessarily the land force at
the disposal of the Admiralty. It was intended, on the con-
trary, to concentrate the surplus reservists at Walmer only for
such time as the needs arising out of the military situation were
more urgent than the requirements of the fleet. At the
moment when the decision was taken, the difficulty of finding
employment and accommodation for some of the reservists
there was considerable, and though, eventually, their employ-
ment on shore service was not only a legitimate grievance to
the men, but was regrettable from the point of view of the
Navy afloat, it had, and could have had, no immediate effect
on naval efficiency. Nevertheless, the wording of the Press
communique issued on September 7th lent an easy handle to
the critics. The statement that “ After providing for all
* See'Appendix A for the text of Mr. Winston Churchill’s instructions.


present and foreseeable future needs of the fleet there remained
available a large number of men ” of the different Naval
reserves was a controversial one, and the ignorance of the
public and the Press of the responsibilities laid on the Admiralty
under the pre-existing plan for the Advanced Base Force, an
ignorance which it was impossible to dispel, made it more than
difficult for the critics to see the problem in its true perspective.
These responsibilities could not, however, be shelved.
While the two Royal Naval Brigades were concentrating,
German cavalry approached the outskirts of Ostend, and on
August 26th it was necessary to send the Marine Brigade
across the Channel to assist the garrison of that town in case
a descent should be made in greater force on this important
coast line, the loss of which would be a fatal blow to our
communications with our army in the field. As we shall
see, when we come to the narrative of the early opera-
tions of the Division, the threat did not at the time
materialize, but the progress of events on the main front,
and the necessity which now became evident for establishing
on the Belgian coast a base for the Naval Air Service,
made it clear that the threat could not be ignored. If
the enemy was less immediately audacious than had been
feared, it remained probable that considerable forces would
be directed in the near future against the Belgian coast. It
thus became necessary to prepare for military action on the
Belgian front on a more elaborate Scale. The War Office were
not only unable to find the troops, but, just at this time, were
pressing the Admiralty to accept for service (in the Naval
Brigades) some thousands of the recruits whom the Army could
neither train nor equip. In these circumstances the important
decision was taken on September 3rd to train and equip the
two brigades of Naval Reservists, and the hitherto independent
Marine Brigade, as an Infantry Division. The decision met
with the full approval of Lord Kitchener.
Such was the origin of the Royal Naval Division. Obviously,
it is easy to imagine a division composed of more homogeneous
elements, and less likely by its nature to create administrative
difficulties. But such a division in 1914 would have been
purely a work of imagination. Unlike the journalist, or even
the historian, the statesman and the administrator have to
subdue their hands to the stuff they work in. Few can be
i*


ignorant of the difficulties of securing agreement among a
number of men on any question of policy. Such difficulties
may indeed be adduced as one more proof of the impotence of
humanity to meet the problems it creates, but they are there,
nevertheless, and can only be overcome by compromises which
are as easy to criticize as they are impossible to avoid. The
problem before the statesman or the administrator lies, seldom
in deciding what to do, always in getting anything at all done
in a world where the support of other men and other interests
is a prerequisite of successful enterprise. And so if we find
that, in the stress of a great crisis, the problem of strengthening
the only land forces available for the special duty of safe-
guarding naval and air bases was solved, it is idle to cavil too
much at the imperfections of the particular measures taken.
These were many, and have never been denied. The simple
question is whether other measures could have been taken at
the time, or, if they could have been but were not, whether, on
this ground alone, the Admiralty should have let a paramount
naval interest go by default. The answer to this question is
reasonably clear.
The administration of the Naval Division was entrusted to
an Admiralty standing committee, presided over by Mr.
Winston Churchill the then First Lord, with Captain Sir
R. Williams Bulkeley, R.N.R. (Chairman of the Admiralty
Volunteer Committee), the Director of Naval Personnel, the
Adjutant-General, Royal Marines, and Major Ollivant, R.A.
(Staff Officer to the Division), as members. This Committee
was responsible for the selection of the personnel of the force,
for the many detailed arrangements necessary to concentrate,
house and feed them, and for the selection of officers to com-
mand the different battalions and brigades. The orders of the
Committee were issued through the Admiralty Secretariat.
The War Office could render very little assistance in the
way of personnel, and none whatever in the almost equally
important matter of equipment (of which so much was to be
heard later). Yet these difficulties, it was felt, so far from
condemning the experiment, were its primary justification.
The War Office were straining every nerve to place and main-
tain our main expeditionary force in the field. Any other
force which might be required for service overseas, if an emer-
gency should arise in the immediate future, must be provided


elsewhere. To provide it, in spite of difficulties, however
great, was the task of the Admiralty Committee.
It found ready to its hand the Marine Brigade which had
returned from Ostend on September Ist, and, at Walmer, 128
officers and 3,400 petty officers and men of the R.N.Y.R., 2,000
Royal Fleet Reserve stokers, and 1,500 selected ratings of the
Royal Naval Reserve. In addition, there had been drafted to
the force 17 retired officers, R.N., 288 chief petty officers,
petty officers and leading seamen, R.N., and 320 petty officers
from the R.F.R.
The training of the Marine Brigade gave rise to no problems.
When it was decided to incorporate it in the Naval Division,
the only change considered necessary was the disbanding of
the R.M.A. battalion,* and the formation of a fourth R.M.L.I.
battalion. This was done by drawing one company and one
platoon from the battalions provided by the three Marine
Divisions at Chatham, Portsmouth and Plymouth. These
battalions were commanded by Lt.-Colonel R. McN. Parsons,
R.M.L.1., Lt.-Colonel Luard, R.M.L.1., and Lt.-Colonel
Matthews, C. 8., R.M.L.1., and the new (Deal) Battalion by
Lt.-Colonel Beith, R.M.L.I. The whole Brigade, after a short
period under Major-General McCausland, had been placed
under Brigadier-General Sir George Aston, K.C.8., and, when
they returned from Ostend, they went into active training at
Portsmouth, till they were ordered overseas again, this time
to Dunkirk, at the end of September.
These battalions had, of course, a large number of recruits
to absorb, but they had at their disposal trained instructors
and regular officers, and the machinery for barrack square
training of the most orthodox character. They were thus,
in effect, trained, both now, before Antwerp, and in the months
following, independently of the rest of the division, of which
they became an integral part only when divisional training
began in January, 1915.
Very different was the'problem of organizing and training
the rest of the Division. The first thing had been to reduce
to military shape the heterogeneous force of naval reservists
who poured into Walmer between the 22nd and 26th August.
* It was intended to use the personnel of this battalion to form divisional
artillery, but the scheme had to be abandoned owing to difficulties of supply
and training.


This force, divided into two, and separated into two camps,*
became the Ist and 2nd Naval Brigades, commanded by Com-
modore Wilford Henderson, R.N., and Commodore Oliver
Backhouse, R.N. The rudimentary battalions were known
first of all by prosaic numbers, but later by the names of eight
famous admirals, a stroke of genius which had an incalculable
influence in keeping alive some elements of the naval tradition
to the very end of the war. The first definite organization
of the two Brigades was as follows ;
Ist R.N. Brigade— G.O.C.: Commodore W. Henderson,
R.N. Brigade Major; Major Cunningham. Staff Captain :
Captain Dyke.
Ist (Drake) Battalion—O.C.: Commander V. A. L. Campbell,
R.N. 2nd in Command and Adjutant: Major F. Wilson,
R.M.L.I.
2nd (Hawke) Battalion —0.C.: Commander Fargus, R.N.
2nd in Command : Major Bryce (Scots Guards).
3rd (Benbow) Battalion —O.C. : Commander Beadle, R.N.
2nd in Command : Major Fletcher.
4th (Collingwood) Battalion—O.C.: Lt.-Colonel Aymer
Maxwell (Coldstream Guards). 2nd in Command: Major
Trefusis.
2nd R.N. Brigade —G.O.C.: Commodore O. Backhouse,
R.N. Brigade Major: Major Maxwell. Staff Captain : Captain
Saunders.
sth (Nelson) Battalion—O.C.: Commander C. D. Bridge,
R.N. 2nd in Command ; Major Murray (Grenadier Guards).
6th (Howe) Battalion —O.C. : Commander Viscount Curzon,
R.N.V.R. 2nd in Command: Major Dalrymple Hamilton
(Scots Guards).
* The 2nd R.N. Brigade moved from Walmer to Lord Northbourne’* park
at Betteshanger on September 9th.


7th (Hood) Battalion —O.C. : Lt.-Colonel Quilter (Grenadier
Guards). 2nd in Command : Major Viscount Bury (Scots
Guards).
Bth (Anson) Battalion —O.C. : Lt.-Colonel George Corn-
wallis West (Scots Guards).
The establishment of the battalions* was fixed for the time
being at 937 other ranks, made up as follows ;
Petty Officers —(R.N.) 28
Petty Officers —(R.F.R.) 48
Petty Officers, Leading Seamen and
Seamen—(R.N.V.R.) 424
Stokers—(R.F.R.) 250
Seamen —(R.N.R.) 187
Had it been possible to maintain this establishment of
disciplined men, progress in the matter of training might
have been rapid. Almost at once, however, the needs of the
fleet made it necessary to withdraw many of the better trained
personnel and to substitute for them the new army recruits
who had been taken over, at the request of the War Office,
from the surplus enlistments of several North Country regi-
ments. The number of recruits coming in from the army
swamped the under-officered battalions, and it became neces-
sary in the middle of September to open a divisional depot
at the Crystal Palace. This depot was placed under the
command of Commodore Sir Richard Williams Bulkeley, R.N.R.
This problem of providing officers for the depot and to
complete the establishment of the battalions could only be
met, as in the army, by commissioning men from civil life.f
The new officers had, for the most part, no sort of training,
but they were urgently needed for duty with the battalions
in camp, and there the.majority had to go, without even a
day’s preparation for their new profession.
The progress made in training the Naval Brigades turned
* For the text of the orders issued by Mr. Winston Churchill, see Appendix A.
t These officers were chosen by a selection committee under the chairmanship
of Sir Richard Williams Bulkeley. The Press notice asking for candidates to
come forward gave as the required age “ between 25 and 85.” This wise variant
of the usual practice had exceptionally good results.


necessarily on the personalities of the few regular officers
available with the battalions and at the depot for the fourfold
task of training officers, training recruits, creating the adminis-
trative machine and at the same time making a beginning
with platoon and company training. On the whole, and
with the inevitable exceptions, the progress was surprisingly
good. To the 2nd Naval Brigade, in particular, Major Maxwell
and Colonel Quilter (of the Hood Battalion) were a tower of
strength. A serious difficulty, however, was that of providing
suitable training for the officers. The officers with permanent
commissions in the R.N.V.R. were, of course, as uninstmcted
in land war as the newest joined civilian, and, as these officers
were often of considerable seniority, the difficulty was a real one.
To attempt to train officers for responsible military duties
in a short time was contrary to the whole tradition of the
pre-war Army. It was soon realized that to do so was essen-
tial, but it was not so soon realized that a special system of
training was necessary. In the Naval Brigades in September,
the idea was, too often, that the function of junior officers
was to receive and carry out orders. There is no better
method, perhaps, of learning to command than by learning
to obey. But it is a slow method. We shall see that the
peculiar problem was recognized and solved a little later
(and solved exceptionally well), but it is necessary to say
here what has been said if some of the difficulties experienced
by the Naval Brigades at Antwerp are to be understood.
The other difficulties arose from a more obvious source.
For all their admitted shortcomings, the Naval Brigades,
in the course of September, took on quite definitely the charac-
ter of military formations. Of a divisional organization,
however, there was little sign. There was not even a Divisional
Commander,
The administrative machine consisted of four staff officers
(Lt.-Col. Forster, Major Micklem, Major G. S. Richardson and
Major Ollivant) working with an improvised assortment of
clerks at 41, Charing Cross, under the orders of a departmental
Committee. At least one of these officers, Major Richardson,
had the highest administrative abilities, but, as luck had it,
both he and Major Ollivant had to go overseas in the middle
of September with the Marine Brigade. In the result, the
task of organizing even the nucleus of a mobile Division,


while at the same time organizing a depot and training and
equipping two infantry brigades, proved to be an impossible
one. There was indeed a principal medical officer (Fleet-
Surgeon Gaskell, F.R.C.S., R.N., had been appointed to this
post in succession to Fleet-Surgeon Mesden, R.N. on September
22nd), and some divisional engineers were being recruited.
There was, however, no trained administrative staff, no signal
company, no artillery, no supply train and no field ambulances
available at this time for duty with the Division in the field.
It was the absence of such essentials as these, far more than
the lack of training of the infantry personnel, which retarded
the progress at Walmer and Betteshanger. Military history
abounds in instances of decisive successes achieved by relatively
untrained troops, certainly by troops less disciplined than the
majority of those in the Naval Brigades. But defects of in-
dividual proficiency and inexperienced leading can be over-
come only by a rigid and scientific organization under the
hand of a keen, dominating and experienced commander.
The Brigades of the Naval Division in September, 1914, had
no commander and formed part of no effective organization.
The office at Charing Cross did all that could be done in
the circumstances, but it was not enough, and when, very wisely,
it was decided on October Ist to transfer the administrative
control of the Naval Division to the Marine Office, it was too
late. The hour of crisis was dawning; the Naval Brigades,
for all their unpreparedness, had to take the field, and the
missing divisional organization had to be improvised under
the guns of Antwerp.
The order to move overseas reached the camps at Walmer
and Betteshanger at 2 a.m. on the morning of October 4th.
In what circumstances the desperate decision was taken we
shall see in the next chapter. Before turning to the con-
troversial story of the operation in Belgium in August, Sep-
tember and October, we must, however, say something of
the personal quality ©f the officers and men of the three
Brigades who were thus signalled out, from the many other
newly-raised formations, to be the first to face in the field the
legendary strength of the German armies.
From the first, the Division attracted men of a remarkable
quality. Those from the R.N.V.R. Divisions, whether they had
joined before the war, or were recruited after the war, were


easily distinguishable. The R.N.V.R. comprised in its ranks
both before and during the war men of no inconsiderable
education, inspired by an enthusiasm which more than made
up for that lack of mere physical stamina inevitable in
men whose daily life is one of office routine.
In sharp contrast were the newly-joined recruits taken
over from the War Office, men who had enlisted in the very
first days of the war, mostly in the Durham Light Infantry,
the Northumberland Fusiliers and the King’s Own Yorkshire
Light Infantry. These men, of truly remarkable physique,
inexhaustible patience and endurance, and unfailing courage,
were almost all miners from Durham and Northumberland.
They had none of the somewhat mercurial optimism of London
troops, still less had they the positive zest for fighting which
characterizes some regiments north of the Tweed. But they
had a courageous acquiescence in even the most outrageous
fortune.
In many ways resembling these North Country recruits,
and particularly in their patience, endurance and fighting
quality, were the men of the Royal Fleet Reserve, who, adding
to their inherent qualities those others which come only from
discipline and technical training, were the real backbone of
the Division from the date of its formation to that of their
withdrawal for service with the Fleet in June, 1915. The
quality of these men was all the more remarkable because they
were possessed of some superficially less attractive charac-
teristics. They never became “ smart ” soldiers. Like all
men worth their place in the firing line, they were resentful of
incompetence in their officers, and they were inclined to assume
it in any newly joined officer till the contrary was proved.
Many officers can recall with some amusement, but without
much pride, their early efforts to exercise authority over “ the
stokers.” Military (or naval) discipline had no terrors for
them : they knew the regulations better than most, and the
appropriate penalty for any minor delinquency had, one soon
came to know, been taken into account as just, or more than,
worth while before the particular breach of discipline was
decided on. In these circumstances, it need hardly be said,
the one unforgivable crime in the eye of the stoker was to
neglect to impose it.
These peculiarities were, however, only superficial. As
10
The Royal Naval Division


a body, these men were possessed of a remarkably high sense
of duty, all the more compelling, perhaps, in that it was only
completely evoked under the most trying conditions. Finer
fighting men on the day of battle the Division never knew.
Their magnificent example in the first serious engagements
in which the Division was to take part was the foundation
of the fighting tradition of the Naval Brigades.
The R.N.V.R. officers were drawn from too many places,
too many professions, to give them any marked corporate
characteristics. The majority, no doubt, of those from the
Clyde, Mersey, and Tyneside Divisions were engaged, in one
capacity or another, in the shipping industry, and not a few
had served their apprenticeship in the Merchant Service before
settling down on shore. But the life of cities produces much
the same characteristics all over the world, and there was,
probably, less difference than was thought at the time between
these officers and their admittedly civilian colleagues who
joined the Division throughout September.
Some, indeed, of the most recently joined officers were
to play a predominant part in the training or organization
of the Division, and from the very first figured largely in its
life, and became part of its tradition. Such were Arthur
Asquith, Rupert Brooke and Denys Brown, who were appointed
as sub-lieutenants to the Anson Battalion early in September.
Bernard Freyberg was already appointed to the Hood, which
he was to command with so much distinction. F. S. Kelly,
an old Oxford rowing blue, and holder of the record for Dia-
monds, who combined with these achievements a brilliant
musical talent, was with the Drake. There were others less
well known to the public, who came to the front equally soon.
Indeed, if ever there was a military formation with a “ caffiefe
ouverte an talent ” it was the Naval Division, and the most
remarkable thing about it was that in every battalion were
found men to take advantage of the opportunity when it came.
Most of these men were unknown before the war, and were
forgotten six months after it was over, but they were the
rank and file of the officers of a Division which had no use
for supermen, and they won such distinction as came their
way merely by the exercise in unfamiliar surroundings of the
ordinary qualities of mind and character which bring success
in civil life.
11
The Formation of the Royal Naval Division


The characteristics of the officers of the Naval Brigade
which were developed in their early days were, indeed, the
result of other influences than the peace-time training which
the majority had undergone.
There was, of course, in each battalion more than one officer
with a regular military training, and on these officers all alike
depended for such strictly technical knowledge as they found
it essential to possess. But, broadly, the junior officers had
to teach themselves anything they wanted to know about
the art of war, and to learn from experience the habit of com-
mand. The two camps were, from the young officers’ point of
view, two vast experimental stations containing all the material
for successful improvisation, unhampered by any limiting
conditions prescribing the line of development. Under these
conditions audacity and initiative were at a premium, and the
more conventional qualities of junior subalterns less in request.
The desire to mould the different patterns of men to one type
of officer may have existed in the minds of some in authority,
but, if so, circumstances were against its realization, and more
particularly because the senior officers of the H.N.V.R., who
had a very strong esprit de corps of their own, were at first by
no means anxious to adopt more than was essential of military
technique. In a sense this was unfortunate, but it had in
the end a not unsatisfactory result, for it gave an enduring
quality to the early traditions of the Naval Battalions, who
remained, to the very end of the war, resolute in their deter-
mination to do things always as seemed best to their judgment,
and never to sacrifice their independence to the outward forms
of discipline. Discipline there was, but it was the discipline
which bowed to superior judgment or ability more readily
than to superior rank, and bowed to rank against its judgment
only when the exigencies of the situation strictly demanded
it, as the alternative to more serious ills. This made the Naval
Battalions and Brigades always and admittedly difficult to
command, but perhaps also it made them, in some ways,
rather well worth commanding. What at any rate is indis-
putable is that the traditions, which were born of these early
days of experiment, gave to the Naval Division an individual
quality which it preserved to the end, and which assisted it to
more than one historic success.


OPERATIONS AROUND ANTWERP (OCTOBER 1914)




CHAPTER II
OSTEND, DUNKIRK AND ANTWERP
THE operations in Belgium in August and September, 1914,
are overshadowed by the more spectacular struggle
which opened on August 23rd at Mons. The dramas of the retreat
from Mons, of the Marne and of the Aisne, engrossed the attention
of the world at the time, and have since almost monopolized
the interest of historians. Not till after the Aisne, when the
race for the sea began, did the eyes of Europe turn to the
Channel ports, for which the struggle seemed only then to be
beginning. On this reading, even the siege of Antwerp was an
isolated episode, in which we were unwise to intervene, an
irrelevant side issue which should not have distracted our
attention from the battle of main armies.
Macaulay’s schoolboy might welcome this interpretation of
events, for it would spare his overburdened memory the recollec-
tion of many minor operations controversial in their inception,
confusing in their brevity, and of an influence in the campaign
as a whole which, if not disputable, is at any rate disputed.
Yet the determining triumph of the Allies in the first three
months of the war did not consist only in the very important
facts that Paris was saved and that the battle front was stabilized
on a line running North and South, rather than on a line
running East and West, but in the fact that, as late as October
10th, the Belgian coastline was still in our possession, and that
we were thus enabled permanently to retain the more important
Channel ports. Had the ports fallen in August or September,
Paris could not have been saved. Had the Germans reached
the Belgian coast in the first days of October, our victories on
the Mame and Aisne would have lost their strategic signi-
ficance ; in the outflanking race northwards we should have
been beaten. Neither the French ports nor the Belgian coast


could be directly defended by our original expeditionary force,
or by our allies. Why were they not seized by the enemy ?
How did it happen that the greatest opportunity ever offered
to the Germans on the Western front was missed ? The truth
is that the safety of the Channel ports was an essential of British
naval strategy, and that it is, in great part, to the efforts of the
Admiralty, in co-operation with the War Office and the French
General Headquarters staff, that we must look for the explana-
tion of the inaction of the German High Command.
In their efforts the Allies were assisted undeniably by the
caution of the leaders of the enemy forces in Belgium, but the
salient and determining fact is that the enemy were given reason
for caution, and persistently encouraged to exercise it. Had it
been otherwise the Channel ports would not have been saved.
The formation of the Advanced Base Force by the Admiralty,
on the outbreak of war, was the initial step taken by them for
the defence of these ports. The second step was taken on
August 25th when the Marine Brigade under Brigadier-General
Sir George Aston, K.C.8., was ordered to Ostend. The move
was, as we have seen, prompted by no sudden vagary of the
First Lord of the Admiralty, but by the news that, on the even-
ing of the 24th August, German patrols had approached Ostend.
The Marine Brigade, though hardly at the time capable of
offensive action (the battalions had been returned from camp
to their divisions for further training only a few days before),
was embarked on the morning of the 26th, the Chatham Batta-
lion on four Channel Fleet battleships under Rear-Admiral
Currey, and the Plymouth Battalion in four Channel Fleet
battleships under Admiral Bethell. These last ( Vengeance ,
Goliath, Prince George and Ccesar), with the light cruiser Proser-
pine, six destroyers and three monitors, formed the covering
force.
Owing to difficulties of co-ordinating the movement of
the different squadrons, bad weather and delays off Ostend,
the force was not landed in its entirety till the morning of the
28th.
Sir George Aston’s orders were to take up a defensive posi-
tion round Ostend, keeping close to the coast, so as to enjoy the
protection of the Fleet, and to facilitate re-embarkation should
events necessitate it. His force proceeded to entrench on the
perimeter of the town, forming an outpost line, with bicycle


patrols linking up the positions. The force was not mobile ;
it had no cavalry, no supply train, no engineers and no artillery ;
moreover, the lie of the land deprived it of the intended support
of the guns of the fleet.* It was capable, however, of doing
what was required, for its presence meant that the enemy
must send a properly equipped force against Ostend if they
wished to occupy it. Meanwhile, it provided an effective
covering force to the landing of any French or Belgian troops
who might be sent to garrison it, or to take the offensive against
the enemy’s communications. In fact, a very considerable
force of somewhat disorganized Belgian troops from Havre
were landed on August 31st under cover of this Brigade, and,
had the situation developed as was feared on the 25th, there
is no doubt that more effective forces would have followed.
In short, the Allies retained the option of defending the town
should they so decide.
By the end of August, however, the intelligence reports
made it fairly clear that no immediate descent on the Channel
ports need be feared, and, partly for this reason, partly to free
the Naval covering force for more urgent tasks, the Marine
Brigade was suddenly ordered on the night of the 81st-lst to
re-embark. Though the force was deployed on a seven-mile
front, and two hundred tons of baggage and stores had to be
loaded on the transports, the task was accomplished in just over
twelve hours. Reporting on the operations as a whole, the
Admiralty stated that “ the promptitude with which the
Brigade was embarked, landed and re-embarked was highly
creditable.” Considering the limitations of the force in the
matter of training and organization the tribute was well
earned.
Sir Julian Corbett speaks of this expedition—it was really
hardly more than an excursion—as having had little “ material
effect on the campaign. ”f As a statement of fact no one will
quarrel with this verdict. The measure was one of precaution.
When the threat to Ostend did not materialize, the precaution
of providing cover for a landing of trained troops at that point
became superfluous, and the Marine Brigade was naturally
withdrawn.
By the middle of September the situation had profoundly
* Corbett, “ Naval Operations,” Vol. 1., page 98.
t Corbett, “ Naval Operations,” Vol. 1., page 124.


changed—for the better, as far as concerned the operations of
our own expeditionary force, but for the worse, as regards the
threat to the Channel ports. These were now clearly menaced
from two quarters. The Germans in their advance had, ac-
cording to their original plan, left behind in Belgium a strong
force under General Von Beseler to engage and defeat the
Belgian Field Army, and, having done so, to lay siege to Ant-
werp. This force (consisting of the 3rd Reserve Corps, the 4th
“ Ersatz ” Division, a “ Marine Division,” three “ Landwehr ”
Brigades and a strong quota of army troops and siege artillery)
had by now taken the field, and the Belgian Field Army was
falling back on Antwerp. In view of the Belgian losses and of
the numerical superiority of the German containing forces,
there would have been reason to fear for the safety of the ports,
even if there had been no question of co-operation between Yon
Beseler and the German main armies. But, in fact, such co-
operation was just what there was reason to fear. On
September 15th the left flank of the main allied battle line was
at Noyon. The German positions on the Aisne had proved
impregnable to frontal attack, and the only way in which a
further allied advance could be effected was by repeating against
the German right the tactics of the Marne. There was, how-
ever, little or no hope that the manoeuvre, so successful
before, would have any similar results. Then, the enemy’s
right, attacked by Manoury, could not be reinforced. Foch in
the centre had seen to that. The result was a rapid and im-
mediate retreat; the alternative would have been disaster.
Now, it was almost certain that any threat to the German right
would lead only to a counter turning movement, executed by
troops drawn from other parts of the German line. This, as we
know, is precisely what happened, and, within a few hours of the
opening of the attack near Noyon, it became clear that the op-
posing armies were so evenly balanced, and so equally served
by their communications, that the position would not be stabi-
lized till one army or the other reached the coast. Who would
reach the coast first and at what point ? If the French ports
were to be saved, we must prevent the junction of the German
right and Von Beseler’s force until our own left had reached
the Belgian coast.
It was in these circumstances that Sir John French drew the
attention of the authorities at home to the necessity for safe


guarding the Belgian coast,* and that on September ISthf the
French Government made a formal request to London for the
intervention of a British force, based on Calais or Dunkirk, to
demonstrate against the menacing German right. To the
British Admiralty, as well as to the War Office, the plan com-
mended itself, for our short experience of St. Nazaire had
strengthened the conviction that the Channel ports alone pro-
vided a satisfactory base for our growing army overseas.
Seldom indeed was the inter-relation of naval and military
strategy more complete. The military situation required a
threat to the German communications : the naval situation
made it imperative to relieve the threat to our own. Where,
however, were to be found the troops necessary for even the
most audacious demonstration against Von Beseler and the
German right ?
The enterprise and enthusiasm which had raised and
equipped the two Naval Brigades in a week was not to be
damped by the request to organize a field force in the same
time. The Naval Brigades themselves were still immobile.
The men were there, but the organization, the training, the
mobility were lacking. The Marine Brigade had, however,
been reorganized with success ; the more elderly reservists had
moreover been replaced by younger men (though some of
them were only recruits), and the force had enjoyed the benefits
of a fortnight’s field training. The War Office offered the
necessary army troops (including the Oxfordshire Hussars, a
famous yeomanry regiment), and a detachment of Royal
Engineers. This force was ordered to Dunkirk, and was dis-
embarked by September 21st. Sir George Aston was again in
command, with Major Powys Sketchley, R.M.L.1., afterwards,
and until his death in the summer of 1916, so well known a
figure in the Naval Division as Brigade Major, and Lt.-Colonel
H. D. Farquharson as A.A. & Q.M.G.
To enable the force to demonstrate over a wide area, and
so keep the enemy in doubt as to the size of the concentra-
tion, extreme mobility was essential. A force of armoured
cars belonging to the R.N.A.S., but manned by two hundred
specially selected men of the R.M.A. and R.M.L.I. (fifty from
ISS^iSQ 1 a * u^er account see “ 1914 ”by the Earl of Ypres, 2nd Edition, pages
t Corbett: “ Naval Operations,” Vol. 1., pages 169-170.
2


each Marine Division), under Major Armstrong, R.M.L.1., which
had been operating independently under Commander Samson
at Dunkirk since September 12th,* was placed under Sir George
Aston’s command; arrangements were made for more cars
and motor transport to follow. Among this motor transport
were a number of motor omnibuses from London, whose drivers
had been hurriedly enlisted as Royal Marines at Chatham, j*
The idea underlying the operations of this heterogeneous
force recalls, and was perhaps prompted by, the historic
exploits of Stonewall Jackson and Stewart in the Shenandoah
Valley. The almost insuperable administrative difficulties
created by the despatch of a composite force for which
the War Office was not responsible, and which had no
regular supply service of its own, marred in some degree
the execution of a very promising conception. Things
improved when Major Richardson went over a few days later,
and gave the force the benefit of his wider experience of practical
administration; but the infantry force remained necessarily
almost immobile. The presence in the Marine Brigade of 687
recruits partly accounted for their inactivity : mainly, it was
the absence of any reliable information of the enemy move-
ments which held them to their ground, since, with its ponderous
administrative arrangements, the force could not afford a false
move.
The armoured cars were, however, faced with no comparable
difficulties. Till the composite force arrived, they had been based
on Dunkirk, and had patrolled a very wide area, embracing
Amiens, Albert, Arras, Courtrai and Ghent. Later, their head-
quarters were moved to Morbecque near Hazebrouck, from
which advanced base patrols, operating in sections of from three
to ten cars each, went out continuously searching for German
cavalry detachments, and engaging them wherever possible.
In one such action near Douai, towards the end of September,
Lieut. Williams, R.M.A., was wounded.
* These cars had been sent overseas in the first instance to protect the
R.N.A.S. base at Dunkirk, from which point Commander Samson was operating
against the German air bases nearest to England. The employment of armoured
cars was a new departure destined to have very far-reaching results.
t These buses remained in France attached to the Army until the Autumn
of 1915, and were the pioneers of the Army ’bus companies. Their record is
of interest as that of another singularly fruitful and sensible improvisation in
which the Admiralty was first in the field.


Meanwhile, the Infantry had remained at Dunkirk, except
for the Portsmouth Battalion, which had been sent, at the urgent
request of the French, to Lille, to cover the withdrawal of a
number of isolated French detachments. At the end of the
month, however. Sir George Aston was invalided, and Colonel
Paris, C. 8., R.M.A., was sent out to take his place. He at once
(September 27th) moved his headquarters to Cassel, and there
concentrated all three battalions of his Brigade, less the recruits
whom he left at Dunkirk. Cassel was a commanding position
across the Belgian frontier, far better suited to form the ad-
vanced base for the more serious operations which seemed now
likely to develop ; and, by shedding his recruits, Col. Paris
further strengthened his force.
The dominating facts in the situation on the evening of
September 30th were that the main armies in the race for the
sea had reached Lens, that the Germans were closing on Ant-
werp, and that the effects of their bombardment on the outer
forts showed that it was only a question of days before these
positions would have to be abandoned. The French had, in
these circumstances, already offered to send a force of 15,000
men to operate against the flank of the besieging army, if the
British Government would co-operate, and Lord Kitchener,
through Sir Francis Villiers (British Minister at Brussels), had
suggested despatching as soon as possible the 7th and 3rd
Cavalry Divisions, if the French support could be relied on.
Neither Division (nor indeed the promised French contingent)
was ready for immediate service, but till October 2nd the
plan held the field.
On that day the situation changed suddenly for the worse.
The Germans broke through the outer line of the Antwerp forts,
driving the Belgian Field Army back on the line of the Nethe,
and the Belgian Government decided to abandon the defence
of the position to the fortress troops. This decision was tanta-
mount—so much can be said with conviction in the light of the
happenings on October 9th—to the surrender of the fortress
within at most three days, and'probably sooner.*
The surrender of Antwerp at this juncture would have
involved the gravest possible danger of losing the Channel
For a detailed account of the capacity of the fortress troops and of their
fiA P er^orman ces on October Bth and 9th, see “La Defense de la position forti-
nee d Anvers en 1914,” by Lieut.-General Deguise, the Governor of Antwerp
from September Bth till its surrender.
2*


ports; for the junction of Von Beseler and the main German
army (by this time at Lille), which must have meant the
definite outflanking of the allied line, could hardly then have
been prevented, “It was a position which, for naval reasons
alone, could not be accepted without an effort to prevent the
breakdown of our plans.”*
There was one way out of the difficulty, though one only.
If the Belgian Government could be induced to modify their
decision to withdraw the Field Army, the German plans, which
were clearly based on an attack from the East, and not on an
enveloping movement culminating (in accordance with the
plan prepared in peace time by the German staff) in an attack
from the South, would be inevitably delayed for a definite
number of days. The reason for this was that the Belgians
would have to be driven from the line of the Nethe before the
guns could be got into position to bombard the inner forts,
the ramparts and the city. Insufficient attention has been
paid to this fortunate modification of the German plan, which
had so signal an influence on the situation at this date. Yet
the reason of it is avowed in the German monograph on this
campaign.f Von Beseler was afraid of the menace to his
flank, constituted by the presence of allied troops at Ostend
and Dunkirk, and the threat of a further intervention. The
activities of the Marine Brigade and, perhaps still more, of
Commander Samson and his “ motor bandits,” as they had
come to be known, had had in fact precisely the intended effect.
Thus the time was now come to take advantage of the delu-
sions under which the enemy was labouring, to bring into
operation, if possible, even at the eleventh hour, the plan
already in being for the relief of Antwerp; or, in any event,
by delaying the fall of the fortress, to perform the more vital
service of saving the ports.
It was in these circumstances, not to initiate an unpre-
meditated adventure, but to save from premature abandonment
a plan of operation inaugurated at the instance of the French
High Command, that the First Lord of the Admiralty under-
took, at the request of the Government as conveyed to him by
* Corbett: “ Naval Operations,” Vol. 1., pages 183-184 ; the “ plans ”
were, of course, those for the employment of the 7th and 3rd Cavalry Divisions
in conjunction with the French in the relief of Antwerp.
f “ Antwerpen, 1914,” Erich von Tschischwitz: Berlin, 1921.


Lord Kitchener, his much discussed visit to Antwerp, on the
evening of October 2nd.
Concrete promises of support were required of Mr. Winston
Churchill before the Belgians were induced to hold their hand.
But, on the understanding that the Marine Brigade was to go
immediately to reinforce the line of the Nethe, that the two
Naval Brigades from England would follow at once, and that,
if no more substantial aid could be sent, the Belgian Government
should be free to review the situation in three days’ time (on
October 6th), the matter was arranged. In these circumstances,
and anticipating Government approval which was subsequently
forthcoming, General Paris received orders, early on the morning
of October 3rd, to take his infantry to Antwerp.
The Brigade entered Antwerp, without difficulty, by the
railway running through Ghent, Lokeren, and St. Nicholas,
and detrained at Edeghen, a suburb some four miles due south
of the town, at 1 a.m. on October 4th. They moved at 9 a.m.
into trenches on the Western bank of the Little Nethe, imme-
diately north of Lierre, where they relieved the 21st Belgian
Regiment.
The position in which the Brigade found themselves formed,
with the line of the Scheldt as far as Termonde, the key to the
remaining Antwerp defences; for the line covered the breach
made by the enemy in the main (outer) defensive position.
Once the river lines had fallen, nothing could save the town from
intensive bombardment. On the contrary, while they held,
the position was less definitely hopeless than has been imagined.
The trouble was that the Belgian Field Army was exhausted,
that there was virtually no efficient artillery support for the
infantry, and that the trenches, at any rate on the line of the
Nethe, were not only inadequate to sustain a fierce bombardment,
and without any covered communications, but so sited as not
to command the crossings of the river. It is, nevertheless, clear
that the forcing of the line of the Nethe and the Scheldt by
Termonde was a task to which the enemy would have to devote
serious attention, so long as those lines were resolutely defended.
The battle on the Nethe was already in progress when
the Marines entered the trenches, on the morning of October 4th,
but the line was intact. The forces under General Paris’s com-
mand consisted, in addition to the Marine Brigade, of the 7th
Regt. Belgian Infantry, the Ist Carabineers, some machine-gun


detachments of the R.N.A.S. and a detachment of Royal
Engineers under Captain Rooke, R.E. The 7th Regiment and
the Chatham, Plymouth and Deal Battalions R.M.L.I. took
over the front-line trenches, each battalion forming its own
local reserve; the Ist Carabineers and the Portsmouth Bat-
talion were in Brigade reserve. October 4th passed quietly;
but, during the night of the 4th-sth, the enemy brought up
field guns to the opposite bank of the river, and, firing into our
advanced trenches at close range, compelled a retirement to
the main line of defence, 300 yards further back. At the same
time, enemy scouts crossed the river into Pierre, in the sector
held by the 7th Belgian Regiment. On the afternoon of the
sth, the enemy achieved a more important success, when they
crossed the Great Nethe (which was not under fire from the
trenches on the west bank) in force, and drove back the Belgian
troops on General Paris’s right flank. Later in the afternoon,
the position was partially restored, on the initiative of General
Paris, the original line of trenches being retaken by the
Belgians, in a counter attack “ gallantly led by Colonel Tier-
chon, 2nd Chasseurs; ”* but the Germans could not be dislodged
from their holding on the west bank of the river. Later, on
the same day, the enemy crossed the Lower Nethe north of
Lierre—on the left of the sector held by the Deal Battalion.
The situation was at once reviewed by the Belgian General
Staff, but it was decided, very late on the evening of the sth,
to fight on, and to make a determined attempt to throw the
enemy back across the Nethe. This decision was taken, and
the orders consequent on it were issued, without consultation
with General Paris. An attack to have had any chance of
success would have had to be carefully organized, well supported
by artillery, and carried out by fresh troops. As it was, the
order for the attack reached General Paris at 1.15 a.m. The
troops under his command formed the only body of troops in
the line who were not exhausted by previous fighting; but they
were also there, primarily, to stiffen the defence, and, in the last
resort, to cover a retreat. To risk this small body of troops in
a night attack, for which no preparations had been made, seemed
in the circumstances impossible. In the result, the attack was
carried out by the Belgians alone, and was at first partially
successful. By 11 a.m., however, on the 6th, German counter-
♦ General Paris’s dispatch to the Admiralty dated October 31et, 1914.


attacks deprived us of our gains, and the line of the Nethe
became untenable.
General Paris decided at once on a withdrawal to a position
intermediate between the river line and the inner forts, and
the retirement was begun, under a very heavy bombardment,
at 11 a.m. This was, superficially, a disappointing issue,
and the German account goes so far as to express surprise
that the British and Belgians did not persist further with
their counter-attack on the night of the s th-6th. The facts
are, however, unquestionable. There were insufficient troops
to fight, without adequate artillery support, more than a
delaying action. Only by keeping his forces, and the Belgian
troops under his command, intact, could the game of delay be
at all prolonged. In the circumstances, the fact that the enemy
did not dare to follow up the retirement, on the morning of the
6th, is ample justification for the decision to retire. The salient
point was that, at this date, three days after that on which the
Belgian Government had determined originally to withdraw
the field army, the field army was still in being in front of
Antwerp, holding a position sufficiently defensible at any rate
to give the Germans reason to pause before renewing their
advance. The share of General Paris and his force in bringing
about this situation was certainly not inconsiderable. It was not
on the front held by the Marines that the decisive break-through
had taken place.
It will be remembered that the Marine Brigade was not
the sum total of the immediate assistance promised by Mr.
Winston Churchill. He had also undertaken, subject to the
consent of the Cabinet, that the two untrained Naval Brigades
from Walmer and Betteshanger should follow at the earliest
possible date. This undertaking also had been carried out,
and on this same morning the Brigades had begun to detrain
at the city station.
The decision to send these Brigades cannot be seriously
challenged. The promise to send them had indeed justified
itself by the time it was fulfilled, for the Belgian resistance had
been prolonged. If it is fairly certain that this could not have
been done but for the timely arrival and judicious handling of
the Marine Brigade, it is also true that the effort would not have
been made but for the definite promise of further reinforcements.
Moreover, the actual arrival of the Brigades created the greatest


enthusiasm, and undoubtedly counteracted to some extent the
then prevailing depression.
The Naval Brigades were, however, a slender asset from a
military point of view, and their capacity for service in an
emergency had been considerably weakened by their experiences
since they left camp two days before. After a long march to
Dover, the Brigades had loaded their own stores (of which
too many were taken, including the men’s kit-bags and officers’
uniform cases), and embarked late in the evening on transports
so over-crowded that many of the men were compelled to stand
almost the whole time on board. Not till 12 noon, on the
sth, had the transports been able to get into Dunkirk Harbour.
Since leaving camp more than twenty-four hours before, the
men had had only one meal (at Dover at about noon), and that
an improvised one, and when they reached Dunkirk they had
to set to work at once unloading the transports, and loading
up the waiting trains. In the interval, an attempt had been
made by the base staff to remedy the more glaring deficiencies
in kit and equipment, and 120 rounds of ammunition (which
had to be carried in pockets for the most part, as few had
bandoliers or haversacks) were served out. The absence of a
trained staff, and the inexperience of some of the battalion
and company commanders, had made the business of disem-
barking, issuing stores and entraining exceptionally long and
tedious, and the men were thoroughly exhausted by the time
they had started for Antwerp. Even in the train, the men had
the strictest injunctions not to sleep lest the train was attacked.
Rupert Brooke summed up a day of chaotic improvisation as
a “ very tragic and amusing affair,” from which we may infer
that for some at least of the junior officers the day brought a
certain measure of disillusion.
The first train for Antwerp, consisting of advance parties,
had left the quayside at 9 p.m., but it was not till 11.30 p.m.
that the last battalions of the 2nd Brigade got away.
The trains began to arrive at Antwerp in the early hours
of the 6th, and the Ist Brigade, as soon as they were formed
up, were marched off again to Wilryk, an eastern suburb a
few miles from the station. As the men passed the station
barriers many had been given tinned meat, sardines, or
coffee by the civil population, and when, on arrival at Wilryk,
orders were given to arrange billeting accommodation, it looked




Men of the Naval Brigades in trenches near Vieux Dieu, Antwerp,
October 7th, 1914.


as though they were going to get the essential rest. Almost
at once, however, they were ordered by Major Richardson
to Vieux Dieux, another suburb further east, near which
ran the line of the inner forts. Here, while the Brigade
were breakfasting, Mr. Winston Churchill came on the scene,
and spoke to many of the officers of the intended plan, which
was still, at this time, to hold the Germans on the line of the
Nethe, till the 7th Division and the expected French divisions
could join hands on the west of Antwerp and attack the flank
of the besieging army.
After breakfast, the Brigade got orders from the Belgian
staff to move forward to some dismantled trenches, between
the line of the inner forts and the line of the Nethe, there to
remain in reserve to what was still (at 10 a.m.) our line of
resistance.
Meanwhile the 2nd Brigade had detrained. By the time
they were ready to move off the whole city was astir, and the
scene was one of poignant humour, of romantic excitement, of
that unintelligible optimism which comes to men in any brief
respite from an inca mlable menace. To the station had
come the Civic Guard and numerous officials ; as the Brigade
marched away (in this case direct to Vieux Dieux), the shops
were open, and, as in all times of public excitement, the whole
population was in the streets, fearful lest solitude might
perhaps reveal for a moment the face of truth. “ Every
one cheered,” writes Rupert Brooke, “ and flung themselves
on us, and gave us apples and chocolate and kisses”—another
more prosaically-minded eye-witness includes also jugs of
beer in this Homeric catalogue of gifts—“ and cried ‘ Vivent
les Anglais ’ and ‘ Keep ! Keep ! Heep ! ’ ”
The enthusiasm was infectious. The doubts of the evening
dusk had given way to the resilient optimism of midday,
and so these raw battalions, without any orders, without
equipment, with but few senior officers skilled in the control
of troops in the field, and few junior officers who had been
taught anything save to be controlled with a good grace,
marched through Antwerp without more, perhaps, than a
subconscious repudiation of the cheers which acclaimed
them as seasoned troops, possessing in their bayonets the
veritable means of deliverance to a great city.
The 2nd Brigade halted on the way to Vieux Dieux for


breakfast, and eventually arrived there at about 4 p.m.
Here they found part of the Ist Brigade, which had been brought
back from the trenches in front of Vieux Dieux, on its way
to join the Marine Brigade on the new advanced position,
now being consolidated.
The retirement of General Paris’s force from the Nethe
line was now completed, and the Marine Brigade and the
Belgians were entrenching on a line from Vremde to Bouchout.
General Paris had learnt of the arrival of the Naval Brigades
while the retirement was in progress, and, as soon as the situa-
tion was clearer, not knowing, of course, of the literally con-
tinuous activities of the Ist Brigade since 9 a.m. on October 4th,
he had ordered it to come up on the left of the Marines,
and extend the line across the Malines Railway.
The scene in Vieux Dieux as the 2nd Brigade arrived, and
the Ist Brigade re-entered it on the way to the front, was
a memorable one. The two brigades of British troops filled
the Square, yet, through the ranks, came endless Belgian troops
returning from the trenches. Excited staff officers shouted
indiscriminately to everybody to keep cool, guns galloped in
all directions, motor cyclists rushed through with apparently
endless dispatches, and, threading their way in humble, pitiful
groups, by by-streets and on the edges of crowds, the refugees
from the outlying villages fled from the certain, to the uncertain,
disaster. Here, too, the brigades had their first sight of war-
weary troops. Later, the Division came to know well enough
that look, which marks out men exhausted by desperate and
long-continued exposure to the risks of imminent and horrify-
ing death. The sight of the Belgian troops in Vieux Dieux
was their first introduction to the realities of war.
Amid these scenes of excitement, Commodore Henderson’s
Brigade moved forward to the new position, the Drake and
Benbow Battalions going into line on the right of the Chatham,
and the Hawke and Collingwood Battalions into support to
the Marine Brigade near Chateau Weyninex. On the right of
the Benbow Battalion were some Belgian troops, who, however,
retired later in the evening.
More fortunate than their fellows, Commodore Backhouse’s
Brigade, though less exhausted, were able, on arrival at Vieux
Dieux, to go into billets, where for a time they remained.
Already, however, grave decisions had been taken, which made


it necessary before the night was out to reconsider the dis-
positions of the force.
It must be understood that there were, on the morning of
the 6th, no fewer than four separate bodies of troops fighting
in and round Antwerp. There was the Belgian Field Army,
under H.M. the King of the Belgians, the garrison of the fortress
of Antwerp, under the immediate command of Lieut.-General
Deguise, General Paris’s advanced base force (with Belgian units
attached for tactical purposes), and the two Naval brigades,
who did not know, till after they arrived in Antwerp, that
they were to come under General Paris’s command. There
were also present in Antwerp Mr. Winston Churchill, who, as
First Lord of the Admiralty, stood in a special relation to the
Naval and Marine brigades, and Sir Henry Rawlinson, who had
been sent by Lord Kitchener to command the force which
was assembling at Ostend, and which had been originally
intended for the relief of Antwerp.
During the early part of October 6th, the future arrangements
for the defence of Antwerp remained undecided. In pursuance
of the agreement arrived at with Mr. Churchill on the 3rd,
the Belgian General Staff, under whose orders came General
Paris’s force, had, as we have seen, continued a vigorous
defence on the Nethe and, subsequently, on the Vremde line.
They had also strengthened their forces on the Scheldt, and
had beaten off very determined efforts of the Germans to
cross the river at Schoonaerde. During the forenoon, however,
the Belgian authorities had met Mr. Winston Churchill and
General Rawlinson to discuss the future. The arrival of General
Rawlinson’s force had been delayed owing to naval difficulties,
and it was not to be concentrated now till the Bth at the earliest.
There was also no news of the expected French force. All
this meant, in effect, that the Belgians were free to decide
whether to continue the defence, or to revert to their original
plan of withdrawing the Field Army. Eventually a com-
promise was arrived at. The Army, less the 2nd Division,
would at once withdraw across the Scheldt, and ultimately, if
necessary, fall back in the direction of Ostend; but it would
defend the crossings of the Scheldt as long as possible, while
General Deguise, with the help of the 2nd Division of the Field
Army and of General Paris’s force (now increased to three
brigades), would continue to man the eastern defences of the


fortress. Under this arrangement, General Paris, who had
now been promoted Major-General, was left in independent
command of the British troops in the fortress.* The scheme
for relieving the fortress was not definitely abandoned, but the
loss of the line of the Nethe, and the withdrawal of the Field
Army, made it virtually certain that the defence could not
be prolonged sufficiently to make the scheme practicable.
During the afternoon of October 6th, the rumour of the im-
pending departure of the Belgian Army began to circulate,
and the effect on the moral of the remaining Belgian troops
was deplorable. In these circumstances, General Paris had
to consider whether it would not be wise to withdraw his force
that night to the inner defences. As the afternoon drew
on, the reports regarding the Belgian troops became more
and more alarming, and, by the time the final decision regard-
ing the future defence of the fortress was arrived at, the
General’s mind was made up, and orders were issued to
Brigade Commanders for a further withdrawal to take place
at 2 a.m.
While these orders were being written, Mr, Winston
Churchill and General Rawlinson were with General Paris,
and, after the decision had been taken, both expressed their
agreement with the latter’s view of the situation.
The front to which General Paris had decided to withdraw
was the line of the inner forts, a very strong prepared position,
consisting of eight forts covering Antwerp from the east and
north-east. The right of the line was protected by the Scheldt,
and the left by inundations. Between the forts were trenches,
well wired and solidly constructed, with a perfect field of fire
of five hundred yards. On the other hand, the trenches were
old-fashioned and quite useless against modern artillery ; there
were no communication trenches, and the forts could not be
relied on, either as to the quality of their armament or the resolu-
tion of the garrisons. The line, however, was the best there
was; the trenches could be deepened; and, above all, the
position could, at least, not be carried by infantry assault. To
hold it meant, at any rate, to impose on the enemy the delay
necessary for him to bring up his guns; or, alternatively, to
• His improvised Divisional Staff now consisted of Colonel Ollivant and Major
Sketchley, General Staff Officers, and Major Richardson as A. A. & Q.M.G. Colonel
Seely and Major Bridges were also lent to General Paris temporarily for staff
duties. Beyond these officers there was no divisional organization.


force the line of the Scheldt and cut off the retreat of the
garrison.
To rest the Marine Brigade, General Paris put the two
Naval brigades into the trenches, the Ist R.N. Brigade on the
left (Forts 2 to 5), and the 2nd R.N. Brigade on the right
(Forts sto 8). Between Fort 8 and the Scheldt were Belgian
fortress troops, relieved later by the Chatham Battalion.
The night of October 6th-7th passed off quietly, there
being very little shelling, and that directed mainly against
the houses behind the line. The only “ incident ” was on the
Anson front, where two guns in the fort on their left flank
burst, causing an ominous and significant panic among the
Belgian garrison. The remaining guns in the fort were then
manned by naval gun crews, picked from the ranks of the
battalion.
Still the Germans hesitated to follow up the retirement,
and, on the morning of the 7th, the staff were able to send up
rations to the men in motor-buses, which drew up in front of
our lines. So quiet, indeed, was the situation that many
officers drove back into Antwerp on derelict carts, which were
to be found behind the lines, to buy food and drink for their
company messes. Meanwhile, officers of greater seniority
unburdened their minds by writing field messages with ceaseless
activity. Throughout the day, men were kept busily engaged,
under the superintendence of the engineers, in digging shrapnel
trenches in the rear of the main position, though the shortage
of tools prevented any great progress being made except
on the right. Only an occasional shell passing overhead
into Antwerp reminded the troops of the stern realities
of their situation. Remote, however, as its dangers still
appeared at the time, the position of the Brigades was far from
comfortable. They had no suitable cooking arrangements ;
the men had nowhere to sleep, the trenches themselves were
overcrowded; there was no support line, and meals were
irregular and scanty. Moreover, the entire ignorance of active
service conditions on land, which was common to all ranks of the
Brigades, made the situation, which to trained troops would
have appeared comparatively peaceful, unnecessarily trying.
The men in some battalions were being worked too hard, having
regard to what they might be called on to face; and the golden
rule that a soldier, on front-line duty, when he is not working
29
Os tend, Dunkirk and Antwerp


should be sleeping, was not being, and had not been, observed.
Particularly was this true of the officers, many of whom, for
absolutely no reason, came back to England, after the Antwerp
expedition, without a single proper eight hours’ rest to their
credit.
The first half of the night of October 7th-Bth brought no
change in the local situation. The front was still clear, and
there was no suspicion of any attack. Towards 2 a.m., however,
a German patrol was seen in front of our wire on the Drake
Battalion front, and the firing from the Drake trenches led
to an outburst of rapid fire along the front of several battalions
to the right and left. This incident, reported to have led to
the death of one cow, did little credit, no doubt, to the measure
of control exercised by some of the officers; but many parallels
could be found for it in early experiences of most formations,
and it certainly cannot be regarded as a conclusive proof
that few of the men in the Division knew how to load or fire
a rifle.
Order had barely been restored after this incident, when
a desultory bombardment was opened on our trenches, which
continued for some hours. The shelling was mostly by six
and eight inch howitzers, but was neither heavy nor well
directed ; on the 2nd Brigade front, in fact, the casualties
were extremely light —only some half-dozen men being wounded.
The Ist Brigade lost rather more, one officer, Lt.-Colonel Max-
well (commanding the Collingwood Battalion) and three men
being killed, and some twenty men wounded; but, thanks
largely to the progress made in improving the trench system on
this front, the damage was less than might have been expected.*
The bombardment, however, finally shattered the moral of
the remaining fortress troops in this part of the line, and Forts
2, 3 and 4 had to be taken over, wholly or in part, by officers
and men from the Naval Brigades.
Nevertheless, there was nothing in what had occurred on
this front to make our position untenable. The serious hap-
penings were those on the Scheldt at Schoonaerde, where the
Germans, after severe fighting, had secured a footing across
the river on the evening of the 7th, and, during the night, had
thrown across more than a brigade. It was this that made
* The medical arrangements were in the skilled hands of Fleet-Surgeon
Finch, R.N., and, when tested on this occasion, proved excellent.
30
The Royal Naval Division


it clear to General Paris that the Belgian Field Army was
nearing the limits of its powers of resistance, and that the
time when it would be necessary to withdraw was therefore
approaching. Accordingly, at 7 a.m. on the morning of the
Bth, he informed General Rawlinson by telephone that he would
probably be forced to withdraw that night. Already, the
previous day, the Brigade staffs had been warned to recon-
noitre the routes to the lower (pontoon) bridge at Burght,
and Colonel Bridges had, in conjunction with Major Richardson,
made certain preliminary arrangements, and had secured
boats to take the Division across, in the event of the bridges
being destroyed. The only thing that remained was to secure,
if possible, trains to meet the Division outside Antwerp, and
this was put in hand by General Rawlinson, who sent Colonel
Fairholme to the Belgian (Field Army) Headquarters at Sel-
zaete to make the best possible arrangements.
It was not, however, necessary as yet for General Paris
to make an irrevocable decision. Belgian rearguards were
still covering the approaches to the main roads and rail-
ways leading from Antwerp to the coast, and the longer his
force could stay the better. The only immediate danger,
indeed, seemed to be from the north, where, according to the
Belgian reports which reached General Deguise, the Germans
had got round the flank of our line and captured Forts 1 and
2. Colonel Seely and Major Bridges found, however, on going
personally to the Ist Brigade line, that no Germans had been
seen, and that the forts, though abandoned by the Belgians,
had been taken over by Naval gunners from the ranks of the
Brigade. In the circumstances, there still seemed a hope of
prolonging the defence for a little time; and it was agreed
that, so long as the flanks were safe, and the bombardment
along the line not sufficiently serious to necessitate withdrawal
on that ground alone, the Division would remain. Only in
the event of any change for the worse in the situation on
the northern bank of the Scheldt, or on the left of the Ist
Brigade, would the Division withdraw.
There was indeed every reason for remaining to the last
possible moment. The popular idea that the position was
untenable, and that it was only by good fortune that anyone
escaped, has no shadow of foundation in fact. The lines of
the inner forts, and the Belgian positions across the Scheldt,
31
Ostend, Dunkirk and Antwerp


could be held for a good many hours (if not for two or three
days) longer, if only the Belgians were ready to remain in
their trenches, to man their forts, and to fire their guns. More-
over, though nothing could have saved the city from ultimate
destruction except a further intervention, such intervention
was still possible. General Paris was, in the circumstances,
bound to remain as long as the Belgians stood to their remaining
positions, and so safeguarded for him a line of retreat.
During the afternoon of the Bth, however, General Paris,
who had moved his headquarters so as to be in the closest
touch with General Deguise, saw reports coming in of con-
tinual defections of the Belgian fortress troops, which made it
clear that the conditions, on which alone he could remain, were
no longer being fulfilled. His written instructions (which he had
received from Mr. Winston Churchill) were imperative. “He
will exert his utmost efforts to secure the prolongation of this de-
fence . . . and, secondly, he will insist on being excluded
from any capitulation or surrender, and will in all circum-
stances keep and consider himself and his force free to make
their way to the left bank of the Scheldt in order to rejoin
Sir Henry Rawlinson’s command or any other British force,
naval or military.” If the retreat of the Division were further
postponed, the freedom to withdraw across the Scheldt would
be lost, and the exclusion of the force from the now inevitable
surrender would become impossible.
At 5 p.m. on the Bth, therefore, the final decision was
taken, and reported to Mr. Winston Churchill by telephone,
as the decision of the Commander on the spot, and accepted
as such by him without question.
The order for retirement was issued between 5.30 and
6 p.m. The original of the order cannot be traced, though
it was sent to the Admiralty by General Paris. The tenour
of the instructions is, however, known. The Ist Brigade
was to go by the Malines Gate to the city pontoon bridge,
and thence to the rendezvous —Zwyndrecht; the 2nd and Marine
Brigades were to go their direct routes to the pontoon bridge
at Burght, and then to Zwyndrecht. The Portsmouth Bat-
talion of Marines was to act as a rearguard, moving off in rear
of all details. All Brigades were to leave on receipt of the
order.
The order for retirement had not been unexpected. The


different commanding officers had already been warned on
the 6th and 7th to reconnoitre the road to the pontoon bridge,
and the new route now assigned to the Ist Brigade, being
through the town, was easy to find. Unfortunately, the staff
officer, charged with the duty of delivering this order to Commo-
dore Henderson, delivered it instead to Commander Campbell,
of the Drake Battalion ; and intimated to him, at the same
time, that his brigade had already been notified and were on
the point of departure. The result was that, whereas the
2nd Brigade, the Marine Brigade and the Drake Battalion
left as soon as possible, Commodore Henderson and the
Hawke, Benbow and Collingwood Battalions only learnt of
the order to retreat, as the result of a visit from Colonel
Ollivant* at about 7.15, and were, even then, not informed as
to the vital point that the retirement was to take effect on
its receipt.
The result of these mistakes was that, while the 2nd and
Marine Brigades were able to reach the bridge at Burght at
about 9.30 p.m. in good order, and, while the Drake Battalion
reached the lower bridge as early as 9 o’clock, Commodore
Henderson did not arrange to retire till 9.30, and, for various
reasons, did not start till even later. The Portsmouth Marines,
detailed as rearguard to the division, were, of course, longer
delayed, and did not leave till some short time after 10.80 p.m.
The order had been for all three brigades to rendezvous
at Zwyndrecht, a western suburb of Antwerp, about 14 miles
from the centre of the line of the forts. From there, General
Paris had intended to march to Beveren-Waes, not more than
seven miles ahead, in the hope of getting a train, and, failing
that, to continue his march westwards, through Stekene and
Moerbeke. This plan was based on incorrect information
regarding trains, for a message sent by Colonel Dallas from
Selzaete (telling General Paris that the line from St. Nicholas
was not safe because of the presence of Germans at Lokeren,
and that he must therefore go to St. Gillaes-Waes), had un-
fortunately miscarried. The true situation became known
to General Paris only during the course of the retreat.
The march of the two brigades and of the Drake Battalion
* Colonel Ollivant was the staff officer detailed to take the order to the
Marine Brigade. It was after doing this that he had called at the Ist
Brigade H.Q.
3
33
Os tend, Dunkirk and Antwerp


to the river, a distance of some seven or eight miles, had been
accomplished without much difficulty, and there was no
interference whatever by the enemy. This was perhaps because a
detachment, which had approached our lines just before the
retreat, had been fired on, and had retired, with the conviction
that the defence of the fortress was being continued. Yet
the occasional shells falling in Antwerp, the theatrical reflec-
tion of great fires, and the noise of continuous explosions,
seemed to cast over the deserted streets an atmosphere of
calamity, and gave to the weary battalions some faint warning
of what they might have to face across the river.
Here, on the roads to Zwyndrecht, was a scene not indeed
unparalleled in the annals of modern savagery but never
surpassed in the pity it inspired. It seemed as if the whole
population of Antwerp, women and children, priests and
nuns, the sick, the aged and the infirm, had fled from their
homes, and yet, momentarily indifferent to the consequences,
they must halt ever and again to look back at the burning
ruin of their hopes and their aspirations. To the other
sorrows of exile, was added the threat of an armed and
hostile pursuit. Mixed up with the procession of fugitives,
were men driving cattle, and mules and peasants’ carts, fleeing
in an interminable procession along the same road; and each
man, in his haste, impeding the progress of the others.
Amid these scenes it was impossible, from the start, to main-
tain any military formation. Battalions got separated from
each other, and, as the hours passed, companies and even pla-
toons had to fight their way along for themselves. Officers and
men had been exhausted (to some extent needlessly, it is true,
but the fault was not theirs) before they started. By the
time they reached Zwyndrecht, about 11.30 p.m., they had
marched, under the most impossible conditions, for nearly six
hours. Some of the men had no water-bottles, and all carried
ammunition in their pockets, which chafed unbearably as
time went on. Acting on very correct instructions, many
started the retreat carrying also boxes of ammunition, trench
stores not lightly to be abandoned to the enemy, and these
boxes were carried many miles, with a remarkable fidelity.
Yet, by the time the rendezvous was reached (the Drake
Battalion arrived first, but was closely followed by the other
brigades), the limit of endurance seemed near.
34
The Royal Naval Division


After a halt (during which time General Paris received
reports from his staff officers that all three brigades were
present), the column marched on along the St. Nicholas Road;
and it was not till two hours’ later, when they got past
Beveren-Waes, that they learnt that they could only get trains
from St. Gillaes-Waes.
Now the worst of the journey began. The new line of
march was off the main road along narrow lanes, and the
press and confusion was redoubled. As buses and motors
made futile endeavours to pass along the line of march, and
only succeeded in driving the men off the road, and then coming
to a standstill themselves, the confusion soon bordered on
chaos. To understand the scene in these last hours, we
must see through the enveloping darkness not battalions of
trained men, used to the unceasing fatigues of war, marching
along recognizable roads; but, rather, groups of tired and
hungry men, painfully cutting out a path for themselves along
narrow lanes, through the throng of refugees, to which every
hour and every path opening into the line of march added its
tale of panic and confusion.
Inevitable that, in scenes such as this, stories should spread
of men throwing away their equipment, of officers losing their
men, of men refusing to acknowledge constituted authority.
Almost all such stories were false. The battalions that started
the march finished it, and finished it without loss. The head
of the columns reached St. Gillaes-Waes at 7 a.m., and the
last had entrained by nine o’clock. Having regard to the
incalculable circumstances, the lack of adequate equipment and
food, the raw condition of the men, and the utter inexperience
of many of the senior and junior officers, there was much
that was creditable in this achievement. Save for the mistake
already explained, which lost the best part of four battalions,
but was due in no way either to any defect in General Paris’s
plans for the retreat, or to the admitted fact that the battalions
themselves were untrained, the dispatch of the Naval Brigades
to Antwerp would not have excited popular criticism. What is
still more important, it would not have obscured so fatally
the true history of the Antwerp operations, in which the Naval
brigades played only a small part, and that not a part which
depended for its execution on any military qualities. They
were sent by request to fulfil a promise, and they fulfilled it.
3*
35
Os tend, Dunkirk and Antwerp


The less equable fortunes of the Hawke, Collingwood,
Benbow and Portsmouth Marine Battalions must now be told.
As we have said, Commodore Henderson, after Colonel
Ollivant’s visit, had ordered the Ist R.N. Brigade to retire
at 9.30 p.m. Some delay‘occurred in arranging for the Ports-
mouth Marines to cover this retirement, but eventually a
start was made, at about 10.15 p.m. The Hawke Battalion
got away first and crossed the river (though by the upper
bridge at Burght and not as intended by the city bridge) at
about midnight. The departure of the Benbow and Colling-
wood Battalions was, however, delayed still further, and by
the time Commodore Henderson and his staff, who were with
these battalions, reached the river, the bridge had been de-
stroyed. Colonel Bridges’ foresight in providing boats for an
emergency saved the situation, and it was in these that the
party crossed, followed shortly afterwards by Colonel Luard’s
battalion.
The road from Burght to Zwyndrecht, where Commodore
Henderson still hoped to find the rest of the Division, was
by now comparatively clear; and all might yet have been well,
if the three Naval battalions had not halted at Zwyndrecht
for more than two hours, while Commodore Henderson, whose
car had been commandeered by a staff officer, and who was
thus without any means of getting into personal touch with
General Paris, tried to get news. When, at last, the three bat-
talions started for St. Gillaes-Waes, it was nearly 5 a.m. From
the available records it appears that partly as the result of the
confusion on the roads, partly, perhaps, owing to the variable
quality of the staff work, carried on under almost impossible
conditions, mainly owing to the extreme physical exhaustion
of the men,* these battalions lost all cohesion. This must
certainly have been the case, if we are right in stating that
details of the Ist Brigade reached St. Gillaes as early as 11.30
a.m. on the 9th, while others did not reach till 3.45 p.m. This
may have been unavoidable; but it is, nevertheless, certain that
had the Ist Brigade—only some 1,500 men in all—maintained
as much cohesion as did the 2nd and Marine Brigades, they
might have begun to entrain at St. Gillaes-Waes at 2 p.m.,
♦ This brigade had throughout been subjected to more severe exertions
than the 2nd Brigade, and the reckless way in which the strength of the men
had been used was now a fatal element in the situation.


and have got away before the enemy threat to the railway
had developed sufficiently to be regarded as a menace to their
line of retreat. As it was, a report (not, as it turned out,
a correct one) reached St. Gillaes just as the Ist Brigade
had entrained, that the enemy had crossed the southern railway
at Lokeren, and had already cut the line at Moerbeke, a station
a little way down the line.
Meanwhile the rearguard (Portsmouth) battalion, which had
taken a different route, had arrived at St. Nicholas, only to
leam, as General Paris had learnt some ten hours before, that
the Germans were at Lokeren. Colonel Luard decided to march
to Kemseke, i.e., one station further than St. Gillaes, acting
on information, received from Belgian sources, that no trains
were running from any nearer station. His battalion, curiously
enough, had picked up some six hundred stragglers from the
Naval battalions, under Lieut. Crossman, R.N., but the
column, though naturally exhausted by their experience,
managed to reach Kemseke some time after 8 p.m.
Almost at this hour, the Ist Brigade, which had under-
taken the shorter march to St. Gillaes, crossed the Dutch frontier,
with the result that the Hawke, Benbow and Collingwood
battalions, with the Brigade Staff, were interned. Acting
on information, misleading, as it turned out, as to the
strength of the threat to his line of retreat. Commodore
Henderson had felt it his duty to save his command from
useless casualties and apparently inevitable surrender. His
decision was subsequently upheld by the Admiralty and
the Government.
It would, indeed, have been one of the ironies of war had
the stragglers from his command, who were at almost the
same hour entraining at Kemseke, made good their escape.
But this was not to be. The train from Kemseke had only got
as far as Moerbeke (reached about 10 p.m.) when it was derailed.
The Marines, who formed no more than half the complement
of the train, at once got out, and rallied round their officers.
The H.N.V.R. details, without officers, and, for the reasons
already described, in a hopeless state of physical exhaustion,
mostly remained asleep in the train. A few, however,
under Lieut. Crossman, R.N., got out, and joined a party
of Marines under Major French and Captain (then Lieut.)
Gowney, who had opened fire on the German detachment.


Under cover of the fire, Colonel Luard and a number of his
men marched forward along the railway, and many more
could have escaped. 1 Unfortunately, however, the majority
had got out on the far side of the train, and, hurrying in the
wrong direction, were surrounded and captured. In the
circumstances, Major French and the covering party were
compelled to retire, leaving behind some wounded, including
Lieut. Crossman, and the R.N.V.H. details, who, to the
number of 7 officers and 950 men, were captured by a
hardly superior German force, which immediately retreated
with its prisoners.
The train itself, with the refugees, was taken on later into
safety by a Belgian officer, and many Belgian troops passed
down the line as late as the morning of October 10th.
Colonel Luard, Major French (who was awarded the D.S.O.
for his services on this occasion), Captain Gowney (who was
awarded the D.S.C.), and approximately half the other officers
and men of the Portsmouth Battalion made good their escape
by road to Selzaete, a fact which shows that the German
threat to the line of retreat was even now, on the night of
October 9th-10th, not very serious. Further evidence of this
is to be found in the success with which Lieut. Grant, R.N.V.R.,*
and forty men of the Benbow Battalion made their way along
the frontier, and also reached Selzaete on the 10th.
As regards the general conduct of the operations, Sir John
French’s dispatch says the final word. “ From a comprehensive
review of all the circumstances,” he gave it as his opinion that
“ the force of Marines and Naval Brigades which assisted
in the defence of Antwerp was handled by General Paris with
great skill and boldness.”f
And, after all, what was the cost of these operations in
comparison with their results ? Antwerp did not fall, thanks
to British intervention, till October 10th; by that time Sir
Henry Rawlinson was in position at Ghent with a substantial
* This officer was awarded the D.S.C, for a fine exploit in bringing these men
through. Sub-Lieut. Modin, of the same battalion (who also came through on
the 10th), was awarded the same distinction for displaying a similar resolution.
t The question of the Naval Division is, of course, quite independent of the
merits or demerits of the plan for relieving Antwerp. If the scheme advocated
by the Earl of Ypres in his book “ 1914 ” had been adopted, it would still have
been essential to prolong the defence of Antwerp in order to give the scheme
a chance of success.


force, the Belgian Field Army had retreated and rested, and the
left wing of our Expeditionary Force was at Bailleul. The
result was that the three forces could stand on the line of the
Yser, and bar for ever the road to Calais, Boulogne and Dunkirk.
For this decisive success had been sacrificed the lives of 7
officers and 58 men ; 8 officers and 135 men had been wounded;
37 officers and 1,442 men had been interned, and 5 officers
and 931 men had fallen into the hands of the enemy. It
is impossible to speak lightly of such losses, but the sacrifice,
less than was exacted in many minor and fruitless engagements,
was certainly not in vain.


CHAPTER III
THE TIME OF PREPARATION
WHEN the Naval Division returned from Antwerp (they
had been re-embarked from Ostend on the 10th and
11th), and their losses became known, there was a virulent
outcry. The true facts of the situation in Belgium and of the
movement of our main army to the North could not be made
public, and critics were able to point to the fall of Antwerp,
and the loss of some three thousand officers and men, as
evidence of the inefficiency of the Division, and the incom-
petence of those who directed its employment.
Challenging this ill-informed criticism, Mr. Winston Churchill
issued to the Division the following message :
“ The First Lord welcomes the Royal Naval Division
home, on its return from active service. Officers and men
of all ranks and ratings have acquitted themselves admirably,
and have thoroughly justified the confidence reposed in them.
The loss of a portion of the Ist Brigade, through a mistake,
in no way reflects upon the quality or character of the Division.
“ The Brigade of Royal Marines, throughout the operations,
sustained fully—by their firmness, discipline and courage—
the traditions of the corps. It is not necessary to say more
than this. The Naval Brigades bore themselves admirably
under the artillery fire of the enemy, and it is to be regretted
that no opportunities of closer contact with his infantry were
afforded them.
“ The dispatch of the Naval Brigades to Antwerp has inter-
rupted, for a time, the progress of their instruction and training.
They were chosen because the need for them was urgent and
bitter; because mobile troops could not be spared for fortress


duties ; because they were the nearest and could be embarked
the quickest; and because their training, although incomplete,
was as far advanced as that of a large portion, not only of the
forces defending Antwerp, but of the enemy forces attacking.
“ The Naval Division was sent to Antwerp, not as an isolated
incident, but as part of a large operation for the relief of the
city. Other and more powerful considerations prevented this
being carried through. The defence of the inner lines of Ant-
werp could have been maintained for some days ; and the
Naval Division only withdrew when ordered to do so in obedience
to the general strategic situation, and not on account of any
attack or pressure by the enemy. The prolongation of the
defence, due to the arrival of the Division, enabled the ships
in the harbour to be rendered useless and many steps of im-
portance to be taken.
“ It is too early yet to judge what effect the delaying, even
for five or six days, of at least 60,000 Germans before Antwerp
may have had upon the fortunes of the general battle to the
southward. It was certainly powerful and helpful. Apart
from the military experiences, which have been invaluable,
the Division have been the witnesses of the ruthlessness of the
German foe towards a small and innocent State. These facts
should inspire all ranks to fit themselves in the shortest possible
time for further service in the field, not merely as fortress, but
as mobile units.
“ The Belgian people will never forget that the men of the
Royal Navy and Royal Marines were with them in their darkest
hour of misery, as, please God, they may also be with them
when Belgium is restored to her own by the Armies of the
Allies.”
This pronouncement failed to convince the First Lord’s
political opponents, but set at rest present uncertainty as to
the future of the Division. The decision to train the Naval
and Marine Brigades as a mobile division was to be persisted in.
The first step was to open recruiting for three new batta-
lions, to take the place of the interned Hawke, Collingwood
and Benbow Battalions, and to organize the Divisional depot
for their training. The next was to create, at the same depot,
reserves to supply the Division in the field; and then to
provide for the reinforcement, reorganization and training of
41
The Time of Preparation


the five Naval battalions which remained in being. Last, but
not least, it was necessary to organize and equip the Divisional
troops. When the time came, it was proposed to concentrate
the entire Division for brigade and divisional training at a new
camp at Blandford. This, it was hoped, would be early in the
new year.
The twofold task, which fell to the Crystal Palace Depot
under this programme, of training officers and non-commissioned
officers, and specialists of all kinds, as the nucleus of an in-
structional staff ; and of organizing simultaneously three new
battalions and three reserve battalions, was a heavy one. The
fact, however, that the whole Division could be served by one
depot* meant that, with skilful organization, the minimum of
administrative and instructional staffs could produce the
maximum result. To Sir Richard Williams Bulkeley, the Com-
modore in charge of the Crystal Palace Depot, to Lt.-Colonel
Ramsden, R.M., the Chief Military Instructor, and above
all to Lieut, (now Lt.-Colonel) J. H. Levey, the Adjutant
of the instructional staff, no small measure of praise is due for
the way in which the many problems were solved. It would
no doubt have been possible (and to have done so might well
have modified the rather indifferent attitude of the military
authorities) to beg, borrow or steal a nucleus of trained officers
and N.C.O.’s from elsewhere, and to drill the thousands of
untrained civilians into something resembling a military for-
mation. This course was often suggested, but happily it was
not adopted. Instead, it was decided to find among the
thousands of keen and physically well-equipped civilians
waiting training at the depot, not only the subaltern and the
private with a rifle, but the leaders of companies and battalions,
regimental sergeant-majors, quartermasters, drill sergeants,
musketry instructors ; the brains and sinews, and not merely
the flesh and blood, of battalions, brigades and depots. In
short, it was decided to create a self-supporting Division, whose
strength would come from within, not from without.
In these circumstances, the Training School of Instruction
was organized by Lieut. Levey. N.C.O. instructors were
obtained from the Royal Navy and Royal Marines and, later,
* Though full advantage was not taken of this at once, for actually the
Marine Brigade drew on the Marine Depots for recruits and reserves of
officers and men until late in 1015.


from the Brigade of Guards. The first course was for officers
only, but the second marked an important development when
a number of “ Candidates for Commissions ” were selected
from the recruit battalions, and, after a preliminary instruction
in general subjects, were given a month’s training as officers,
with a view to testing their fitness for commissions. This
experiment is believed to have been the origin of the Cadet
battalions, organized so much later by the military authorities.
It was only another step to extend the benefits of the course
to the rank and file, with a view to creating an adequate reserve
of N.C.O.’s. For this purpose, a training company of about
two hundred men was attached to all the courses held after
1914.
It would be absurd to suppose that the stock of Caesars and
Napoleons multiplied with every course, or that every officer
and man, who completed his training there, was turned out a
complete expert in the art of war. But it would not be wrong
to suppose that there was a very real difference between the
training given to raw civilians there and elsewhere, which made
up, almost at the start, and, in the end, more than made up, for
the lack of regular officers on the establishment of the Division.*
It was partly a difference of atmosphere, partly of technique:
at the time, probably, the atmosphere seemed the more impor-
tant ; later, those who had been trained there came to realize
that technically, also, their training had been remarkably sound.
In the new army battalions, the civilian, whether a newly-
commissioned officer or a recruit, was a minnow among tritons.
Sent from all parts of the country to join battalions at once,
these men had to learn the elements while they were actually
serving with their units. They had little confidence, they had
but a slight idea of their duties, and no preparatory grounding
in the first principles of war. There were above them, below
them (if they were officers), around them, men who had made a
lifelong study, so it must be presumed, of the very subjects of
which the civilian was ashamedly ignorant. “Mine not to
reason why ” was inevitably, if only for the sake of peace and
quiet, the motto of the civilian, plunged into such an atmo-
sphere. And, indeed, it was a reasonable one. There was
plenty to learn, and many ready to teach.
* After Antwerp, many of the very few, who had accompanied the Division
there, were recalled by the Army, and were not replaced.


The atmosphere at the Crystal Palace was rather different:
the officer’s time of training there was emphatically not a
period in which he learnt how to carry out orders, but
what orders to give, and how to get them executed; not a
period in which he learnt his drill and his musketry, but how
to teach drill and musketry; not a period in which he
was taught elementary tactics, but rather the underlying
principles, knowing which he could not only solve minor
tactical problems himself, but could face, with a certain measure
of confidence, the practical business of training troops.
If the training of officers was, perhaps, a little ahead of that
provided elsewhere in 1914 and 1915, that given to candidates
for commissions was actually without parallel till the Cadet
battalions were formed nearly two years later, and that given
to aspirant N.C.O.’s was in advance of anything attempted
throughout the war.
The system evoked the very best that was in the men to
whom it was applied. Its very existence gave an incentive to all
ranks, and, above all, there was no false barrier created between
the officer and the N.C.O. Each knew exactly what the other
had learnt in order to qualify for his position, and each, in this
way, got confidence in himself and in the other. The organiza-
tion was very largely based on promotion by merit, proved in
competitive examination. Naturally, very many officers were
commissioned without prior service in the ranks ; but, literally,
scores of such officers were passed, in the first three months
of their training, by men who, as candidates for commissions,
had shown greater aptitude for command. And these candi-
dates for commissions were not selected on any ground save that
of merit. Commissions in the Naval Division were not only
open to, but were obtained in the very earliest days by, men of
all walks of life. Naturally, the advantages of early education
could not be, and were not, overlooked, but the equal advan-
tages of experience, endurance, and the habit of supervision
were not ignored. The bright, young, public schoolboy or
undergraduate, so dear to the heart of the novelist, and so
excellent an ornamentation of less anxious days, was taken
at no more than his true valuation.
From the training schools were drawn the officers and petty
officers for the new Hawke, Benbow and Collingwood Bat-
talions, which were gradually re-formed in December and


January, 1915, under Lt.-Colonel Leslie Wilson, D. 5.0., M.P.,
R.M. (Hawke), Colonel J. Oldfield, C. 8., R.M.L.I. (Benbow)
and Commander Spearman, R.N. (Collingwood).
The Hawke Battalion was fortunate enough to be allowed
to absorb, as one of its companies, the Public Schools Battalion,
raised originally by Commander the Hon. Victor Gibson for
service in the Army, and later re-enlisted in the R.N.V.R.
for service with the Naval Division. The senior officers of
the Battalion could not, of course, be absorbed in the Hawke
Battalion, and were transferred to service elsewhere; the
men transferred were under the command of Lieut. Wolfe
Barry, R.N.V.R., who thus became O.C. “D ” Coy. in the
new Hawke Battalion.
The Hawke Battalion had, as its second in command, Com-
mander Ramsay Fairfax, R.N., one of the few officers of the
Naval Division who had, prior to joining the Division, seen active
service afloat. Commander Fairfax was, later, to command the
Howe Battalion in France with great distinction.* The second
in command of the Collingwood Battalion, Lt.-Commander
West, R.N.V.R., was also, curiously enough, destined later to
command the Howe Battalion.
Very wisely, the technical training of officers, N.C.O.’s
and specialists, the training of recruits, and of the active
service companies were kept wholly distinct from the adminis-
trative and disciplinary control of the depot. The former was
left almost entirely to Lt.-Colonel Ramsden and Lieut. Levey,
assisted by the best products of their training school; the
latter, to the Commodore and his staff, and the regular R.N.
and R.N.V.R. officers of the executive, medical and accountant
branches, who provided the senior officers of the depot.
The organization and disciplining of a huge depot in London
was no light task, but it was well done. The chief needs of the
private soldier, hard work, good food and clothing, warmth, sleep,
and leave, and amusement, were all provided. The provision
of the necessaries of life never seems to call for comment; only
when the machine breaks down, do we remember the man at
the wheel. Indeed, in more ways than one, the senior officers
of the depot had a thankless task in feeding, clothing and
equipping, in the months from October, 1914, to February, 1915,
many thousands of men, that they might be ready to go out as
* Later still, Commander Fairfax commanded a brigade of Tanks.


complete units or as drafts, often under other commanders.
Of all those who commanded battalions at the depot in 1914,
only Captain Spearman, R.N. (Collingwood), took his battalion
to the front. The rest, from reasons of age, health, or seniority,
had to remain behind : it was the same with very many of
their officers, who, nevertheless, played an important part in the
creation of the reorganized Division.
While the organization of the new battalions and the training
of the reserves was thus proceeding, the nine battalions which
had survived the Antwerp expedition were being overhauled.
The Marine Brigade was placed under the command of Brig.-
General Trotman, R.M.L.l.,with Captain M. C. Resting, R.M.L.1.,
as Brigade Major, and Captain C. F. Jerram, R.M.L.1., as Staff
Captain. After a brief period of training at the different
Marine Barracks, the Brigade went to stations at Gravesend,
Browndown, Tavistock and Deal, till the Blandford Camp was
ready. The 2nd Brigade had returned to their summer camps
at Bettyshanger, where drafts of officers and men from the
depot at the Crystal Palace were ordered to join them and com-
plete their establishment. Early in November, the Brigade went
into barracks at Portsmouth (Nelson), Chatham (Anson), Ply-
mouth (Hood) and Portland (Howe). During this period, con-
siderable changes were effected. The Commanding Officers of
the Nelson, Anson and Howe Battalions were all transferred to
different appointments during the three months following on
the Antwerp expedition; their places were taken by Lt.-Colonel
Eveleigh, R.M.L.1., Lt.-Colonel Moorhouse and Commander
Collins, R.N.V.R., the first two being regular officers, and the
last a company commander in the Hood Battalion. At the
same time it became necessary to make changes in the per-
sonnel of the battalion staffs and among the company com-
manders, owing to the transfer of a number of the senior
R.N.V.R. officers to sea service, and the withdrawal by the
Army of several Army officers. The opportunity was taken
to promote to responsible positions those who had done good
service at Antwerp, or who had joined the battalions from the
depot with good records of service elsewhere.
Of the Ist Brigade, the Drake was the only surviving unit,
and, while the other three were being re-formed at the depot,
Commander Campbell’s battalion went to Alnwick, for coast
defence duty. In succession to Commodore Henderson, Brigadier-


General Mercer* was appointed to command the Ist Brigade,
with Captain F. Wilson, R.M.L.1., who had been attached to
the Drake Battalion at Antwerp, as Brigade Major.
Meanwhile, the divisional troops were being recruited and
trained, under arrangements inaugurated by the Admiralty, and
carried out by the Marine Office. The Engineers were com-
manded by Major Carey, R.E., who became C.R.E. of the Divi-
sion ; and the Divisional train by Lt.-Colonel Chaytor, an officer
of the New Zealand forces. The Field Ambulances were
officered mainly by regular Naval Surgeons (under the
command of Fleet-Surgeon Gaskell, R.N., who became
A.D.M.S. of the Division); a few of the N.C.O.’s of the Medical
Unit were supplied from the Marine Shore establishment, and
the military training of the unit was entrusted to Captain Case-
ment, R.A.M.C., later D.D.M.S. of the Division. With these
exceptions, the divisional troops were recruited direct from civil
life, the Medical Unit through, and mainly from, the ranks of the
St. John Ambulance Corps, and the first three companies (the
Signal Company and twt) Field Companies) of Engineers directly
from the three Institutes of Civil, Mechanical and Electrical
Engineers, though later a limited number of qualified tradesmen
were enlisted.
In a field off the road from Dover to St. Margaret’s Bay,
near Martin Hill Station, was the first camp of Naval Divisional
Engineers. Recruiting for this force had begun on September
16th, and the establishment for three companies was nearly
completed by the end of the month. Of this remarkable unit,
in which many even of the sappers were qualified professional
engineers, Lieut, (later Brig.-Gen.) G. H. Harrison was the first
Adjutant; the first and second Field Companies were organized
under Major Chivers (with Captain Morgans second in command)
and Major Adams (with Captain Rugg second in command); and
the Signal Company under Major Spittle, R.M. Other officers
gazetted in the early days, were Major Aveling, Major Revel and
Major Teale, the last of whom took the Third Field Company
(formed in February, 1915) to Gallipoli. These companies of
trained specialists were a tower of strength to the Division, not
only by virtue of the quality of their work for the field, but of
* The late Major-General Sir D. Mercer, K.C.8., wh o relinquished command
of this brigade in 1917 to become Adjutant-General of the Royal Marines, in
which office he rendered many services to the Naval Division.


their unrivalled efficiency in work outside the scope of the
ordinary Field Company, for which the varied training and wide
experience of the rank and file proved invaluable. In the First
Field Company alone ninety per cent, of the men rose, after a
short time at the front, to commissioned rank.
After enduring the Dover mud till the end of November, 1914,
the Corps went into billets at Walmer and Deal till the Blandford
Camp was ready.
The Medical Unit of the Royal Naval Division was first put
into training at the Crystal Palace, under Captain Casement, on
the 3rd December, 1914. From them, the complements of three
Field Ambulances were selected, and Fleet-Surgeon Finch,
Staff-Surgeon Stanford and Staff-Surgeon Fleming were ap-
pointed to command them.
Almost at the same time that the Medical Unit went into
training, the Divisional train was formed at the Crystal Palace,
from volunteers from the R.N.V.R. and R.M. battalions at the
different depots. Major F. Holmes, R.M., was appointed Senior
Supply Officer. A little later, the Ordnance Company was
raised by Col. Lord Bangor (late R.A.) from men at the Marine
depots not fit for general service, and Lord Bangor was
appointed D.A.D.O.S. of the Division,
There remained only the Naval Divisional Cavalry and the
Divisional Artillery. Ambitious schemes for the former had
been drawn up, even before the Antwerp expedition, and for
some time it was rumoured that, under the title of the Royal
Naval Hussars,* yet another new Corps was to be formed.
The Admiralty records contain even a descriptive account of the
uniform of this remarkable organization, which was to be built
up on the lines of the Boer Commandos. Such a unit would have
been invaluable, but perhaps political considerations decided its
fate. Anyway, it was not formed; but instead a Divisional
Cyclist Company was formed at Forton Barracks on the Ist
December, 1914, under Major French, D. 5.0., R.M.L.I. No
such substitute was, however, available for the missing artillery,
which, owing to the very successful, but, on the whole, unfor-
tunate stone-walling policy of the War Office, was never
formed.
By the close of 1914 the Naval Division was, nevertheless,
well on the way to becoming a mobile unit. The Antwerp
* I fear the name is apocryphal.


battalions, reinforced and reorganized, several of them under
new commanders, all with a stronger cadre of officers, were
ready for serious brigade and divisional training, and, with
the organization of the Divisional Troops and the completion
of Blandford Camp, such training was now practical.
The first infantry unit of the Division to enter Blandford
Camp was the Nelson Battalion, which arrived there from
Portsmouth on November 27th. The rest of the 2nd R.N.
Brigade, the Drake Battalion, and some of the Divisional Troops
followed. The Marine Brigade, whose lines were not ready
for occupation, arrived during the last days of January,
and went into billets in Pimperne, Iwerne Minster and Shilling-
stone. By this time, too, General Paris and his staff had taken
up their residence at Stud House. The Hawke, Benbow and
Collingwood Battalions had not, however, yet completed
their preliminary training at the Crystal Palace, and the division
at Blandford was thus short of three infantry battalions. To
equalize matters between the Brigades, the Ist Brigade, of
which General Mercer assumed command as from January Ist,
was strengthened by the transfer of the Nelson Battalion
from the 2nd Brigade. In the result, the nucleus of three
Brigades, a Signal Company, two Field Companies of Engineers,
and a complete establishment of other Divisional troops, were
available for divisional training by January 28th.
As the concentration of the Division neared completion,
there came an improvement in discipline and efficiency. This
was the result partly of the rivalry of the different battalions
and brigades, and, to a greater extent, of the belief that, once
the spade work had been done and the equipment completed,
the departure of the Division overseas would only be delayed
until all units had reached fighting efficiency. Moreover,
the issue in December of active service uniform and equip-
ment to all ranks (up to this time the Naval infantry battalions
had been fitted out in blue, with that rather primitive equip-
ment which had startled the critics at Antwerp) had immensely
improved the* appearance of the troops, and was thus in itself
a great aid to discipline.
At this point the history of the preliminary training of the
Naval Division comes to an abrupt end. The whole force
was never actually concentrated, much less trained, as a
Division, Events moved too rapidly.
4


The story of those events, the why and wherefore of those
orders, which once more sent the Division overseas so unex-
pectedly, will be sketched in the next chapter. These orders
mark, however, the beginning of the Division’s second period
of active service, which lasted till March, 1919, and before’
relating the story of those years it is necessary to say
something of the organization which the Division, proceeding
overseas, left behind it, and the influence of this organization
on the spirit and the efficiency of the fighting units.
The Crystal Palace had begun, as we have seen, as a regi-
mental depot for the two Naval Brigades. Even at that
time the fact that, as in the case of the Guards Division
later in the war, the whole of the first-line battalions supplied
from the depot served together in the field, gave to it
an exceptional importance in relation to the Division, and
bred a more uniform technique, and a more instinctive
habit of co-operation, than might otherwise have been
achieved. This alone would call for comment. The
difference between the Naval Division and the ordinary Army
organization became even greater when, first, the Crystal
Palace was expanded into a depot, not only for certain infantry
battalions, but for the Divisional troops; and, secondly, when,
shortly after the Division went overseas, the whole of this
enlarged depot was transferred to Blandford, further expanded
to be the depot for all units of the Naval Division, including
the Royal Marines, and placed under a general officer respon-
sible to the Admiralty.
Under these arrangements, Commodore Sir R. Williams
Bulkeley remained in charge of what became a purely
naval depot at the Crystal Palace, and with him remained
most of the R.N. and R.N.V.R. officers, who had commanded
the training battalions at the Crystal Palace in the early
days. The principal exception was Captain Hunter, R.N.,
who commanded the Fourth Reserve Battalion at Blandford,
till he went to sea in 1918.
To write the history of the innumerable developments in
training and organization of the divisional depot, subsequent
to 1915, would involve telling of the evolution of methods of
instruction and training throughout the war. Such a history
should perhaps be written, but our only concern here is to
emphasize what there was, in the home organization of the


Naval Division, which helped to create in the Division overseas
qualities which were distinctive, and which did, in fact, dis-
tinguish the Division, from other equally famous fighting
formations.
To the Blandford organization English military experience
afforded no precise parallel. When the “new army ” divisions
went overseas, they left behind them no visible embodiment of
their existence. They drew drafts from innumerable depots.
Their casualties went back to different depots, and, when they
returned to the front, they returned as often as not to a different
division. Such modifications of training, as the experience
of a division in the field showed to be necessary, had to be
achieved through the machinery of the War Office, if at all.
Nor were they in fact ever adopted, unless it was possible, and
considered desirable, to make them of general application
throughout the whole army. Still more serious was the poten-
tial reaction on the esprit de corps of the division. Neither men
nor officers could count on joining or rejoining any particular
division. Each time they went to the front, they had to meet
new faces, to learn new ways, to obey new whims, to learn the
practice of alternative theories, to imbibe, very often, new
standards of efficiency and conduct.
The Naval Division was more fortunate. If, in its surface
routine, it was in no way different from hundreds of other camps
in 1915 and 1916, in almost every other respect the Blandford
depot was, certainly, unique. Its situation, on high ground
in the open country, at any rate appeared to have been selected
for reasons of health; and it was, in fact, incomparably healthier
than most other camps. It was entirely self-contained, and
it was isolated from all other troops in training in the Southern
Command. The Camp thus became, even geographically, a little
township of its own, with a life shut off entirely from other
regiments and corps. When the Marines sent their reserve
battalion there in 1915, the depot became the Division in
miniature; all units were represented there, and each sup-
plied each other’s wants. It provided its own engineering
services, its own medical services, its own hospital, its own
rifle range, its own chaplains, its own supply and transport,
all responsible solely to the Camp Commandant. It was not
m 1915 even technically subject to Army jurisdiction, and its
organization at home was, to all intents and purposes, that of
4*


a mobile unit in the field, with the General in command respon-
sible only to the authorities in Whitehall.
Thus there was maintained at home the divisional spirit,
fostered by what was, in theory as well as in fact, a divisional
organization, after the Division had gone overseas. And thus
was maintained that strong individuality, that sense (only
half-justified, but none the less valuable) of being “ not as other
men,” which is the origin of all esprit de corps, and which, in
the Naval Division, was so fortunately centred round what
was not merely a temporary or a sentimental association but
an effective fighting organization. One further point—not
the least important—must be noticed. The Division had
had to find from within its ranks not only its leaders in the
field, but its administrators and instructors at home. When
the time came for reinforcements to be sent out, there were
thus available officers and N.C.O.’s, not only well trained,
but fully accustomed to responsibility, and better versed in
administration than those who first went overseas; and who,
at the same time, were not unfitted by age, seniority, or tem-
perament for the command of men in the firing line, which
meant in the mud and dust, the heat and the blizzards, of an
uncertain Eastern climate. Their places on the depot staffs
were taken by officers returning from the front; thus
that essential interchange between the firing line and the
training ground became an accomplished fact, not only, as
elsewhere, among the rank and file and the junior officers, but
among the battalion commanders, the adjutants and the instruc-
tors. The General at home and the General in the field could
and did co-operate, and, perhaps to a greater extent, the inter-
change of adjutants and company commanders meant that
traditions and customs which grew up under the stress and
strain of battle experience took root, as a matter of course, at
the depot. Thus the traditions and the lessons of Gallipoli and
the Somme were insensibly inherited by later drafts of officers
and men, who saw their first fighting at Arras or Passchendaele.
Indeed, some of the finest officers who ever served in the
Division came from the depot late in 1915 and in 1916.
It was not only among the officers that tradition and esprit
de corps was fostered by this organization, but even more was
it so among the rank and file. From the Crystal Palace and
Blandford there went out literally tens of thousands of men,


many of them again and again, to rejoin the Division. The
history of the Division is the record of what these men did.
They, like the officers, had seen the Division growing.
They knew exactly how much more their officers knew than
their N.C.O.’s and their N.C.O.’s than themselves, for they
had all started together; this knowledge created an automatic
discipline at the front or on parade, which was not relaxed
in leisure hours, but which, in the circumstances, could be
tempered by a measure of friendly intercourse which was
never fatal to discipline. This acquaintance was not, as
elsewhere, broken but strengthened by the ebb and flow of
war. Very many, probably the majority of the men, never
changed their companies, let alone their brigades or battalions,
throughout the whole of their service at the front. When
they came back wounded or sick and returned eventually to
the depot, they would join up again with some, at least, of the
old officers, the old N.C.O.’s, the old platoon.
A striking instance of the reality of this friendly atmosphere
is to be found in the history of the Durham and Northumber-
land miners who came to the Division. The first contingent,
barely two thousand, had, as we have seen, come accidentally,
They had enlisted in different northern regiments in August.
1914, and had been transferred to Walmer, Betteshanger and
the Crystal Palace, because of the breakdown of the arrange-
ments for their accommodation in the North. But this con-
tingent was followed by thousands of others from the same
mining villages, voluntary enlistments in every case. At
least a third of the best fighting men of the Division came
from these villages, and they came because of the reputation
which the Division enjoyed among the men already enlisted.
That, for all their experiments in training and organization,
the Division could not have reached efficiency without the
ordinary drill, discipline and technical training common to all
units of the British Army, is so obvious as to be hardly worth
saying, and that any other-form of divisional organization would
have provided these essentials is equally clear. But it is not
fanciful to think that the finest technical training will not
come to full fruition without other qualities, which the organiza-
tion we have described did undoubtedly foster to an exceptional
degree, and which we can sum up in two simple phrases as
esprit de corps and a genuine friendship between officers and men.


And so, behind the Division in the field we must remember
always the depot. But for the depot, the following chapters
of this history, when we speak of the Division moving from
battlefield to battlefield, from campaign to campaign, would
have only a specious unity. Between every battle, often
between one phase of a battle and the next, there is some vital
change among the individual personalities who form the
Division. When we compare campaign with campaign these
changes become more numerous, more far-reaching. Far-
reaching as far as the individual is concerned, but as far as
the Division is concerned, wholly devoid of significance. Why ?
Only because, behind the flux of the battle-front, there remained
always, for the Naval Division, a divisional organization at
home. To this plain fact the continued existence of the Naval
Division through four years of war is pre-eminently due. There
was no bond of local patriotism such as made the 51st Division
so living an organism, no age-long tradition such as stimulated
the Guards Division. In place of these traditional spurs to
enthusiastic action the Naval Division had, in addition to
youth and enthusiasm, a scientific organization. The two
together spelt victory.


NOTE
In reply to a request for his “impressions” of the Crystal Palace and Bland-
ford depots in 1915, my friend Mr. Hugh Lunn sent me the amusing noteswhich
I print here in extenso. They seem to me to recall very fully the atmosphere
of those strenuous, but amusing, days.
I arrived at the Crystal Palace on November 23rd, 1914, to begin my training
as an officer of the R.N.D. Already in the train from Victoria the shadow of
him who at that time dominated the Crystal Palace was cast over me, and
chilled me to the bone. My fellow-passenger, an R.N.D. officer, was a
melancholy, refined young man, not at all communicative. To his resentment,
for he gazed at me as at a new boy inclined to be unseasonably familiar, I pressed
him with questions. However, he revenged himself adequately with a curt
description of Lieutenant Levey, the military instructor to whose charge I
would presently be committed—a man without bowels, an expert in insults,
a flail, a tempest, a tiger.
Presently I found myself in a lecture-room. The lecture was already in
progress when I crawled in. The audience appeared to me, in my demoralized
state, to consist of an extraordinarily brilliant body of young men, superbly
at ease. They were actually laughing, and no wonder ; for the lecturer, whom
I now took courage to examine, was extremely witty, animated and charming
—a dark, good-looking man, seething with vitality. What a delightful fellow !
I thought, and my spirits rose. But where was Lieutenant Levey ? Probably,
I thought, that powerful, forbidding person in the corner, who is keeping an eye
on us lest our attention to the lecture should relax.
As we left the lecture-room, I sought to confirm this guess by a question to
another officer. He was contemptuously amused. “ That’s old Quinlan,”
he answered; “the lecturer is Levey.” “ Why, he’s delightful,” I protested,
but my companion advised me to wait till I had experienced Levey on the parade
ground, before I passed a final opinion on his charm.
Lieutenant Levey had joined the Scots Guards as a private, and rose to
be a sergeant-major before the outbreak of war. It would be difficult to
exaggerate his prestige at the Crystal Palace towards the close of 1914. The
R.N.D. was a rough-hewn body in those days. The officers commanding the
various battalions were retired Naval Captains or R.N.V.R. Commanders,
conversant, I doubt not, with the arts of tacking, trimming, studding sails, and
the like, but very much at sea, on land. Now here was a man who, from earliest
youth, had been preoccupied with the technique of loading in the standing
position, of advancing in fours from the right, of forming close columns of
platoons, a man who could slope arms like a thunderbolt, and order them like
the crack of doom. Students of Carlyle, the senior officers at once recognized
“ how indispensable everywhere a King is, in all movements of men.” With a
kind of stern joy they submitted to learn from Lieutenant Levey, and, when
I arrived at the Crystal Palace, they had most of them passed through his class.
It was now the turn of younger persons to realize, again in Carlyle’s words, that
what “ the Commander over men tells us to do must be precisely the wisest,
fittest, that we could anywhere or anyhow learn ; the thing which it will in
all ways behove us, with right loyal thankfulness, and nothing doubting, to
do.” Of course, that “ right loyal thankfulness ”is a little overpitched. I will
try to reconstruct as well as I can a typical scene in the Crystal Palace grounds.
The class of officers is standing easy : out of the corner of his eye Colour-Sergeant
Ashton* watches for Lieutenant Levey’s approach. “ Squad! ” Instantly
the class is standing-at-ease, eyes front, rigid. Each officer swells, in his own
imagination, to grotesque proportions, the others dwindling in proportion ;
his tunic appears to be unbuttoning itself, his puttees gape and wriggle, his tie
will presently be shaking in the wind; his hands are wool, and he is unable
to die. _
• Oolour-Sergeant Ashton helped us through many an awkward moment, whispering and pushing the
careless and the confused into the way they had been directed to go, Napoleon might not have approved
of Oolour-Sergeant Ashton; but neither would Oolour-Sergeant Ashton have very greatly relished
Napoleon.
55
The Time of Preparation


Five minutes pass, crammed with passionate exertion. A roar of pain and
rage I Lieutenant Levey hurls himself at No. 4in the front rank. The two
faces almost touch. “ You, you 1 What’s your name ? Never heard of such
a thing I Got a little boy at home . . . order arms better’n you.”
The agony begins again. Another roar I Lieutenant Levey hurls himself
at No. 7in the rear rank. The two faces almost touch. “ You, you 1 What’s
your name ? Where d’you come from ? I’ve been in the Army twenty years
—never seen such an exhibition 1 Fall about like a sack of potatoes ! Never
heard of such a thing.”
An officer drops his rifle. “ What the HELL are you doing, that officer at
the end of the rank. Drop a rifle on parade 1 I’ve been in the Army twenty
years. Never heard of such a thing I Got a little boy . . .” etc., etc.
The best drill instructor is he who can deal with every lapse or negligence,
however trivial, as though it were an unprecedented phenomenon, a demonstra-
tion deliberately planned to sap loyalty, to sow dissension in the ranks, to
debauch the nation, to enhearten the enemy, and to bring the Empire crashing
to the ground. Such a drill-instructor was Lieutenant Levey.
All the same, most of us, I think, acquired in time a kind of tremulous regard
for Lieutenant Levey, and, without rancour, learnt in suffering what we after-
wards taught in extremely broken prose.
At lunch and dinner, in the mess, the talk was largely Levey. Men find it
hard to imagine a throne without a power behind it: Monsieur Mendel, for
example, behind Clemenceau ; General Weygand behind Marshal Foch. Was
Colonel Ramsden, we subalterns would ask each other, the brain behind Lieu-
tenant Levey ? Or was Lieutenant Levey the brain in front of Colonel
Ramsden ?
Technically, Lt.-Coloncl Ramsden was the Chief Military Instructor, and
Lieutenant Levey his second-in-command. Hence these debates.
We did not see the Colonel often, but were content to picture him sitting
in his office, meditating on the larger issues of war, or brooding over the
psychology of the temporary officer. He must have had misgivings, for once,
when we were sitting down to a written examination, a presence loomed in the
doorway, uttered two words ; “No cheating,” and retired.
A subaltern, having passed through the class, was attached to a battalion.
Innumerable imitations of Lieutenant Levey were in the course of a few weeks
scattered over the grounds of the Crystal Palace, roaring like doves at tough,
sardonic miners. It is difficult to roar with conviction when the end of the
sentence does not present itself clearly to the roarer. Fortunately, in those
early days sick leave was granted in a generous and unpedantic spirit. I
remember a note from the M.O. which ran : “ You are not to return till you feel
perfectly fit; ” and a conversation between J and myself. “ Are you
applying for sick leave to-day ?” I asked him. “ No,” he replied, “I am not
feeling well enough.”
In those days, the war was still a strange and exciting phenomenon, and
the routine of an army not yet become a habit to the civilian soldier. The mess
was very mixed in its composition. But the general level of character and
intelligence was high. Beyond doubt the ’l4 vintage was the best, though
even then, I concede, some curious specimens were bottled. Ker and Harms-
worth stand out in my memory as types of the finest young officer of the new
army.
Another type of new army officer was, I believe, more fully represented in
the Naval Division than elsewhere ; the man who had knocked about and seen
life in the raw, planted tea in Ceylon, and daggers in recalcitrant cannibals,
built bridges in India, and blown them up in South America. This kind of
officer was apt to be unduly affronted by the luxury of a sleeping bag, or the
elaborate fittings of a dug-out. However, with one or two exceptions, this
type did well: I should say “ made good.”
At the high table, in mess, sat the Sea-Captains, the C.M.1., Lieutenant Levey,
and our Commodore, Sir Richard Williams Bulkeley, with his second-in-com-
mand, Commander Roberts Wray. Sir Richard did not, as far as I know,
concern himself too closely with detail, but he was great on discipline, and
caused a pamphlet to be distributed, in which he set forth the reasons that led
him to consider discipline as of paramount importance. One saw him at times


pacing the quarter-deck of H.M.S. Crystal Palace with Commander Roberts Wray,
and divined the brief interchange of words ;
“ Discipline, Wray, discipline. It all comes back to that.”
“ Ay, ay, sir.”
A fortnight’s intensive training at Blandford, in Dorsetshire, completed,
more or less, the young officer’s military education. I went there in June, ’l5.
The heat was terrific, and the daily papers, read hurriedly at breakfast, annoyed
us with pictures of Londoners retreating to underground cellars with an assort-
ment of iced drinks.
In spite of field days, the defence of Pimperne, open order drill, picketing
and night operations, this second course was far less agonizing than the first.
I except, as far as I am concerned, my attempt to march the officers’ squad on
to a given point, and halt them in close columns of platoons. That was an
awful experience. I remember well the curt casualness with which Captain
Levey (for Captain he had now become) informed me that he wished me to
carry out the above movement; the roar with which I opened, the tentative
suggestions with which I continued, and my subdued return to the ranks.
Some officers were not at all alarmed by Captain Levey. A subaltern in
A 4 Lines told us one day in mess how he had tamed the Captain.
“ He called me out and told me to march the squad on a given point, you
know—began shouting at me—l didn’t like it—turned to him, and said :
* Captain Levey, do you notice that my hand is shaking ? Captain Levey, it
is shaking not with fear but with anger. Out East, where I have just come
from, I shoot men who talk to me as you have just talked. Drop it I ’ From
that moment,” he concluded, “ I had no more trouble with Levey.”
It always used to delight me to hear from a subordinate how he had brow-
beaten a superior officer ; but I never had the luck to be actually present during
the beating of a superior officer’s brow.
We finished the fortnight at full strain, with a field day, night operations
lasting till breakfast the following morning, and, after a few hours’ repose, a
written examination. The field day exhibited the full scope of Captain Levey’s
genius. His generalship was excellent; but his tact was superb. At one time
it looked as if nothing could save his army from gaining an overwhelming
victory over the force commanded by Colonel Ramsden. But at long last the
Captain’s passionate energy and consummate resource were rewarded by a
drawn battle, slightly in the Colonel’s favour.
The night operations were like other night operations, superficially annoying
and uncomfortable, but with wonderful moments when the scent of the pine
woods and the warm earth revived, for the last time in many, the forgotten
magic of the world.
The dawn that broke on these particular night operations was one of the
loveliest I have ever seen. Did Captain Levey feel its influence, and retire to
a grove, weeping, he knew not why ? Almost certainly not. But all great
men have their limitations ; and great he was, beyond doubt. I refrain from
a technical estimate of his extraordinary talent as a military instructor. Here
I have tried simply to describe the personal impression he made on the raw
subaltern; a very remarkable impression, even when the novelty and excitement
of the time have been allowed for.
The other day (November, 1921) I read in a newspaper that the house of
Colonel Levey (for Colonel he has now become) had been broken into by burglars,
who subsequently returned him his war medals. “ I cannot help thinking,”
Colonel Levey remarked to the interviewer, referring to the restitution, “ that
the thief was an ex-Service man.” No doubt; but the journalist missed, and
Colonel Levey ignored, the tragic pith of the situation : the biter bit, the expert
in night operations dished by a fellow practitioner. Where were your pickets,
Colonel Levey ? Where were your outposts ? “ Never heard of such a thing 1”


CHAPTER IV
THE VOYAGE TO THE EAST
THE second departure of the Naval Division overseas was
as unexpected as the first. We have seen how the
whole Division, less one Field Company of Engineers and the
Hawke, Collingwood and Benbow Battalions, had finally been
concentrated for Divisional training by January 28th. The
next day came the first orders for overseas. They affected
only two battalions, the Plymouth and Chatham R.M.L.I.
battalions, and the Staff of the Marine Brigade,* but the
event is noteworthy, not only because through the issue of these
orders the last chance of concentrating the whole Division for
serious divisional training passed away, but still more,
perhaps, because it gave rise for the first time to those rumours
that the Division would never again be employed as a separate
formation in the field, which, from that date, hardly ever
ceased to be current, and were hardly ever wholly without
foundation.
That the Naval Division should never have been concen-
trated except under fire, is merely an incident in its history. It
was in the most literal sense a fighting Division. The rumours
which made up the mess-room gossip through the whole course
of the war, rumours of dispersal, transfer to the army or to
sea service, or condemnation to garrison duties, were, however,
more than an episode in the history of the Division : they were
part of its daily life, the very atmosphere it breathed.
The two Marine Battalions which left Blandford for Ply-
mouth on February Ist, under Brigadier-General Trotman, sailed
♦ Captain M. C. Testing, R.M.L.I. (Brigade Major), and Captain C. F. Jeriam,
R.M.L.I. (Staff Captain). Brigadier-General Trotman was in command of the
force.
58


for an unknown Eastern destination on February 6th. The
general belief was that the balance of the Division would be
dispersed on different independent operations, and rumour
gave East Africa as the destination of a number of battalions.
Not till the 17th February, when Mr. Winston Churchill
inspected it, did the hopes of the Division revive. The in-
spection was held in pouring rain, under the most unfavourable
conditions, but the verdict of the First Lord must have been a
favourable one, for the next day the orders came for the rest
of the troops at Blandford to prepare to follow the Marine
Battalions. Exactly a week later, the Division was again
inspected by the First Lord, and two hours later by H.M. the
King. On this occasion the inspection was unusually detailed,
Mr. Winston Churchill inspecting every battalion, except the
Nelson battalion, which he had seen on his visit the week
before. At 11.30 the Royal Standard was hoisted and the
King’s inspection began; after which, the Division marched
past the saluting point in column of companies, and later
marched again past His Majesty on their way back to camp
in double column of fours.
This was the end of the Division’s training. The 26th and
27th, the last two days spent by these units at Blandford, were
occupied with the distribution of ammunition and iron rations,
and the overhauling of equipment and kit, and on the evening
of the 28th the whole of the Division, with the exception of the
partially trained Collingwood Battalion, the Third Field Com-
pany of the Engineers (by now at Blandford, but also untrained)
and the Hawke and Benbow Battalions (still at the Crystal
Palace), marched out of camp by Black Lane to the town
station. The next day the troops embarked at Avonmouth,
and sailed the same day; General Paris and the Headquarters
Staff, General Mercer and the Ist Brigade Staff, the Drake,
Nelson and Deal Battalions, the Ist Field Ambulance, and the
Motor Machine Gun detachment of the R.N.A.S., on board
the Franconia , and other units in the Braemar Castle, the
Gloucester Castle, the Grantully Castle, the Minnetonka and the
Astrian.
The decision to send the Division overseas was, as we have
said, unexpected. It is doubtful, however, if it was premature.
Officers and men had everything to learn of the things which
active service alone can teach, but it is a reasonable view that
59
The Voyage to the East


they were otherwise adequately trained. Those who consider
no training adequate which is not comparable in its duration
to that considered necessary for the corresponding ranks of the
regular army overlook, perhaps, one very vital difference between
a professional and a volunteer formation. The average civilian
soldier must usually learn the business of soldiering in less
time than that required by regular officers who join their
regiments virtually straight from school. After all, the con-
verse holds : no one expects a regular officer, who retires and
goes into the City, to begin as an office boy, and it would be
strange if a really competent professional or business man
were to find serious difficulty in mastering the work of a com-
pany commander. The same, mutatis mutandis, holds good of
lower ranks. There were cases where this was hardly appre-
ciated, with the result that units, brigades, even whole divisions,
became routine-bound, over-trained, stale. This danger was
avoided in the case of the Naval Division, and, in this sense, it was
right to regard all, save the three recruit battalions, as already
in February, 1915, fit for service overseas. If, however, it is
reasonable to assume that, in marked contrast to the Division
which went to Antwerp in 1914, the Division which left Bland-
ford on this occasion was fit to take the offensive, it would be
idle to pretend that the decision to send it to the East
was equally uncontroversial. Nothing in the war (not even
excepting the Antwerp expedition) has been the subject of
weightier criticism than the decision reached in February, 1915,
to embark on extensive military operations in the Near East.
To understand the operations in which the Naval Division
was so soon to begin to play its part, the circumstances leading
'ip to them must be briefly outlined.
At the end of 1914, the dominant facts in the general situa-
tion were the staying of the German offensive on the West,
and the ominous threat of a decisive German victory in the
East. Turkey, known to our military advisers to be still one
of the most formidable military powers in Europe, had declared
war on the Allies on October 31st, and must be expected at
any time to make her presence felt on the Russian flank unless
her armies could be engaged elsewhere. This in itself was
serious enough, for the Russians were already sufficiently hard
pressed by the Germans and Austrians; but it was only
part of the story. Serbia was threatened with an Austro-
60
The Royal Naval Division


German invasion, and such a threat, if it materialized, might
be expected to bring to the aid of the Central Powers the armies
of Bulgaria and Rumania. In such an eventuality, would
Italy feel herself able to intervene on the side of the Allies,
a step which she was at the time actively contemplating ? These
dangers were so grave that they could not be ignored. They
had to be faced, on the contrary, with energy and resolution.
Whatever may have been the faults of the Allied strategy, the
errors of generals or politicians, the need for some action to
prevent the threatened disasters in the East is, if not un-
challenged, at least unchallengeable. Those who attempt
to review the 1915 situation in the light of our success in 1918,
and still suggest that, because the war had to be won on the
Western front, it had to be fought on that front, forget that
the drain imposed on the German, Austrian and Turkish re-
sources in 1915 and 1916 by the vigorous prosecution of the
war in the East, was as decisive in the battle of armies as the
battles of attrition in France and Flanders in 1916 and 1917.
Is it seriously arguable that disaster could have been averted
if Italy had remained neutral, if Serbia had been crushed,
and if Russia had been faced by a German-Austrian-Turkish
offensive, before the British armies were sufficiently power-
ful (which was not till 1916) to initiate a vigorous and
continuing offensive in France ? These considerations in
themselves afford no argument for, and are not mentioned
here in defence of the Gallipoli expedition, its strategy,
its tactics, or the adequacy of the preparations made for
it; but they are unanswerable as arguments in support of
the Cabinet decision (arrived at on February 16th, 1915)
to send substantial forces to the Near East.* It was in
pursuance of this decision that the main body of the
Royal Naval Division were ordered overseas later in the
month.
The decision to employ the new “ Mediterranean Expedi-
tionary Force ” (as it came to be known) in the historic attempt
to force a passage for* the fleet through the Dardanelles, by
seizing the Gallipoli peninsula, was more controversial. This
operation had been considered directly Turkey came into the
war, but had been put aside, in view of the then success of the
• See, for a fuller discussion of this point, Corbett: “ Naval Operations,”
Vol. 11., pp. 60-69.
61
The Voyage to the East


Russian armies and of the critical situation in the West. No
more had been heard of the Dardanelles till January 2nd,
when the now menacing situation in the East was brought
urgently to the notice of the Government by a request from
the Russian Commander-in-Chief for an early demonstration
against Turkey, with a view to relieving his armies from pressure
on their flank. Lord Kitchener, through the Foreign Office, at
once agreed; and the Admiralty immediately sought the views
of the Admiral Commanding in the Eastern Mediterranean
(Vice-Admiral Carden), on the possibility of rushing the Dar-
danelles, an attack on the Straits being clearly the most
direct threat which a naval Power could bring to bear on
Turkey. Admiral Carden replied by telegram that, in his view,
the Straits could not be rushed, but could be forced by extended
operations directed to the systematic reduction of the forts.
It would be outside the scope of this history to examine
the tangled story of the manner in which the Government
finally, on January 28th, committed themselves to endorsing
this project. It is sufficient for our purpose to record their
decision, which was arrived at independently and prior to the
decision to assemble in the Near East a substantial military
force. The only military movement to which this decision,
by itself, gave rise was the dispatch of the two Marine Battalions
to the East on February 6th in advance of the rest of the
Division. These battalions were not to form part, as has been
often assumed, of any military force, but were to act under the
fleet in what were definitely assumed to be purely naval opera-
tions, involving the landing only of reconnaissance patrols or
demolition parties, operations normally within the province of
a naval commander.
Towards the end of February, the position was that the
preparations for the naval attack (assisted only by the Marine
Battalions) were well advanced, and that the concentration of
troops to exploit any naval success, or to operate in the Balkans,
if that theatre should appear later more profitable, was pro-
ceeding. If the naval attack had succeeded, there would, of
course, have been no Gallipoli campaign; but when the naval
attack, begun at last on February 18th, proved inconclusive,
and then had to be broken off because of the weather, Admiral
Carden suggested speeding matters up by a military landing
on the peninsula. The proposal was rejected by the War
62
The Royal Naval Division


Office as involving an irrelevant diversion; the assumption
still was that the main work of reducing the forts could be
achieved by the Navy alone. The Admiralty appear to have
endorsed this view, and Admiral Carden was so informed, but
he was asked, at the same time, to confer with General Birdwood,
and told that “ if he was of opinion that the army could help
him, he was at liberty to submit suggestions.”* The same
evening (February 24th) the War Office sent out similar in-
structions to General Birdwood.
This development marked the first definite step towards the
decision to attempt to force the Straits by conjoint naval and
military operations, and, for this reason, February 24th is one
of the critical days in the history of the war ; and not for this
reason only, but also because, on this day, the Government
appeared first to be moving towards the conclusion that the
Dardanelles operations must somehow or other be carried
to a successful conclusion,
There was, however, still a firm belief in the chances of a
purely naval success. It was not till the beginning of March
that events at the front, in which the Plymouth Marine
Battalion took a gallant if unsuccessful share, brought about a
decisive change in the prospects of the purely naval campaign.
Admiral Carden’s plan had been to force a passage through the
Straits, by a series of progressive bombardments against the
forts which guarded the whole length of the Straits on either
side. The long range guns would keep down the fire of the
forts, while the ships with lighter armament closed in to effective
range and destroyed them. The long range bombardment
would then lift and come down on the next group of forts, and
in due course these also would be closed and put out of action.
The same procedure would be applied, and of course at the
same time, to any mobile batteries which the enemy might
bring, in support of his permanent defences.
The first naval attack, on February 19th, had had, as we
have seen, to be broken off before the merits of the plan could be
tested, but, when the attack was renewed on February 25th,
the fleet, standing in close, compelled all the outer forts to cease
fire. Next day, demolition parties from the fleet, covered by
Marine detachments, were put ashore to complete the work of
destruction. These parties, which displayed the utmost
* Corbett; “ Naval Operations,” Vol. 11., p. 156.


gallantry and energy, did no small amount of damage, and
further landings on February 27th and March Ist and 2nd
added to the tale of destruction. As far as the outer forts
were concerned, everything indeed seemed to be proceeding
according to plan. It was quite otherwise with the more impor-
tant attack on the inner forts, which had been begun on the 26th,
and had proceeded as weather permitted, but without any
sort of success. The main objectives of the fleet were, of
course, the groups of forts at Chanak and Maidos, guarding the
entrance to the Narrows. Before, however, these could be
effectively bombarded, the smaller “ Dardanos ” group had to
be subdued, and the minefields at the entrance to the Narrows
(by Kephez Point) had to be swept. Despite all efforts, neither
task had been accomplished, nor had any material progress
been made by the evening of March 3rd. The fire of the
forts, indeed, whose position was accurately known, could be
kept down, but all attempts to deal with the mobile batteries
had failed. It was becoming increasingly clear that without
the occupation of some commanding position on shore, which
would enable the fire of the ships’ guns to be effectively con-
trolled, or the forts to be taken in reverse, no further
progress could be confidently expected. General Birdwood,
who had by this time conferred with Admiral Carden, appears
to have advised Lord Kitchener in this sense, and the next
day’s operations made the situation even more clear. These
operations consisted of landings by the Plymouth Battalion at
Kum Kale and Sedd-el-bahr. Both landings were unsuccessful,
and their failure was significant. The plan in each case was
much the same. The parties landed in open boats without
much opposition, but, once landed, they were unable to make
any headway. The idea was to advance inland and hold a
line in each case some two miles in length, on the Asiatic side
from Kum Kale pier to Yeni Shehr, and on the peninsula from
Morto Bay to Cape Tekke. These lines were to be held for
three hours, while an exhaustive search was made for guns,
gun positions and ammunition dumps, and while the work of de-
struction and survey, hitherto undertaken piecemeal, was carried
to completion. Instead, the landing parties, though consisting
of two companies each, found themselves held up almost on the
beaches, while the Turks were occupying strongly entrenched
positions in the neighbourhood of the different objectives.
64
The Royal Naval Division


Against these it was found impossible to advance, even with
the assistance of the ships’ guns.
In the circumstances, there was nothing for it but to with-
draw, and even this proved to be difficult, though, in the
end, it was successfully accomplished.
This failure was important because of the light it shed on
the prospects of the purely naval attack. The destruction
of the outer forts, at least, had been considered, until now, to
have been relatively satisfactorily achieved. It was now seen
that the Turks were not only undismayed at our success but
still in a position to maintain by force of arms their hold on
the coast-line even at the entrance to the Straits, and even there
to bring mobile batteries to bear at their pleasure on our
fleet and transports.
In spite of this it was decided to persist, and the attacks
on the inner forts were renewed on March sth and the follow-
ing days. These, like the former attacks, were, at the very
best, negative in their results, and the situation was thus
dubious when the War Council met on March 10th, to take
a final decision regarding the question of the military force to
be sent to the Near East.
The crux of this question was the 29th Division, which it
had been agreed to send out in February, but which Lord
Kitchener had since felt unable to release. Though it is clear
that no definite proposal to abandon the naval attack in
favour of joint naval and military operations was under con-
sideration at this date, there can be little doubt but that the
decision, now finally reached, to send the 29th Division, marked
the definite acceptance by the Government of the Near East
as an important military theatre. It meant, in particular,
that, if the naval attack failed, the Government were by
this date determined to push the attack home by military
measures, if such were recommended by the authorities on the
spot. The necessary corollary to these decisions was the
appointment of a Commander-in-Chief, and Sir lan Hamilton
was selected almost immediately after the meeting of March
10th. Sir lan’s written instructions* make the Government’s
position unmistakable. “ Having entered on the project of
forcing the Straits there can be no idea of abandoning the
scheme.” It is, of course, equally clear from the instructions
* Second Report of the Dardanelles Commission, paragraph 18.
5
65
The Voyage to the East


that the Government still hoped that military intervention
would not be necessary to subdue the forts, and that, as
Sir lan Hamilton puts it in his Diary,* “ the Cabinet did not
want to hear anything of the army till it had sailed through
the Straits.” But these were pious wishes. The written
instructions above quoted (reinforced by a subsequent tele-
gram from Lord Kitchener) decided the issue. The only
essential precaution enjoined by Lord Kitchener was that
extensive operations should wait on the arrival of the 29th
Division.
The fact that the Government had by this date definitely
faced the possibility of combined operations did not mean,
however, that in their view the naval attack need not be
pressed. On the contrary, high hopes were now entertained
of extensive Russian co-operation against the Turkish forts
on the Bosphorus and the Turkish armies if we could force the
Dardanelles; and Admiral Carden was urged on March 11th
to further efforts. Only in preference to an attempt to rush
the Straits across unswept mine-fields were combined opera-
tions on an extensive scale to be undertaken this side of
Constantinople. Admiral Carden agreed to the Admiralty
proposals, and the plans for a final attempt on the Narrows
were put in hand and were ready by March 15th. The next
day Admiral Carden was forced under medical orders to
resign his command, and the date of the attack was post-
poned while the Admiralty exchanged telegrams with the
new naval commander, Vice-Admiral de Robeck, who was
able to assure them that he was satisfied that the proposed
attack was sound, and that he was anxious to carry it out.
In these circumstances, the historic action of March 18th
was decided on, and with that decision the active participation
of the Naval Division in the Gallipoli operations begins.
It must not be imagined, though it is indeed hard in the
light of events to imagine otherwise, that the situation seemed,
to those on the spot, anything but reasonably promising
at this time. It is indeed poignant to recall the high hopes
with which the Naval Division had started out to the scene
of war. Rupert Brooke has left on record his own peculiar
enthusiasm : “I had not imagined,” he wrote, “ that fate
could be so benign. ... I am filled with confident and glorious
* “ Gallipoli Diary,” Vol. 1., p. 8.


hopes.”* He was not alone in his excitement. The English-
man’s protective irony could not indeed be expected to survive
the splendour of that voyage through the Mediterranean,
when the first breath of spring was in the air, the sea was
brilliant like a jewel, and “ sunset and dawn divine blazes of
colour.”
Not even Malta, that suburb of the East, could break the
spell. Africa lay behind them, the Greek islands and Con-
stantinople lay before them. The spirit of adventure was in
the air of spring, and no jarring note intruded on the Eastern
scene as the transports worked up the Mediterranean from
Malta in the second week in February and weighed anchor
in Mudros harbour. Later, with the too facile genius of our
race, even these primitive islands of the Aegean Archipelago
became Anglicized, but as yet those tranquil shores were the
embodiment of a classic, if somewhat arid, simplicity. Thucy-
dides’ description of primitive Attica comes inevitably to mind
as we wander in memory among these barren but fragrant
hills, and see the scattered peasants eking out a peaceful
existence from the small patches of comland and vineyard
which they had won in the course of a struggle with nature
extending through many sunny, if penurious, centuries.
And in the harbour itself the scene was not only unfamiliar,
but without parallel in the modem annals. Indeed, as John
Masefield says, you might have thought that all the ships
of the world were gathered there. From the Queen Elizabeth ,
then the pride of the fleet, to the smallest variety of tramp
steamer that ever carried yeast from Edinburgh to Grimsby,
every type of craft was represented. Coming to rest in such
an anchorage, the battalions of the Naval Division suffered no
sense of anticlimax.
At 6 p.m. on March 18th, the Division, still in the original
transports, sailed out of the harbour eastwards. Steering W.
and N. of Imbros, the transports arrived off the western shore
of the peninsula at 5.30 a.m. on the morning of the 19th.
Down the coast, the flotilla moved on to Cape Tekke, and came
up with H.M.S. Dublin at 6 a.m. There, at the entrance of
the Straits, destroyers went cruising round, and Queen Eliza-
beth, Dublin , Glory , Albion and Inflexible were keeping up a
desultory bombardment on the Turkish forts. The first
* “ Rupert Brooke ; A Memoir,” by Edward Marsh, p. 137.
5*


sight of these historic waters, famous beyond all other channels
of the world, held out, to the untrained and enthusiastic eyes
of the young officers and men on board the transports, the
promise of early developments. The great ships, gathered off
the entrance, appeared in truth to dominate the scene.
Every moment the men expected orders to disembark. From
the decks of the troopships the Turkish infantry could be
seen lining the cliffs. The hour of battle seemed at hand.
But in fact the movement of the transports, a demonstra-
tion planned to divert the attention of the enemy from what
should have been the closing and critical stage of a great naval
attack, was no longer required. The great naval attack had
failed, and within two hours of their first sight of the enemy,
the Naval Division received orders to return to Lemnos.
There was in one sense no reason why the failure of this
naval attempt on the Straits should have been regarded as
decisive. The disaster which had led to the breaking off of the
engagement, though believed at the time to be due to floating
mines, was caused, so it has since been established, almost acci-
dentally, by a minefield laid by the Turks on the night of the 17th
and 18th in waters which we could have cleared. Unaccountably,
this minefield had been missed by our sweepers, and the result
was a heavy loss in capital ships, but the loss need not have
been regarded as likely to recur if the operations were renewed :
in other words the original plan was not necessarily shown
to be incapable of fulfilment.
The Admiral, however, was not long in deciding not to make
any further unsupported attacks on the Straits, and, on March
21st, he formally notified Sir lan Hamilton of his decision.
The effect was to commit the Army to an attack on the Gallipoli
peninsula. Sir lan Hamilton’s instructions from Lord
Kitchener were such as to compel him to undertake such
military operations as were necessary to enable the fleet to
reach Constantinople, unless he was convinced that no opera-
tions of the kind were possible; and, after a personal recon-
naissance, he was already reasonably satisfied that this object
could be achieved by military operations against the Gallipoli
peninsula.
When, therefore, the Admiral notified him, on the 21st,
that he would require military assistance if he was to get the
fleet to Constantinople, the only question left open was the


time and the place of the military attack. The time was the
immediate question. The chance of a surprise had been jeo-
pardized by the naval operations. A further delay would
render a surprise impossible. Despite the grave difficulties,
General Birdwood was in favour of an immediate landing.
Admiral Wemyss held similar views. In addition to the
Naval Division, there was on the spot approximately the
strength of an Australian Division. An immediate landing,
it was urged, might be comparatively unopposed, and might
mean the capture of Achibaba almost without a struggle.
Meanwhile other troops could be brought on the scene. But
Sir lan Hamilton had no hesitation in rejecting the plan.
The 29th Division could not be expected for a fortnight or
longer; the Naval Division transports were not suitably
loaded for landing operations; troops from Egypt could
not arrive for some days. The force might indeed reach
Achibaba, but what chance had they of remaining there,
unsupported by artillery (save a few Australian guns), without
Engineers’ stores, periscopes, and tools ? In the absence of
detailed preparation for the landing, the supply and the trans-
port arrangements for even twenty thousand men must
inevitably be inadequate ; if bad weather arose they must
break down completely, and weather conditions could not be
expected to become settled till mid-April at earliest. Above
all, there was Lord Kitchener’s precise instruction that no
extensive military operations should be undertaken till the
arrival of the 29th Division.
In these circumstances it was decided to postpone the attack,
and to make, in the interval, the most careful and detailed pre-
parations ; and on the 22nd March the Naval Division transports
sailed from Mudros to Port Said, where they were to re-ship
their stores, and await the concentration of the remainder of
the force.
The disembarkation of the Division was completed by Mon-
day, March 29th, and on that and the following days the R.N.D.
S.A.A. column (Major Carter), the R.N.D. Supply Column
(Major J. D. Buller, A.S.C.), the R.N.D. Sanitary Section and
the 19th Mobile Veterinary Section joined the Division. On
the Ist April, orders were received by General Paris to send a
detachment to take over a section of the trenches at Kantara
on the Suez Canal defences, and a composite force consisting
69
The Voyage to the East


of two half-battalions from each of the Ist and 2nd Naval
Brigades (Drake, Nelson, Howe and Anson Battalions), under
General Mercer, left for Kantara by rail at 7 a.m.
On April 3rd, the Division was inspected at Port Said by the
Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Pierce and his Flag Captain
(Captain Burmester, R.N.) being present. The inspection
passed off successfully, at least according to Sir lan Hamilton,
who notes in his Diary the next day that the Division “ marched
past very well indeed.” For a division, not by any means at its
best on a parade ground, this was satisfactory. The day has,
however, a painful significance, as it marked the beginning of
Rupert Brooke’s illness, an illness not then, or for some days,
diagnosed as serious, but which was to lead to the untimely
death of one of the most brilliantly gifted Englishmen of his
day. It is easy to find defects in the writings of men of genius—
because they set in their own works a standard which inevitably
they cannot always maintain —but only poets of the younger
generation have ever doubted that by the death of Brooke
England lost not only the greatest of her younger poets, but a
voice which would have championed the cause of humane
justice without discrimination in a world where, later, such
voices were to be few.
Two days later the arrangements for the transport of the
Naval Division had taken shape, and the re-embarkation of
stores began. On this day, also, the Anson Battalion were
ordered to Alexandria to act as beach parties for the 29th
Division, who had just arrived, but whose transports, like those
of the Naval Division, had been loaded as for a peace-time
change of station. The Anson left Alexandria at 4 p.m. It
is interesting to recall that this battalion, which, as it happened,
had the most honourable part of any in the Naval Division at
the landing on April 25th, was detached and sent to Alexandria,
in the belief that it would be required solely for routine fatigue
duties. Nothing but disappointment was felt by the Anson
officers, at this time, with the task believed to be before them.
The remainder of the Division proceeded at top speed with
the work of re-embarkation. Time was indeed pressing. It
was now a fortnight since the last naval attack; and the Admiral
had consented to break off further active operations, only on the
understanding that they would be renewed again by April 14th
at earliest. A slight interruption to the embarkation was
70
The Royal Naval Division


caused by a reported attack on the Canal defences at Kantara,
on the 7th, with the result that at 11 a.m. all troops in
Alexandria were ordered to “ stand by.” The attack proved,
however, to be nothing more than a reconnaissance by a
mounted patrol, some sixty strong, which was beaten off without
loss, the enemy not venturing within effective range; and, at
2 p.m., the division was able to “ carry on.”
The next day, Bth April, the first Naval Division transport
(the Braemar Castle) sailed for Mudros. On board, were General
Trotman and his staff, and Colonel Matthews and the Plymouth
Battalion of Marines. The Bfaemar Castle was followed by the
Cawdor Castle (Chatham Battalion), the Gloucester Castle (Ports-
mouth Battalion), the Inkorika (Motor Machine Gun Squadron),
the Royal George (Commodore Backhouse, R.N., and staff, and
the Howe Battalion), the Gfantully Castle (Hood Battalion),
and the Somali (Ist and 3rd Field Ambulances and details
R.M.A.). All the transports had their tow of lighters, not for
the disembarkation of the Division (even at this eleventh hour,
when every element of surprise had been sacrificed to completing
the preparation and equipment of the force, there were not
enough lighters to enable the whole force to be landed simul-
taneously), but for the use of the 29th Division. The departure
of these transports left in Egypt only the headquarters of the
Division, and General Mercer’s Ist Naval Brigade, who were
required for the re-embarkation of horses and mules. As soon
as this had been completed, the Brigade and the divisional troops
embarked on the Alnwick Castle (Deal Battalion R.M.L.1.), the
Ayfshite (R.N.D. Engineers), the Franconia (D.H.Q. and H.Q.
Ist Brigade, Drake Battalion, Div. Cyclist Company and Signal
Sections), the Minnetonka (Nelson Battalion, S.A.A. Column
and No. 2 Field Ambulance) and the Astfian (Divisional Train).
As the transports arrived at Mudros, they were ordered to pro-
ceed to Trebuki Bay, Scyros, in conformity with the detailed
plan of campaign which had by now been decided on.
71
The Voyage to the East


CHAPTER V
THE GALLIPOLI LANDINGS
UNLIKE the Grecian Islands and the peninsulas of Italy
and Spain, fellow survivors of that prehistoric inunda-
tion which buried beneath the Black Sea and the more placid
waters of the Marmora, the Aegean and the Mediterranean a
once fertile and sunlit Continent, the Gallipoli peninsula has
an almost accidental importance. It is no more than a chain
of rugged uplands and mountain peaks running down from the
Thracian mainland between the Aegean and the Sea of Marmora ;
a narrow strip of land nearly fifty miles in length, but only a few
miles in width, where many nations have passed, many historic
events have taken place, and where, for all this, no culture has
taken root and no civilization has endured. But beneath the
cliffs of its eastern shore, and dominated by its once moun-
tainous peaks, still rising above the level of the sea to a height of
seven or eight hundred feet, lies the narrow channel which we
know as the Straits of the Dardanelles.
From the first dawn of history the control of the Straits has
been the foremost aim of one or more of the great Powers of
Asia or Europe. Opposite the southern extremity of the
peninsula lie buried the seven cities of Troy, and when the
control of the Straits was finally wrested from Persia by the
lonian Greeks, the history of Mediterranean civilization begins.
With the loss of the control of the Straits by Athens to Sparta
at Aegospotami, the power of the Athenian Empire hastened to
its premature decline. The assertion of Roman superiority in
these same waters was the historic service of Sulla to the cause
of Roman imperialism. On the control of the Straits the
Byzantine Empire depended through a thousand years for
its amazing stability, amid a world relapsed into barbarism.
To her control of these waters, won by her naval supremacy,
72


Venice owed her greatness; and with the defeat of Venice by the
Turks off the entrance to the Straits the renascence of Mediter-
ranean civilization came to an end. Through their control of
the Straits the Turks had maintained themselves in Europe
for more than five hundred years.
And so history was only repeating itself when the seizure of
the Gallipoli peninsula became for a little, perhaps for too short
a time, an avowed aim of British strategy. But history had no
lessons to teach us as to the manner in which we could establish
a footing on that inhospitable and barren shore. However old
the strategy, new tactics must be brought into play. The
greater battles of the past had been fought on the sea ; following
precedent, we too had attempted a decision at sea, and we had
failed. The science of earthwork defences had, as in purely land
warfare, so in amphibious warfare, outrun the development of
destructive explosives, and, where the wooden hulks of Lysander
had been supreme, the Queen Elizabeth had proved ineffective.
It was now the turn of the Army. The point where the naval
operations had broken down was in the reduction of the forts
guarding the approaches to the Narrows. The object of the
military operations was to succeed where the Navy had failed.
To this end they had either to reach, and hold for so long as
might be necessary, some position on the European or Asiatic
shore of the Straits, from which not only these forts but those at
Chanak, and Kilid Bahr and beyond, could be dominated and
silenced, or so to manoeuvre as to cut off the Turkish garrison
in Gallipoli and enforce its surrender.
The alternative plans, discussed at the time and subsequently,
were many. Broadly, however, the choice appeared to Sir lan
Hamilton to lie between a landing in Asia to secure the eastern
shore of the Straits, a landing on Gallipoli with its objective the
Kilid Bahr Plateau,* a landing at Bulair, or a landing in the
Gulf of Xeros. The last two projects, particularly popular with
amateur strategists, are attractive only on a misreading of the
situation and were never very seriously considered.
Looking at the map, we see Bulair to be the narrowest point
of the peninsula, and the mistaken impression has prevailed
that the seizure of this position would isolate the Turkish forces
* A dominating feature running inland almost due west from Kilid Bahj
for a distance of some four miles, which is at its broadest two miles in length,
and from 600 to 800 feet above sea-level throughout.


on the peninsula itself and compel their surrender. But the fact
is that the main communications of the Turkish divisions in the
peninsula did not run through or anywhere near Bulair, but down
and across the Straits to the town of Gallipoli. The most
northerly point from which the land communications of the
force guarding the Narrows could be threatened was the Sari
Bair bridge, south-east of Suvla, and commanding the road
from Gallipoli to Maidos. But if this position were aimed at,
it would be folly to attack it from Bulair, twenty miles to the
north. The distance, in fact, could never be traversed in
hostile country, with a large Turkish army in the rear round
Adrianople, and the consequent need for a large force not only
to maintain communications but to protect the base.
The same objection, with even more force, applies to the
proposal to land north of the Bulair lines, in the Gulf of Xeros.
From there, only one objective was possible, and that was the
main European military centre of the Turks at Adrianople.
But such an objective implied warfare on a wide front, with no
assistance from the fleet, if it was to be anything more than a
futile, if spectacular, diversion. For extensive land operations,
we had not the troops : for a diversion, there was no occasion.
The plan for landing in Asia was more attractive, and, in
one of its most vital assumptions, it was shown to be justified.
A landing at Kum Kale was proved to be a practical, military
operation, and the Turks did not expect us to land there. A
substantial advance up the Asiatic shore of the Straits might,
it was urged, enable the fleet, fired at from one side only, to
get through the Narrows. The objection to the plan, and
one which, in the light of the gallant and determined
character of the Turkish reaction, history will probably regard
as decisive, was that we could not, with any certainty, maintain
ourselves on the Asiatic shore against a strong enemy attack.
The advantages of the narrow front, of the constant support of
the guns of the fleet at all stages of an advance, which enabled
us to maintain ourselves on the peninsula against the most
determined assaults, would not have entered into the situation
had we landed on the Asiatic coast. Instead of the guns of the
fleet, we should have had the guns of the enemy on our left
flank.
The question before Sir lan Hamilton narrowed itself
down to this. Was it possible, with the forces at his disposal,


to reach and hold the Kilid Bahr Plateau ? The plateau was
protected from a force attacking it from the western beaches
(Gaba Tepe, or Anzac Cove) by the Sari Bair ridge, and from a
force based on the southern beaches by the hill of Achibaba.
Both these carefully prepared positions were formidable, if
not actually impregnable, should it be necessary to attack them
when once the main Turkish forces were concentrated for their
defence. The Turks had, so it was correctly thought, four
first-line divisions on the peninsula, and they were within
easy reach of reinforcements from Asia, where they had
another four second-line divisions immediately available. Sir
lan Hamilton had at his disposal only four divisions (with
not even a ten per cent, margin for casualties in the 29th or
Naval Divisions) and the French force, less than two divisions,
mainly of African troops. Could we neutralize the over-
whelming advantages of the enemy, in position, in preparation,
in numbers, by immobilizing the bulk of his reserves while we
were making good our hold on the shore of the peninsula ?
Having landed, could we hope to hold the enemy in suspense
as to the direction of our main attack sufficiently long for us
to concentrate our army before he could concentrate his ?
Even if we succeeded so far, were our resources in men,
in guns, in ammunition, in equipment, sufficient to enable us
to take the offensive with a reasonable chance of immediate
success ? And, even then, could we maintain ourselves—even
on the defensive—with lengthened communications crossing
impossible country, without roads, docks, or landing stages,
against the full strength of the Turkish reserves ?
No man living could have answered these questions with
any great degree of conviction in either sense. Yet they had
to be faced. The only alternative would have been the aban-
donment of the whole campaign, in view of its admittedly
dubious issue. This course was, indeed, in the first instance
definitely recommended by General Hunter Weston, in an
“ appreciation ” written at Malta, and neither General Bird-
wood nor General Paris definitely excluded this possibility from
his consideration. Indeed, as the Extracts quoted by Sir
lan Hamilton from the Memoranda submitted by these com-
manders clearly indicate, there was no unreasonable optimism
among the higher command in the days immediately preceding
the landing. Looking back on these forebodings, in particular
75
The Gallipoli Landings


on General Hunter Weston’s remark that “ there is not in
present circumstances a reasonable chance of success,” and
General Paris’ less definite but depressing opinion that “ To
land . . . would be hazardous in the extreme under present
conditions,” it may seem a matter for regret that their prudent
counsels did not prevail.
Although, however, the situation was anxious and obscure,
and although no considered estimate of the requirements of
an army attempting the seizure of the Gallipoli peninsula
had been put before the Cabinet, Sir lan Hamilton had, never-
theless, been given instructions which he could hardly interpret
otherwise than as requiring him to attempt the task with the
forces at his disposal. The result was, as it happened, fatal
to the success of the operation, for, when the first check occurred,
the necessary reinforcements and the still more necessary
guns, material and ammunition were not available in time to
retrieve the initial failure. By the time we were reinforced,
sickness had taken its hold of what had become a beleaguered
garrison, and the reinforcements were inadequate. The
necessary guns and ammunition were never sent. Here,
probably, and not in any tactical mishandling of the forces
available, or in any fallacious strategy, was the primary cause
of our failure; but it is a cause which redeems the campaign
from insignificance as a military achievement. Whatever else
may be said, the divisions that fought at Gallipoli (maintained
at great expense indeed, but starved of all essential military
supplies, denied reinforcements, and forced to fight when, to
a man, they would, in France, have been considered medically
unfit even for the quietest part of the line), engaged the power
of the Turkish armies, and, in the war of armies, if not in the
war of positions, they were victorious. This consideration is
relevant not only to an historical verdict on the results of the
campaign, but in abatement of any criticism which the legion
of those who never fail to be wise after the event may think
fit to bring against the undoubted miscalculations which
preceded it. To have failed in a great adventure through lack
of meticulous estimating of requirements (if, indeed, that was
the governing factor) was lamentable. To have let the issue
of the war in the Near East go by default would have been
an irretrievable disaster. It is with that thought uppermost in
his mind, that we must imagine Sir lan Hamilton to have flung


his doubts to the wind in deciding to attempt to seize the
peninsula with the slender forces on the spot, and to trust to
the military authorities at home for that loyal support which
every Commander-in-Chief has the right to expect.
Having reached his decision, the question was to decide on
the best means to give effect to it. The essential problem was
to prevent, by a number of simultaneous attacks, whether
simulated or actual, the concentration within forty-eight hours
of the four Turkish divisions on Gallipoli and their reinforce-
ment from Asia. To do this, it was necessary not only to land
in Asia, as well as on the peninsula, but to threaten directly the
real objective, the Kilid Bahr Plateau, from more than one side.
Any landing or demonstration which did not threaten this
position, would, if things went badly for the enemy, be inevitably
ignored.
With this object it was decided to make two landings in
force—at Gaba Tepe and in the toe of the peninsula —
and to detach the French corps for a demonstration in
Asia, and the Naval Division, for a demonstration at Bulair.
This involved a division of forces, but there was no means of
avoiding it; on the available beaches only a small covering
force and no guns could be landed in the first instance, and
subsequent progress must be slow. To land the whole force
on either front would have taken longer than it could have
taken the enemy to concentrate their own forces, had their
reserves not been held to their ground. The only hope was to
immobilize their reserves at points as widely separated as
possible; and to trust to our fleet to concentrate our forces
quicker than the enemy, working across the endless hills and
gullies of the peninsula, could concentrate his.
So the plan finally took shape. The main landings were
assigned to the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps
(in the neighbourhood of Gaba Tepe) and to the 29th Division
(south of Achibaba). The Asiatic diversion (to take the form
of a temporary landing of at least a brigade) was assigned to
General D’Amade’s Force, and the bloodless Bulair demon-
stration to the Naval Division. It was for the purpose of this
demonstration that this Division, less the Plymouth and Anson
Battalions (attached to the 29th Division for the Southern
landings), had been ordered to rendezvous at Scyros.
77
The Gallipoli Landings


The date first fixed for the landing was April 23rd, and it
was on April 21st, after a further conference with the Naval
Commander on the morning of the 21st, that the first operation
order of the Naval Division in the campaign was issued. The
previous days had been spent in practising landing operations,
in case of eventualities, and, with the issue of the detailed orders,
nothing but calm weather was now needed for the operations
to proceed. Unfortunately on the evening of the 21st a strong
wind sprang up, and continued through the following day and
night, with the result that the landing was postponed forty-
eight hours.
On the 23rd, the day first planned for the landing, Rupert
Brooke died; he was buried the same evening in an olive
grove, some five thousand yards up the valley that runs north-
east from the Beacon on the north shore of Trebuki Bay.
There the curious, or the faithful, may find his resting-place
marked by fragments of white marble piled above his grave by
Charles Lister, Denis Browne, F. S. Kelly, Arthur Asquith,
Bernard Freyberg and Patrick Shaw-Stewart. The news of his
death was telegraphed to the Admiralty from Lemnos, and Mr.
Winston Churchill’s tribute in The Times of April 26th recalls
across the years the position which Rupert Brooke filled in the
eyes of thousands of his countrymen at a great crisis of their
fate. The lapse of time and the nakedness of the literary hori-
zon have only emphasized the truth of that striking tribute.*
♦“Rupert Brooke is dead. A telegram from the Admiral at Lemnos tells
us that his life has closed at the moment when it seemed to have reached its
A voice had become audible, a note had been struck, more true,
more thrilling, more able to do justice to the nobility of our youth in arms
engaged in this present war, than any other—more able to express their thoughts
of self-surrender, and with a power to carry comfort to those who watched them
so intently from afar. The voice has been swiftly stilled. Only the echoes and
the memory remain ; but they will linger.
“ During the last few months of his life, months of preparation in gallant
comradeship and open air, the poet-soldier told with all the simple force of
genius the sorrow of youth about to die, and the sure triumphant consolations
of a sincere and valiant spirit. He expected to die; he was willing to die for
the dear England whose beauty and majesty he knew; and he advanced towards
the brink in perfect serenity, with absolute conviction of the rightness of his
country’s cause, and a heart devoid of hate for fellow men.
“The thoughts to which he gave expression in the very few incomparable
war sonnets which he has left behind will be shared by many thousands of young
men moving resolutely and blithely forward into this, the hardest, the cruellest,
and the least-rewarded of all the wars that men have fought. They are a whole
history and revelation of Rupert Brooke himself. Joyous, fearless, versatile,
deeply instructed, with classic symmetry of mind and body, he was all that one
would wish England’s noblest sons to be in days when no sacrifice but the most
precious is acceptable, and the most precious is that which is most freely
proffered.”


While the Division was at Scyros, General Paris was asked
to supply, for beach duties in connection with the impending
landings, a further three hundred ratings with sea experience.
These were drawn from the Hood and Howe Battalions, and
the party, under Sub-Lieut, (later Lt.-Colonel) J. O. Dodge,
R.N.V.R., left for Mudros the same day.
On the evening of the 24th the transports sailed north
towards the peninsula. The transports of the 29th Division
were at the same time moving out from Mudros Harbour, to
the accompaniment of those enthusiastic cheers which echo
now with so ironic a significance. With them, and in parti-
cular with the Plymouth and Anson Battalions, to whom, as it
happened, fell the earlier share in the active operations, went
the thoughts of all on board the Naval Division transports,
as they steamed north to their solitary but peaceful rendez-
vous five miles west-south-west of Xeros Island.
The fleet of transports, escorted by H.M.S. Canopus (on
board which were General Paris and his staff), Dartmouth
(G.O.C. and the Staff Officer 2nd Naval Brigade), Jed and
Rennet , reached the rendezvous at daylight; at 5.45 a.m.
H.M.S. Dartmouth and Doris began a bombardment of the
Bulair lines, which continued throughout the day; two hours
later, Colonels Ollivant and Richardson on board H.M.S.
Rennet carried out a detailed reconnaissance of landing-
places on the north shore of the gulf. The Rennet was stood
in close to shore, and was but once fired on —sustaining no
casualties. All this time, the fleet of transports was lying
ostentatiously in the background, but there was no evidence
that the feint was being taken in any way seriously. For the
same evening, a more realistic enterprise was decided on,
and a platoon of the Hood Battalion was ordered to effect
a landing under cover of darkness, to light flares upon the
beaches and shoot off machine guns and rifles, and, by great
activity and in the manner of a stage army, impersonate
a force many times their size, and thus to give the
threatened invasion 'the hall-mark of reality. The fact
that the fleet of transports had been demonstrating for several
hours opposite the point to be invaded insured a warm if not
cordial reception, which would in all probability spell disaster
to the force involved. This was pointed out by Lt.-Commander
Freyberg, who volunteered himself to swim alone to light flares
79
The Gallipoli Landings


upon the hostile shore. His bold offer was accepted. The
night was dark, with a touch of frost in the air, and there was
a slight sea running in the Gulf of Xeros when Freyberg, painted
black and greased to keep out the cold, was lowered into the
water with a little canvas raft of flares. He was armed with
a small revolver, with sheath knife slung round his waist, and
wearing a small luminous wrist compass for direction in case
the stars became obscured. A start was made at 10 p.m. ;
it was dark and unattractive, save for the phosphorescent
splash from the muffled oars of the ship’s boat. By some mis-
calculation, in the dark, of the distance, two miles had to be
swum, and it was midnight before a landing was effected.
The raft was hidden while a reconnaissance of the enemy
position above the cliff was carried out.
Crawling about, naked, on an open and exposed cliff after
two hours’ swim on a cold, windy, April night was not a very
cheerful occupation, but Freyberg was able, in spite of the
noise from his chattering teeth, to get close up to the enemy
trenches on the cliffs. After a few minutes of searching, the
raft was recovered and the first flare was lighted on the beach.
Immediately machine-gun fire was opened from the picket
boats all round and the British war ships bombarded the
beaches. Freyberg had to take refuge in the water to avoid
fire, but swimming in the direction of the Bulair line, was
able to light two other flares on the beaches, a quarter of a mile
apart. When this had been accomplished the mission was at
an end. The stars were all covered by clouds, and so, on a
compass bearing due south, he made a start from the in-
hospitable shore, in the hope of being picked up in the dark
by a destroyer or picket boat. The ships, of course, showed
no light, and there were no flashes from the guns, which were
by now silent. It was a meagre chance ; but after two hours’
swimming Commander Freyberg was retrieved, cramped and
nearly dead with cold.
The effect of these operations was substantial. As we
have seen, there were four Turkish divisions on the peninsula ;
two were allocated to the defence of the Bulair lines, and
two to the Southern defence systems hingeing on Kilid Bahr
and Achibaba. The headquarters of the Southern defensive
system was at Maidos, of the Northern at Gallipoli. When
the Naval Division feint began, the coast against which they
80
The Royal Naval Division


Brig.-General Bernard Freyberg, V.C., C.M.G., D.S.O.
(From the portrait by Ambrose McEroy in the possession of the Imperial War Museum.)




were operating was in truth but lightly held. But no sooner
had the transports been sighted, than one of the divisions
based on Maidos was moved northwards, another was
held ready to join it, and General Liman van Sanders
took up his post of command on a height near the central
front of the Bulair lines. Not till nightfall did he even suspect
that the operation was a feint—but by this time the land-
ings which the reinforcement of the Southern force might have
prevented had been achieved.
The story of these landings (Sir lan Hamilton had decided
on no less than five) must now be told.
The enemy south of Achibaba held one well-sited line
of trenches, strongly wired, which ran across the southern
slopes of Achibaba in front of Krithia. This was his line
of resistance. His outpost line, known to be held in force,
consisted of still more elaborately wired earthwork defences
on three small knolls which lay at intervals of about a mile
from each other, and not more than 500 yards inland, on a line
running roughly parallel with the southern coast of the
peninsula from Cape Tekke to Sedd-el-bahr. Linked up with
these defences, were advanced posts, guarding the only two
beaches on the southern shore at which a landing could be
anticipated. The first was the bay below Sedd-el-bahr, where
the tall and precipitous cliffs give place for some 350 yards to
a green amphitheatre of crumbled and grass-grown slopes,
falling away to the sea and ending in undulating ridges of sand.
The second was nearer the entrance to the Straits, west of
Cape Helles, where the line of cliffs is broken by a small gully,
opening on to a strip of beach 40 yards deep at its widest
point, and the whole not more than 250 yards long. There
were also small detachments watching Morto Bay and Gully
Beach.
The main Turkish line on the slopes of Achibaba was
our first objective. To enable an attack on this line to be
developed effectively, the two main beaches must be stormed.
Once the beaches were secured by the covering forces, further
troops were to be landed, and the advance was to begin. To
ensure the immediate success of this advance, a third landing
6
81
The Gallipoli Landings


was to be made at a small cove almost exactly on the left
flank of the Turkish position. This force was to join in the
pursuit of the Turks as they were dislodged, or in the pre-
liminary attack, should any untoward event make it necessary.
The finishing touch to the Turkish dSbdcle was to be given
by two flanking parties, landed a couple of miles behind the
Turkish position on either flank. These parties, though
small in numbers, were expected to harass the retreating
Turk, and prevent anything like an orderly retirement. As
the main line advanced, the flanking parties would join in
the assault on the main Turkish position. The places selected
for the landing of the flanking parties were the north of Morto
Bay (“ S ” beach) in the Straits, an ideal landing-place for a
small force, but impracticable for a large one because of its
exposure to artillery fire from Asia; and “Y ” beach on the
Aegean shore. In the case of these two landings there was
to be only a covering force: i.e ., no more troops were
to be landed than those required to carry the position
in the face of, what was expected to be, a very slight
opposition.
The forces detailed for the five landings were as follows :
“V ” Beach Ist Dublin Fusiliers
Ist Munster Fusiliers
2nd Hampshires
“A” Coy. Anson Battalion
1 Platoon “D ” Coy. Anson
Main attack Q Battalion
“W ” Beach Ist Lancashire Fusiliers
4th Worcesters
Ist Essex
“ B ” Coy. Anson Battalion
Battalion H.Q. Anson Battalion
\
(“X ’’Beach 2nd Royal Fusiliers
Ist Inniskillings
Ist Border Regiment
“ D ” Coy. Anson Battn. (less 1
Platoon)
“ C ” Coy. Anson Battalion
82
The Royal Naval Division


iMorto Bay 2nd South Wales Borderers
(less 1 Coy.)
“ Y ” Beach Plymouth Battalion R.M.L.I.
Ist K. 0.5.8.
1 Coy. 2nd S. Wales Borderers
The Morto Bay party landed without much opposition, and
soon occupied three lines of trenches above de Tott’s battery,
which was evacuated by a small Turkish detachment. In this
they were assisted by sailors and marines from the covering
ship. Once safely established on shore, the detachment stood
to its ground, waiting till some movement of the enemy should
give them an opportunity for effective intervention without
risking the loss of touch with their line of supply (and retreat).
In this position the detachment was found when the line was
finally advanced.
The “Y ” Beach party met at first with little opposi-
tion ; the actual landing .was made from trawlers at 5.45
a.m. without covering fire, and the crest of the steep cliffs
had been gained without loss by 6.30. Touch with the enemy
was shortly obtained about 800 yards to the north, and a
defensive flank was formed facing north-east, to the defence
of which Lt.-Colonel Matthews, C. 8., R.M.L.1., of the Plymouth
Battalion (who was in command of the whole force) detailed
two companies of the Marines. The remainder of the force
advanced to the east over a wide front. Crossing the deep Gully
Ravine, when a few prisoners were taken, Colonel Matthews
took up a position on a ridge running roughly parallel to it, a
few hundred yards beyond. Here, 300 Turkish infantry were
seen moving south, and two field guns taking up a position east
of Krithia. For two hours the forces remained unmolested
and stationary, waiting for signs of the expected advance
from the south. There were none. A further advance with
this limited force was hardly practicable, if any touch was
to be maintained with the left flank, and, as a Turkish attack
in some force was expected, failing the success of the Southern
landings, it was decided to withdraw to a defensive position
covering the original landing-places, with the right flank only
thrown forward across the gully, to give immediate support
to any advance from the south. By 3 p.m. this withdrawal
6*
83
The Gallipoli Landings


was completed, and at dusk, when the Turks first began to
threaten the position, the right flank also was withdrawn to
the shore. The new position was a rough semicircle, with
each flank resting on the sea, and the centre thrown forward
some five hundred yards. The Marines held the flanks, each
with two companies, and the K. 0.5.8. and South Wales
Borderers held the centre.
The decision to remain on the defensive was well-reasoned,
and was indeed almost inevitable, having regard to the fact
that, although Colonel Matthews had reported the unopposed
landing to General Hunter Weston, he had received no acknow-
ledgment and no information of the happenings at the other
beaches.
It remains, however, true that a bolder policy would, in all
human probability, have had far-reaching results ; what those
might have been will appear when we turn back to the more
splendid, if more tragic, story of the operations which had been
going on simultaneously on the southern shore of the peninsula.
As in the case of the other small detachments, the Royal
Fusiliers landed at “ X ” beach without serious opposition.
So effective, indeed, was the support afforded to the covering
force by H.M.S. Implacable that the Turkish infantry lining
the cliffs above the beach were driven back on their main
position, while the infantry scaled the cliffs without a casualty.
Immediately the heights had been made good, Colonel Newen-
ham secured his left and front with half his battalion, and,
holding one company in reserve, threw the other forward
towards Hill 114, where he hoped to gain touch with the main
landing force at “W ” beach. He was met, instead, by a
heavy and well-directed fire from an enemy clearly still in
undisturbed possession. There was nothing for it but to
wait till the whole of his force was ashore, and then, instead of
moving forward on Krithia, as he had hoped, to turn south-east
to secure his flank. This set-back was, of course, a reaction
from the partial check experienced at “ W ” beach, owing
to the dominating position above Sedd-el-bahr being still in
the hands of the enemy. The reason for this was that the
landing at “ V ” beach had failed.
“ V ” beach was of all the beaches selected for landings
the most suitable for defence. The beach itself was not more
than ten yards wide, and edged by a small but perpendicular
84
The Royal Naval Division


bank of sand not above five or six feet high: beyond, was a
green amphitheatre rising over a gentle slope of some two
hundred yards to a height of two hundred feet above the level
of the sea. Not only was the whole beach commanded from
Sedd-el-bahr Castle, but these green and peaceful slopes were
themselves covered with trenches and dug-outs invisible from
the shore, and beyond reach of damage from the preliminary
bombardment—for the dug-outs were cut back in the slopes
of the hill, and the trenches themselves so deep as to be immune
from any save a plunging fire.
At the first hint of dawn, three companies of the Dublin
Fusiliers and the 4th Platoon of the Anson Battalion (Lieutenant
Denholm, R.N.V.R.) were disembarked from the sweepers,
which had brought them from Mudros, and took their places in
the boats, the whole force of six hundred men being borne in
six tows (each made up of a pinnace and four cutters) in line
abreast. On the right of the line of tows was the Rivet Clyde ,
carrying the remaining company and the headquarters staff
of the Dublins, the Munster Fusiliers, half the Hampshire
Regiment, and Sub-Lieut. Tisdall’s 13th Platoon of the Anson
Battalion, accompanied by Lieut.-Commander Smallwood,
R.N.V.R., the Second in Command of the battalion.
The River Clyde grounded almost at the same time as the
men in the open boats reached the shallow waters, but, owing
to the strength of the current, some delay occurred in fixing
up the “ bridge ”of lighters. Meanwhile the Dublins, landing
from open boats,* had been almost annihilated. Of three
companies of this fine battalion, barely a hundred and fifty men
reached the shore alive. A few of these, in the fury of their
first attack, climbed the low ridge of sand which edged the
beach, and were seen to disappear into the ruins of Sedd-el-bahr.
The rest clung desperately to the slender shelter of the sand-
bank, waiting.
* It was to assist in manning the numerous auxiliary craft (tugs, lighters,
etc.), which had to play their part in this unprecedented operation of landing a
modern army on a hostile beach from open boats, that the naval ratings from the
Hood and Howe battalions had been lent to the Navy. These ratings were
scattered in small parties and had no independent task assigned to them.
Sub-Lieut. Dodge was, however, appointed an assistant Naval Landing Officer
at “V” beach and accompanied the Dublin Fusiliers in their first assault.
He was wounded before reaching the shore, but remained on the beach through-
out the 25th and until the afternoon of the 2Gth. He was subsequently awarded
the D.S.C. for his services at this landing.


Where was that tide of men which should have swept before
now from the Rivet Clyde to overwhelm the enemy by con-
centrated weight of numbers ? Throughout the morning,
indeed, the little company of the living below the sandbank,
almost on the water’s edge, were joined by others from the
ship.* But they came only in ones and twos, through a hurri-
cane of fire. For every man that stepped ashore from that
floating bridge of lighters, six or seven had fallen as they
crossed the short fifty yards which lay between the ship
and the shore. The wounded fell most often from the
lighters as they were hit, and lay in the clear waters, visible
but beyond reach of help. The dead lay beside them, or
on the lighters or by the water’s edge. On that shore, and
round the wreckage of those wounded boats, only the living
were conspicuous.
Among the foremost of these, were Lieut.-Colonel Doughty
Wylie and Captain Walford, who were to lead the desperate and
successful assault on the following day, and whose monument,
put up by the French in memory of a brilliant feat of arms,
still stands, as it stood throughout the campaign, amid the
ruins of Sedd-el-bahr. No less conspicuous were those officers
and men of the Navy who superintended the operations on the
River Clyde. Keeping the landing parties between decks to
avoid useless slaughter, Commander Unwin and his officers
worked for continuous hours on the lighters and in the water,
in the first instance making fast the bridge of boats, later
repairing it, as the connecting hawsers were shot in half; later
still, rescuing those of the wounded who had fallen above the
water’s edge or on to the lighters. Only now and then did
their labours cease for a moment, when, in Commander Unwin’s
judgment, the time had come for another party to attempt
the passage ashore. Then, without a moment’s delay, the work
of repair and rescue would begin again.
In the work of rescue Commander Unwin was assisted not
only by all those under his immediate command, but also by
Sub-Lieut. Tisdall’s detachment of the Anson Battalion.
Tisdall’s heroism must have been noteworthy even on that
day and at that place, for it was noted. The official account
♦ Among these was Lieut.-Commander Smallwood, R.N.V.R., who, like
Sub-Lieut. Dodge, was wounded coming ashore but remained on the beach
till late on the 26th.
86
The Royal Naval Division


“V” Beach Landing, seen from the River Clyde, 11 a.m., April 25th, 1915.
(From a photograph taken by Lieut.-Commander E. G. Boissier, D.S.C., R.R.V.R.)




of his exploits, for which later he was awarded the Victoria
Cross, is as follows ;
“ During the landing from the S.S. River Clyde at * V *
beach in the Gallipoli Peninsula, Sub-Lieut. Tisdall, hearing
wounded men on the beach calling for assistance, jumped into
the water, and pushing a boat in front of him, went to their
rescue. He was, however, obliged to obtain help, and took
with him on two trips Leading Seaman Malia, and on other
trips Chief Petty Officer Perring and Leading Seamen Curtiss
and Parkinson. In all, Sub-Lieut. Tisdall made four or
five trips between the ship and the shore, and was thus re-
sponsible for rescuing several wounded men under heavy and
accurate fire.”
For their share in these gallant exploits C.P.O. Perring, the
platoon sergeant of Tisdall’s platoon (promoted on the field
a few days later to commissioned rank), Leading Seaman Malia
and Leading Seaman Parkinson were awarded the Good Conduct
Medal.
But no amount of individual gallantry could make good
the heights of Sedd-el-bahr that day. It was clear that it was
only under cover of darkness that sufficient troops could be
landed to afford any chance of a successful assault. All that
could be done was to keep down the Turkish fire, and prevent
the enemy leaving their defences and annihilating the heroic
survivors of the ill-fated assault. Even this was only made
possible by the machine guns on the River Clyde.
“ W ” beach was longer and less deep than “ V ” beach,
and was no less strongly defended. The two sides of the
gully which runs down in the centre of the beach were as deeply
entrenched as the amphitheatre at Sedd-el-bahr, and the
entanglements actually low down to the water’s edge. More-
over, there was no Rivet Clyde to hold out the hope (though,
as it turned out, a fallacious hope) of instant and overwhelming
reinforcement to the detachments landing in open boats.
Nevertheless, the attack on the actual beach was instantly
successful. The covering force (the Ist Battalion Lancashire
Fusiliers), with whom were Lieut.-Colonel Moorhouse and his
adjutant (Lieutenant Newman), with “ B ” Company of the
Anson Battalion, approached the shore in four lines of cutters,
eight abreast, towed by eight picket boats. When within a few
yards of the beach, the tows were cast off and the boats
87
The Gallipoli Landings


rowed to the shore. Whether by a happy inspiration or by
singular good fortune the boats on the left of the line diverged
a little from the direct line of advance, and their occupants
landed on a small ledge of rock immediately under the cliff at
Tekke Burnu. Here they escaped the cross-fire which was
brought to bear on other parts of the beach, and were able in
their turn to assist the main assault by flanking fire ; the war-
ships also closed in and began an intensive bombardment.
Thus assisted, the main body of the Lancashire Fusiliers cut
their way through the wire and collected under the cliffs at
either side of the beach. There the companies were hastily
reorganized and then led to the assault. By 9.30 a.m. the
trenches up the gully were taken, and the beach was in our
hands. In all this early fighting, the Anson platoons and the
detachments from the Hood and Howe took part, and not
until the heights had been gained were they reformed and
assigned to their duties as beach parties, when their first tasks
were to mount a guard on the Turkish prisoners, to clear the
beach of wire, and to collect tools, ammunition and rifles from
the casualties. In the course of the first hour’s fighting, Sub-
Lieut. T. F. Melland, R.N.V.R., was wounded.
The capture of “ W ” beach gave the army by 9.80 a.m. a
temporary security of tenure on the peninsula, for at least
the remaining battalions of the 29th Division could be landed ;
but an advance on Krithia was impossible, for, as things were,
it was necessary first to reduce from “ W ” beach the prepared
positions on the Turkish left centre and left, which should,
on the original plan, have been penetrated by the forces detailed
for the “V ” beach landing. Unfortunately, even the gallantry
of the Worcester and Essex Regiments, who had arrived to
the support of the Lancashire Fusiliers in the firing line by
10 a.m., proved unequal to this task. Though the twin positions
of Hill 114 on the left and Hill 138 on the right of “ W ” beach
were in our hands by 4.30 p.m., the heavy fighting had taken
a grievous toll of casualties, and, with tired troops, a further
advance was judged impossible. In the result the Turks
remained in possession of the heights of Sedd-el-bahr.
Thus the night of the 25th found the detachments at Morto
Bay and “Y ” beach still exposed to independent attack,
and the main force in the south still unable to advance from
the shore. Daylight, the aimed fire of ships’ guns and re-
88
The Royal Naval Division


View from the bridge of the River Clyde, early autumn, 1915




inforcements were necessary to any further attempt against
Sedd-el-bahr. Could the flanking parties hold their ground
so long without support ? Could the main body main-
tain itself where it was until dawn ? And what of the heroic
survivors of the ill-fated “V ” beach landing ? Could this
small party, crouching still under the shelter of the sand hills
only a hundred yards or so from the water’s edge, protected
only by the naval machine guns on the River Clyde , be re-
inforced during the night, so that they could attack with any
hope of success at dawn on the 26th ?
On such a scene of tragic anxiety and suffering fell the
brief twilight of the Eastern evening. The isolation of the
scene was, indeed, a thing for pity. In Egypt were the troops
whose presence would have made the landing a sure and swift
success. On the Albion , with his staff, was the Commander-
in-Chief, held to his post of command, without news, without
even a sight of the newly-won positions. And on these stricken
shores, where the dead were being buried with that hurried and
tremulous silence so much more eloquent of human limitations
than any funeral panegyric, the scattered relics of twelve batta-
lions were keeping a ceaseless vigil. Till light came, they
were beyond reach of the fleet, with no supports behind
them but the Anson beach companies, and in front of them
the whole strength of the enemy, able in darkness to mass
unobserved and fall perhaps in overwhelming strength on any
point which he might choose.
Throughout the whole of the day, the men of the Anson
Battalion on “ W ” beach had been occupied without interval
in the unloading of stores, the transport of ammunition and
water to the firing line and the burying of the dead. The
company which had shared in the first assault had been rein-
forced during the morning by three more platoons of “A ”
Company (diverted from “ V ” beach), under Lt.-Commander
Peter McCirdy, and with this party came the Reverend H. C.
Foster, the Chaplain to the 2nd Naval Brigade, the first Anglican
Chaplain to land on the peninsula. Now when night fell, this
small party found themselves the only reserves available on
u W ” beach in case of a Turkish counter-attack. No less
wearing, no less responsible, was the lot of “ C ” and “ D ”
Companies of the Anson (Lt.-Commander Gordon Grant, D.S.C.,
and Lieut. Spencer Warwick) at “ X ” beach.
89
The Gallipoli Landings


To attempt to rest within sight of the lights from the firing
line, to wake up to a noise of rapid fire only a few hundred
yards away, to hear shells passing over you, or dropping round
you, and to know nothing, except that your company or
battalion may be called at any moment for any duty, and that,
unless you rest, you may not be ready when the time comes—
that was the everyday experience of the regimental officer for
many weeks throughout the campaign. How far more wearing
the experience of the beach parties on that first night, when
the firing line was barely two hundred yards away, when
there were no reserves, when the dead were as yet unburied
and the wounded unattended, when there was no place to lie
in, which was not under rifle fire, when, through the thinly*
held line of shallow trenches, manned by tired men and with
but few senior officers surviving, might pour down upon the
beach without more than a moment’s warning the whole force
of the enemy.
It was, indeed, almost a relief when, in the middle of the
night, the expected attack took place, and cries for ammunition
came down from above. Soon the whole Anson detachments
were in the firing line, and the beaches were left to the chaplains,
the doctors, the wounded and the dead. The scene in the
firing line was less terrifying than the desolation of the beaches.
True, the trenches were wide and shallow, there was no wire
and no cover; but to troops fighting their first night-battle
the risk of death is less alarming than the sense of isolation,
the feeling of ignorance, the harassing fear of the unknown.
The Turkish attack was, in fact, not made in force. Skilled
beyond all other European armies, except our own, in the art
of rapid fire, the Turks attacked more often than not as a
measure of defence. Their method throughout the first months
of the Gallipoli campaign was to open up and maintain an
almost unbelievable volume of fire, generally high, but suffi-
ciently well directed to make close or prolonged observation
from the front line a matter of extreme danger. Under cover
of what was in effect a formidable barrage, small parties would
go forward, and attempt to enter our lines.
The chief damage done by these tactics was in the back
areas, where the ceaseless fusillade of “ overs ” exacted a
nightly toll of casualties among working parties, ration parties,
and reliefs on the beaches, or, later on, in the gullies. So it
90
The Royal Naval Division


was on this first night, and the somewhat alarmist reports
which reached the beaches, and from thence no doubt perco-
lated to General Headquarters, were probably due rather
to the unexpected nature of the Turkish tactics than to the
severity of the actual attacks.
The force at “ Y ” beach was subjected to much the same
tactics, though carried out with greater success. We have
seen that Colonel Matthews had completed his retirement to
the cliff by 6 p.m. on the 25th. No sooner had he done so
than a strong force of Turks came into action against his
left and centre, having taken up a position some three
hundred yards away from our line in the dense scrub. Heavy
rifle fire began at dusk, and, owing to the semicircular position
which had to be taken up, the effect was unusually severe, the
fire directed from the left of the position at effective range not
only taking toll of the Marines guarding the left flank, but
taking the Marine companies on the right in reverse.
As soon as darkness came down, the Turks, under cover of
their cross rifle fire, made repeated attempts, as usual in small
groups, to break through our line, and the K. 0.5.8. in the
centre were heavily engaged for some hours. The crowning
horror of the scene was the fate of the wounded, who,
having been taken to a position half-way down the cliff, were
attacked (whether with a calculated disregard of the laws of
war and humanity or in the confusion of the night-battle) by
a party of Turks, who crawled through the thick scrub on the
cliff face and came in behind our lines. Meanwhile, the rifle
fire from the main enemy position took constant toll of the
front-line troops, who were compelled, by the daring of the
Turkish patrols working in and out of the scrub to expose
themselves almost continuously. Time and again, these patrols
would get into our line, only to be driven out again at the
point of the bayonet. Only once, at 5.30 a.m. on the 26th, was
a serious breach effected. This, as often happens, was at the
junction of two units, the K. 0.5.8. and the left-flank com-
panies of the Marines, but the line was soon restored by a
counter-attack, in which Lieut. F. C. Law, R.M.L.1., took
a distinguished part.*
This was the final thrust. In the half-light before dawn,
r. * ?. n fighting of this night, Lieut. J. F. May, R.M.L.1., of the Plymouth
■Battalion, was killed.
91
The Gallipoli Landings


the Turks, who had suffered probably nearly as heavily as the
invading force, withdrew to a distance, and only the shelling
served as a reminder to the tired troops of the horrors of the
night. But by now supplies were short, the force had lost
a third of their slender effectives (less than two thousand rifles
to start with), the K. 0.5.8. had lost most of their senior
officers, and the experience of the night had made it clear that,
failing support from the south, the position could not be main-
tained without reinforcements, at least not without ammuni-
tion and water. Accordingly, at 7.30 a.m., Colonel Matthews
signalled his appreciation of the situation to the covering
ship, suggesting at the same time a withdrawal, if it should be
impossible to replenish his supplies. A
It was in answer to this signal that boats at once left for
the beach, and simultaneously the right flank and centre, i.e.,
the K. 0.5.8., the company of the South Wales Borderers,
and two companies of the Marines were ordered to the beach to
re-embark. Colonel Matthews, who was on the extreme left
at the time, was unaware of what was taking place until the
re-embarkation was almost completed. In his Judgment,
however, a withdrawal was necessary, failing reinforcements
and supplies, and having throughout the operations received
no message from General Hunter Weston, he withdrew with
the remaining companies. of Marines some two hours later,
after collecting and embarking the wounded. By 9.30 a.m.
on the 26th, “ Y ” beach, so gallantly held against the most
desperate attacks, was abandoned to a defeated enemy.
Sir lan Hamilton himself assumed that orders for the retire-
ment, of which he was an irritated eye-witness, had been issued
by General Hunter Weston. General Hunter Weston, how-
ever, was not responsible for a decision which was defended
by Lt.-Colonel Matthews at the time, and subsequently before
the Dardanelles Commission.
But if the night of April 25th-26th brought to weary
troops at Cape Helles and “ Y ” beaches their first and, there-
fore, their most terrifying experience of the Turkish night
attack, and if the dawn saw the inexplicable end of the adven-
ture of Colonel Matthews’ force, the gathering darkness on
the 25th brought a welcome interval of relief to the sorely-
tried forces at Sedd-el-bahr, and the dawn of the 26th witnessed
their final and amazing triumph.
92
The Royal Naval Division


Under cover of darkness, and perhaps also because the
enemy were already preparing for the inevitable retreat, the
remaining troops on the River Clyde came ashore without
loss, and took up a position, marked down during the day as
affording the best cover available, under the shattered earth-
works of the old castle on the extreme right of the beach.
Here they were joined by the survivors of the first landing,
who crawled across the enemy’s front under cover of the ridge
of sand which had sheltered them through the day. At day-
break the force advanced to the assault assisted by a heavy
fire from the ships, and, capturing the village, the old castle
and the dominating Hill 141 in a succession of brilliant, if
costly, open order skirmishes, were in possession of the entire
position by 2 p.m. The retreating Turks, retiring through the
wooded country round Morto Bay, suffered heavily from the
fire of the Albion, off Sedd-el-bahr, and of the Lord Nelson,
keeping watch over the Morto Bay detachment.
Now was the time for an advance. But the beaches behind
our line were bare of reinforcements, and, of the slender force
which had been landed, nearly half were supplementing the
efforts of the Anson beach parties in getting stores, ammuni-
tion and water ashore. In these circumstances, it appeared
a regrettable necessity to wait for fresh troops and more
supplies, and to allow an opportunity for rest to the 29th
Division before a further advance. It was decided to devote
most of the day to the disembarkation of the French at “ V ”
beach, where Lt.-Colonel Moorhouse and the rest of the
Anson Battalion had now landed as a beach party. The
Commander-in-Chief decided at the same time to release, from
his slender reserve, the Drake Battalion of the Naval Division.
Orders to this effect reached General Paris in the Gulf of Xeros
at 1 p.m., and the Drake sailed for Cape Helles at once.
The landing of this battalion, at 8.30 p.m. on April 26th,
was in its way as significant as were the heroic landings
of the day before. The beaches had been hardly won ; even
now the line lay only a few hundred yards inland, and it was
but thinly held by tired men. But the separate and organized
life of the beaches was already beginning. From this night
onward, at least until the end of the July battles, the same
scene was to repeat itself. The army which was not sufficiently
prepared for victory was showing itself as ever impenetrably
93
The Gallipoli Landings


armed against defeat. The staff, which failed for so long to
reduce order out of chaos in the peaceful atmosphere of Mudros,
turned the battlefield of the Lancashire landing into a tolerable
office while the shells were still falling and the dead were still
unburied. This was the night of the transition. From now
onward the nightly scene on “ W ” beach was one of silent but
ceaseless activity. As dusk fell, the sweepers would come in
from Mudros, and would be directed by signal from the shore
to their allotted anchorage, or, if their draught allowed, to a
berth alongside one of the floating piers improvised already
from the wreckage of lighters and ships’ boats, and strengthened
with every unconvincing but effective device which sailors and
engineers could concoct without material of any kind. As
soon as the sweepers were made fast, staff officers of the
different departments would come on board and receive
reports of the troops and stores. Then, while any troops
would be brought ashore and handed over by the military
landing officer to guides from their own formations, beach
parties would go on board to unload stores and dispose of
them under orders of the different administrative officers.
Meanwhile, it would be bitterly cold for troops called on, within
a few hours, to exchange the meretricious comfort of a passenger
ship for the sombre desolation of the very edge of a battlefield.
It was this sudden change, unparalleled in any other
campaign of the present war, a change singularly dramatic,
which so heightened the impression left by the first night
on the peninsula. For, on the very edge of those indifferent
waters, there remained to the end the wreckage of boats
and stores; the once green slopes of the gully which closed
the view were scarred with trenches and shell holes, and
worn to the colour and substance of dust by the ceaseless
passage of men. Here and there were gathered in pitiful
heaps rifles and equipment, salvage from the wounded and
the dead, and amid this wreckage, across the sand still
strewn here and there with the remains of rusted entangle-
ments, men moved about with that brisk solemnity which one
meets but seldom beyond range of the guns, which contrasts so
markedly with the lackadaisical formalism of the base. In
the near distance, indeed, could be heard, almost every
night for the first four months of the campaign, the ceaseless
rifle fire of the Turks, and, occasionally, the sound of artillery
94
The Royal Naval Division


bombardment, brought very close by the proximity of our
heavy guns.
Of the extent of ground which, in fact, separated the beach
from the firing line after the very first days of the campaign,
nothing could be guessed by the newly-arrived troops, who
could see no further than the sloping walls of the gully, honey-
combed with dug-outs. No wonder that, at the first glance,
the narrow beach seemed the embodiment of desolation, a
strange wilderness peopled by flitting figures stumbling against
each other sometimes in the darkness, but more usually moving
about with the precision of ghosts in a world of shades. And
this was no idle fancy, for under the sand and up the sides of
the gully many men were buried, and an impalpable atmo
sphere of death and decay was in the very air men breathed
95
The Gallipoli Landings


CHAPTER VI
THE MAY BATTLES
THE situation south of Achibaba on the morning of the
27th April was a curious one. We held the Turkish out-
post line, linking up the three small hills overlooking the entrance
to the Straits. On the beaches at Cape Helles and Sedd-
el-bahr we were busy disembarking not only the stores and
guns of the 29th Division but also the French Expeditionary
Force, whose operations at Kum Kale, brilliantly executed and
maintained for as long as was necessary, were now at an end.
For two miles in front of our line was an open plain, clear of the
enemy as far as the eye could see ; our advance over this plain
must moreover be effectively covered from the left flank by the
guns of the fleet, and from the right by the flanking force
north of Morto Bay. Seeing our troops sitting (or more often
standing at their ease) in the shallow trenches overlooking this
wide stretch of open and undefended country, an inexperienced
observer landing in the peninsula for the first time on this day
must have wondered at the stories he had heard of the bitter
fighting of the preceding forty-eight hours. When, at 4 p.m.,
the French having come into line on the right of the 29th
Division, an unopposed advance carried our line forward a
distance of no less than two miles, his wonder must have
increased. The campaign south of Achibaba, which had
threatened throughout the 25th to end in disaster, seemed indeed
to have taken an almost miraculous turn for the better. No
little wonder that, to the short-sighted, April 28th was expected
to see our troops entrenched on our first objective. Little
less is it to be wondered at that critics who look back on this
period of the campaign in the light of subsequent events have
actually been found to suggest that the Turks were anxious
for us to consolidate our position, and land our guns, stores
and reinforcements, if only to ensure that we thus committed
96


ourselves to wasting our strength in a subsequently fruitless
struggle.
The explanation of the dramatic advance of the 27th is,
however, simple. The Turks had planned two positions south of
Achibaba. The first was on the lower slopes of the hill covering
Krithia, with their left resting on the Kereves Dere (a deep
ravine running, roughly, across our front, inland from a point on
the shore of the Straits a mile and a half north of Morto Bay).
The second was the line commanding the beaches, a line which
we had finally captured at dawn on the 26th. The average
distance between the two lines was about four and a half miles.
There is no valid reason for thinking that our capture of the
first position was anything but a great military victory, the
truth being that the enemy was thus committed to a defensive
campaign in barren and inhospitable country which must last
as long as we wished, and which must, while it lasted, prove a
disastrous drain on those resources which he had hoped to
employ in a decisive offensive. In these circumstances, our
initial success decided the enemy to retire as soon as might be
on to his second prepared position at Krithia, rather than risk
his as yet slender forces by standing on an intermediate position,
the defence of which might prove more costly. This was only
elementary military commonsense. But there was a further
consideration, equally important to the enemy: this was
time. He had been perilously delayed in his concentration by
the Bulair and the Kum Kale demonstrations. The forces
ultimately available for garrisoning the Krithia defences were
not as yet south of Achibaba. Moreover, the Krithia defences
were incomplete. It was necessary accordingly to delay our
advance as far as possible with a skeleton force. For this, the
country for nearly two miles in front of our line of the 26th was
unsuitable, and so our advance on the 27th was unopposed ;
the remainder of the ground might, on the contrary, have been
designed for delaying actions.
A line drawn from Gully beach to de Tott’s Battery would
show roughly our position on the morning of April 28th.
Behind us was open plain, unsuitable for our communications.
In front of us, the country up to the lower slopes of Achibaba
was far less open and was split by three gullies down which
mountain streams flowed in winter from the heights of Achi-
baba ; of these gullies, the widest and deepest, known as Gully
7
97
The May Battles


ravine, runs down parallel to the western coast of the peninsula,
till it opens out abruptly to the sea at Gully beach, midway be-
tween “X” and “Y” beaches. The others, known as the
Krithia and Achibaba nullahs, divide the rest of the peninsula
into three roughly equal sectors, until they open out into the
plain, at the point reached by us on the evening of the 27th.
These gullies were the key to the Turkish tactics. They provided
covered communications through which their rearguards, un-
detected by our infantry, unassailable by the fleet, could harass
any further daylight advance.
The unexpected ease of our progress on the 27th, might have
been expected to give, and perhaps gave, a clue to the enemy
plans. The country in front of us should certainly have con-
firmed our suspicions if we had had any. The forces opposed to
us must moreover be slender; the strength of the Turks at Anzac
and other information from prisoners told us that. Yet in
spite of all we rested on our gains on the early evening of the
27th, and prepared an elaborately staged “ attack ” for 8 a.m.
on the 28th. The argument for a daylight advance of a formal
character was that the losses in officers made a night advance
unsafe. If, however, there was a chance of reaching Achibaba
before the enemy’s reserves were concentrated, we must get in
touch with his main body at once, and defeat it. The question
was whether a frontal attack in daylight, across country
perfectly adapted for a delaying action conducted with the
minimum of force, was the most likely method of achieving this
result.
The course of the battle (in which the Drake Battalion at-
tached to the 87th Brigade was the only battalion of the Naval
Division to be engaged), suggests only one answer. The
attacking force consisted from left to right of the 87th
Brigade, the 88th Brigade and five French battalions. In
reserve was the 86th Brigade. At 8 a.m. the battle opened.
As on a field day, the front battalions advanced in open
order by short rushes, their bayonets glistening in the sun.
The supporting battalions followed in artillery formation. The
Turks offered, at first, no resolute resistance to that part of the
advance which lay over open ground, covered by the ships’
guns, and the left flank advanced at the outset for a mile or
so, over the high, hilly ground on either side of Gully ravine.
In the centre, however, the 88th Brigade made slower progress
98
The Royal Naval Division


on a front which included the narrower Krithia and Achibaba
nullahs, and on the right, the French, trying to fight up the
steepish slope that leads to the Kereves Dere, were checked at
the start. Even on the left, the Turks advanced more than
once to counter-attack, and elsewhere their rearguards took a
heavy toll of our troops, from positions mostly concealed in
the long grass and scrub.
The defence is brilliantly organized. In and out of the
gullies are little concealed trenches, cunningly sited. We take
one ; it is commanded by another. Where are the men to
take the next ? Another company comes up, and takes it,
only to find it empty; but the rifle and machine-gun fire
still takes its toll, the performance has to be repeated again and
again, and yet, in as costly a battle as many first-class engage-
ments on the Western front, many in the centre and on the right
never see a Turk. All this time we have been advancing on
the left, but the line has become thin, and now the Turks,
heartened by their success in the centre, come on again.
Then orders come to Commander Campbell to take the Drake
through the 87th Brigade, with the South Wales Borderers,
and reinforce the firing line. This much they do, but the
advance is at a standstill. In the centre the line is thinning,
and the 86th Brigade, the shattered but still heroic battalions
of the landing, have been thrown in. Scattered parties of
the Munster Fusiliers even come up against the Krithia defences,
but a fighting patrol is not a match for an army corps in pre-
pared, albeit incomplete, positions ; the isolated units fall
back, and when they retreat the Drake and the South Wales
Borderers can do no more than stand fast. For there are no
reserves. One fresh division at least, almost certainly two, are
wanted.
We dug in on the night of the 28th-29th on a line nearly a
mile beyond the gully on the left, but bending back to our
original position in the centre and on the left. It was the first
of those “ to-morrows ” which were to see us entrenched on
Achibaba. It was the most hopeless and the least successful.
No sooner, indeed, were we dug in, than the Turks drove back
the French on the right almost to Sedd-el-bahr, and two Drake
companies* had to be withdrawn from the firing line to guard
* With them went Commander Campbell; Major Barker, R.M.L.I. (the
adjutant), was left in command in the front line. This fine officer was un-
fortunately killed by a shell during the night.
y*
99
The May Battles


General Hunter Weston’s headquarters above “ W ” beach.
So little had we broken the Turkish resistance.
While the battle of the 28th was in progress, the remainder
of the R.N.D. transports were ordered to Gaba Tepe to disem-
bark the Marine Brigade (Brigadier-General C. Trotman,
R.M.L.1.) and the Ist Naval Brigade (Brigadier-General D.
Mercer, R.M.L.1.). These Brigades, each only two battalions
strong (for the Plymouth and Drake Battalions remained with
the Anson attached to the 29th Division), were to reinforce the
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps.*
The losses at Cape Helles in the attack of the 28th made the
reinforcements of that front no less imperative; and as soon as
the disembarkations at Anzac were completed (by about *8
p.m. on the 29th) the transports were ordered back to Cape
Helles for the disembarkation there of the Divisional and 2nd
Brigade Headquarters, and the Hood and Howe Battalions. At
the same time was disembarked the bearer sub-division of
3rd Field Ambulance under Surgeon Rivers, R.N. The 2nd
Brigade was now concentrated under Commodore Backhouse,
R.N., and was placed in corps reserve under General Hunter
Weston; the Drake and Plymouth Battalions were assigned to
beach duties, and General Paris temporarily had no executive
responsibilities. This was a disappointment for the Division.
It was also the deliberate, though inevitable, throwing away of
a fighting organization, which, had circumstances allowed of its
employment as a whole on the southern front immediately after
the first landing, might possibly have helped to achieve an
historic success.
The fighting value of the Division for subsequent operations
was inevitably weakened by the decisions taken on April
28th and 29th. By the time it was re-formed, many officers,
many men, had become casualties, yet the sacrifices made
had gone but a little way to the formation of a fighting
tradition. The tradition came in time, but if it is asked why
the Naval Division never in Gallipoli achieved the same repu-
tation which it held later in France, the answer is, not that it
was better trained in 1916 than in 1915 (it was, but not
relatively to other new divisions), but that the fruits of its
first period of training at Blandford were never gathered,
* The story of the early days at Anzac and the doings of these brigades is
told in the next chapter.
100
The Royal Naval Division


but scattered to the winds at the bidding of an imperious
necessity which was imposed on the Dardanelles army by
the superior tactics of the enemy. He had succeeded in coun-
tering our strategy by fighting south of Achibaba a series of
brilliantly effective rearguard actions, and so preventing the
junction of the two halves of our force. Our failure in this
respect carried with it the division of our slender, and therefore
indivisible, reserve.
The release of the remaining battalions of this reserve to
reinforce General Hunter Weston had not been premature, for
on the night of May lst-2nd the great Turkish counter-attack
against our southern line was launched. Abandoning their
usual tactics, presumably because of the failure of our
advance on the 28th and the consequent easing off of our
pressure, the Turks came on with determination, their first
line without ammunition that they should rely solely on the
bayonet.
The 2nd Naval Brigade were bivouacking at this time
among the derelict trenches taken from the Turks in the first
advance from “W ” beach. This was the corps reserve line.
The Turkish attack broke out at 10.30 p.m., and the brigade,
called out by the Brigade-Major, Lt.-Colonel Maxwell, at once
moved off. The Anson Battalion was sent up independently
to support the French on the extreme right of the line, and the
Hood and Howe Battalions went into support trenches across
the Achibaba nullah. Thus it was, on this night, that Commo-
dore Backhouse established his headquarters for the first time
at (or at least near) the point in the nullah known throughout
the campaign as Backhouse Post, and that the men of the Naval
Division for the first time set their feet in that strange valley,
which was to be the scene of so many of their more laborious
exploits, of so much tragedy and suffering, of sacrifices so
freely exacted. Along that mile and a half of scrub and
heather was already formed the dusty track which runs from
Skew Bridge, when the bed of the mountain stream turns
north to Achibaba, past Backhouse Post, and into the glade
beyond. Across the glade, not half-way up, and on the
higher ground to the left, where the 86th Brigade was stand-
ing fast against the Turkish attack, the front line now lay.
The shelling and the rifle and machine-gun fire was heavy
still, the trenches afforded but little cover, and the casualties
101
The May Battles


were considerable. By dawn, however, the front was quiet,
and only small bodies of the enemy could be seen falling back
on a wide stretch of front. With the exception of Cox’s
Indian Brigade, just landed, all the reserves had been drawn
into the line, which even then was but thinly held; but it was
decided to counter-attack, and at 10 a.m. the whole line moved
forward.
The essential conditions of success were lacking, and the
Hood and Howe Battalions found themselves engaged in a
futile and hopeless task. Advancing up the gully, and on
the left, with the greatest resolution, their casualties made
it essential to dig in, if at all, not more than four hundred
yards in advance of the old position. Seeing them halt and
not knowing the reason, a General some distance behind the
line sent up reinforcements. These were the 2nd Hampshire
Regiment, and this fine battalion came up under heavy fire
with a smartness and precision which was a remarkable example,
not lost on the Naval battalions, of the power of discipline
and training to rise superior to the most disastrous conditions.
As they came up, however, the enemy artillery not unnaturally
increased their activity, and Lt.-Colonel Quilter had no alter-
native but to order the Hood to fall back. The Hampshires
retired at the same time and for the same reason. The Howe
Battalion conformed. What such an order means to men
fighting their first fight in the open is not hard to imagine.
It is pleasant to recall that Charles Lister, who was wounded
in this unfortunate engagement, was able to write home that
the men in his brigade “ showed great steadiness for raw
troops.” Much good work was done also by the bearer sub-
division of the 3rd Field Ambulance, and by Surgeon Shaw
and Sergeant Roberts (C section) in particular, in withdrawing
the wounded from the advanced position. But Sir lan Hamilton
has written the true epitaph of this operation, which came to
an inconclusive end along the whole British front, when he
says it “ was half heroic, half lamentable.”
In the evening of the 2nd, the Naval battalions were with-
drawn to their bivouacs on “ W ” beach, near the Drake
Battalion ; but on the night of the 3rd the Turks renewed their
attack on the French, and the Anson was again called on to
go to the support of their extreme left flank. In this position
they stayed throughout the 3rd and 4th, fighting continuously
102
The Royal Naval Division


and doing much to restore the confidence of the French native
troops, who had not as yet got acclimatized to the strange
conditions. For their fine work with the Anson at this time,
Lieut. Davidson and Lieut. Warwick were awarded the D.S.C.
The part played by the Anson Battalion in the first days of the
campaign has not received due recognition. They had been
fighting at this time almost continuously since the landings, in
three of which they had taken part, and in the intervals had been
employed on fatigue duties. If their share in the heavy fight-
ing of April 25th had been less arduous than that of the 29th
Division, their intervals of leisure since then had been even fewer.
On the sth, the Anson was withdrawn from the front
line trenches, but neither for this nor for the other naval
battalions was there any rest in store. After the fruitless
attacks of May 2nd, Brd and 4th,* General Liman von Sanders
decided to revert to the defensive, and the result was soon
evident in numerous working parties busily strengthening the
Krithia line throughout the 4th and sth. In these circum-
stances, it was decided to make one more effort to reach and
engage the main body of the enemy before they were finally
secure in their defences. To reinforce the British troops,
seriously depleted by casualties, an Australian and a New
Zealand Brigade were brought from Anzac to Cape Helles. These
two Brigades, and a Composite Brigade consisting of the Drake
and Plymouth Battalions of the Naval Division and the Ist
Lancashire Fusiliers, under the command of Lt.-Colonel Casson,
C.M.G., were formed into a Composite Division operated by
the Naval Division staff and under the command of General
Paris : a Brigade of the 42nd Division (arriving from Egypt,
but not yet concentrated) was attached to the 29th Division,
and the 2nd Naval Brigade, under Commodore Backhouse,
was lent to General D’Amade. The Composite Division, less
the Composite Naval Brigade, and Cox’s Indian Brigade were
placed in reserve ; the troops for the attack were the 29th
Division (with the Brigade of the 42nd Division attached)
on the left, the Composite Naval Brigade in the centre, and the
French Expeditionary Corps (with the 2nd R. N. Brigade
attached) on the right.
This was a stronger attacking line with more adequate
* It was during the fighting on this day that Lieutenant M. D. Campbell,
R.N.V.R., of the Howe Battalion, was killed.
103
The May Battles


reserves than on April 28th. But it must have been expected
that the enemy would be reinforced to an equal extent, and they
were known to have strengthened their defences. Moreover,
the problem which faced us on the 28th, the problem of dealing
with the scattered enemy rearguards without exposing our
whole force to merciless fire from concealed machine guns,
still remained for solution; although we had now a few more
guns, we had not sufficient to put down anything in the nature
of an intensive bombardment in depth. Nevertheless, the
orders for the battle as planned for May 6th, gave the main
enemy position in front of Krithia as the first objective only,
and actually contemplated two further phases. In the second,
the 29th Division on the left was to push forward to two hills
to the west and north-west of Krithia, and so enforce a Turkish
retreat from Krithia itself. In the third, the whole force was
to close in on Achibaba from west, south-west and south
simultaneously.
We read these orders with a certain surprise.
Sir lan Hamilton had suggested (as before the battle
of the 28th) that the advance should be made at night, or,
at any rate, that the troops should be led to assembly positions
in advance of the line held by them, with a view to an attack
at dawn. The Corps Commander was determined, however,
on a daylight operation, though half an hour’s spasmodic bom-
bardment from some fifty eighteen-pounders was all that could
be afforded : the plea was the shortage of regular officers and
of trained troops. The plea was perhaps hardly adequate,
for, if it was impossible to make even a local advance by night
because of the inexperience of the troops, why should day-
light (with its accompaniment of aimed fire) enable the same
officers and men to achieve the spectacular success which the
orders foreshadowed ?
The battle opened at 11 a.m., the first advance being made
by the French on the right and the 29th Division on the left,
and in the centre, up the Achibaba (right centre) and Krithia
(left centre) nullahs, by the Composite Naval Brigade, under
General Paris’s orders, and the 2nd R. N. Brigade, under the
orders of General D’Amade. The 2nd Brigade was originally
intended to advance merely in support of the French, but, at
the last minute, a change was made, and on the French left
the Hood and Anson Battalions (with which was one platoon
104
The Royal Naval Division


of “ A ” Company Howe, under Lt.-Commander Waller, who
did excellent work throughout the day) and the French
advanced in alternate lines. On the Composite
Brigade front, the advance was carried out by the Ist Lancashire
Fusiliers (attached from the 29th Division), the orders being
for the Drake (and, if necessary, the Plymouth Marines) to
follow up any advance, and consolidate the ground gained.
By 12.30, the Hood and Anson Battalions reported an
advance of 600 yards, and had passed the Turkish advanced
trenches by the White House ; the Lancashire Fusiliers had
made slower progress, owing to shrapnel fire and the necessity
for keeping in touch, not only with the 2nd Naval Brigade,
but with the 88th Brigade. On the extreme left of our line
little or no progress had been made, and the French advance was
also disappointing. By 3 p.m. the advance, which at no point
had got near the Turkish main positions, seemed to be every-
where held, and at 3.30 p.m. the Hood and Anson were definitely
ordered by General D’Amade not to advance further, as the
rest of the force could make no progress along the Kereves
Dere ridge. An hour and a half later the whole line received
the same orders, and the Drake went forward to dig in on a
line joining the Hood left with the 29th Division right. This
was done and a gap which had existed for some hours between
the Lancashire Fusiliers and the 88th Brigade was reported
as filled by the Drake at 8 p.m. Fighting between the French
and the 29th Division, the Naval Battalions, in their first
serious engagement, had actually achieved the most substantial
advance recorded, and could look forward with confidence to
the renewal of the battle. But from a wider standpoint the
day’s fighting was disappointing. An Army Corps had been
easily held by the Turkish outposts, and we were not yet
within striking distance of their main position. The Naval
Brigade had encountered plenty of opposition at long range,
but each position when reached had been found to be empty,
and no connected position had been captured or even
approached.
And yet, though the losses had been heavy and the strain
severe, the attack must continue.
The next day, the advance began on the left only and,
after fluctuating fortunes, looked like failing definitely by 3 p.m.
In these circumstances, a general attack was ordered, the New
105
The May Battles


Zealand Brigade being detached for the purpose from the
Composite Division and sent over to the extreme left, where
our failure had been most complete. The 2nd Naval Brigade
under General D’Amade and the Composite Naval Brigade
under General Paris had each the same task in this attack,
to keep in touch with each other and with the flanks. The
Composite Brigade had had this task before it all day, and,
with the object of rendering it simpler, had been reorganized
with the Ist Lancashire Fusiliers next to the 88th Brigade
and the Drake on the right next to Commodore Backhouse’s
Brigade (who now held their front with the Howe and Anson,
the Hood being in reserve). Commander Campbell was in
charge of the Composite Brigade front line. *
The new attack opened at 4.45 and, except again on the
extreme left, met with some success. The French progress,
however, along the Kereves Dere ridge was slow, and no sub-
stantial advance was possible for the Naval or Composite
Brigades. The Lancashire Fusiliers’ front was indeed, in the
end, 800 yards in rear of that of the 88th Brigade when the
fighting died down at sunset; the gap was covered by machine
guns. The net result of the day’s fighting was a slight advance
by the French and the 2nd Naval Brigade, and a gain of some
300 yards by the right and centre of the 29th Division:
between that Division and the Naval Brigade was the Compo-
site Brigade. Throughout a long and trying day, Commander
Campbell had been responsible for maintaining communication
between the two forces advancing unequal distances at
different times, and, for his successful conduct of this in-
conspicuous but essential operation he was awarded the
D.S.O. on the recommendation of the Composite Brigade
commander.
The dawn of May Bth saw yet another advance attempted,
and repulsed on our left. The outlook was dark, especially
as the French professed themselves for tactical reasons unable
to undertake a further attack until the British had achieved
a distinct advance; but the battle thus launched was not to
be allowed to close with so signal a defeat. To offer battle
may have been premature ; but once offered it must be fought
to a finish, and Sir lan Hamilton determined to throw in the
last of his reserves, the Australian Brigade, so as to help the
French. If the left flank could not advance (though one
106
The Royal Naval Division


further effort was to be made, this time by the 87th Brigade),
the right must be securely lodged on the Kereves Dere ridge
before the troops could rest on their gains.
The final assault was ordered for 5 p.m., the main attack to
be delivered by the comparatively fresh Australian Brigade
of General Paris’s Division in the centre, with the 29th
Division and the New Zealand Brigade on the left, and the
French on the right. This time only a quarter of an hour’s
bombardment was possible, but at last the pertinacity of the
Commander and the finer endurance of the troops met with
their reward. Well might the Turks, called on to resist four
general attacks in two days, presume that they had broken
their enemy’s will to victory. But they presumed in vain.
As ever the allied armies were as irresistible in the face of defeat
as they were ineffective in the organization of victory.
The chief honour of the fight went to the Australians and
the French, the former advancing, with an impetuous courage
which recalled and explained the “ Anzac ” landing, for a
distance of at least 600 yards, while the latter swarmed up
the southern face of the Kereves Dere ridge, capturing the
redoubt which had held them up for nearly three days and
consolidating the position on which (though it would have
cheered few to realize it at the time) our right flank was to rest
throughout the campaign. But the Naval and Composite
Brigades had their part to play. The Hood and Howe
Battalions, advancing behind the French, came up into line with
and prolonged their left, and two companies of the Drake
Battalion, under Lieut. Cherry, R.N.V.R., closed the gap
between them and the Australians at a critical moment when
at 8.15 p.m., the Turks were breaking through in force. At
1.15 a.m., the Plymouth Marines were moved up and came
into line between the Drake Battalion and the Australians.
Throughout the night and the next day, the work of con-
solidation, the evacuation of the wounded,* many of whom
were in, or in, front of, our first line, and the replenishment of
supplies, had to be carried out under heavy fire and over
ground wholly exposed to view.
On the morning of the 9th, the 2nd Brigade suffered a
* In this work Surgeon Rivers (3rd Field Ambulance), Surgeon Ballance
(Anson), Surgeon Schlesinger (Howe) and Surgeon McCracken (Hood) did most
brilliant and gallant service.
107
The May Battles


severe loss through the death of Lt.-Colonel Maxwell, the
Brigade Major, who was killed from close range while recon-
noitring the Turkish positions in front of our line. To his
experience and enthusiasm, this brigade, during their months
of training as well as in their first engagements, owed incal-
culably much.
Even now, though we were consolidating our line, the
Turks had no continuous positions within 500 yards of our
front, and to harass us in our work (which they did
with never-failing effect until we had the whole organization
of trench warfare in working order) relied chiefly on concealed
machine-guns and snipers, and on shelling the back areas and
our still open communciations. Some of these snipers had
actually been found behind our lines, but by this time generally
they were a little in front of it. The accuracy of their aim,
even at long range, was amazing. Many fantastic stories were
told of these men, but no very supernatural skill, though the
most undoubted courage, was required for a sniper to conceal
himself in the long grass and scrub which still covered the face
of the peninsula. “ Sniper drives ” became in these circum-
stances an essential form of warfare, and many fine exploits,
spoken of at the time, must be omitted here only because in
the confusion and constant anxiety of those days no written
reports of such minor operations were submitted. Particularly
fine work of this kind was done, however, by Lieut. Magrath,
R.N.V.R., and Sub-Lieut. McHardy, of the Drake Battalion;
and Petty Officer W. Mason of the same battalion was men-
tioned in despatches for his gallantry on May 9th in bringing
in two men of his battalion wounded in an operation of this
character.*
At dawn on May 10th a counter-attack of exceptional
vigour was delivered by the Turks against the French and
the Naval Battalion on their left. For a time the situation
was critical, but in the end the position was restored, on the
Composite Brigade front, largely through the initiative of
Captain Tetley (Plymouth Marines), who led his company in
a counter-attack when the enemy were on the point of breaking
through.
* Distinguished service was also rendered in the May operations by Lt.-
Commander Boissier, R.N.V.R. (Howe Battalion), who received the D.S.C.
C.P.O. Toy, of the same battalion, was awarded the Good Conduct Medal at the
same time.
108
The Royal Naval Division


So ended the first engagement in which the Naval Division
took a substantial and determining part on the peninsula.
The quality of the services rendered by these inexperienced
battalions can best be gauged from the tribute paid to the
2nd Naval Brigade by General D’Amade, in a letter to Sir lan
Hamilton, written on the receipt of the Commander-in-Chief’s
orders on May 10th that the Brigade was to revert to General
Paris’s command. General D’Amade himself read his letter
to the Brigade when he inspected them in their rest camp
a few days later. It ran as follows :
“ In accordance with your orders I am returning the 2nd
Naval Brigade to the Composite Division. It is my pleasant
duty to place on record how much I have appreciated the
brilliant military qualities, the devotion to duty, the courage
and the intrepidity of the three valiant battalions —Anson,
Howe and Hood—of which it is composed. It is a great honour
and a great satisfaction to me to have had during the 6th,
7th, Bth and 9th of May the devoted, active and ever-ready
collaboration of Commodore Backhouse, an officer who has
inspired his troops with those noble qualities to which every
French soldier who has seen them at work renders homage.”
Allowing for all the requirements of international courtesy,
it is reasonable to assume that the battalions to whom such a
tribute was paid, had at the least, shown themselves fully com-
petent to engage in active operations of a character more
trying than is even at this date readily appreciated. And the
Drake and Plymouth Battalions, fighting side by side with
Commodore Backhouse’s Brigade, had made almost identical
progress under the same conditions.
The evening of May 10th marked our firm establishment
on the peninsula, not only south of Achibaba but, as we shall
see in the next chapter, at Anzac ; it marked also, and equally
definitely, the. end of the first phase of the Gallipoli Campaign,
and the definite failure of the plan for concentrating the entire
force against the Kilid Bahr plateau before either part of
it was pinned to its ground by the Turkish reserves.
In these circumstances, a reconsideration by the Govern-
ment of the chances of the campaign was essential, and Sir lan
Hamilton at once submitted to the War Office a revised estimate
109
The May Battles


of his requirements in men, guns, stores and ammunition.
Any precise calculation of our chances of success, had these
reinforcements been immediately forthcoming, is merely guess-
work, but it is certain that they would have been at least
more favourable than at the beginning of August, when the
reinforcements ultimately arrived. Before that time in the costly
war of positions, which could not, it was felt, be allowed entirely
to die down (though some argue that this would have been
wiser), and still more from climatic disease which inactivity
might only have made worse, our original landing force had been
irremediably depleted. At the time, however, prospects seemed
less dubious, for our victory had at least, though at a heavy
cost, won for us a sort of security failing which we must, without
a doubt, have withdrawn. It would have been impossible to
keep an army corps indefinitely in an area so exposed as that
occupied by us on the 28th April. Now, though our advance
had been at the most three quarters of a mile and in places
less, we had got astride of the different nullahs, and had won
a considerable belt of country, whose occasional trees provided
a substantial measure of protection. The result was cover
from view for our infantry and guns and reasonably safe
communication with our front line positions.
To reach even thus far, the Naval Division, though less
hotly engaged than the 29th, had lost heavily. Colonel Quilter
of the Hood Battalion, one of the most distinguished and
popular officers in the Division, and, of the Anson Battalion,
Lieut.-Commander Anderson (who had led the beach party
at Implacable landing), Lieutenant Duncan, Sub-Lieut, Bryan
Melland and Sub-Lieut. Tisdall (whose heroism at the “ V ”
beach landing yet awaited recognition) had been killed early
on May 6th, in the first advance of the Naval Division up the
Achibaba nullah. Later, in the same engagement, Lieut.-Com-
mander Waller of the Howe Battalion, Lieutenant M. D. Cherry
and Lieutenant Edgar of the Drake and Captain B. Andrews
and Lieutenant Barnes of the Plymouth Battalion had fallen,
the last two in the Turkish counter-attack on May 10th. The
losses in non-commissioned officers and men were also severe,
and the five battalions south of Achibaba had been reduced
to an average strength of barely 500 officers and men
when, on May 10th (the 2nd Naval Brigade being then with-
drawn from General D’Amade’s command), they came once
110
The Royal Naval Division


more under General Paris’s command. The battalions could
not, however, yet be withdrawn from the line, and with the
Cyclist Company and some Motor Machine Gun detachments
they were formed, during May 10th, into a new Composite Brigade
and put into the line between the Australians and the French
left which had been withdrawn. This Brigade and the Aus-
tralian Brigade remained as a composite Division under General
Paris till the whole was relieved by the 42nd Division on the
12th, and the Naval battalions withdrew to bivouacs south-
west of Achibaba nullah.
There, with battalions already so dangerously weakened.
General Paris waited for the long-delayed concentration of his
Division, to be completed by the return of his two brigades
from Anzac, and the arrival of the Hawke, Benbow and Colling-
wood Battalions and the third field company of Engineers
now on their way from England.
The narrow plain shut in between the sea, the Straits and
the curved lines of Achibaba, which was all that we had won
at the price of so muc'h blood and treasure, was to be the home
of the Naval Division for many months, and the scene of all
the fighting it was to see on the Eastern front.
Recalling the scene in memory, as it appeared from the line
of the rest camps, which now grew up between Morto Bay and
Gully beach, the chief feature was the distinctness with which
all the prominent features of our own and the enemy position
could be noted, in the course of an hour’s walk across the
peninsula.
Standing to the north of Morto Bay, a little way inland, you
see only an expanse of rocky plain, broken here and there by a
small patch of cultivated ground leading up to the skyline, which
is the ridge overlooking the Kereves Dere. On the side of the
Straits, the view was bounded, as everywhere on the peninsula,
by the cliff line, so that you could not see the Straits or Asia —
unless you stood on the very edge (a fact which saved many
lives during the campaign); and on the other side, by a belt
of wood beyond a valley of shrub and fruit trees, narrowing
gradually to form the Achibaba nullah. Between the cliffs
and the valley (less than a mile) was the French sector.
Turning to the left to walk across the peninsula, you struck
the end of the valley, where, by the side of the small stream
which runs down from the nullah, the Naval Division made


their first advance on May 2nd, and advanced again, and with
greater success, in the battles of the 6th to the Bth. In the later
days of the campaign, the men of the Division came up and down
the valley daily, going between the rest camps and the trenches.
The way from the rest camps was marked for them by a line
of ruined towers, ruined before the war, more ruinous now,
but which still challenged the assaults of time and the violence
of man with mighty memories. For these towers were the
ruins of a Roman aqueduct, which had carried the waters of the
uplands from the same Achibaba to an earlier Sedd-el-bahr.
Coming up roughly along the line of the aqueduct into the green
valley, the battalions followed the course of the stream till it
wound into the small glade, overhung with trees and memorable
for the incessant croaking of frogs, across which lay our front
line before the advance on May 6th. Beyond the glade, the
earliest regular trench system began; further on was the
White House, and further again the line reached by the Division
on May 9th. You could see nothing of these trench lines from
the entrance to the valley, but only the sloping uplands beyond,
leading, as ever, to the inevitable symmetry of Achibaba.
On these slopes lay the main Turkish defences.
Continuing westwards across the peninsula, you reached
higher ground, but for nearly half a mile beyond Achibaba
nullah the country was more thickly wooded, clusters of olive
trees shutting out your view on all sides. Among these trees
were the first settled bivouacs of the Naval Division, and, under
the largest clump, General Paris’s Divisional Headquarters.
So small, however, was the area sheltered by these trees that
those battalions which arrived last inevitably bivouacked
beyond the sheltered zone, in full view of the enemy on the
edge of the open plain. Here the scene changes, and you can
look across almost unbroken ground to the coast-line of the
Aegean sea, two and a half miles ahead. Not only this, but
the country is open to the north to Achibaba (except for some
trees bordering Gully ravine), and to the south to Sedd-el-bahr.
Down the middle of the plain runs the main road from Krithia,
the village which can be seen for the first time on the south-
west slope of Achibaba, to Sedd-el-bahr on the sky-line in the
extreme south.
Walking on a little and then turning to face Achibaba,
you could follow the line of the main enemy position along the
112
The Royal Naval Division


southern slopes of the hill, through Krithia, and then, turning
back again with the curve of the hill, to the coast-line in the
western distance. Across that expanse of level and unshel-
tered country, broken only by the Krithia nullah and Gully
ravine, the army had to advance if it was to turn the Turkish
position from the left.
At this time in May the plain was still green and smiling
in the sun, as when it first burst on English eyes on April 25th.
Later, except for the trees and shrubs, the peninsula, worn
down by the passing of thousands of men, and the endless coming
and going of transport from the beaches to the camps, became
a bare sandy waste. In time it was worse than that. On
three sides the plain rises slightly towards the coast; on the
fourth side it culminates in the domed height of Achibaba.
In this there came to be realized a certain symbolism. The
army was indeed caught between the hill and sea; it could
go neither backward nor forward. The plain, for all its
openness, was a prison, which became a tomb.
8
113
The May Battles


CHAPTER VII
THE DEFENCE OF ANZAC
WE must now turn to the northern zone, where the Aus-
tralian and New Zealand Army Corps, reinforced,
as we have seen, by two weak brigades of the Naval Division,
had been fighting as desperately to maintain a bare foothold
on the peninsula, as had the forces south of Achibaba to extend
their gains. The casualties of two Australian Divisions, during
the first two days’ fighting, amounted to more than 5,000
officers and men. And withal, the generals on the spot were
not confident of their ability to retain their hold on the position.
They held it, but the result was due only to the fighting capacity
of the individual officers and men. For all their gallantry,
the Australians and New Zealanders had, even by April 28th,
reached no naturally defensible position, and the only alter-
native to evacuation was to set about the systematic construc-
tion, under fire, and in face of continuous attacks, of an
impromptu fortress, the garrison of which would have to
maintain, in effect, a siege, until they were substantially rein-
forced; or until such time as the encircling enemy might
be diverted by pressure from our forces in the south or
elsewhere.
Seeing that it was necessary in any event to remain tem-
porarily on the defensive, it may be thought that the slender
reserves available from the Naval Division would have been
better employed somewhere else, but the conditions of the first
three days’ fighting on this front had in fact led to such a
measure of confusion, that it had become urgently necessary
to rest and reorganize the Dominion divisions unit by unit.
Till this had been done there could be no security, and
security was essential, at least while we were still fighting
for elbow room south of Achibaba.
The position held by the Australians and New Zealanders,


on the evening of the 28th, consisted of a strip of beach (known
to history as Anzac cove) more than half a mile south of the
intended landing-place at Gaba Tepe, of the ridge dominating
it (named Maclagan’s Ridge, after the leader of the first assault
which had carried it), and of the inland heights on either side
of Deep Gully, running north-west from the coast, immediately
south of Maclagan’s Ridge for a distance of a mile and a half.
The heights on the left of the gully (known as the Sphinx,
Walker’s Ridge and Russell Top) were in our hands, and
between these and the Turkish positions further to the north-
west was a wide valley. The left of our position was thus
already reasonably secure. Not so our centre and our right.
The heights east of the gully, divided by innumerable narrow,
but often precipitous, ravines into as many separate features,
had been fiercely contested, and on the different plateaux,
covered with tangled undergrowth and rock, the Turks and
Australians still lay face to face actually within bombing range.
Not here, as on the left, had our foothold on the heights forced
the enemy to retreat, nor throughout the campaign did we
ever appreciably loosen his hold of these, his first positions.
In the centre, at the head of the gully, the position was
even worse. About a mile from the coast, the gully is split in
two by a spur (known as Pope’s Hill), running out from the
line of hills, which, facing Maclagan’s Ridge, formed the
northern defensive position of the Turks. On the eastern edge
of Pope’s Hill the Turks were entrenched, and they thus com-
manded the heights on either side of the eastern arm of the
ravine as well as the high ground at its head. Only on the
western edge of the spur had the Australians a foothold, and
even here we had no defensive position covering the head of
the ravine, and no cover, even from view, from the enemy
position on the heights to the north-west.
The first Naval Division units to land were the Marine
Brigade,* the Ist Field Ambulance (Staff Surgeon Fleming,
R.N.), and .No. 1 Field Company of the Divisional Engineers
(Major Morgans, R.M.). The Engineers distinguished them-
selves in their first nine hours under fire by constructing
the main road from the beach to the reserve position on
Maclagan’s Ridge. The Portsmouth and Chatham Battalions
* 1.e., the Portsmouth and Chatham Battalions. The Plymouth Battalion
was still attached to the 29th Division.
8*


moved at once into the front-line trenches on the right
of the gully. The position allotted comprised the posts which
afterwards became famous under the names of Quinn’s and
Courtney’s Posts, and covered the approach to the gully
from the east. The intention was to relieve the 4th Australian
Brigade, but the sector was greater than could be defended by
two battalions, even under normal conditions; and all that
could be done was to occupy parts of it, and enable a tentative
beginning to be made with the Australian reorganization.
The next day (the 29th) more progress was made, for General
Mercer’s Ist Brigade* was landed, and the Deal Battalion was
brought into the line on General Trotman’s left. The Nelson
Battalion remained in reserve. *
The general conditions were very different from those
which the organizing capacity of the trained Staff of the 29th
Division had brought about at Cape Helles. On the beach
the crowd and confusion had been astonishing. So great,
indeed, was the intermixture of units, and the number of men
moving about independently on errands of which they alone
knew the nature, that it was extremely difficult to assemble
even a platoon and march it off. The difficulty in assembling
a battalion, landed in open boats, was correspondingly greater.
When it had been surmounted, it was necessary to climb the
steep hills leading from the beach to the south of Maclagan’s
Ridge, and cross the main gully. Here were no organized
lines of reinforcement or supply, no resting-places for the
reserve formations; but every possible piece of level ground
had been appropriated by individuals of different units, many
of them resting where they had fallen asleep involuntarily
after the exertions of three days’ continuous fighting. In the
darkness it was impossible to tell what places were fully exposed
to the view of the enemy. The result to the Nelson Battalion
—the only battalion not in the firing line from the start—
was that their labours on the construction of dug-outs during
the night of the 29th-30th proved in the morning to be fruitless.
The sides of the gully were rocky, and what, in the wet
season, was the bed of a mountain stream, was now the only
path which the landscape offered. On the upper slopes, thickly
covered with arbutus, dwarf oaks, and other shrubs, the
* This brigade also comprised only two battalions. The Drake Battalion
was already engaged at Cape Helles.
116
The Royal Naval Division


passage of men had, indeed, worn narrow tracks, but these
were not serviceable, and merely showed the least dangerous
line of approach for individuals to the firing line. This was
nothing but a series of hastily-dug posts, untraversed, un-
wired, broken with the wreckage of battle, scarred with
the marks of intensive bombardment, just a series of foot-
holds on the edge of the plateau, but defending the life-line
of the Anzac position. The ground in front of the trenches
was covered with thick scrub, broken by small depressions and
ravines. Beyond it was another gorge, similar to the gully
which formed the centre of the Anzac position. Here were
the Turkish reserves, and from here on to and across the
plateau there was a constant movement of the enemy. Even
when the utmost energy and skill had been spent on the
fortification of our trenches, the situation at this point
remained dangerous, and this key position could only be
maintained throughout the campaign by hand-to-hand fighting
of a desperate character.
The three Marine Battalions remained in these trenches
till May 2nd, fighting being more or less continuous the whole
time. The novelty of the conditions, and the entire lack of a
disciplined organization of the defences, imposed a strain on
raw troops which led inevitably to one or two unfortunate
incidents. There is no room for doubt, however, that in
general great resolution and a very high degree of gallantry
distinguished the defence of the posts by the Marine Battalions
during these days, when the first V.C. was won from the ranks
of the Division (by Lance-Corporal Parker, of the Portsmouth
Battalion), and very severe losses were incurred. The official
record of Lance-Corporal Parker’s exploits gives an indication
of the character of the fighting on a day when, according to
Mr. Philip Schuler, “ a comparative calm stole over Anzac.”
One must presume that it stole so quietly as to be unobserved.
“ On the night of April 30th-May Ist, 1915, a message
asking for ammunition, water and medical stores was received
from an isolated fire trench at Gaba Tepe. A party of non-
commissioned officers and men were detailed to carry water
and ammunition, and, in response to a call for a volunteer
from among the stretcher-bearers, Parker at once came for-
ward ; he had, during the previous three days, displayed
117
The Defence of Anzac


conspicuous bravery and energy under fire, whilst in charge
of the battalion stretcher-bearers. Several men had already
been killed in a previous attempt to bring assistance to the
men holding the fire trench. To reach this trench, it was
necessary to traverse an area at least four hundred yards wide,
which was completely exposed, and swept by rifle fire. It was
already daylight when the party emerged from shelter, and
at once one of the men was wounded. Parker organized a
stretcher-party, and then, going on alone, succeeded in reaching
the fire trench, all the water and ammunition carriers being
either killed or wounded. After his arrival, he rendered
assistance to the wounded in the trench, displaying extreme
courage, and remaining cool and collected in very trying cir-
cumstances. The trench had finally to be evacuated, and
Parker helped to remove and attend the casualties, though he
himself was seriously wounded during the operation.”
Of the two officers in charge of this trench, Lieutenant
Empson was killed, and Lieutenant Alcock conducted a fine
defence for four nights and three days (during which period
no adequate supplies could be brought up), before he was forced
to withdraw, owing to shortage of ammunition. For this, and
other services, this officer was mentioned in Sir lan Hamilton’s
dispatch of 12th June, 1915, and was awarded the D.S.O.
The same dispatch contains the names of Lt.-Colonel Luard,
Major J. A. M. Clark, Major H. G. B. Armstrong,* Captain
D. J. Gowney, D.S.C., and Lieutenant W. R. Sanders, of the
Portsmouth Battalion, all of whom did fine work in these opera-
tions. Surgeon Playne, of this battalion, also rendered the
most conspicuous service, and was awarded the D.S.O.
On the night of April 30th, an attack was carried out by
“ B ” Company of the Chatham Battalion, who had been driven
out of a portion of their line a little earlier. The position lost
was retaken, though with considerable loss. Lieutenant Her-
ford, who had succeeded to the command of the company,
was killed, and Lieutenant Watts (Battalion Machine Gun
Officer) was wounded. The next day (May Ist) the Turks
came back to the attack, but were repulsed.'j' In this fighting
* Major Armstrong was killed in action on May 6th when his battalion was
again in the line on this front.
t In the defence of this position Lieutenant J. Cheetham, R.M.L.1., was con-
spicuous, and, for his courage and initiative, was awarded the D.S.O.


the Marines suffered a severe loss in the death of Sergeant-
Major Hayward, the Regimental Sergeant-Major of the
Chatham Battalion.
The Marines were relieved on May 2nd. The reorganization
of the Australian and New Zealand Corps was now completed,
and the position was appreciably more secure. This was due
less, perhaps, to Mr. Schuler’s “ inexplicable calm ” during
the period from the 28th to the Ist, than to the relief which
the arrival of the two Naval Brigades gave to the main force, at
a time when the resistance of the Turks was by no means
broken, and when the position, so bravely won, could only be
maintained by equally soldierly qualities.*
On May 2nd, after a series of misunderstandings had led to
the postponement of a larger scheme, it was arranged to
attempt the capture of the heights overlooking the head of the
gully. The Naval Division troops were held in reserve for
this attack, but were called on early in the operations.
The precise objectives were Pope’s Hill and the high ground
on either side of it. Two columns were formed for the attack
of this position. On the left, the Otago (New Zealand)
Battalion was to attempt the high ground at the head of the
left arm of the gully, immediately to the west of Pope’s Hill.
On the right, the 16th Battalion was to scale the two ridges
commanding the head of the right arm of the gully. The
13th Battalion, coming up in their rear (there was no possible
line of approach up the hillside to the left of that to be taken
by the 16th Battalion), was to extend the line to the left, and
join up with the centre, where the 15th (Australian) Battalion,
garrisoning Pope’s Hill, was to make a sortie and push forward
an advance line in touch with the Otago Battalion.
In general support in the gully, were the three Marine
Battalions under General Trotman. Two companies of the
Nelson Battalion were in Brigade reserve to Colonel Monash,
who was in command of the Australian and New Zealand
troops detailed for the operation.
* In this early fighting, in addition to those previously mentioned, Lt.-
Colonel R. N. Bendyshe, R.M.L.1., Major G. F. Muller, R.M.L.L, Lieutenant
J. F. Moxham, R.M. and Lieutenant K. A. Higgins, R.M. of the Deal Battalion,
and Captain J. C. Teague, R.M.L.1., Lieutenant C. J. Black, R.M. and 2nd Lieut.
D. H. G. Ferguson, R.M. of the Portsmouth Battalion, were killed. The death
of so many experienced officers at the outset of the campaign was a grevious
loss to the Marine Brigade. Major Tupman, R.M.L.I. (so well known later as
Brigade Major to the Ist R.N. Brigade), succeeded now to the command of the
Deal Battalion.
119
The Defence of Anzac


The assaulting columns were timed to reach the fringe of
the hills to the right and left of Pope’s Hill at, approximately,
8 p.m. From thence, they were to move forward to the assault
of the Turkish trenches on the forward slopes.
The shades of night, always so confidently and justly
reckoned on to bring relief to troops acting on the defensive,
were particularly helpful to the Turks on this occasion, for
the position attacked was in the form of a semicircle, with
the Australians attacking from the centre. The columns
necessarily advanced by routes separated by nearly half a
mile, and they found themselves, when they had got within
striking distance of the enemy, isolated from each other. The
16th Battalion passed through a line of trenches dug by the
Turks on the very edge of the ravine, and took up a position
a little way beyond, to enable the 13th Battalion to move to
their left and join up with the troops in the centre. The 13th
Battalion, late in starting, were late in arriving in position,
and appear never to have made touch, either with the 16th
Battalion or with the troops on their left. But, without hesita-
tion, the battalions each endeavoured to advance.
We must not imagine the scene as an orderly and well-
appointed battle, with the opposing positions clearly defined.
On this rugged hill top, thickly covered with scrub and dotted
with rock, Turks and Australians, losing all organization, fought
a running fight for some hours. But neither the Australians
nor the New Zealanders seem ever to have reached the main
enemy position, and their hold on the plateau’s edge was but
precarious by midnight, when a huge bonfire lit by the Turks
revealed the most complete and hopeless confusion in the ranks
of the assaulting troops on the right of Pope’s Hill.
Two hundred yards or so from the edge of the gully, officers
had set to work constructing a support line, and this appears
to have been manned with some degree of method. Ahead,
some hundreds of yards nearer the Turkish position, the assault-
ing troops, beaten to the ground by a murderous fire, formed
what was alternatively a firing line or a covering force for the
main body behind. Between the two lines were a confused
mass of leaderless men—men from the firing line driven back,
reinforcements coming up from the gully, stragglers looking
for their units, perhaps a Turk or two caught up in the confusion
of the night battle, officers looking for orders, or for men to
120
The Royal Naval Division


obey them. The attack had failed, and in the prevailing ex-
citement the failure seems to have passed unnoticed. When
the confusion was at its height, at 2 a.m., the two companies
of the Nelson Battalion came up under orders from Colonel
Mon ash to support the 13th Battalion. While the rear platoons
of the force were still in the gully, an ill-supported local advance
was in progress, and the leading platoons of the Nelson became
involved. The attack was unsuccessful, but when the two
companies were at last concentrated, no attempt seems to have
been made to make use of these fresh troops, or of the very
numerous army of leaderless Australians wandering between
the lines, for a final assault on the main positions.
Instead, the Nelson Battalion was ordered, by the senior
officer on the right of the 13th Battalion front, to move to the
left and cover the New Zealanders (Otago Battalion), if and
when they could be found. Later, however, the Nelson were
ordered to prepare a position in rear of the 13th Battalion,
the New Zealanders not being in evidence, and no one
having any knowledge of their whereabouts (they were
actually digging in a quarter of a mile further to the left).
This was approximately at 2.30 a.m., and the Nelson companies
remained, accordingly, till dawn fruitlessly digging in with
entrenching tools in rear of the thinly-held Australian support
line. In front, the Australian firing line began to dig themselves
in at the same time. On the right of the front of attack no
greater success had been won. The position was, indeed,
ominously similar. Gallant attacks had been made, but they
had failed, and the losses among the men and also, perhaps,
to some extent the inadequate preparations, had prevented
the construction of any strong defensive line. The over-
riding weakness of the position as a whole was the isolation of
the three assaulting battalions from each other. When dawn
broke, this, and the superiority of ground still enjoyed by the
enemy, made the situation desperate. In these circumstances
the Portsmouth Battalion of Marines, in reserve in the gully,
were asked to go forward. Owing to a misunderstanding, the
request was not addressed to General Trotman, under whose
orders the battalion had remained, and, while the matter was
under discussion, the left flank of the 16th Battalion were pushed
back into the gully, spreading confusion as they retreated.
In the half-light of dawn, amid a hail of bullets coming from
121
The Defence of Anzac


every direction (for the trenches in the gully itself were under
fire from both flanks, from the front, and in places even from
the rear), with an uncertain battle raging on the very edge of
the plateau above, the rumour that the Turks were pouring
into the gully might have had disastrous results. The men
were, however, promptly rallied by the staff of General Trot-
man’s brigade, and those who had been the first to turn were
among the first to regain their self-control and to assist in
stemming the dangerous panic. Nothing, however, could save
the position on the plateau itself but the capture even at this
eleventh hour of the main Turkish trenches; and, in the belief
apparently that these trenches had, in fact, been captured
elsewhere on the battle front, and were still in our hands, the
Chatham Battalion were sent forward to attack those opposite
the sorely pressed 16th Battalion. Almost at the same time,
an ill-fated order was given, in the centre of the battle front,
for the Nelson Battalion companies to attempt, by attacking
to a flank, to protect the 13th Battalion.
The attack of the Chatham Battalion, brilliantly led by
the Adjutant, Captain Richards, R.M.L.1., was extremely
successful, and in the face of a very heavy, but not
devastating, fire, two lines of trenches were taken and, in the
first instance, held. Unfortunately, no support was now
forthcoming on either flank, and after a gallant defence of some
six hours, during which Quartermaster-Sergeant White and
Sergeant Oakey specially distinguished themselves, the position,
so finely won, had to be abandoned. With it, went our hold
on the improvised trenches dug by the Australians on the edge
of the plateau at this point.
The fate of the attack on the other sectors was in the end
the same : the Nelson Battalion companies had failed to
drive home their flanking attack (directed against an advanced
machine-gun position), and were ordered by the Australian
Commander to retire. Unfortunately, here, as on the 16th
Battalion front, the terrors of the night battle had led to a good
deal of disorganization, and here, too, something in the nature
of a temporary panic broke out. The position was, however,
restored, and the Nelson companies, rallied in the gully by
Sub-Lieut. Sowerby, returned to the 13th Australians’ trenches.
Here from 6 a.m. till dusk a memorable stand was made. By
the afternoon, when our positions on the right had been aban-
122
The Royal Naval Division


doned, it became clear that it was only a useless waste of life
to cling on in the centre to a position which could not possibly
be held against a determined assault such as its importance to
the enemy would certainly produce. But before the position
could be surrendered, countless wounded, and stores and
ammunition had to be cleared. Under constant harassing
from the enemy, this was successfully achieved, and, at 5.30,
the garrison were able to begin an exceedingly cool and well-
planned retreat, so well-planned, indeed, as to be carried out
almost without loss, although it was daylight and the enemy
were closing in on all sides.
On the extreme right of the battlefield, the Otago
Battalion had, it was learnt later, achieved much the
same measure of success and failure as the 13th Australians;
in the end they too, though some hours later, had to
retreat.
In this unfortunate engagement, the Division suffered
many serious losses. The Chatham Marines lost nearly three
hundred officers and men, killed and wounded, among the
killed being their Adjutant (Capt. Richards, whose services
since the early days of the Antwerp expedition to this last
assault had been so uniformly distinguished) and Lieutenant
Grinling. In the Portsmouth battalion, Lieutenant Sanders,
2nd Lieutenant T. A. D. Deane and 2nd Lieutenant T. H. C.
Fulton were killed while the battalion was in support on the
gully. In the Nelson Battalion the losses, in proportion to
those engaged, were even more serious. Lt.-Commander
Gibson (commanding “ B ” Company), Lieut. P. C. Garnham,
R.N.V.R., and Sub-Lieuts. Paton, Bookless, Whitaker and
Cooke were killed or mortally wounded, and Lt.-Commander
Primrose (second in command) and Lt.-Commander T. L. Price
(commanding “A ” Company), wounded. The losses in petty
officers and men were nearly two hundred.
The local results of this costly and unfortunate affair were
intangible. Heavy losses were inflicted, but they were sus-
tained, and the same factors that turned against us the balance
of advantage in the indecisive assaults at Cape Helles later
in the campaign, turned it against us here. The Turks could
relieve their tired troops and replenish their casualties, while
we could not. As at Cape Helles, however, the immediate
results were good. The Turks were put on the defensive, and
123
The Defence of Anzac


our men got breathing space for the all-important work of
consolidation and organization.
The next day a definite scheme of defence was drawn up,
under which the three main posts covering the front of the
position, on the safety of which, in view of our failure to secure
the high ground dominating the heads of the gully, our security
still depended absolutely, were placed under a united command
and organized for mutual support. The responsibility for
these historic strongholds (which came to be known as Court-
ney’s, Quinn’s and Pope’s Posts, after the officers who had
garrisoned them in the earliest days), fell, for so long as his
Brigade remained on this front (till May 12th), to Brigadier-
General Trotman, R.M.L.1., who had under his command the
Portsmouth and Chatham Battalions and the 4th Australian
Infantry Brigade.
As Mr. Schuler tells us, “ it was on the holding of these
precarious and well-nigh impossible positions in the early
days of the occupation that the whole Australian line
depended.”
Of the part which the Marine Battalions took in their defence,
during these critical days, at the very beginning of the cam-
paign, the records tell little, and published history even less.*
But it is a sufficient commentary on the part which they had
played in the earlier days of active fighting, that they were
allocated to the defence of positions of such importance. The
history of these posts throughout the campaign is a history of
desperate conflicts, sustained with equal tenacity by the enemy
and by the Australian infantrymen and the (dismounted)
Light Horse Brigade. It was a style of warfare in which indivi-
dual gallantry and resource told more than scientific training.
Yet gallantry and resource could not do more than just hold out.
From Quinn’s Post, indeed, a series of abortive assaults were
made, often with disastrous losses, and the first of them took
place while the Marine Brigade was still at Anzac, on the evening
of the 10th May. Like so many which followed it, it failed,
owing to the failure to join up of the assaulting parties, each
of which gained a lodgment in the enemy trenches. Each
party in turn was enfiladed, and forced to withdraw down the
* The Australian sources rightly concentrate on the assistance, invariably
forthcoming, which Australian units rendered to the Marine Battalions on more
than one occasion.
124
The Royal Naval Division


communication trenches, newly dug from our own to the tem-
porarily captured position.
Two days after this unsuccessful effort, the Marine Brigade
was relieved by the Light Horse Brigade, and sailed at once for
Cape Helles.*
The lot of General Mercer’s Brigade was less arduous and
responsible. This Brigade had seen little or no actual fighting,
save the two companies of the Nelson Battalion on May 2nd and
3rd; and they were sent, immediately on the conclusion of that
engagement, to relieve Australian and New Zealand troops on
the left of the position. Here, owing to the lie of the land, the
fighting was infinitely less severe ; the main enemy positions
were some hundreds of yards off, and only in the many saps,
which ran out from the opposing lines, did the forces come to
close quarters.
The sector first allotted to General Mercer’s Brigade was on
the extreme flank, partly covered from direct assault by the
Australian trenches, slightly to the north on Walker’s Ridge.
The enemy position was centred on a ridge still further to the
north, and the flat ground, immediately off the shore, was held
only by rival outposts and wire entanglements. Looking north,
indeed, from the shore at this point the whole view was open as
far as Salt Lake, and beyond Suvla Point the mainland of
Turkey and Bulgaria was visible on a clear day in faint outline
across the Gulf of Xeros. If they turned their backs on this view
of the promised land, the men of the Nelson and Deal Battalions
could see, to the south, the whole western coast of the peninsula
and the ships off Cape Helles. To the west, set in the placid
water of the Aegean, could be seen Imbros and Samothrace,
behind which the setting sun would throw a brilliant glow over
the rugged outlines of their purple peaks.
The trenches on the extreme left held by the Nelson Battalion
backed on to a sandy gorge opening out to the sea. The
sides of the cliffs were precipitous, and cut by the wind and rain
of the unequal climate into sharp edges, bare of all vegetation ;
only birds and insects seemed to abound, and at one and the
same time could be seen vultures, pigeons, shrikes, martins,
* The period from May 3rd to May 12th was one of severe, if discontinuous,
fighting, and the Marine Battalions suffered further losses. Among the officers
killed during this period were Major A. C. H. Hoskyns, R.M.L.1., Lieutenant
J. F. Hyland and 2nd Lieut. F. A. Erskine of the Portsmouth Battalion, and
Lieutenant M. Curtin and Lieutenant A. F. Hayward of the Chatham Battalion.
125
The Defence of Anzac


swallows and small greyish hawks; while the trenches abounded
in yellow centipedes, caterpillars, lizards, and brown and blue
butterflies.
The firing line was manned throughout by a composite force
of the Nelson and Deal Battalions, under the command of
Lt.-Colonel Eveleigh, H.M.L.I. No incidents of moment mark
this period, though the line taken over had to be considerably
extended to release the whole of the New Zealand Brigade,
who normally garrisoned the sector, for service in the general
engagement at Cape Helles on May 6th to Bth. The Naval
Brigade remained in the line till the 13th, when they also re-
embarked for the southern front. The Ist Field Ambulance,
whose work had won high tributes from all sides, left* at the
same time.*
By this time, the situation had immensely improved.
Most noticeable of all, was the order which had been won from
the earlier chaos of the beaches, and the regular system of
trench reliefs, which had been worked out in the face of such
appalling difficulties. In this transformation, as well as in the
offensive of the 2nd and 3rd, the Naval Division brigades (raw
as they were) had played a small but honourable part, and
had vindicated their courage and their training.
* For particularly gallant work during these operations Surgeon Pratt, of
this Field Ambulance, was awarded the D.S.C.
126
The Royal Naval Division


CHAPTER VIII
THE BATTLES OF JUNE AND JULY
BY May 18th, when the units which had been sent to Anzac
had returned to the Achibaba front, the Naval Division
(save for the Hawke, Benbow and Collingwood Battalions, by
now on the high seas) was concentrated under General Paris’s
command. The campaign developed very rapidly into trench
warfare. In three brief weeks, the order and method imposed
by the necessities of a siege came over a scene which heretofore
had been expanding, changing, taking fresh colour almost
every hour, under the stress of active warfare, its cruel losses,
its alternating moods of exultation and depression, the know-
ledge of triumph or the tacit admission of defeat.
The first salient change was the allocation to different for-
mations of the responsibility for certain sectors of defence. No
longer was there to exist that camaraderie of the battle-field,
when even divisions cease to exist as distinct units, and the
reserves, the supports, and the front-line troops develop, almost,
an esprit de corps of their own. Now each division found its
own supports, its own reserves, and each looked askance on its
neighbour. In one sector, sniping and bombing had become a
science; in another, sapping and digging in at night (“ straighten-
ing out the line ”) was the order of the day, a third excelled in
the discipline of its sentries, a fourth in the excellence of its
field engineering. And each came to regard the other with a
peculiar mixture of admiration and dislike, bred by differences
of character and ambition and training.
On the right of the line, standing fast to their finely won
position on the ridge of the Kereves Dere, were the French, whose
sector was a monument of field engineering, of effective organiza-
tion of all things material. Next came the Naval Division, with
their front stretching from the French left across the Achibaba
127


nullah to the right of the Krithia nullah : this was the front
to which the Naval battalions of the 2nd and the Composite
Brigade had fought in the earlier battles. On the left came the
42nd Division, and on their left again, the 29th Division and
Cox’s Indian Brigade, stretching across the main gully to the sea.
With the organized sectors of defence, came the rest camps.
Whether a battalion was out of the line for rest and reorganiza-
tion, or in corps reserve, or in divisional or brigade reserve, the
only place for it except actually on days of battle was the rest
camp. There were its household gods, in the shape of its
quartermaster’s stores and transport, and there, more important,
the laborious dug-outs, which alone offered cover from view of
the enemy and a possibility of shelter from the more than
occasional shells.
The Naval Division rest camps were directly behind their
trench sector, on the broken ground to the left of the lower
reaches of the Achibaba nullah. Without timber or corrugated
iron of any kind, neither comfort nor safety could be immediately
attempted. Only through long weeks of scheming and con-
trivance and loot could the former be approached. The latter
remained beyond reach.
The early camps suffered in another way : they were never
meant to be permanent; and the Naval Division camps were
dug by young men who still cherished the illusion that what
generals did not intend would not occur. And so the camps
were carelessly planned, unnecessarily cramped, avoidably un-
comfortable in their lay-out.
For these reasons, among others, it would be wrong to suppose
that the reversion to trench warfare carried with it intervals
of rest and that generally peaceful atmosphere which we
ordinarily associate with it. Every square yard of the peninsula
was under fire; and in a situation where the safety of the
fighting troops depended absolutely on constant artillery sup-
port and a plentiful supply of engineering materials and labour
for extensive digging, there were none of these essentials. The
days following on the May battles were, in the circumstances,
days of unremitting anxiety and hard work, in which every man
who could be spared had during the brief hours of darkness to be
employed on digging communication trenches, or in pushing
forward our front line to within striking distance of the enemy.
Only, it was felt, by renewing the offensive very soon and driving
128
The Royal Naval Division


Howe Battalion Rest Camp, Gallipoli, June, 1915.




the enemy north of Achibaba could we gain sufficient ground
and protection to concentrate the expected reinforcements for a
decisive victory.
In pursuance of the prescribed policy, the Naval Division, in
addition to providing innumerable digging parties all over the
peninsula, carried out no less than four night advances before
the end of May. These operations, on the 18th, 23rd, 24th and
27th, the first two of which were carried out by the 2nd Naval
Brigade, and the next by the Ist and Marine Brigades respec-
tively, took our front line forward nearly half a mile at a cost of
less than fifty casualties, and brought the Division within from
two hundred to four hundred yards of the main defensive posi-
tion across the Achibaba and Krithia nullahs. Incidentally,
these operations gained for us almost as much ground as had
those of May 6th-Bth, without giving any unnecessary chances
to the enemy to reduce our strength still further before our
next assault. If, however, the losses in specific operations
were miraculously few, the daily rate of wastage from shells in
the camps and trenches, and overhead rifle fire in the gullies and
communication trenches, was high. The Ist Brigade suffered a
particularly grievous loss when their Brigade Major, Major Frank
Wilson, R.M.L.1., was killed by a sniper only a few days after
the 2nd Brigade had lost Lt.-Colonel Maxwell in the same way.
Among other fine officers killed at this time were Lt.-Commander
P. McCirdy, R.N.V.R., of the Anson Battalion, Sub-Lieut. E.
Rennie, of the Drake Battalion, Lieut. Treves, R.N.V.R., and
Sub-Lieut. Gilbert, of the Nelson Battalion, Lieut. R. O.
Tollast and Lieut. A. M. Oakden, of the Divisional Engineers,
and Lieut. White, R.M., of the Chatham Battalion. Major
Wilson’s place was filled by Lt.-Colonel Moorhouse, and Major
Roberts, R.A., took over the Anson Battalion.
On May 28th and 29th, under conditions safer, but more
dispiriting, than those which their fellows had faced on April
25th, the three remaining battalions landed on the peninsula.
The Division was at once reorganized on the original plan.
The Hawke and Benbow joined the Drake and Nelson in the Ist
Brigade, the Collingwood joined the Howe, Hood and Anson in
the 2nd Brigade, and the Deal with the Plymouth, Portsmouth
and Chatham battalions formed a complete Marine Brigade.
For all this, the Division was weaker than on April 25th.
Then, the effective strength was 10,500 men. At the end of
9
129
The Battles of June and July


May, before the arrival of the reinforcements, it was less than
half; and the arrival of three fresh, but wholly inexperienced,
battalions was, as far as the immediate future was concerned,
a very moderate compensation. What was needed were not
fresh units who had to buy their experience, but drafts for the
more seasoned battalions. The urgency arose from the decision
to make the next attack on June 4th.
It is easy now to say that this attack was foredoomed to
failure. Yet such is the buoyancy of temperament of
inexperienced soldiers that to many, at least in the Naval
Division, this fateful day seemed to hold the promise of a
long-awaited opportunity. Never since Antwerp had the whole
been concentrated under the hand of their commander. Then
they had been raw troops, untrained and unequipped; now,
save for three battalions, they had had the finest of all training,
worth how many years of peace-time manoeuvres, fighting
continuously for a month, side by side, with some of the finest
regular battalions. Even the inexperienced Collingwood,
Hawke and Benbow were by no means untrained, were well
equipped and well commanded. The more seasoned
battalions were indeed thinned by losses, weakened by illness,
handicapped by reorganizations under trying conditions.
But in the excitement of a concerted advance might not tired
troops regain their enthusiasm ? Might not the Naval Division,
now for the first time united under the orders of their own
commander, set the final seal on their reputation ?
The new attack, like those of May 6th and Bth, was to be
a direct frontal assault on the whole Turkish forward position.
We started, moreover, with three advantages, which we had not
previously enjoyed. We were now right up against our objec-
tive, not vainly groping for it ; we had limited the objectives
of the first waves of the attack, and, finally, our troops, though
not fresh, were infinitely more rested than they had been early
in May. To this extent, the modified optimism which prevailed
was justified; but there was another side to the picture. The
Turks had been strongly reinforced and were deeply entrenched,
and their left flank (against the French ; that is, on the right
of the Allied line) rested on the Kereves Dere Ridge. This
130
The Royal Naval Division


position was unassailable, except to an advance along the line
of the ridge. Such an advance the French had attempted on
May 6th and Bth, but had only pushed forward for a distance
of two or three hundred yards along the crest. Seeing that
the ridge ran diagonally to our front, it was clear that any
failure to advance further along the crest and the upper slopes
in the forthcoming attack must prejudice our chances on the
lower slopes, where were the Naval Division. Equally, failure
there might imperil any gains in the centre, and must, in any
event, reduce their tactical value. On this view the success
of the operations as a whole must depend largely—far too
largely, considering to what extent we were committing all our
resources to the uncertain issue—on the success of the French
attack. This made the attack from the outset an incalculable
gamble.
On the British front the attack was to be carried out by
the 29th, 42nd and Naval Divisions, each attacking the Turkish
trenches opposite to their own. The Naval Division, which
had the shortest sector (less than a thousand yards of front),
had to supply two brigades, less one battalion, to the Corps
as a general reserve, and were left, for their share in the battle,
only the 2nd Naval Brigade and the Drake Battalion. Holding
the last-named in reserve, General Paris arranged with Com-
modore Backhouse for the Howe, Hood and Anson to attack
the first two front-line trenches and the redoubt on the right
of the brigade boundary, and for the assault of the Turkish
third line to be carried out by “A," “B” and “D” Com-
panies of Commander Spearman’s Collingwood Battalion. The
remainder of the Collingwood were held in Brigade reserve,
under Lt.-Commander West, R.N.V.R.
Next to the Anson (on the right of the Brigade) were French
Colonial troops, and next to the Howe (on the left) the Man-
chester Brigade of the 42nd Division.
At 2.30 a.m. on the 4th the battle may be said to have
opened with the departure of the 2nd Brigade from the rest
camps. Stumbling across the broken ground into the valley
of the Achibaba nullah, the leading battalion walked up the
dusty road, past Backhouse Post, where Colonel Quilter and
Major Maxwell were buried, into the communication trench
alongside the stream. Behind them could have been seen an
endless number of small groups of heavily-laden tired men,
9*
131
The Battles of June and July


ten or a dozen in each group, or sometimes less, walking almost
as though in their sleep, so well did they know the road, or so
little did they care to awake the memories which it held for
them. These groups were the platoons of three battalions.
Very different must have been the appearance of the Colling-
wood Battalion, at full strength, confidently going forward to
the unknown event. The Turks were very quiet that night,
and, save for the frogs croaking, there was scarcely a
sound.
After the attacking groups had gone forward, the Ist Brigade
Battalions came down from the trenches, the Drake to those
round Backhouse Post, and the Nelson and Hawke Battalions
to the rest camp. 4
The attack was timed for noon, and the hours of waiting,
from dawn to midday, added a new chapter to the horrors of
war. To move with a light heart to the assault in the grey
half-light of dawn is difficult enough, but at least there is a
shadow over the sun to veil the shadow in men’s hearts.
Here, hour by hour, the sun beats down more pitilessly.
Towards ten o’clock the air grows fetid, and the flies begin to
swarm on the filth of the parapets, and maggots crawl over the
bodies of the dead but a foot or two below the ground. Even
the small comforts of garrison duties in the line seem strangely
remote. Everything is still, expectant, uncomfortable. With
curiosity, officers and men watch the bombardment, on which
their chance of survival so greatly depends. In the rest camps,
and near the headquarters of generals, the noise is terrific,
and the impression one of a vastly efficient destruction. In
the trenches the noise is immeasurably less, and the passage of
the occasional shells tells the true tale. A desultory bombard-
ment had begun at 8 a.m., and at 10.30 a.m. the rate of fire
was increased, but the results were negligible. We now know
that the proportion of guns to rifles was only a third of that
allowed in. France, and the number of rounds per gun im-
measurably less. No statistics were needed to reveal, at 11.20
a.m. on June 4th, the full measure of the weakness of our
artillery, for at that moment the first intensive bombardment
ceased, and a feint of attack was made along the whole line.
In an instant the whole enemy line burst into rapid fire,
machine guns swept the parapets of our trenches from end to
end, and the Turkish artillery searched our reserve trenches
132
The Royal Naval Division


and our communications. The bombardment, which should
have disorganized the Turkish defences, driven their riflemen
to cover, and destroyed their machine-gun emplacements, had
done-—just nothing.
At 11.30 the bombardment was resumed, and at 12 noon
the Howe, Hood and Anson advanced to the assault. Once
again, the Turkish rifle and machine-gun fire swept our parapets.
This time they found a target. In the first seconds of the
attack more than half the officers of the 2nd Naval Brigade
(including Major Roberts, R.A., of the Anson, Major Sparling,
R.M.L.1., of the Howe (who were both killed), and Lt.-Colonel
Crauford-Stuart, of the Hood) were hit. Once the whole of
the men were over the parapet and in the open, the law of
averages came into play, and of the few officers, who still found
themselves standing, about half, with about half their men,
reached the Turkish front line. It was unoccupied, save by
the dead, the dying and the wounded. Without a moment’s
delay, the Anson went on, led by Lieut. Stuart Jones,
R.N.V.R.,* the* senior surviving officer, and stormed the
redoubt in the Turkish second line ; the Hood and Howe came
up on the flank. Seen through field-glasses, it was an orderly
and dashing advance, particularly on the right, where the
Anson were described by Sir lan Hamilton as fighting in the
best style of the Regular Army. But in the captured trenches
the impression was different. There was an ominous inactivity
on the right of the line, where the Turks could be seen in force
in their original trenches : there was a still more ominous
volume of fire pouring in on the trenches which had been
captured. To hold the eight hundred yards of line which had
been their objective, and which they had reached, there were
left of the attacking force only some twenty officers and three
hundred men. Every minute took its toll of the slender
garrison. Would the Collingwood come up in time ?
Punctually the Collingwood began their advance. But the
success of their comrades helped them in no way. From the
Turkish left, on the Kereves Here Ridge, there broke out the
same tornado of fire on a target as impossible to miss as the
first. The Collingwood, afterwards supposed to have suffered
their losses almost wholly in their retreat, actually suffered more
• With him was C.P.O. Stear (later promoted to Lieut., R.N.V.R.), who, for
fine work in this attack, was given the D.S.M.


than half of them in their advance, among those to fall being
Commander Spearman, R.N., and his Adjutant, Lt.-Commander
Annand, R.N.V.R., both of whom were killed in the first
moments of the attack. The Turkish positions on the upper
slopes of the ridge were still intact, and our attempt to retain
our hold on the lower slopes of the ridge was foredoomed to
failure. Not more than three hundred of the Collingwood
reached the advanced trenches, where by now the scene was
one of indescribable confusion. On the right, the enemy could
be seen in full command of their second- and third-line trenches,
while parties were coming back even into the front line, where
the French had once been. The Naval Battalions were still in
the enemy’s second-line trenches on the Anson and Hoqd front;
but on the Howe Battalion front, where there was no dead
ground between our lines and those of the enemy, only a few
of the Howe*, and none of the Collingwood, had reached the
enemy’s line ; and here also the Turks were now beginning to
come back. With great gallantry, the Anson and Hood and
Collingwood Battalions actually attempted a further advance,
at 12.30 p.m., but the situation was impossible. With the
exception of Lieutenant Stuart Jones, of the Anson, and Sub-
Lieut. Cockey, of the Hood, all the surviving officers were hit
before the enemy’s third line was reached.
With the Turks converging on the captured positions,
a retirement became imperative. This was hardly less
costly than the advance, partly because of a brave but
useless attempt to hold on to a position half between the
Turkish and our own original line. It was at this point that
“ B ” Company of the Collingwood, who had advanced at 12.80
to dig a communication trench across the captured ground,
were almost annihilated. No more now at the eleventh hour
than earlier, in the first fury of the assault, could gallantry
and self-sacrifice prevail against the enemy’s machine guns
on the flank. Any attempt to hold a position in advance of
our front line was, in the prevailing circumstances, merely
quixotic; and after sustaining cruel losses the surviving officers
rightly decided on completing the retirement.
They were only just in time. At 12 noon the assaulting
* Among these were Lieut. P. H. Edwards, H.N.V.R. (wounded), and C.P.O.
Homer, P.O. Smith and A.B. Pierce. These N.C.O.’s displayed the greatest
gallantry and resolution, and each received the D.S.M.
134
The Royal Naval Division


force had consisted roughly (excluding details left in the
transport lines, at the Field Ambulance, or at the rest camp)
of 1,900 men and 70 officers, almost half the men and a third
of the officers being in the Collingwood battalion. Now,
at 12.45, there returned to our lines 5 officers and 950 men.
But of these not all could now be relied on, for many were of
the Collingwood, who in this hour of horror had been deprived
of all their officers, save one, and of all stability, and there were
none to rally and organize the survivors of this fine, but ill-fated,
battalion.’ 1 ' The situation, if a counter-attack had developed,
must have been critical, for, in the audacious hope of a crush-
ing victory, the Divisional Commander had been left with
but one reserve battalion. The Drake Battalion were ordered
up at once to the front line, and General Paris was forced
to ask for a battalion from the Corps reserve to take their
place as a reserve to the Division. The request was granted,
and the Benbow Battalion left the rest camp at 2.80 p.m.
and moved up into the gully.
Every effort was made to secure French co-operation for
a renewal of the attack. The first intention was for an attack
by the R.N.D. alone at 2.15, with artillery support from the
French. This support was not, however, forthcoming, for
the Commander-in-Chief was at the same time organizing and
attempting to arrange for a joint operation by the French and
the Naval Division. All his endeavours failed. The French
Commander found himself wholly unable to co-operate, and
an unsupported attack by the Naval Division was rightly
judged impossible. The issue of the battle had depended
from the start on the success of the first assault, and this
in turn had depended, for the reasons given, on the advance
of the French Colonial troops along the ridge. The gamble
had failed.
The failure was unfortunately conspicuous. In the centre
of the line, the 42nd Division had achieved a memorable
advance,,and had captured and held three lines of Turkish
trenches. Their casualties throughout the day had been
serious, but not overwhelming, and they had been able to hold
on, though with steadily increasing losses, in the hope of
* The battalion was actually brought out of the line by C.P.O. Carnal! (later
promoted to Sub-Lieut. R.N.V.R., and posted to the Hood Battalion). For
his services on June 4th he received the D.S.M.


enabling the attack on the right to be renewed. Now their
right had to be withdrawn. Here only the first line of
captured trenches could be safely consolidated so long as our
left remained where it was. Even then the front line held
by the 42nd Division to the west of the Achibaba nullah
was nearly 350 yards ahead of the old front line on the east,
to which the Naval Division had fallen back. This gap had to
be filled, or the last of the morning’s gains had to be
surrendered.
The Manchester Brigade were still heavily engaged, and
could find no troops for what must be not only a difficult
but an expensive task. In the circumstances, the Nelson
Battalion were sent forward to get their first experience of
active operations south of Achibaba.
It was apparently first thought that an attack would
have to be made on the Turks who still held on to their old
front line on the immediate right of the Manchesters; but
Colonel Eveleigh, after discussing the position with the Briga-
dier on the spot, hit on a wiser, though still hazardous, plan, the
execution of which was entrusted to “D ” Company of his
Battalion (Lt.-Commander H. C. Evans, R.N.V.R.). This plan
was to construct a number of separate entrenchments covering
the gap between the two front lines, and so sited as to afford
the maximum protection for the exposed flank. Protected
by covering parties, these posts could be completed before
dawn, and could then be joined up during the day into a
continuous line.
Throughout the night the Turkish fire was continuous,
and casualties were heavy, but the plan was so far successful
that digging was able to continue, which would almost cer-
tainly not have been possible had the Turks been led to
realize our intentions by a formal attack on their flank. When
dawn broke, the fire, aimed from close range by the enemy
in the front line to the right of the Manchesters, became
intense, but enough cover had been won during the night
to enable the posts to be not only held but steadily
strengthened and extended throughout the day. By four
o’clock (when “ C ” Company of the Hawke Battalion relieved
the Nelson Company to carry on the work of consolidation),
the trench, though shallow, was almost continuous.
With the safeguarding of the captured line the main battle


of June 4th-sth was at an end.* It only remained for General
Paris to relieve the remnants of the Howe, Hood and Colling-
wood Battalions, and this was done without delay, the Hawke
Battalion taking over from the left of the Drake (who had
relieved the Anson some hours before), and filling the gap
between them and the Nelson Battalion.
This left as an effective divisional reserve only the Benbow
Battalion, who remained in the neighbourhood of Backhouse
Post.
Having regard to the disastrous reverse suffered by the
French and the Naval Division on the morning of the 4th,
the result was not wholly unsatisfactory. The fine pertinacity
of the 42nd Division during the afternoon of the 4th and the
work of the Nelson Battalion the next night had at least
prevented the enemy from exploiting his earlier success and
had preserved for us some substantial gains.
The price paid by the Naval Division for this very negative
success was, unfortunately, out of all reckoning. More than
sixty officers'} - and 1,300 men became casualties, and, of these,
nearly half were killed. The losses in senior officers and
in Company Commanders impaired the fighting efficiency of
the Division for some time to come. In the 2nd Brigade,
one Battalion Commander (Lt.-Colonel Collins), one Second
in Command (Major Myburg, of the Hood) and one Company
Commander (Lieut, the Hon. K. Dundas) remained. The
loss of the few regular officers of experience was particularly
grievous. A drastic reorganization was necessary, if those
battalions who had already won for themselves a first-class
fighting reputation (the Hood, Howe and Anson Battalions)
were to retain a separate existence, and it was in these tragic
circumstances that General Paris found it necessary to dis-
band, not only the Benbow, but the ill-fated Collingwood
Battalion, whose cruel losses were due in no way to lack of
gallantry or skill. Under this arrangement, the Hood, Howe
and Anspn absorbed the officers and men of these battalions,
♦ Hard fighting continued, however, on the left front of the 42nd Division
throughout the 6th and 7th of June, and the Chatham Battalion was detached
from the Corps reserve to assist General Firth’s Brigade in their efforts to safe-
guard the most advanced of the captured trenches. Owing to lack of artillery
support the full scheme of consolidation (which necessitated two small advances)
was not carried out, but the position was substantially maintained.
t For a list of officers killed in this disastrous engagement see Appendix D.


and the Naval Brigades were reduced to three battalions
apiece.
The veteran Colonel Oldfield, of the Benbow, had been
wounded on June sth, and it was thus his Second in Command,
Major Bridges, R.M.L.1., who took command of the Anson
Battalion, with Lt.-Commander Stuart Jones, the senior sur-
viving officer of the old Battalion, as his Second in Command.
Major Myburg succeeded to the Hood, and Commander West
was appointed Second in Command of the Howe. Among
other officers transferred to the Anson Battalion were Lt.-
Commander Bernard Ellis and Lt.-Commander Gilliland (both
from the Benbow), who were to serve this battalion with such
distinction in France.
The disaster of June 4th raised wider issues than the
organization of the Division which had been most signally
involved in it. The battle had been watched from first to
last with alternate hope and disappointment by the Com-
mander-in-Chief, and when it was over his mind was made
up. He would not seek for another decision at Cape Helles.
The strong reinforcements for which he had already asked
would be thrown in on a new front. The campaign at Cape
Helles would be for the future directed towards the gradual
demoralization of the enemy by minor operations, with a
view to exhausting his man-power, drawing his reserves, and
diverting his attention from other points. To enable this
policy to be carried out, one fresh Division, and one only, would
be landed at Cape Helles.
With this decision the campaign south of Achibaba
entered on a new phase, lasting till the middle of July, during
which active fighting was always in progress somewhere or
another, but the routine of trench warfare was also continuous,*
and attention was ever increasingly concentrated on the
strengthening of our defences. The local offensives of this
period were not unimportant; if nothing else, they forestalled
an attack by the enemy and enforced his respect. But, pro-
ceeding continuously, and side by side with the more spectacular
happenings, we find constant work on saps, on the deepen-
* And brought its toll of casualties : Surgeon Stewart, R.N., Sub-Lieut.
C. E. C. Flood, Captain C. G. Bulling, R.M. (Deal Battalion), Sub-Lieut. T. E.
Love (Hood), Sub-Lieut. A. C. Iliff (Nelson) and Surgeon F. H. Reas, R.N.
(Drake) were among those killed in the last three weeks of this month while
on ordinary trench duties.


Inspection of the 2nd R.N. Brigade by General Sir Ian Hamilton, G.C.B.,
at Imbros, June, 1915.




ing and traversing of old trenches, and the making of
new ones, on wiring, on the construction of strong points and
machine-gun emplacements, which was at least equally im-
portant. At this time, too, trench mortars and catapults
(barbaric weapons, manufactured by some effort of inherited
memory by—so it was said—Messrs. Gamage) appeared for
the first time, to give a superficial touch of science to the
primitive Eastern scene.
The reorganized Naval Division maintained throughout
this period their old sector astride the Achibaba nullah,
slightly extended by taking over a small stretch of line from
the French. The sector was held alternately by the Marine
and the Ist Naval Brigade, and Commodore Backhouse’s
brigade were taken to Imbros for an essential rest. A use
was found at this time for the Divisional Cyclist Company
(Major N. 0. Burge, R.M.L.1.), who were trained in bombing
and attached to the different battalions to assist them, as far
as might be humanly possible, to master the constant and
untimely vagaries ■of these peculiar instruments. Later, when
all battalions had developed a section of trained bombers of
their own,* the experts returned to Divisional Headquarters,
to form the nucleus of the first bombing school founded on the
peninsula.
After the battle of June 4th-sth the attention of the
Divisional Commander was also directed to the construction of
a more advanced firing-line, with a view to the renewal of the
attack, should occasion arise, under conditions more favourable
than those prevailing on June 4th. It was clear that the line
could be pushed forward, without great hazard, to a distance
of nearly 100 yards, but, opposite the centre section of the
divisional front, was an advanced Turkish trench which it
was felt ought to be at once easy to capture and useful to hold,
and which, had it been either, would have assured an even
more substantial advance. This trench it was decided to
attack with the Hawke Battalion on June 19th. A daylight
assault was out of the question, since every rifle and machine
* The metaphor is not without point. From now onward, till the end of
1917, the Army was subjected to continual epidemics, the first symptom of which
was almost invariably the formation of a new section of specialists attached to
Battalion Headquarters. When the epidemic died down, the specialists would
either cease to specialize or be distributed among the companies—according to
the severity of the onset of the particular disease.
139
The Battles of June and July


gun on the slopes of Achibaba and the Kereves Dere com-
manded the ground, and Colonel Wilson was left with no
alternative to a night attack.
This was carried out by “A ” Company (Lieutenant
Morgan, R.N.V.R.). The first assault, for which the Turks
did not seem unprepared, was met by a very heavy fire ;
Lieutenant Morgan and a number of men were killed round
the enemy trench, and a large number were wounded. Rallied,
however, by Lieutenant Horsfield, R.N.V.R., the company
went forward again, quickly made good their hold on the
trench, and began consolidating. Till day broke, the position
looked secure, though our losses, both in the original attack,
and from rifle and machine-gun fire in the later stage of the
operation, were very high, having regard to the comparative
unimportance of the objective. At dawn, the situation took
on a very different aspect. The captured trench was discovered
to have no adequate field of fire, and to be so sited as to be
subject to direct enfilade from the main Turkish position. This
was not all. In the darkness, the Turks had pushed down a
small party of bombers, who were able from an old com-
munication trench which lay in dead ground to the garrison of
the captured trench, to inflict the most severe losses on them.
Had the bombing attack developed during the night, the
position might have been retrieved by a sortie. By day, this was
impossible. Already, moreover, the garrison was dangerously
reduced. Lieutenant Horsfield, wounded in the first assault,
had been wounded again, this time mortally. Sub-Lieut.
Tremayne, the battalion machine-gun officer, had been killed.
Of the original assaulting party not more than twenty were
unwounded. These survivors had been relieved about 6 a.m.
by a platoon of “ C ” Company, but within ten minutes of enter-
ing the trench half of this platoon also had become casualties.
In these circumstances, it was decided to evacuate the position,
as the only alternative to further and useless losses. In
addition to Lieutenant Morgan, Lieutenant Horsfield and Sub-
Lieutenant Tremayne, Sub-Lieutenant Little had been killed
on his way back to the line after “A” Company had been relieved,
and Sub-Lieutenant Milvaine had been seriously wounded
while in charge of a working party engaged on a communication
trench; he died of wounds a few days later. Of the petty
officers and men, fourteen were killed and seventy-four wounded.
140
The Royal Naval Division


The next day but one, the French carried out a brilliant
advance along the ridge of the Kereves Dere, and captured the
key positions which they had failed to secure on June 4th.
The Marine Brigade was in reserve for this operation.
On June 22nd, the Marine Brigade relieved General Mercer’s
Brigade in the trenches, and were called upon to attempt once
again the capture of the trench which the Hawke Battalion
had, three days before, held for six hours and then been obliged
to abandon. This time the attempt was made by “A ”
Company of the Portsmouth Battalion, under Major Grover,
R.M.L.I. The attack again succeeded, but the retribution
came even more swiftly ; the utmost gallantry and skill could
not prevail against the facts, and the position was rightly
given up within an hour and a half. In this operation the
Marines suffered seriously, Major Grover and 2nd Lieut. P. L.
L. Jermain being among the killed. On this day the Drake
also lost a fine officer in Lieutenant P. W. Magrath, R.N.V.R.
After these set-backs, the Division reverted to its older and
wiser policy of sapping by day and digging in in the open and
wiring by night. In these operations the Chatham Battalion
(Lt.-Colonel R. McN. Parsons, R.M.L.1.) did fine work,
which was carried on by the Drake Battalion (now under
Lt.-Commander H. D. King, R.N.V.R., Commander Campbell
having been invalided a few days after June 4th).
On July sth the monotony was relieved by an episode
which the available records have dignified by the name of
a Turkish attack. This was directed against the French
lines, but, despite the blandishments of two extremely smart
German officers who were seen urging the Turks to go forward,
it never developed. Some twenty Turks, however, impelled
perhaps more by curiosity than by zeal for battle, entered the
Anson Battalion* lines. A counter-attack was immediately
organized by Major Bridges, and the battalion returned to
their line. The enemy meanwhile had taken advantage of
our timely retreat to return to their own lines, and the officer
commanding the Anson Company in charge of the front line
had finished his breakfast and had come out of his dug-out.
This fantastic episode made an amusing tale in the mouths of
the Division’s enemies in the peninsula (who were not all
♦The Anson, having returned from Imbros, were attached at this time to
the Ist Naval Brigade.
141
The Battles of June and July


Turks). The more important thing was that the main attacking
force of the enemy had been suitably handled on the parapets
of their own trenches by the machine guns of the Hawke and
Drake Battalions. Altogether at least a hundred casualties
were inflicted by the Naval Battalions alone, and the French
undoubtedly accounted for more. Our losses were negligible.
The day following, the Naval Division were relieved by the
newly-arrived 52nd Division, who were to undertake our
Divisional attack. Behind the scenes, the last act in the drama
was being rehearsed ; and it was felt to be essential that the
attention of the Turks should be effectually diverted from
other fields.
The decision to renew the offensive south of Achibaba on
any considerable scale in advance of the larger operations
now pending was nevertheless unexpected. A resolute defen-
sive, designed to improve the health of the troops and to lead
up to a general attack to be made simultaneously with the
major operations, would have been a policy more easily under-
stood. The fact was, however, that the General Staff felt for
some reason convinced that we could not risk a purely defensive
policy throughout July. The result was a compromise between
the need for an offensive as it presented itself to General Head-
quarters, and the still more urgent need for rest as represented
by the authorities on the spot. The compromise took the only
possible form of an attack by the only fresh Division, but its
results were not fortunate. The attack was the most bloody
engagement (in proportion to the number engaged and the
nature of the objective) of any fought south of Achibaba, and
it led indirectly to the spread of sickness* on this front, on a
scale which cannot have been without influence on the final
issue of the campaign.
During the days preceding the attack (which was planned
for July 12th) the Naval Division, already so severely depleted,
and having now an establishment of only ten infantry
battalions, was ordered to furnish a battalion at full strength,
to be trained in pack mule work in connection with the new
landing. The Anson Battalion, reinforced by details from
other battalions and from the Divisional troops, were detached
• It should be explained that dysentery was already rife on the peninsula
in June, 1915. The wastage, however, was only gradual. After the July
battles the wastage became very rapid
142
The Royal Naval Division


Firing Line in R.N.D. Sector, mid-summer, 1915




for this duty, and the Deal Battalion of Marines had to take
their turn on fatigue duties at “W ” beach. The strength of
the Division on the eve of the attack consisted thus of eight
weak infantry battalions. General Paris had proceeded to
Mudros on leave, on July Bth. Brigadier-General Trotman,
R.M.L.1., was temporarily in command.
The objectives of the 52nd Division were the same as of
the Naval Division on June 4th, and the French were to co-
operate on the right, in so far as was necessary. The Turkish
positions on the right, which had then made it impossible for
Commodore Backhouse’s brigade to retain the trenches which
they captured, had, however, been already taken by the French,
on June 21st; and to make assurance against enfilade fire from
the right doubly sure it was decided that the 52nd Division
should themselves attack in the first instance only on the right.
An advance from the left of their front was to be attempted
only if the attack on the right succeeded.
The first attack (by the French, and the 155th Brigade of
the 52nd Division, from the right of Parsons Road) began at
7.80 a.m., after an eighty-minutes’ “ intensive ” bombardment,
and was generally successful. The second stage of the opera-
tions, when the 157th Brigade were to advance from the left of
their line, was also carried out according to plan later in the
day, although the situation in the centre was not altogether
clear. By the evening the position was that on the left the
attack had succeeded completely, as also on the extreme right
of the French line; that in the centre the attack had not got
beyond the front two enemy lines, and that parties of Turks
were holding out even here in communication trenches and
shell holes. The day’s fighting had been exceptionally severe,
and the whole of the 52nd Division reserves had somehow
become involved in the attack. In these circumstances, the
Chatham, Portsmouth, Plymouth and Drake Battalions of the
Naval Division had unexpectedly been called up to take the
place of the original divisional reserve, and the Howe, Hood,
Nelson and Hawke Battalions were under orders to move at
ten minutes’ notice.
During the night of the 12th-13th the position remained
unchanged (though the Nelson Battalion moved forward to
Backhouse Post), but on the morning of the 13th the communi-
cation between the 157th Brigade in the advanced trenches by
143
The Battles of June and July


the Achibaba nullah and the remainder of their Division,
was still extremely precarious; and it appears that an attempt
made by this brigade, by working back along old communi-
cation trenches, to establish touch between themselves and the
right of the position in the enemy’s old second line led to a
temporary retirement. Major Sketchley, H.M.L.1.,* who was
on a reconnaissance when the retirement took place, had no
difficulty in restoring the situation, and the Turks, who had
followed up the retreat, were soon driven back. But the
advanced position, so restored, remained isolated, and the Turks,
still in possession of most of their third-line trenches, and con-
sequently of covered approaches to the forward positions of
the 52nd Division on the left, appear to have remained masters
of the situation.
It seemed certain, from the grievous losses which were
being sustained, and from the entire breakdown in communi-
cations, that we must either advance further or withdraw.
In these circumstances, Brigadier-General Trotman (temporarily
commanding the R.N. Division) was asked to clear up the
position, and he determined on a general attack on those third-
line positions of the Turks which had so far defied capture.
This attack, the orders for which were issued at 3.20 p.m., was
to be carried out by the Chatham, Portsmouth and Nelson
Battalions at 4.30 p.m. The Nelson Battalion was to attack
on the left, the Portsmouth in the centre, and the Chatham, in
co-operation with the French, on the right. The Drake and
Plymouth Battalions remained in divisional reserve.
Owing to an inexplicable congestion in the trenches, the
orders did not reach the Chatham Battalion (Lt.-Colonel
Godfrey, R.M.L.I.)f till 3.55 p.m., and the thirty-five minutes
left before the attack were quite inadequate to the necessary
preparation ; more particularly as it was impossible to get
any news of the movements of the French. The attack,
therefore, was actually carried out only by the Nelson and
Portsmouth Battalions, though Colonel Godfrey worked for-
ward into the two lines of previously captured trenches on the
Chatham Battalion front, which were held by scattered details
* G. 5.0.2 of the R.N. Division. For his forceful intervention on this occasion
Major Sketchley was awarded the D. 5.0., and Lance-Corporal Way, his orderly,
who assisted him in organizing the counter-attack, gained the G.C.M.
t Lt.-Colonel R. McN. Parsons, R.M.L.1., had been wounded on June 28th.
For his services with the R.N. Division he was later awarded the C.B.


of the 52nd Division. The Nelson and Portsmouth Battalions,
on the other hand, advanced with the greatest gallantry.
Colonel Eveleigh’s battalion had no difficulty in capturing and
consolidating the left of the objective, where they found them-
selves in touch with the sth Battalion H.L.1., still clinging on
to the gains of the previous afternoon in the neighbourhood
of the Achibaba nullah. The Portsmouth Battalion, like the
sth K. 0.5.8. before them, found that the enemy third line,
further to the right, did not exist in recognizable form (the
dispatch puts it, perhaps, less clearly, when it says that the
Portsmouth Battalion fell into the same error as the K. 0.5.8.
at the same place), and they advanced too far. Losing almost
all their officers, they had to fall back, but, even then, they dug
in on a line in advance of the narrow ditch (not more than
eighteen inches deep) which was all that there was of the
enemy’s third line at this point. One platoon of this battalion
(under Lieutenant Murdoch Browne, R.M.L.I.)* remained
isolated from the rest of the battalion in a still more advanced
position. Only those who actually witnessed the unbelievable
confusion of the battle, the sickness of the troops, intensified a
hundredfold by local conditions, and the tenacity of the Turkish
resistance at this time, can appreciate the brilliant character
of these advances, which were, in terms of the operations of
these two days, decisive.
The losses in the Nelson and Portsmouth Battalions had,
however, been disastrous. Lt.-Colonel Eveleigh and Lt.-Colonel
Luard and ten other officers’)* had been killed. Five other
officers and 273 other ranks had become casualties in the Nelson
Battalion alone, and in the Portsmouth Battalion Captain
Gowney, D.S.C., was the only unwounded officer. For the sur-
vivors, moreover, clinging desperately to their gains as night
came on, the conditions were well-nigh unendurable. Some of
the worst scenes ever experienced on the battlefields of France
or Mesopotamia were crowded into this narrow front of half
a mile, over which fighting had been continuous for nearly
♦ Lieutenant Browne, was awarded the D.S.C. for his services
in the Gallipoli campaign. By his death in France (on November 13th, 1916)
the Corps lost an officer of exceptional promise.
j- Lieutenants Wilmot-Sitwell and Dougherty, of the Portsmouth Battalion,
Lieut. Baldwin, R.N.V.R., and Sub-Lieutenants J. M. F. Dickson, W. H.
Edwards, W. Lintott, E. V. Rice, B. W. Smyth and F. H. J. Startin, of the
Nelson Battalion, Sub-Lieut. Weaver, of the Howe Battalion, and Assistant
Paymaster H. Biles, R.N.V.R., of the 2nd Brigade Staff.
IO


forty-eight hours, where many hundreds of men lay dead
or dying, where a burning sun had turned the bodies of the slain
to a premature corruption, where there was no resting-place
free from physical contamination, where the air, the surface
of the ground, and the soil beneath the surface were alike
poisonous, fetid, corrupt.
The Nelson Battalion were the best off, in tolerably deep
and traversed trenches, but they had no safe communications
either with our old line or with the Portsmouth Battalion,
whose scattered relics were digging in on an undefined line,
running back from the right of the Nelson to a point some
two hundred yards in advance of the left of the Chatham
Battalion. With the Chatham Marines in the old Turkish
second line were the confused elements of many units of the
52nd Division, facing gallantly the almost impossible task of
organizing the defence of what may have been a trench, but
had become a graveyard. Even from here, there were no safe
communications with our old front line.
If the brilliant success of the afternoon were not to be
thrown away, prompt and energetic measures were needed.
They were taken. The Drake Battalion was sent up to take
over the whole disputed ground between the entrenchments of
the Nelson on the left and the Chatham on the right. Though
the battalion came up for the first time in the dark, the correct
line was found, held, and consolidated, and by dawn lateral
communication had been established along the whole front.
For this fine piece of work Lt.-Commander King, R.N.V.R.*
was to a large extent responsible. The losses of the Drake
Battalion were not inconsiderable. In particular the two
senior Company Commanders in the battalion, Lt.-Com-
mander N. Wells and Lt.-Commander Sir J. H. Campbell,
both survivors of all the earlier battles, were wounded.
The line now held was still short of our objective, for a
portion of the enemy’s third line, which had been the objective
of the right of the 115th Brigade and of the French left on the
morning of the 12th, had, owing to the inability of the Chatham
Battalion and the French to co-ordinate an advance on the
afternoon of the 13th, not been again attacked. The new
* Lieut.-Commander (now Captain) H. D. King, R.N.V.R., was soon after
this engagement awarded the D.S.O. and promoted to the rank of Commander
His fine work with the Drake Battalion was a feature of the campaign.


line was, however, in General Paris’s view* the best from a
purely military point of view which his Division had as yet
been called on to hold, and it was wisely decided to be content
with it. General Paris was. thus able to devote his unfailing
energies to the extremely difficult task of reorganization and
consolidation. The first move was to withdraw from the over-
crowded, insanitary and dangerously exposed trenches as
many men as possible of the gallant 52nd Division (the whole
sector had now been handed over to the Naval Division. All,
save one battalion on the extreme left of the sector, were
withdrawn on the 14th from the forward trenches. The new
sector was then divided into two Brigade sub-sectors, with the
Marine Brigade on the left and the Ist Naval Brigade on the
right.
Here, for ten days, hardly less anxious and no less un-
pleasant than the actual days of battle, the Division laboured
on the essential tasks of burying the dead, reconstructing the
trenches and pushing forward barricades along the trenches
communicating'between our own lines and those of the enemy.
The strain on the troops must have been almost unprecedented
in the annals of defensive warfare, but the work proceeded :
battalions worked at high pressure for short spells in front
line, and within less than a fortnight conditions reverted to
normal. The Hood Battalion carried out a highly successful
operation during this period, when they rushed a Turkish
barricade, which had been established too close to our line,
and won another thirty yards of trench. In this operation
Lieut. Charles Lister played a very prominent part, and was
wounded, leading the attack with a characteristic distinction.
Lt.-Commander Freyberg, D. 5.0., who had taken over
command of the Hood Battalion from Major My burg (sick)
earlier in the month, was on this occasion wounded for the
second time. He was temporarily succeeded in command
by Lt.-Commander E. W. Nelson, R.N.V.R.
On July 25th the responsibilities of the infantry, so often
incomparably the heaviest, were at last lightened, the garrison-
ing of the trenches being taken over, under Naval Divisional
arrangements, by the 33rd Brigade. This was the beginning
of the long promised rest, and on August Ist the Naval Division
handed over the line for a definite period to the 42nd Division
* The General had returned from Mudros on the evening of the 13th
lO*


and the French. The long deferred time of rest had come,
but it had come too late. The strength of the Division, even
after the June disaster, had been 208 officers and 7,141 other
ranks. On August Ist, it was shown as 129 officers and 5,038
other ranks. The strain of the July battles and of the subse-
quent fortnight in the line had definitely broken not the fighting
spirit but the physical health of the men. Even of the five
thousand officers and men remaining at the beginning of August,
not 10 per cent, would have been considered fit in France for
duty in the quietest part of the line. In Gallipoli at this
time all officers and men who could actually walk to the trenches
were reckoned as fit. On any other classification the campaign
must have been abandoned. The plain fact was Jthat the
capacity of the troops to stand the strain of continuous fighting
under unhealthy conditions had been over-estimated.
The only relief which the infantry could find was in bathing
when out of the line. This was not merely pleasant but safe,
since a wise discrimination in the choice of bathing places
ensured the protection of the cliffs against shell fire. The test
of moral at this time was the ability to face the walk to the
beaches for the pleasure of bathing on arriving there. Samuel
Butler says somewhere that the essence of morality is that the
pain precedes the pleasure. On this view, bathing in July was
a highly meritorious achievement. It was certainly the only
thing which enabled even the hardiest to survive, though not
to escape, dysentery and jaundice and the other effects of living
on tinned food (shared with swarms of flies), in an almost
tropical climate for a period of months.
The Naval Division had at this difficult time their own
peculiar difficulties to contend with. No sooner had the Division
reached their bivouacs and begun the first tentative reorganiza-
tion than an order was received that 300 fleet reserve stokers
were to be transferred for fleet service. The first thought
was that the Division was being broken up. It was not far
wrong. The Naval Battalions were being deprived of their
backbone of trained and disciplined veterans, and the task of
reorganization had assumed serious proportions. So severe
had been the losses experienced by the Anson, Howe, Hood,
Nelson and Drake Battalions, that the withdrawal of 300
stokers meant, practically, the withdrawal of every regular
rating from the battalions. The needs of the fleet were no
148
The Royal Naval Division


doubt urgent; but it is probable that the stokers would have
been allowed to remain if adequate reinforcements could have
been provided to bring the Division up to full strength. The
strongest representations, personal and official, had been
made to the authorities at home, pointing out the urgent need
for reinforcing the Naval Division after the battle of June 4th,
and again after the battle of July 12th-13th. Before this date
Sir lan Hamilton, in a personal letter to Mr. Winston Churchill,
wrote that “ the Naval Division have really done superbly.
They have . . . suffered proportionately heavy losses. . . .
The particular brigade I spoke of (the 2nd Naval Brigade)
will, if it receive reinforcements within a fairly short time, be
second to none as a fighting machine in the service. If, on the
other hand, I am forced by circumstances to shove it into
another severe fight before reinforcements come, then it will
be so pulled down in strength that there will not be enough
of the old soldiers remaining to leaven the new drafts.” The
First Lord of the Admiralty received at the same time the
most urgent official representations, and the Army Council were
formally requested to assist in the provision of reinforcements on
the very grounds so forcibly urged by Sir lan Hamilton. The
War Office were unable, however, to assist in any way, and
indeed, stated that they proposed to telegraph to Sir lan
Hamilton giving him carte blanche , after consultation with
Sir John de Robeck, to make any necessary reductions in the
establishment of the Division. The fact that a division was
at the Dardanelles had appeared before now to be a sufficient
reason for starving it of the ordinary reinforcements, and, in
any case, it is arguable that the War Office could not have
been expected to go out of its way to help the Naval Division.
The fact remains that their decision meant that the Division
could be fit for little more than garrison duty for the remainder
of the campaign, and that the fighting strength of the whole
force was thus avoidably diminished.
With the stokers, went Commodore Backhouse and his
staff, and the 2nd Naval Brigade ceased to exist. So also
did the Marine Brigade. For the Marines, too, there were
no adequate reinforcements, and the Portsmouth, Plymouth,
Chatham and Deal Battalions were amalgamated into two
battalions under Lt.-Colonel Matthews, C. 8., R.M.L.I.
(succeeded a little later by Lt.-Colonel Hutchison,
149
The Battles of June and July


R.M.L.1.) and Captain F. N. White (temporary, pending
the arrival from England of Lt.-Colonel Stroud, C. 8.,
R.M.L.1.). With the Marine Battalions were brigaded the
Anson (still on detached duty) and the Howe Battalions. This
now became the 2nd Naval Brigade. The Ist Brigade con-
sisted of the Drake, Nelson, Hawke and Hood Battalions.
Lt.-Commander H. D. King and Lt.-Commander B. C. Freyberg
were confirmed in the command of the Drake and Hood
Battalions and were promoted to the rank of Commander.
Major Burge (from the Divisional Cyclist Company) was
appointed to command the Nelson with Lt.-Commander
Nelson, R.N.V.R. as Second in Command; and Lt.-Colonel L. O.
Wilson, D. 5.0., M.P. continued in command of the Hawke
Battalion.
With this reorganization our detailed narrative of the
events on the Gallipoli peninsula must close. The remaining
four months of the campaign surpass perhaps in historic
importance, though assuredly not in dramatic interest, the
days of the earlier struggles. But neither in the great events
at Anzac and Suvla in August and September nor in the
heroic local assaults delivered at Cape Helles in August and
September by the 29th, the 42nd and the 52nd Divisions, did
the Naval Division play a part. Sir lan Hamilton’s prophecy
had been fulfilled at any rate to the extent that the Division
was numerically too weak to be thrown into any severe engage-
ment. How it was that so much had been sacrificed for so
little can never be wholly accounted for in a single page, or even
in a single volume. But it is hardly possible to doubt that,
as things turned out, in the light of the unexpected resistance
by the Turks to the attack from Anzac, and of the unexpected
breakdown in our offensive at Suvla, the battles of June and
July on the peninsula cost more than they were worth. For
they cost much more than the equivalent of the aggregate of
our casualties. The Naval Division in August, 1915, was some-
thing very different in numbers, in experience and in their
capacity for endurance from the Naval Division in May. The
same was true of the other Divisions on the peninsula through-
out the same time.
And so the only thing that remains to tell about the Naval
Division in Gallipoli is the story of an anticlimax rising
almost, in the end, to the dramatic level. Yet at the same
150
The Royal Naval Division


Gully Ravine, Gallipoli, September, 1915.




time we shall be able to trace the Naval Division developing,
reorganizing, even under the most depressing conditions,
finding within itself and in its reinforcements unexpected
sources of strength, and in the end needing but little more than
rest and a change of diet before it was ready to take its place
in the line once more as a fighting Division trained and equipped
for the offensive. New personalities had come and were
coming to the front under provocation of the urgent opportu-
nity. Commander King more than upheld the reputation of
those officers of the regular R.N.V.R. who had formed the
majority of the original officers of the Division, and of whom so
few were now left, and the new Adjutant of the Drake, Lieut.
Sterndale Bennett, R.N.V.R. was gaining that experience which
alone was necessary to make him an equally outstanding figure.
Commander Freyberg had enhanced the reputation which he had
won by his dashing exploit in the Gulf of Xeros and was
showing himself not only a fine soldier but a distinguished
leader of men, and Lt.-Commander Asquith, Lt.-Commander
W. M. Egerton and Lieut. F. S. Kelly shared with Commander
Freyberg the credit for bringing the reorganized Hood
Battalion in the ensuing months to that brilliant standard
of efficiency which was later to assist the Division to an
historic success. Lt.-Commander Stuart Jones, Lt.-Com-
mander Ellis and Lt.-Commander Gilliland were creating at
the same time a new Anson tradition, and Lt.-Commander
C. S. West and Lt.-Commander P. H. Edwards were setting
an inspiring example to the Howe Battalion, which had its
own difficulties to contend with.
The new Nelson Battalion under Lt.-Colonel Burge, the
Hawke Battalion still under the courageous leadership of Lt.-
Colonel Leslie Wilson and Commander Ramsay Fairfax, R.N.,
and the reorganized Marine Battalions (as finely officered as ever
before) were also to show themselves fully capable of profiting
by the example of their commanders. In short, the Naval
Division as it had sailed for Gallipoli was passing away, but
a successor was growing up whose achievements, when the
time came, were to challenge, if not to surpass, those of its
predecessors. The time, however, was not yet. The force
south of Achibaba was no better in its present situation
than a beleaguered garrison, and the wind from Suvla bore on
its wings no rumour of relief.
151
The Battles of June and July


CHAPTER IX
ANTICLIMAX
NEITHER in the landing at Suvla and in the general
offensive from Anzac to which that landing was sub-
sidiary, nor in the diversions at Cape Helles early in August,
had the Naval Division, as such, any share. Only the Anson
Battalion and the 2nd Field Ambulance were detached for
special duty at Suvla, the former in charge of pack transport,
the latter as corps troops. Amid the constant fluctuations
of the new front these two units carried out their essential if
inconspicuous task and won high praise from those in authority,
but no account can be written here of the scenes amid
which they moved, of the nature of the fighting, and of the
day-to-day incidents which marked the different stages of
the campaign.* The Naval Division remained south of
Achibaba, and it is only in its effect on that front that we can
treat of the August and September fighting further north.
Considering all things, the secret of the date and place
of the new landing was fairly well kept, but towards the end
of July the excitement grew, for all knew that somewhere,
and soon, a new attempt was to be made to break through
the Turkish cordon and set our armies once more on the
move. For those divisions who, with the bitter experience
of more than three months’ continuous fighting behind them,
were called on to suffer the inevitable losses entailed by a
demonstration against entrenched positions, or who waited,
as did the Naval Division, as spectators, for the news which
might restore to them their freedom of action, the early days
of August were memorable. The initial disappointment,
when it came, was severe.
* There is a fairly full account in that excellent work, “ On Four Fronts
with the Royal Naval Division,” by Surgeons Sparrow and Mcßean Ross
(Hodder and Stoughton, 1918).
Lieut, the Hon. K. Dundas, R.N.V.R. (Anson), was killed at Suvla on August
7th by a chance shot. As is known, the landing was virtually unopposed.


The partial failure of the operations of August 6th-llth
was not, however, fully realized as involving the final break-
down of the campaign.
From a purely military, point of view, the delay at Suvla
was as fatal as the delay at Cape Helles in April; but it was
not more so. Just as we had had to take Achibaba within
forty-eight hours or fail even to threaten our real objective, so,
in August, we had to carry Ismail Oghi Tepe and threaten
the flank of the enemy position centred on the historic hills
of Chunak Bair and Koja Chemen Tepe, if these vital positions
from which our guns would command Maidos and the Narrows
were to fall to the assault of what was now the main force
operating from Anzac. But the breakdown of this plan was
not in itself the ultimate disaster. There was still a chance
of victory. New formations were available, and could have
been sent to Gallipoli early in September, to exploit the in-
adequate, but still remarkable, success gained in August. Why
they were not; how they were first held up till the perhaps
premature offensive at Loos had petered out, and how then
they were diverted to Salonica, is told in full detail in Sir lan
Hamilton’s Diary. It was for the news of these reinforcements
that every soldier on Gallipoli waited during the days follow-
ing the inconclusive close of the first northern battle.
Slowly the hope of reinforcements faded. Rumour—truly
the swiftest of military as of other disasters—spoke of
doubts and hesitations at home. Troops returning from
hospital in Egypt brought news of the indifference with
which their great if unavailing sacrifices were regarded by the
hierarchy of conservative opinion which ruled the councils
at that rather Capuan base. It was then that the spectre of
doubt, which had loomed up first when the authentic news
from Suvla came to hand, began to cast a lengthening shadow.
As things happened, the failure at Suvla, inexplicable perhaps,
perhaps merely unexplained, was indeed the cause of the
untimely ending of the campaign. But it was not simply
the decent charity of one soldier towards another which made
common men hesitate, and in the end refuse, to place the
whole blame on the staffs, generals and battalions whose
several responsibility for the defeat it is still so difficult to
determine. Others, who had intrigued against the expedi-
tion almost from the start and who now abandoned it, not
153
Anticlimax


in favour of the French front, but in favour of Salonica, must
share the ultimate responsibility for the decisive failure, for
“ a disaster,” as Mr. H. W. Nevinson rightly says, “ leaving
its lamentable mark upon the world’s history.”
The immediate result of the admission of defeat on the
northern front was that, south of Achibaba, the resistance
of the sorely tried infantry divisions to physical ills and hard-
ships long endured was weakened by the subconscious realiza-
tion that the campaign was at a standstill. During the
September and October, the war-weary divisions at Cape Helles
melted like snow in the noon-day sun. By the middle of
October, the effective strength of the division had sunk to
3,200. Since April 25th, out of more than 16,500 men of
unmatched physique and still unimpaired determination, over
13,000 had become casualties, killed, wounded, or evacuated
sick. But for the splendid work of the Naval surgeons through-
out the whole period, these figures—appalling as they are—
would have been far higher.
It was when this wave of sickness was at its height that
it became known that Sir lan Hamilton was handing over
the Supreme Command. Only a few days before he had
visited the Naval Division trenches with General Paris and
General Mercer, and spoken to very many officers and men.
It was no surprise when this visit became, in retrospect, a visit
of farewell. And it was no coincidence that his resignation
came at a time when the strength of the Division was at its
ebb. For the change in command was no more than the
logical and expected result of the change in the opinions of
the Government at home. It is one of the ineradicable mis-
fortunes of modem war that the fighting soldier can never
get to know his Commander-in-Chief, but it was generally
felt that, with Sir lan Hamilton, went the last hope of an
energetic prosecution of the campaign. His departure, in fact,
summed up the situation, crystallized it. What everyone
had feared, was now to happen.
From mid-August onward, the Division were in the front
line, and often actively engaged in the modified offensives
peculiar to stationary warfare. The new divisional sector
which they took over from the 29th Division on August 15th
lay between Gully ravine and the Krithia nullah. The sector,
sadly damaged in the costly demonstrations of August 6th and
154
The Royal Naval Division


Bathing from the Beach between Cape Helles and Sedd-el-bahr.




7th (carried out on this front by the 29th Division), was neither
healthy nor secure. The front line was a part of the old
Turkish trench system, and was joined to the present Turkish
line by numerous communication trenches, watched from
barricades, generally within hand-bombing distance of the
enemy. These barricades marked almost invariably the scene
of the most bitter hand-to-hand fighting. The bodies of
English and Turks alike were built into the walls of these
rough-and-ready fortifications, and others were buried only a
few inches below the ground. In the rest of the front-line
trenches the conditions were only a little less unhealthy.
These conditions accentuated the sickness which was due
primarily, as has been said, to other causes. The numbers
available for duty in the trenches fell constantly, while the
length of the divisional sector could not be correspondingly
reduced. In the result, the hours of duty were lengthened,
the reliefs were less frequent, the fatigues were more
arduous.
If active fighting was at an end, the strain of the defensive
war carried on under these difficulties was considerable. More-
over, in face of the possibility of a winter campaign, communi-
cations had improved ; a trench drainage system had to be
prepared, and a new front-line trench had to be dug and wired.
Our trenches were so sited as to be extremely open to effective
bombardment, and the work of reconstructing the sector was
dangerous, as well as irksome, to the depleted garrisons.*
Throughout this period, a semblance of an offensive war also
had to be maintained, if only to forestall any possible Turkish
attack. To this end, saps were pushed out, barricades pushed
forward, and intensive trench-mortar bombardments added to
the horrors of war.
The incidents of this eventful but unromantic period call
for little mention. On August 27th we read of a daring recon-
naissance of the Turkish front line by Lt.-Commander Asquith
(Hood)_ and Lieut. Blyth (Drake); two days later, of a
Turkish reconnaissance of our own trenches in the neighbour-
hood of the Northern barricade, which was beaten off with
loss by the Hawke Battalion. Again, two days later, we read
* And to the Engineers, whose energies were unfailing. It is certain that
no division was ever better served by its field companies than was the Naval
Division.


of the advancement of one of the barricades by Lt.-Commander
Isgar, of the Howe Battalion, in a cool and successful
operation. During September and October episodes of this
character, so vivid in experience, so drab in retrospect, follow
one another almost monotonously. By October 6th, the new
firing line was completed, and the rest of the month was
occupied with the almost more dangerous and uninspiring
task of wiring it. Later in the same month, Lt.-Commander
Isgar, assisted by C.P.O. Gray, P.O. Conway and L.S.
Townes, pushed forward the Worcester barricade. Early in
November, Sub-Lieut. Hancock’s platoon of “ C ” Company of
the Hawke Battalion carried out the same operation at the
Southern barricade with equal success.
The value of these operations, entailing as they did a con-
stant stream of minor casualties, and aggravating if possible
the prevailing sickness, was sometimes called in question. We
had, however, to hold on this front a very superior force, fully
conscious of the victory which they had won on the Northern
front in August. On other grounds, too, the policy of the
Divisional Commander had much to recommend it. In these
operations, the newly-joined reinforcements, put into the line
as they arrived, were able to learn something of war, and to
retain something of discipline. The tactics afforded, in fact,
the only solution of the most serious domestic problem with
which the Division was confronted, the absorption of reinforce-
ments under conditions so circumscribed, that it was actually
impossible to parade even a platoon.
Difficulties of organization and discipline were heightened
by the heavy losses of officers from sickness in August and
September. Brigadier-General Trotman was away ill for the
whole of September, and Lt.-Colonel Stroud, R.M.L.L,
temporarily assumed command of the Brigade. Lt.-Colonel
Matthews, R.M.L.1., was invalided permanently from the
peninsula at the same time. Lt.-Colonel Wilson (Hawke
Battalion), was invalided on October 7th, and was succeeded
temporarily by Commander W. G. Ramsay Fairfax, R.N.
Lt.-Colonel Burge, R.M.L.I. (Nelson Battalion), was inva-
lided in October, and was succeeded temporarily by Lt.-
Commander E. W. Nelson, R.N.V.R. The rate of sickness
among junior officers was correspondingly high. During the
period August 15th to November 80th the Ist Naval Brigade
156
The Royal Naval Division


alone, in addition to losing four officers killed* (Sub-Lieut.
Farrow of the Hawke, Sub-Lieut. Bligh of the Drake, and
Lieutenant the Hon. Charles Lister and Sub-Lieut. E. H.
Gibson of the Hood) and two wounded, lost sixty-three officers
evacuated sick.f Among those who left the Division during this
period were three chaplains, the Rev. H. C. Foster, the Rev.
B. Failes and the Rev. F. Pierce, and the medical officers of the
Nelson (Surgeon Parker, R.N.) and of the Hawke (Surgeon
W. Bradbury, R.N. J), all of whom had done magnificent work
throughout the campaign.
If the health of the officers was bad, that of the men was
no better, and the constant fatigues made their existence
infinitely more burdensome. The result was that in September
and October the Division lost well over four thousand men
(though they received reinforcements which made the net loss
a little less), and even in November, when the colder weather
made the conditions in the trenches more bearable, the loss
was over a thousand.
That work, continued without cessation, and that the
sector was very materially strengthened, was to the credit of
the men of the infantry and the officers and men of the
Engineers. Their work was not materially lighter whether
they were in or out of the line. In preparation for winter,
and to make room for the 2/2nd and 2/4th Battalions of the
London Regiment, who came to reinforce the Division in
October, the R.N.D. rest camp was moved during October to
the extreme left of the peninsula, behind the new divisional
sector. The new camp was systematically planned to afford
the maximum protection against the shell-fire, but there was
no available timber, and only a little corrugated iron. Safety
and comfort, therefore, alike, depended on digging. The
idea was to build rows of oblong dug-outs, five feet deep at the
back and six feet in front, each draining into a narrow com-
municating trench, at least seven feet deep, along which officers
* In the 2nd Brigade Captain E. B. Carpenter, R.M. (Plymouth), Lieut.
G. S. Perkins, R.M. (Deal) and Sub-Lieut. Massey (Howe) were killed during
this period.
f Among them were Surgeon D. R. Bedell Sivright, M. 8., R.N. (best known,
perhaps, as a Rugby international) and Lt.-Commander W. S. Miall Green
(Benbow), both of whom died a short time after.
J For his services in the peninsula Staff-Surgeon Bradbury was later
awarded the D.S.O. and Surgeon Parker the D S.C.


and men could move round the camp entirely unobserved. In
the event of a heavy bombardment it was thought that these
deep and narrow trenches would themselves afford fairly
effective protection. The chances of prolonged bombardment
of the rest camp were, however, serious, and it was decided to
ensure against its effects still further by linking up the rest
camp with the cliffs, by a prolongation of two or more of the
internal communicating trenches. The camp could then be
evacuated, if necessary, under cover.
This elaborate scheme, necessary though it might have
proved itself, entailed an almost heartbreaking task for the
infantry battalions. Yet this task, too, was well on the road
to completion by the end of November, and the Division was
experiencing the nearest approach to comfort which had yet
been encountered on active service when the weather broke.
The first sign was a torrential downpour of rain on the night of
November 26th-27th. The next night it turned to snow, and
throughout the next two days a northerly gale blew, while the
frost, which had set in on the 27th-28th, lasted for the best
part of three days, reaching its height on the morning of the
30th, when the thermometer stood at 18° Fahrenheit. For
three days it had not risen above 22°, and the effect of this
sudden cold on men who were still suffering from the effects
of an almost tropical summer was extremely bad. Only one
dug-out per company was roofed. The remainder (four-fifths)
of the men were in the open, or at best under a covering of
worn-out waterproof sheets ; and the supplies of blankets, fuel
and oil were wholly inadequate to the emergency. Had the
cold continued, the situation must have become as serious at
Cape Helles as it did at Suvla and Anzac, when two hundred
died of cold in three days, and ten thousand men were evacuated
sick. Even as it was, there were many cases of frost-bite
among the troops whose ill luck it was to be in the line at this
time. Twenty-four occurred in the Ist Marine Battalion
alone.
To the general surprise, for the Army Corps at Cape Helles
had learnt to expect but little from fortune, the weather
improved (though only for a week or so) on December Ist, and,
though the trenches were temporarily flooded by the thaw
which came as suddenly as the frost, things were normal again
by the end of the first week in December. In one all-important


respect they were actually better. The frost, unbearable
while it lasted, put an end at once to the lingering summer
sickness.
On December sth, the Division, just as it was nearing the
completion of the rest camp, received orders to take over a
new sector on the left of the line, from the right of the 42nd
Division to the left of the French sector, which was now to be
shortened. This relief was carried out by General Trotman’s
brigade on December 11th. On the 17th, the rest camp was
given over to the 87th Brigade, and the Naval Division moved
into French billets on the coast above Morto Bay.
The first thought of the Division, on learning that they had
to take over part of the French line and a French camp, was
one of dismay. The French artillery and the French wine
were universally admired, but the fact that the new sector
would be supported by a group of “ 75’s ” was regarded
as the one consolation. It was assumed that the French
trenches would be more primitive, less clean, and less well
organized than our own, and that the French camp would be a
poor substitute for that which the Division had built up at so
great an expenditure of energy. No assumption could have
been more incorrect. Though the ground on which the camp
and the reserve lines stood was rocky to a depth of some feet,
the trenches and dug-outs were both deeper than our own.
They were also weather-proof, built round with stones, and
roofed with corrugated iron. The officers’ quarters were as
comfortable as could be, with tables and chairs, wooden floors,
firmly constructed stone walls, and doors and windows complete
with everything but glass. This was not Sybaritic luxury.
It merely meant that the French War Office had sent out to
Gallipoli supplies of stores essential to the health and comfort,
and so to the fighting efficiency, of the troops, in quantities
which were proportioned to the numbers of their expeditionary
force. For English troops, corresponding supplies had never
been available.
In the trenches, also, was much that the British Army had
lacked through the campaign. Particularly striking was the
abundance of strong corrugated iron (very different from the
flimsy material of the same name which was doled out in yards
to the British) which formed the material for most of the dug-
outs, and was in itself almost splinter-proof, being more than


a quarter of an inch thick. The whole of this corrugated iron
was of English manufacture.
From a military point of view, the most striking feature
of the French organization was the artillery liaison system.
The arrangements were no better (at least in theory) than
those universally adopted a little later by all formations, but
they were in advance of anything yet experienced by the
Naval Division.
It was, however, no period of rest or comfort which awaited
the Division in this sector. All that can be said is that the
arrangements made by the French made it just practicable for
the trenches to be maintained in reasonable security by a
numerically weak division, under conditions which were
extremely unfavourable. Two new factors made 4 a profound
change in the military situation in December, 1915. In the
first place, the weather settled down by the second week
in December to definite winter conditions, which meant heavy,
though not continuous, rain. In the second place, the Turks,
for the first time, began a systematic and effective bombard-
ment of our front-line trenches with heavy guns.*
Both these adverse factors were such as could be, and were,
overcome on other fronts. By an army starved of supplies,
starved of rest, under-officered, suffering from continual dis-
appointment, hopelessly under-gunned, they could only be
endured, f
To offset the obvious hardships and increasing dangers
to which the force was exposed there was little but the improved
health of the troops, which clearly would not be maintained
indefinitely through a winter campaign, and the return to all
battalions of not a few tried officers and men who had been
evacuated sick earlier in the campaign.
It was in these circumstances that official news came of the
evacuation of Suvla and Anzac. The official announcement
naturally did not forecast—rather, it definitely denied—the
possibility of the evacuation of the southern beaches, but, from
* Captain C. F. Mead, R.M.L.I. (Deal Battalion), Sub-Lieut. C. Bridgland,
R.N.V.R. (Drake) and Sub-Lieut. B. W. Kenny, R.N.V.R. (Nelson), were among
those killed in these closing days of the campaign.
f I do not intend to suggest that the moral of the Division was on the
ebb. It was not. The truth is that it was only the moral of the troops which
enabled a resolute defence to be maintained under almost impossible conditions.
The mere physical strain, however, made a renewal of the offensive, unless
reinforcements could be supplied, impossible.


the point of view of the linesmen, this was immaterial. What-
ever happened, the relief of the Naval Division for a period of
rest, if only on the adjacent islands, could not now be long
delayed.
Few military histories, which record so proudly and so
truly the enthusiasm of all ranks of an army at the beginning
of a campaign, give equal prominence to the no less fervent
longing of all soldiers for a period of rest after months of con-
tinuous fighting. To live on the Gallipoli peninsula was
to be continuously, not merely within effective range, but under
fire. Not a day passed but that some camp was shelled, and
all the beaches; while the daily fatigues were as often as not
carried out under indirect rifle fire. The prospect of a temporary
change from these conditions could have been nothing less
than joyous in any circumstances. As it happened, the pros-
pect first dawned on the men in the front-line trenches during a
week of exceptionally persistent bombardment, when the
casualties were severe. Austrian heavy artillery, moreover,
was reported to be coming into position.
The first hint of relief for the Naval Division was the
announcement, made on December 29th, before the policy
of evacuation was definitely decided on,* that the Bth Corps
would be relieved by the 9th Corps. This was the alternative
scheme which would have been adopted had it been decided
to remain at Cape Helles ; but the purpose of the announcement
was wider. On December 24th, Sir William Birdwood, now
commanding the Dardanelles Army under the supreme com-
mand of Sir Charles Monro, had received orders to make all
“ preliminary preparations for immediate evacuation in the
event of orders to this effect being received,” and it was essential
to make some public explanation of the withdrawal of certain
surplus stores, etc., which had to be put in hand without delay.
The situation soon resolved itself, and on the next day
(December 30th) General Paris received orders to prepare for
early evacuation.
Immediately on receipt of his instructions to make pre-
liminary preparations, General Birdwood had ordered silence
to be maintained at stated intervals each night from the 25th
♦ It is not universally known that among those in high command on the
peninsula and in the Eastern Mediterranean were many vigorous opponents of
evacuation.
II


onward, and, as far as the front line was concerned, nothing
was required in the way of definitive preparations but to con-
tinue in the same way. But much elaborate organization
remained to be carried out behind the lines. The first thing
was to complete the relief of the French troops from the right
of the line, and to relieve the 42nd Division from the sector
to the left of the Naval Division, the object in each place being
to reduce the number of separate formations to the minimum.
In place of these, the 13th Division and the remainder of the
29th Division, now at last strongly reinforced, returned to
Cape Helles. The necessary trench reliefs were carried out
on the nights of December 31st and January Ist, and the lines
from sea to Straits were held thereafter by only fqur divisions,
the 13th on the left, the 29th and the 52nd in the centre and
the Royal Naval Division on the right. In support of the
last named, there remained some French artillery, which the
French commander readily agreed should come under our
orders for the remaining few days of the campaign, to “ escape
the disadvantages of divided command in the final stage ”
of the evacuation.
The Naval Division sector, which had previously consisted
of some two thousand yards of line between the restricted
French sector overlooking the Straits and the 42nd Division,
now ran, roughly, from the centre of the old sector to the coast.
General Mercer’s brigade remained where it was before, and
General Trotman’s brigade moved across to the new sub-
sector on the left, the 52nd Division taking over the old sub-
sector on the right. The Hood and Drake Battalions of the
Ist Brigade and the Ist R.M. and Howe Battalions of the 2nd
Brigade were now in the front lines, the Hawke Battalion and
the 2nd R.M. in the reserve (Eski) line, and in bivouac the
Nelson and Anson Battalions and the 2/2nd and 2/4th
Battalions of the London Regiment.
The date of the evacuation had been fixed for January Bth,
and the final plans, modelled on those so supremely successful
at Anzac and Suvla, had been made. The task before the Corps
Commander was, indeed, more arduous than had been the case
on the other front. The accumulation of stores was more
considerable, the front deeper and the communications more
exposed. But the problem was still essentially a simple one.
During the days immediately following the reorganization of
162
The Royal Naval Division


the sectors of defence, all troops not required for front line or
support duty, and all stores not needed for the maintenance of
this smaller force had to be withdrawn. As soon as this was
done the final withdrawal, accompanied inevitably by an
increasing, but still a very limited, measure of risk, could begin.
For the purpose of the final orders issued to the troops con-
cerned, this stage of the operation was defined as beginning on
“ X ” day, “ Z ” day being, of course, the day on the evening
of which our positions on the peninsula would be surrendered.
The date of “X ” day was necessarily determined by the
progress made with the withdrawal of stores, guns and reserve
troops.
For this the arrangements were in charge of Major-General
the Hon. H. A. Lawrence, then commanding the 52nd Divi-
sion (later Chief of Staff to Sir Douglas Haig in France).
Progress was, on the whole, as good as could have been
expected. The first units to leave were, as has been stated, the
French infantry and 42nd Division. Next came the bulk of the
artillery, the horses, and the surplus transport of the remaining
troops. Then, in the last days, the baggage of the Divisional
and Brigade Headquarters, the battalion records and the
regimental stores of the units in the line.
By “ X ” day, first announced as January sth and then
postponed till January 6th, all this had been accomplished,
and there was nothing to show that our movements had aroused
the enemy’s suspicion. On this day the period of calculable
risk began. The front line trenches and the reserve (Eski)
line were still held in full strength, but the artillery was now
reduced to a minimum, and the reserve infantry were preparing
for embarkation. Thus, on the night of January 6th-7th,
the two battalions of the London Regiment attached to the
Naval Division were embarked, and by the morning of
January 7th the total strength of the Division (all arms) was
reduced to some 4,400. Assuming other divisions to have
been similarly thinned, there were not many more than 16,000
men on the peninsula on January 7th, when the Turks opened
a terrific bombardment at 2 p.m. The shelling on the left was
the heaviest ever experienced on the peninsula; on the right,
where the Naval Division were, it was less severe than the
bombardments of December 23rd, 24th and 25th. This was
extremely opportune, since an effective counter-bombardment
ii*
163
Anticlimax


could be maintained on the left flank by the guns of the support-
ing squadron (Captain Dent, R.N.), but on that flank only.
As it was, the attempted attack was broken by the help of the
Navy, and the whole front was quiet again by 5 p.m.
After this episode, the execution of the plan went on un-
interruptedly, and during the night of January 7th-Bth the
support battalions (Hawke and 2nd R.M.) of the Naval
Division left the trenches for the last time. They were relieved
in the Eski line by detachments of the front-line garrison.
The final allocation of troops for the divisional sector of the
firing, support and Eski lines was 845 all ranks and 8 machine
guns to the firing line, 300 all ranks and 2 machine guns in
immediate support, and 460 all ranks and 3 machine guns in
the third line, all drawn from the Hood, Drake, Ist R.M. and
Howe battalions. Simultaneously, all other arms of the Divi-
sion in the defensive zone were reduced proportionately, except
the medical personnel, which was fixed at the proportionately
high figure of 210 all ranks.
The dangers of leaving the defence of a position 2,000 yards
in extent to be defended in depth by nearly 2,000 men were
obvious ; but they were not overwhelming. In bivouac, were
approximately another 2,000 men (the Hawke Battalion, two
companies of the 2nd R.M. Battalion and details of Engineers,
medical personnel and the other infantry battalions), and a
new line covering the beaches had been organized by the G.O.C.
embarkation. To this line had been allotted (from the Naval
Division) 400 officers and men of the 2nd R.M. Battalion.
Even the absence of artillery, though it must have meant
very heavy losses had an infantry engagement developed,
could hardly have meant disaster. The real danger was of
a storm at sea, which would cut off the slender garrison for a
period of days. But against this risk no staff work could
prevail.
By now it was “Z ” day. The day’s programme was
mapped out in detail. Ammunition had to be buried, control
posts had to be manned ; officers in charge of the different
parties had to familiarize themselves for the last time with
the exact route of their departure, with the posts to which
they must report. The burden of work fell, however, to the
staffs of battalions and brigades. Strengths of platoons
and companies, which are usually left to the computation of
164
The Royal Naval Division


Horses picketed on the road made between Cape Helles
and Gully Ravine.




clerks in orderly rooms, were the key to the whole operation.
No margin of error was permissible. The route from the
front line to the beach was picketed, and, at stated points,
control posts in charge of officers and signallers had to be fur-
nished with exact numbers of the parties which would pass
them at different times, each scheduled to the minute. As
the parties passed, the figures were to be telephoned to the
next post, and so on till the beach was reached. If the strengths
were inaccurate, or the parties not up to scheduled time, the
embarkation arrangements must break down, for each boat
had to be loaded to capacity, and as it became available.
There was no margin for men, expected at one time, arriving
at another.
The computation of a battalion state is at all times one
of the minor horrors of war. In a campaign where it is im-
possible by parading a battalion to exercise the only real
check on the figures supplied, it verges on the major category.
Where the state has to be exact, the balance goes over. And
so, for many of the officers, this last day on the peninsula, which
should have been charged with so many poignant and dramatic
memories, was spent in feverishly tracing bombers, signallers,
transport men or batmen, detached some months before for
some special duty, but electing to appear or disappear at this
eleventh hour with a quiet modesty which may have indicated
a high degree of personal charm, but which accounted for a
regrettable absence of that quality in Brigade Majors, Staff
Captains, Colonels and Adjutants. Besides these trifling
but urgent anxieties, was the disinclination to be wounded
at this last moment of an historic campaign.
The afternoon of January Bth wore on, and as the bright
sun faded from the winter sky to sink beneath the still placid
waters of the Aegean, a silence fell upon the peninsula. Faded
now were those dreams of suffering, of ambition, or of victory,
which each man, however humble, or however noble, holds in
the secrecy of a mind dominated by trustful humility, or am-
bition, or the inspiration of patriotism. Beneath the soil of
that dedicated peninsula, were many who had experienced all
these things; and by these, who had experienced none, those
others were to be abandoned. No longing for rest, for the joys
of decent and homely comforts, for the society of friends,
could quite remove the impression. The trenches were to be


surrendered, and the graves of friends were to be abandoned to
the enemy. Nearer home, in battles more vast, and in their
material issue more important, something of what had been
lost was to be regained. But what was saved, was saved by
the material victory of superior force. The chance of a victory
against odds, and so of an earlier and a wiser peace, had gone
for ever.
Probably the judgment of the rank and file was on the
whole a merciful one. Perhaps it was too merciful. But,
at any rate, it was amid a silence which it needed no discipline
to enforce, that at 6.15 in the gathering dusk of that fateful
but uneventful day, the troops in bivouac were paraded for the
last time on the peninsula, and marched off along the familiar
roads worn by the feet of so many men of their own race now
dead or broken in battle. With no more than a look, men
passed by landmark after landmark familiar in earlier
battles, till they reached those beaches, so nobly won, which
it was now so important to abandon with quickness and
precision. Hardly a shell came from Asia, and those that
did, fell mercifully. Each party, as they arrived, were marched
along one or other of the piers, packed into lighters or destroyers,
so many, methodically counted, into each, and moved off to
the larger transports waiting off the coast.
All this time, the front line garrison remained; it was no
use their leaving till the destroyers and lighters, having taken
all the reserve troops, were ready to make their second journey.
Then only, between 9 and 10 p.m., did the critical hours begin.
For at this time the strength of the trench garrisons was to
move off, leaving only a skeleton force capable of a resistance
long enough, so it was planned, to enable the main garrison
to be recalled, or to be embarked, as the situation might dictate.
At 11.45 p.m., as soon as the main garrison had been embarked,
the skeleton force was itself withdrawn, and the line was left
open to the assault of the enemy. Even now the victory
would not have been a bloodless one. As the force withdrew,
special parties of Engineers and others connected mines pre-
viously laid, and closed up barricades and entanglements,
before they, too, passed down to the beaches. With them
passed the control posts. So, stage by stage, the procession
moved on. The period of extreme hazard seemed over. The
bulk of the garrison was already embarked, and no Turkish
166
The Royal Naval Division


patrols could have got through the mined and barricaded
trenches, in time to worry the slender rearguard on the open
road between the trenches and the last line of defence above
the beaches.
Here, however, the situation was more disquieting. Ever
since seven o’clock the wind had been rising, and though the
first and second trips were well up to time, the arrangements
for the 11.30 embarkations had had to be altered at the last
minute, and the prospects for the final trip were anxious. The
last troops were expected between 2 and 3 a.m. By 2.30 a.m.
all had arrived, but a heavy surf was dashing upon the shore,
and it was only under conditions of great stress and peril that
the embarkations were effected. The last of the Naval Division
to embark were General Paris and his staff, who left soon after
3 a.m. The last of all were Corps and General Headquarters
staff and the Naval and Military embarkation officers.
By 3.30 a.m. the inevitable step had been taken. Never
again, till peace had been signed, would British troops revisit
the peninsula which they had conquered and held against all
assaults of the acknowledged enemy.
167
Anticlimax


CHAPTER X
FROM THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN TO THE FRENCH FRONT
WHEN the Naval Division anchored in Mudros harbour
on the morning of January 10th, 1916, its period of
service with the Army was, temporarily, at an end, and the
force came under the orders of Admiral Sir John de Robeck.
It was not uncharacteristic of the Division that, after being
withdrawn unexpectedly from its training under the Admiralty
to serve the needs of the War Office in two great emergencies,
it should now, when it had become thoroughly seasoned and
experienced in land warfare, find itself under Naval command,
in a situation which seemed to give no chance of its being
usefully employed. If, however, the situation was Gilbertian,
it was not unpleasant.
Mudros, at this time, was a scene of a vastly ironic activity.
The end of the campaign had marked, here, a veritable climax
of preparation. The brain behind the chaos had had a vision
(so much at least was clear) of some not distant day when
mere huts and tents would be too primitive to have any place
in the new township which was to be set up on the shores
of the harbour. The shells of huge concrete buildings bore
eloquent witness to the simple grandeur of the idea. The
foundations of camps, the beginnings of roads, mysterious
engines and other mechanical devices lying derelict by the
wayside, but still monumental in their challenge to the sur-
rounding simplicity; a flock of turkeys in good time for Christ-
mas, 1916, cases of wine labelled medical comforts and filled
with water coloured with an unmistakable ingenuity, well-
stocked canteens, beer by the barrel for sale, a clothing depot
which could have supplied an army in the field, bore testimony
to a really remarkable organization. But the Army was no
longer in the field. Soon only the organizers and the Naval
Division remained.
168






It was not in accordance with the plan, this sudden juxta-
position of the men and the stores. Admirable, in the circum-
stances, was the energy which led to the early disappearance
of everything which could be moved ; and it was but a matter
of weeks before only the concrete structures, the derelict
machines and the Naval Division remained.
For a short time, it looked as if the Division and the concrete
might share the same fate, fixed for all time on the deserted
edge of the almost deserted waters. But the problem resolved
itself with unexpected ease. On Tenedos and on Imbros, as
well as on Mudros, the hand of the organizer had lain, if more
lightly, and it was judged necessary to establish semi-permanent
garrisons on the three islands. The duty was assigned to one
brigade of the Division,* and the other (the 2nd) R.N. Brigade
was lent a little later to the Salonica Army, for duty on the Guh
of Stavros.
The only strictly military duty falling to the garrisons
of the islands was at Imbros and Tenedos, where detachments
had to take over from the R.N.A.S. three anti-aircraft guns.
The crews for these guns were found from volunteers from the
Hawke and Drake Battalions. Otherwise, the routine consisted
of a certain amount of police work, the examination of persons
passing in and out of the small area in occupation of the garrison,
the mounting of numerous guards and pickets and the search
for hostile snipers whenever someone threw a cartridge into
an incinerator. The greater proportion of the garrison was
employed on none of these duties, and carried out company,
or battalion training.
The Stavros front, impressive to the ear as the description
is, was not more dangerous than the islands. After the failure
of our attempt to save Serbia from the German invasion in the
autumn of 1915, the allied force had retired into Greece and
taken up a line, covering Salonica, with its right flank on the
Gulf of Stavros. This line, some sixty miles in length, was
only thinly held, and between our army and the Bulgarian
frontier were interposed a number of Greek divisions. The
2nd Brigade held the right divisional sector of this line, their
chief duties being to improve the defensive position on their
* The Hawke and Drake Battalions with the H.Q. Ist R.N. Brigade went
to Imbros, one company of the Hood Battalion to Tenedos, and the balance of
the Ist Brigade remained at Mudros.
169
From Mediterranean to French Front


front, and to prevent Greek stragglers or spies from the
Bulgarian Army from getting behind our lines. In certain
circumstances the position held would have been one of im-
portance, since it guarded one of the two routes by which the
Bulgarians might, if the acquiescence of the Greeks could be
secured, direct an attack in strength against us. There was,
however, no likelihood of such an attack, of which, in any
case, the cavalry patrols many miles in front of our lines would
have given us ample warning.
While the Division was thus peaceably engaged, the
authorities at home had been thinking, at intervals, of its
future employment. Some thought the Division should remain
on garrison duty in the East, that the divisional organization
should be scrapped and the force reduced to six battalions.
The friends of the Division urged, on the contrary, that it should
be reinforced and sent to France. The rival schools of thought
must have been nicely balanced, for in April orders for the
reduction of the Division to six battalions were issued by the
Admiralty. The orders were, however, countermanded, and,
when the rumour was circulated that the Division was going
to Mitylene, it was felt that its departure in the opposite
direction would not be much longer delayed.
The Division arrived in France in May, 1916, and was
concentrated, according to what was now a well-established
routine, in a back area (near Abbeville in this case), for the
issue of stores and equipment, and for such preliminary
reorganization as was necessary.
When it was finally decided to send the Division to
France, the plan had been to complete it to the strength
of twelve battalions, from reserves at the depot. The new
battalions were to be the 2nd Hood, the 2nd Anson, the 2nd
Hawke, and the 2nd Drake. The nucleus of the 2nd Hood
was at once formed (from the Ist Hood) under Commander
Asquith, with Lt.-Commander Kelly, D.S.C., as second
in command. The other three battalions were to come out
as complete units from the depot, the 2nd Anson under Lt.-
Colonel Ramsden, R.N. (with Major J. H. Levey as second in
command), the 2nd Hawke under Captain Hunter, R.N., and
the 2nd Drake under Lt.-Colonel Britten, R.M.L.I.
Throughout June this plan held the field, but eventually
it had to be abandoned, owing to the shortage of officers and
170
The Royal Naval Division


men available for reinforcements for the existing battalions.
It was therefore decided that the Division should be brought up
to infantry strength by the addition of an army brigade (the
190th Brigade), consisting of the Ist Battalion H.A.C., the
4th Bedfords, the 7th Royal Fusiliers and the 10th Dublin
Fusiliers. The promise of this Brigade marked the end of a
chapter in the history of the Naval Division, which was recog-
nized by a change of the official name of the Royal Naval, to
the 63rd (R.N.) Division. Even at this date, however, the
division in the field was not absorbed definitely into the army
machine. The two Naval Brigades, becoming the 189th and
188th Infantry Brigades, remained (after almost hourly noti-
fications to the contrary) unchanged in their composition, and
the divisional Engineers, the Medical Unit and the divisional
train were not interfered with. The result was that the reten-
tion of the Division in France still depended, to a great extent,
on the goodwill of the Admiralty, who had the right to with-
draw all officers and men commissioned or enlisted in the
Naval or Marine forces. The advantage accruing was greater
than might have been expected. It was, indeed, most unlikely
that any substantial proportion of the force would in any
circumstances be withdrawn for sea service. The fact remained,
however, that this was always a possible result of any injudicious
attempt to abolish those characteristics of organization, rank
and discipline, on which the esprit de corps and the fighting
efficiency of the Division so largely depended.
Rightly, the Naval Division was spared none of the recog-
nized stages of acclimatization arranged for all formations
arriving in France for the first time. The first essential was, of
course, to fill the vacancies in the Divisional and Brigade staffs
and among Battalion Commanders. Brigadier-General Mercer
had been promoted and appointed Adjutant-General of the
Royal Marines, his Brigade Major (Major Tupman, R.M.L.1.)
had been given the command of an army battalion, and Briga-
dier-General Trotman, C.B.* and his staff had been transferred
to the new (190th) Brigade. In their place, Brigadier-General
H. E. S. Prentice, D. 5.0., was appointed to the 188th and
Brigadier-General L. F. Phillips, D. 5.0., to the 189th Brigade.
Important changes were also made at Divisional Head-
* Brigadier-General Trotman had been awarded the C.B. for his services
on Gallipoli.
171
From Mediterranean to French Front


quarters. Colonel Richardson and Colonel Ollivant had both
left the Division while it was at Mudros, and their places were
now filled (as A. A. and Q.M.G.) by Lt.-Colonel Foster, R.M.L.I.
and (as G. 5.0.1, after two interim appointments) by Lt.-Colonel
Aspinall, C.M.G., D. 5.0., who had served on Sir lan Hamilton’s
staff at Gallipoli, and who was to be a good friend to the Division
for many months. Other changes were necessary to fill the
places of Fleet-Surgeon Gaskell, R.N., A.D.M.S., who had taken
up an appointment under the Admiralty ; Lt.-Colonel Carey,
C.M.G., late C.R.E. of the Division, who had become C.R.E.
of a corps in France, and Lt.-Colonel Chaytor, who had com-
manded the divisional train. Their places were taken by
Fleet-Surgeon Finch, R.N., Major Harrison, R.M., and Lt.-
Colonel Liddell, A.S.C.
Of the Battalion Commanders, Captain King, D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R. (Drake Battalion) and Major Bridges, R.M.L.I.
(Anson Battalion) had left the Division for duty under the
Admiralty, and the command of the Howe Battalion was also
vacant. Lt.-Colonel Tetley, R.M.L.1., and Lt.-Colonel Saunders,
R.M.L.1., were given command of the Drake and Anson
respectively, and Major French, R.M.L.1., was temporarily
appointed to the Howe.
While these changes were taking place, the battalions and
divisional troops (who had left such stores and transport,
as were theirs, in Egypt or in Mudros) were completely re-
equipped, or, more accurately, completely equipped for the
first time. The infantry battalions had never before had
horses for their mounted officers (many of whom, incidentally,
had very naval notions of horsemanship), and had seen their
first line transport only for a few days prior to leaving Bland-
ford in 1915. The transport available on the peninsula had
been limited to three limbered wagons and a field kitchen
or two per battalion, and the once trained personnel for the
ordinary complement had long since become casualties. Now,
not only had the battalions to organize their transport but
to learn how to use it. This applied with even greater force
to other units. The Naval Division had never moved, as a
division, except by train or transport till it reached France,
and the habit of mobility had now to be hastily acquired.
Equally important were the modifications of organization
imposed by the new tactics. The machine gun had, in France
172
The Royal Naval Division


2nd R.N. Field Ambulance at Stavros, March, 1916.




in 1916, been elevated to the dignity of a Brigade gun, and the
Lewis gun had taken its place as the battalion weapon. At
the same time trench mortars had become standardized, and
trench mortar batteries were as recognized a part of the
establishment of a Division as were infantry battalions. Yet
the Lewis gun and the Stokes mortar were, to the Naval
Division, completely new weapons.
The Brigade machine-gun (Vickers) companies were formed
at once by withdrawing from the battalions the existing machine-
gun sections. The 188th Brigade Company was commanded by
Captain Mac George, M.G.C., the 189th Brigade Company by
Lt.-Commander H. E. Funnell, R.N.V.R., and the 190th
Brigade Company by Captain Bastian, R.M. The Brigade
trench mortar batteries were formed from volunteers from the
different battalions, the 188th under Lieutenant Alan Campbell,
R.N.V.R., and the 189th under Lieutenant O. J. Wainwright,
R.N.V.R. The infantry battalions were in due course brought
up to strength again, by drafts of officers and men from
Blandford.
The reorganization progressed by somewhat easy stages,
and, in particular, owing to the change of plans regarding the
composition of the third brigade, the Division was short of
one brigade till the middle of July. As early as the middle of
June, however, it had moved from the Army concentration
area to the IVth Corps area, to undergo the next stage in the
established routine. Here, in pleasant villages north-west of
Arras, due west of the IVth Corps line, which ran from Lens
to the Vimy Ridge, the Division had a period of battalion and
brigade training, during which platoons, companies, battalions,
and brigades were in turn attached to the 47th Division in the
Angres and Souchez sub-sectors, for preliminary tours of duty
in the trenches. This was the practical part of the training
programme, and, if the Division had not much to learn about
the art of trench construction or trench discipline, it had every-
thing to learn about conditions wholly novel and demanding a
radical alteration of the accustomed dispositions. The theo-
retic training was equally thorough. As soon as the Division
passed into the Corps area, vacancies for courses of instruction,
especially in the new arms, poured in on the battalions. The
system of schools and courses became at later stages a mixed
blessing, but at this stage it was essential.
173
From Mediterranean to French Front


Finally, the Division approached the accepted standard of
proficiency, and went forward to its place in the fighting line
on the 17th July. On this date General Paris* took over
command of the Angres-Souchez sector, from the 47th Division.
The 190th Brigade was not yet available, and the sector taken
over was thus only a two-brigade front, but the Division was,
at long last, in sight of its complete establishment. On July
29th, the 63rd Divisional Artillery,f to which the Naval Division
was to be so substantially indebted throughout the rest of the
campaign, came into the line. The story was completed on
August 30th, when General Trotman’s 190th Brigade relieved
a brigade of the 40th Division in the Calonne sub-sector,
on the left of the Angres sub-sector, held by the 188th
Brigade.
The Divisional sector lay between Lens and the Vimy Ridge,
through the ruins of two mining villages, Calonne and Angres,
and thence southward across the Souchez river. The front
line, which ran north and south, had originally been further
west; for in the rush to the sea the enemy had carried their
line across the Arras-Bethune road (east of which our line
now ran) right to the heights of Lorette, a mile or so west of
Souchez village. These heights had been won back by the
French, in a famous battle in the summer of 1915. Since then,
our position on the low ground of the Souchez valley, and across
the slag heaps which marked the outskirts of Lens, had never
been, nor was likely to be, seriously challenged. It was not
naturally strong, but that part of the sector which ran through
the mining country lent itself readily to infantry defence, and
the Souchez valley, through which the enemy might otherwise
have attacked, was dominated by the immensely strong position
of Lorette. How the French had captured that position in
1915 by direct assault, none but those who made the attack
could say. It was certain, however, that with the enormous
increase in the weight of artillery available and with the im-
* General Paris had received the K.C.B.for his services in Gallipoli. Among
others of the Divisional staff and the Divisional troops who had been decorated
at the same time were Lt.-Colonel Richardson, Fleet-Surgeon Gaskell, Fleet-
Surgeon Finch and Lt.-Colonel Carey, who received the C.M.G., and Major H.
D. Lough, R.M.L.I. (D.A.A. & Q.M.G.), Fleet-Surgeon Fleming, R.N. and Major
Teale, R.M., who received the D.S.O.
t The artillery consisted of the 315th (Lieut.-Col. Higginbottom), 317th
(Lieut.-Col. S. Gosling) and 223rd (Lieut.-Col. Gemmell) Field Artillery Brigades.
Brigadier-General A. H. De Rougemont was appointed C.R.A. of the Division.
174
The Royal Naval Division


provement of defensive tactics the Germans would never
retake it.
The trenches taken over from the 47th Division were an
eloquent testimony to the reliance now placed on the new
methods of defence. The Naval Battalions who had been
attached to that Division in their same trenches for instruc-
tion had indeed been inclined to scoff at their instructors ;
it was certain that such trenches could never have been held
in Gallipoli. They came to learn, however, that, though the
trenches were certainly capable (like most others in France)
of very substantial improvement, their first criticism had been
very wide of the mark.
Positional warfare in France was something wholly different
from that to which the Division had been hitherto accustomed.
The rifle and the bomb were as little used in the day-to-day
routine of the trenches as the bayonet. The infantry were
neither the first nor the last line of defence, for, by them-
selves and unaided, they had ceased to be capable (in strict
theory) of defending anything. The change had begun with
the development of the artillery of the opposing armies, which
had been a feature of the war at the beginning of 1915. Before
that, in Flanders, as later in Gallipoli, the front line trench had
been the main line of resistance, held by an unbroken line of
rifles and bayonets. Close at hand were support and reserve
lines, from which reinforcements could be sent to the front
line —reinforcements of more rifles and bayonets. Under this
system of defence, the infantry were beyond all question the
most important and therefore the most independent arm.
The system, however, did not anticipate, or allow for, such a
weight of hostile artillery as would render the massing of
infantry in line, on a clearly defined position of no great depth,
a futile manoeuvre. Yet so it became. Casualties in the
strongly-held front line became more and more numerous ; the
old-fashioned support and reserve lines suffered equally badly,
so close were they to the front line. The system had to be
radically altered.
Under the new system of defence in depth, the front line
and the support line became in effect only a line of sentry groups
and a line of pickets. In 1916, the sentry groups and pickets
were still provided with lateral communication by means of
a connected trench, but in 1917 this was the exception rather
175
From Mediterranean to French Front


than the rule, and a line of posts became the normal first line
of defence. Under either system, the front line was held mainly
for purposes of observation, and, when there was a continuous
trench, the telephone to Battalion Headquarters and to the
Battalions on the right and left was its most important feature.
The support line was the line on which a delaying action would
be fought or any merely local attack held up. The line of
resistance was the third line,* held by perhaps two companies
of infantry (for whom special protection in deep dug-outs had
to be provided), on a battalion front of five or six hundred yards,
and a number of machine guns and trench mortars in fortified
emplacements. These, though they never developed, as they did
in the German lines, into miniature fortresses, were, nevertheless,
more important for purposes of defence than the infantry
themselves.
But if the third line was the line of resistance, the main
defence for it consisted, not even in the machine guns and
trench mortars, still less in the rifles and bayonets of the
garrison; but, now and henceforward, in the protective
artillery barrage. Only with those few who might come alive
through this were the infantry garrison expected or, indeed,
sufficiently numerous, to deal.
These developments alone were sufficient to change very
greatly the duties and responsibilities of the infantry. It
was not, however, only in defence that the man had become
in many ways less important than the machine, but also in the
numerous diversions of positional warfare. Raids remained
the prerogatives of the infantry, but these were the exception,
not the rule. Intensive bombardments of back areas by the
artillery, of the front line trenches by “ Stokes ” mortars,
night firing off the map by Vickers guns, mining operations
by the tunnelling companies and discharges of gas by the
“ Special ” companies of Engineers were the ordinary forms of
that paradoxical product of trench life, the stationary offensive.
These great modifications in the responsibilities of the
infantry soldier brought nothing but a heavy increase in his
daily burden of work. The very depth of the new defences
* This is a generalized statement, subject, of course, to many exceptions.
The principles remained, however, substantially unchanged till 1918, when
after the March disaster a slightly different system, based on the substitution
of “ zones ” for “ lines of resistance,” came into use. The function of the
different arms remained, however, the same.
176
The Royal Naval Division


meant that there were literally miles of communication and
fire trenches to be kept in repair by the infantry. Even the
ordinary ration and water parties made a serious call on their
energies. Every day the need for emplacements of a more
elaborate pattern and deep dug-outs more proof against the
enemy’s bombardments increased. These had to be dug by
the infantry under the supervision of the engineers. The
enthusiasm of the tunnelling companies provoked continuous
demands for assistance from the infantry in the less skilled
but equally arduous task of removing hundreds of filled sand-
bags. Trench mortar ammunition and gas cylinders had to
be man-handled by the infantry from dumps in the rear of the
defensive system to positions near, or in, the front line. Signal
wires had to be buried by infantry fatigue parties. All the
time, specialist units like trench mortar batteries and machine-
gun companies had to be kept up to strength. The infantry
was, indeed, the only non-specialist arm (though from time to
time enthusiastic staff officers rediscovered the rifle and
bayonet), and it might have seemed that its chief function in
stationary warfare was to supply the needs of other more im-
portant arms. Yet those other arms were, irr reality, important
only in co-operation with the infantry as a fighting unit. It
was this dual role of the infantryman which was the difficulty.
Although few battalion commanders ever had under their
command, except on the actual eve of battle, more than sixty
per cent, of their men, the infantry still had to guard the front.
There was no substitute for their physical presence, for the
officers who would patrol in no man’s land, for the company
signallers, who must give the first warning of any attack; for
the sentry who alone could prevent patrols from entering the
line, for the battalion commander who had to take charge of
the situation in any emergency, to decide which line to hold
and which to give up, when and where to counter-attack and
what directions to give to the artillery, and to all the new and
proud varieties of specialists who swarmed round his line.
The infantryman was the servant but still, in an anomalous sort
of way, the master of all.
It was just here that there was something wrong. It was
not one of those characteristic compromises, of which English
constitutional historians have so much to say, which cannot
be defended in theory but which work admirably in practice.
12
177
From Mediterranean to French Front


It worked, because it had to work, but it did not, and could
not, work well. To this plain fact, and not to any intellectual
or moral deficiencies, was due the much exaggerated but
still, to some extent, real unpopularity of “ the Staff ” in France
in 1916.
The life of the Division in the new sector was almost
uniformly without incidents of individual importance. The
Brigade and Divisional diaries chronicle, indeed, only one
which can be characterized as an active operation—a highly
successful raid by the Anson Battalion, on September 10th,
carried out to secure an identification, badly needed to check
enemy movements to and from the main battlefield of the
Somme. The raid was carried out by Lieutenant F. C. Mundy,
Sub-Lieut. W. B. Moir and twelve other ranks of the battalion
at 5 a.m. on an enemy sap opposite the northernmost Angres
sub-sector, and the party captured a prisoner belonging to the
103rd Saxon Regiment, 23rd Saxon Reserve Division, 12th
Reserve Corps. In the course of the raid Lieutenant Mundy
was seriously, and Lieutenant Moir and one man slightly,
wounded. But the desired information had been gained.
This incident, apart from the life of the trenches, or in
support in Bully Grenay, in Noulette Wood, or on Lorette
spur, became a matter of routine,* varied only by occasional
activities on the part of the specialists, who would discharge
gas, or conduct a ten minutes’ intensive bombardment, or blow
up a crater, with no very great interest in the result, but just to
keep their hand in and annoy the enemy. Not infrequently,
the annoyance was equally felt by the infantry, but for them,
as no doubt for the enemy, it was all in the day’s work, and they
endured what they affected not to understand.
Meanwhile, the orgy of instruction continued with results
now distinctly less beneficial. Professor Saintsbury has said
somewhere that the limit to the progress of education will be
found not in any lack of people able to learn but in a lack of
those able to teach. In this last respect, as doubtless in others,
the Army have, or at least had, the advantage of the civil
population; because their difficulty was to keep fully occupied
the legion of officers and men who were anxious and available
* Yet there were the inevitable losses. Among those killed in the summer
of 1916 were Sub-Lieut. S. P. Hancock, R.N.Y.R., of the Hawke, 2nd Lieut.
J. W. Somerville, of the 2nd Marines, and 2nd Lieut. W. C. A. Elliot, of the Ist
Marines.


to teach. To meet the difficulty, the more astute, or less
conscientious, battalion commanders kept a strictly limited
list of officers, N.C.O.’s and men, whom they regarded as avail-
able in any circumstances for instruction in any subject.
Even so, the untimely manner in which one course would
begin before another had ended made it necessary to go outside
this list for at least half the vacancies that were allotted.
The other characteristic feature of the early days in France
was equally peculiar to the period. The vast organization
behind the lines was as yet growing, but it was growing at this
period not at the expense of men of military age in non-essential
employments at home, but at the expense of Divisions not
immediately needed for active fighting. Demands for Town
Majors, sanitary squads, staffs for divisional laundries, salvage
experts, bath attendants, batmen by the score, men for making
roads, officers who could speak Chinese, N.C.O.’s with experi-
ence of acetylene welding, subalterns with a taste for licking
boots, came in by every dispatch rider, or, as often as not, in
the form of a peremptory signal. The first few demands were
often easily met, but the time came when every demand which
had to be met was met with a definite loss of efficiency. Pro-
tests were unavailing. The war had to go on, so thought
the cynical infantryman, even if the front-line trenches were
under-garrisoned. The strange thing is that the infantryman
was about right. The divisional laundry in a four-years’ war
was, in fact, almost as important as the sentry in the front fine.
The ironic point seemed, however, at the time remarkably keen.
How far the process of disintegration had gone, few, even
in the battalions themselves, realized, till the Division suddenly
received orders, late on the night of September 16th, to hand
over to the 37th Division (the support and reserve battalions
on the morning immediately following) and to proceed once
more to the IVth Corps training area. The next hours were
a vivid, and not a particularly pleasant, foretaste of the Resur-
rection. From all quarters and at all stages of the march to
the back areas, battalions were met by officers and N.C.O.’s
and men, who had been detached for one duty or another,
some on the very day the units had arrived in France, the
majority immediately on entry into the IVth Corps area.
Some of the officers who rejoined had hardly been with their
battalions at all, having gone from one course of instruction
12*
179
From Mediterranean to French Front


to another ever since they arrived in France. The same was
true of some of the N.C.O.’s. The results were sometimes
humorous, especially when some not over-competent officer
or man, having been sent to a course to be cursed into efficiency,
returned full of importance as a “ qualified ” instructor to the
unit which had selected him, not without reason, as pre-
eminently in need of instruction.
Battalion commanders soon learnt, moreover, that dis-
cipline had not improved in the process of acquiring technical
knowledge. The work of training had to be begun again, on
the very eve of the time of testing. Never had officers greater
cause to be thankful that they belonged to a composite and
individual formation, whose esprit de corps could be trusted to
make their task lighter and its fruits more satisfying than
could under other circumstances have been expected.
The last days of September were spent once more in the
peaceful and friendly villages which lie between Bailleul and
Arras. Di&val, La Comte, Hersin, Ourton, held the 188th
Brigade, and Marquay, Orlencourt, Bailleul itself, held the 190th,
while the 189th went to Fresnicourt, Monchy Breton, Hermin,
Magnicourt and Frevillers. The Artillery Headquarters were
at La Vielfort, and the Brigades were at Bours (315th Brigade),
Calonne Ricquart (317th Brigade) and Chamblain Chatelain
(223rd Brigade). The Train Headquarters were at Bruay, with
companies at Divion, Hermin and Ourton; the Engineers’
Headquarters were at Bajus. Division Headquarters, Echelon B,
were at Ourton, and General Paris and his staff at a chateau
near by. The Field Ambulances were quartered at Fresnicourt,
Divion and Bruay.
This was the first time in its history that the Division had
moved as a complete unit approximately at full strength.
It had entered the IVth Corps area still in process of growth ;
it left it, as it was to remain for the rest of the war, a division
complete in every detail of its establishment. As such, it
comprised some forty different units ; twelve only of them
were first-line infantry battalions.' The other fighting troops
comprised nine batteries of artillery, three machine-gun com-
panies, and the different light, medium and heavy trench
mortar batteries. The principal accessory formations were,
as before, the Signal Company, the three field companies of
Engineers, the four companies of the Divisional Train and the
180
The Royal Naval Division


three Field Ambulances. In addition, there were the Divisional
Ammunition Column, the Ordnance Section, the Sanitary
Section, the Mobile Veterinary Section and the Pioneer Bat-
talion (the 14th battalion of the Worcestershire Regiment,
who did fine work for the Division from now till the end of the
war).
Of these units, the Train, the Signal Company, the Field
Ambulances knew no rest, whether the Division was in, or
out of the line. If they had less danger (which in the case of
the Signallers, at least, was by no means always so), and more
comfortable quarters (which was usual), they had unceasing
work. The Artillery and the Trench Mortars had, on the
contrary, like the Infantry, their periods of peace and quiet.
But when they were in the line (and they usually came into the
line before, and left it after the Infantry), their lot was soon
to be nearly as dangerous,* if less physically exhausting. None
of the specialist arms, however, were called on (except in an
unprecedented emergency) to supply working parties for other
units. This duty fell always to the infantrymen, and as a
matter of course.
The Engineers had a wider and more varied set of con-
ditions to face than any other unit in the Division. They
would be one night in front of our line, and working the next
on an improvement to the lighting at Divisional Headquarters.
In France they were perhaps employed rather more behind
the line than they had been in Gallipoli, when they were almost
constantly in the trenches; but an Engineer officer was always
attached to each Brigade sector, and was responsible generally
for the construction and repair of all the more important works,
though the infantry usually had to supply the labour.
Behind the front line, the principal task of the Engineers was
the maintenance of communications, which involved the
digging, the revetting and the drainage of trenches, the repair of
roads, and, in certain sectors, the maintenance or construction
of light railways.
When we look back on the Naval Division, resting for a few
days in these pleasant Artois villages, we must remember, not
only the infantry battalions of whose doings we speak so
often, but those other units, with their individual tasks in
* Later, particularly at Passchendaele, the lot of the Artillery was fully as
dangerous as that of any other fighting troops.


hand, or accomplished. Above all, we must remember that to
the staffs of the division and the brigades, to the divisional
train, to the medical personnel and the signallers, these moves
from village to village, which meant nothing but a wholesome
march and change of scene to the infantry, meant an actual
increase of work.
The three weeks’ rest now enjoyed was admittedly in
preparation for an offensive. At first it had been intended
that the Naval Division should attack some positions on the
Vimy Ridge which had been lost in May. This would have
been a minor operation, involving at most two brigades; but
the idea was soon given up. Yet another Division was needed
in the south, and it was soon common knowledge that the
Naval Division were going to the Somme. Meanwhile, with
the chances of the future so uncertain, the present took on a
new value.
It is a simple thing to place on record this note of a few
pleasant days, spent by the Naval Division on its way from
Souchez to the Somme ; it is harder, perhaps, to understand.
Yet this much will be clear. The Naval Division was not an
amalgamation of innumerable units, each with its own
memories and traditions. It was one unit, and to get back
to older memories and older associations the officers and men
in it had to look back to the days of peace. It was not
only themselves —that was the least thing that mattered —
but their little world which was moving slowly to the edge of
the void. Battalion concerts, company concerts, card parties,
formal and informal gatherings of every kind, took on an
atmosphere of hail and farewell.
Much had been accomplished together, many men and
cities had become part of the common stock of experience.
The fruits of that experience, the reality and the pride of those
accomplishments, were now to be put to the test.
182
The Royal Naval Division


The Church, Bully-Grenay, August, 1916.




CHAPTER XI
THE BATTLE OF THE ANCRE
THE battle of the Somme had opened, on July Ist, with an
attack by the Fourth Army, and one corps of the Third
Army, on the twenty-eight-mile front from Gommecourt to
Fay, the attack being prolonged south of Fay by the French.
The first day’s fighting had carried us into, and in places even
beyond, the enemy’s front line system from Albert south across
the Somme; but from Albert northward across the Ancre, at
Hamel, to Gommecourt, we had suffered defeat.
With a view to keeping available sufficient reserves to enable
future attacks to be continuous it had been at once decided
to withdraw the left flank of the Fourth Army to the Albert-
Bapaume road, to put in Sir Hubert Gough’s Fifth Army
between the Fourth and Third Armies, and to confine our
attention, for the time, at any rate, to exploiting the success
which we had won south of the Ancre on either bank of the
Somme.
Our progress subsequent to this decision had been con-
siderable but very slow. By July 17th we had secured not
only the whole of the enemy’s first line system from Ovillers
(two miles south of the Ancre) to the British right, but had
obtained a substantial lodgment in the enemy’s second line
system. It was not, however, till September 10th, that the
whole of the enemy second line positions from Pozieres to
La Maisonnette were in our hands, and not till September 25th
that the third line positions of Courcelette, Martinpuich,
Highwood, Flers, and Delville Wood were wholly ours. Even
then, Les Boeufs, Morval and Combles on the right flank of the
attack, and Thiepval on the left, held out against us, and were
not finally captured till September 30th.
This measure of success had been sufficient to achieve the


most immediate object for which the battle had been fought.
This was the relief of the enemy pressure on Verdun. There
were, however, other objects of equal importance which we
had not attained.
If the reinforcements of men and munitions which would
reach us before 1917 were to enable us to force a decision
in that year, the enemy must first be worn down by continuous
pressure, maintained if possible well into the winter of 1916-
1917. To break off the battle of the Somme at the point reached
at the end of September would, on this view, be fatal. There
was, also, the important consideration that, if the battle died
down, the enemy would certainly transfer substantial forces
to the East, where the Allied position, never secure, was now
actually precarious.
If, however, it was clearly a matter of very great importance
to continue our attacks, the situation produced by the previous
three months’ fighting made it a matter of extreme difficulty
to do so.
There was nothing in our gains which reacted at all appre-
ciably on the enemy’s position on either flank. Instead,
the boot was on the other leg. The enemy still held to his
old front line north of the Ancre, and to the south of the battle
front, and so long as he did so, he imposed a very definite
limit on the extent to which we could push forward the salient
which our success on the Somme itself created in our line.
This limit had been wellnigh reached by the beginning of
October, 1916. There had been just a chance at the end of
September that we should be able to maintain our pressure
on the existing front of attack despite these difficulties, but
this depended on the weather allowing us to attack before
the enemy resistance in his new, improvised defence north
and south of the Somme had been consolidated The weather,
however, broke; and we found ourselves at the end of the first
week in October faced, virtually, with only two alternatives.
Either we must widen the base of our salient by attacking and
carrying the enemy positions which still stood firm on the
flanks of our advance, or we must let the battle die down, and
risk the transfer of German troops to the East or a renewal
of the attack on Verdun.
The general situation forbade the easier and less expensive
alternative. In the circumstances, the almost desperate
184
The Royal Naval Division


decision was taken to reopen the battle north, and immediately
south, of the Ancre, against Serre, Beaumont Hamel, Beau-
court and St. Pierre Divion, four pivots of the strong first
line defensive system which (with Thiepval, now in our hands)
had resisted our attacks on July Ist. Attacking these positions,
with all the advantages of surprise, in perfect weather, with
fresh troops, we had then suffered a costly defeat. Since then,
the defences had been greatly strengthened and our resources had
been depleted; the weather conditions, moreover, threatened
to be wholly unfavourable. Yet it was judged, and rightly,
that the renewal of the attack was essential if the fruits of our
earlier victories were to be fully gathered.
The attack was to be carried out by the Vth and Ilnd
Corps of the Fifth Army, the Vth Corps on the front north of
the Ancre, and the Ilnd Corps on the less important front
south of that river.
To the Vth Corps, the Naval Division had been assigned
when it entered the Fifth Army area on October 4th, and it
had at once to prepare for the impending attack.
On October 7th, the 190th Brigade were ordered to take
over a sector of the line, starting from Serre and reaching
southward almost to Beaumont Hamel, with the 63rd Divisional
Artillery in support; officers of the other brigades made recon-
naissances of the enemy position opposite. No definite orders
for the operation had been issued, but it was understood
that the Naval Division would attack Serre or Beaumont
Hamel.
While the 190th Brigade was still in the line, and the two
naval brigades were in billets at Varennes and Forceville, the
Division was shocked to learn, on the afternoon of October 14th,
that General Paris had been dangerously wounded on a visit to
the 190th Brigade trenches and that Major Sketchley, G. 5.0.2
of the Division for so many months, had been killed.
General Paris had been with the Naval Division since the
day when it was first concentrated in Antwerp. He had com-
manded them in their most unfortunate as well as in their most
successful adventures, and he had never failed them. But
he was something more, in the eyes of the Division, than a re-
spected commander ; he was an institution. He was the last
relic of the days when the Division had fought under orders
from the Admiralty : he was the last bulwark between the
185
The Battle of the Ancre


Division and the Army. And he was a very effective one.
He was recognized by those in authority as an officer of pre-
eminent caution and prudence. So long as he remained, there
would be no attempt to interfere with the internal organization,
which meant so largely the fighting efficiency of the Division.
It was not, perhaps, realized at the time, how much the Division
owed to General Paris in this respect, though it did not take
them long to learn it. If he had never erred on the side of
over-enthusiastic praises, he had shown his unswerving confi-
dence in the capacity of the Division to do credit to itself as a
fighting force, by putting no limit on promotion from within
the Division, and by leaving to his subordinate commanders a
reasonably free hand in the discharge of their responsibilities.
The result had been that it had gathered strength from one
reorganization to another, and yet had always preserved its
identity. To this achievement General Paris had contributed
in no small degree, and when he left the Division which he
had commanded so long and with such fidelity, the atmo-
sphere of confidence in the future, which had grown up in the
peaceful Souchez days, was suddenly shattered.
The four weeks which were to pass before the much dis-
cussed attack actually took place were, partly for this reason,
partly because of the general disorganization and lack of
resources behind the battle front, and partly as the result of
execrable weather, the most wearing which the Division had
ever experienced. Refreshed by a few golden days of sunshine
and peace in the pleasant villages of the IVth Corps area (days
which seemed now, amid the rain, the mud, the noise and the
bustle of the Somme, to have been spent in some distant fairy-
land), the Division had come south almost looking forward
to the expected battle. Not even the unutterable melancholy
of the ruined villages, the shell-swept mud of the marshes,
the miserable canvas bivouacs stretched forlornly over puddles
of slime which served for billets for many units, had at first
damped the ardour with which officers and men had surveyed,
from our front, the expected objectives, had made the first
tentative plans and imagined the ultimate success. But
these plans and these dreams were soon interrupted. The
change in the accustomed routine, in the manner of dress, in
the mounting of guards, in the discipline of sentries, which
followed on General Paris’s departure, engaged much of the
186
The Royal Naval Division


attention of subalterns and gave Colonels and Brigadiers not
a moment’s peace. A little later, ill-concealed rumours of a
growing dissatisfaction on the part of the new Divisional
Commander (which led, in turn, to even wilder rumours
of wholesale supersessions, ending in transfer to the Army)
distracted the fighting spirit of the Division still further from
the matter in hand. When, shortly after the change of com-
mand, the Divisional sector was changed to that immediately
north of the Ancre, and the once novel but already tedious
process of studying hypothetical objectives had to be repeated,
the battle once so confidently anticipated had become something
only to be reached after days of anxiety and exertion to which
no immediate end could be foreseen.
It was not for lack of plans or orders that this impression
gained ground. Plans for attacks, by any number of Corps
on a variety of objectives, poured in on the Division, but delays
behind the lines, continuous rain, and not a few expressed
doubts as to the efficiency of the troops intended for the attack,
gave rise to a ceaseless correspondence between Divisions and
Corps, between Corps and Army Headquarters, between Sir
Hubert Gough and General Headquarters 7 and these led to
endless variations and postponements throughout October and
the first days of November.
Meanwhile, the 188th and 189th Brigades remained almost
continuously in the trenches, suffering all the minor but
unpalatable ills of trench warfare in winter, and endeavouring
at the same time to be ready at any moment for the day of
battle. The Hamel sector in the distant days of peace-time
war must have been at once unpleasant and unsafe. The
trenches had been planned by a short-sighted fool and destroyed
by a watchful enemy. There were virtually no dug-outs;
the communication trenches, which ran across a conspicuous
ridge, were under constant and aimed fire; in the firing and
support lines men could only stand and freeze in the mud ;
there was no room to walk or to lie down, and digging, in the
face of the enemy, was nearly, impossible. When battalions
were out of the line their lot was no better a preparation for
the attack, for they would go back no further than Mesnil or
Engelbelmer, from where they would go up nightly to the
trenches, engaged in the most exhausting working parties.
To get round a battalion front at this time was a three
187
The Battle of the Ancre


hours’ walk, with mud often above the knees. Yet in these
trenches half the battalions detailed for the intended assault
had to live, while the other half had to carry up them and
across them stores and ammunition for the innumerable dumps
which would feed the advancing line of battle. The constant
issue and re-issue of battle equipment and stores added to the
confusion. These stores had to be counted in and counted
out, carried up and carried down, till men would have volun-
teered, 1 almost, to go out unarmed, if they could be spared the
perpetual juggling with bombs and sandbags, and flares,
and wire-cutters and compasses, which seemed the only avail-
able alternative.
The last, but not the least, of the hardships of these days
was the digging of assembly trenches on the slopes leading
down to the valley of the Ancre. Here the front-line trench
went back sharply, and General Shute decided that, if the
battalion in this flank were not to lose direction, they must be
formed up in alignment with the rest of the Division. There-
fore, trenches must be dug. The decision was wise, but it
involved a risk, for it added appreciably to the burden and
confusion of these days before the battle, and the burden was
nearly as great as many could bear.
When the final orders came, on November 10th, the limit
of endurance had indeed been reached. Battalions had fallen
from an average strength of nearly seven hundred to the
average of barely five hundred, an exceptionally high rate of
wastage even for the Somme, and the majority of those who
remained were tired men. But they were determined. The
excellent relations of officers and men, which had been
strengthened by recent hardships uncompromisingly shared,
and the esprit de corps of a Division which was determined to
vindicate its reputation, just turned the scale, and justified
the confidence which, after so many debates, had eventually
been extended to it.
The plan, as finally adopted, was for an attack on Serre,
Beaumont Hamel, Beaucourt and St. Pierre Divion by the
2nd Division of the Xlllth Corps, the 3rd, 51st and Naval
Divisions of the Vth Corps and the 31st Division of the Hnd
Corps. The Naval Division’s sector (1,200 yards in width)
was immediately north of the Ancre, at right angles to the
river valley, which ran here almost due east to Beaucourt, while
188
The Royal Naval Division


our trenches and those of the enemy ran roughly north and
south.
The Division’s objective was Beaucourt and the inter-
vening positions opposite to their front.
At a distance of from 180 to 250 yards from our assembly
trenches, on higher ground, was the German front line system,
consisting as usual of three lines of trenches. The last of these
trenches formed the “ first ” objective, and was known, for
that purpose, as the Dotted Green Line. Behind the front
line system, and separated from it by a valley, through which
ran the road known as “ Station Road,” was a second ridge,
running from Beaumont Hamel to Beaucourt Station. On
this ridge was a strongly fortified position, called the Green
Line. This was the second defined objective. The country
immediately behind this line was featureless, except the
right front of the Divisional sector, where it slopes up to the
hill immediately in front of Beaucourt, which commanded
the enemy’s communications with his forward systems on this
part of the front. On the western face of this hill was a trench,
which continued parallel to the front across the more level
ground on the left. This trench was known as the Yellow
Line , and formed the Division’s third objective. The final
objective, known as the Red Line, was a roughly-defined posi-
tion to be taken up beyond Beaucourt, the capture of which
would be, for the Naval Division, the real proof of success.
The first and third of these objectives were to be attacked
by the Ist Royal Marines, the Howe, the Hawke and the Hood
Battalions, each advancing in four waves. The second and
fourth objectives were to be attacked by the 2nd Royal Marines,
the Anson, the Nelson and the Drake Battalions. The plan,
in detail, was that the first four battalions would rest on the
first objective (that is, in the enemy’s front-line trenches),
and reorganize, while the other four battalions passed through,
and captured the Station Road valley and the Green Line.
They, in their turn, would rest and reorganize, while the first
four battalions passed through to the Yellow Line. The final
assault on Beaucourt was then, after another pause, to be
carried out by the battalions, who had reorganized on the Green
Line. With each battalion, was to go a sub-section of the
Brigade Machine-Gun Company, and trench mortars were to
follow as soon as possible.
189
The Battle of the Ancre


The key to the operation was the great tactical discovery
of the Somme, the “ creeping barrage.” Against the enemy’s
scientific underground works, the old intensive bombardment
had proved useless. The substitute was a barrage which moved
with the infantry, and which, if closely followed —the whole
success of the method depended on this —allowed the infantry
to get into the trenches and block the exits from the dug-outs,
before the enemy could come up and bring his machine guns
into action. A feature of the scheme was, that when there were
two or more trenches forming part of the same system, and
all interconnected by underground communications, each was
assaulted by a separate “ wave,” which remained in the trench
allotted to it till it was finally cleared. This ensured that the
enemy would not come up behind our attacking troops as the
battle progressed.
The complicated task assigned to the Division, and the
novelty of the method of attack, added to the already grievous
burdens of preparation. The smoke and noise of the barrage
would make the issue of orders or the control of movements
during the advance impossible, except, perhaps, on occasion, by
isolated platoon commanders. It was thus essential that
not only every officer but every man should know before-
hand his different objectives, the time-table of the barrage,
the halts in the different lines, and, above all, the direction of
his advance. In addition, the whole success of the operation
depended on keeping up with the barrage, and attacking the
dug-outs immediately the lines were reached. This meant
that every man had to be told off to particular tasks, and
armed with particular weapons. The organization and re-
organization of the different “waves” of each battalion,
the distribution of maps and time-tables, and the questioning
and cross-questioning of N.C.O.’s and men, to ensure that each
knew his part at every step of the attack, which extended, even
on the official timing over more than four hours, occupied every
minute of the hours immediately preceding the night of the
12th-13th.
The night was reserved for the most important of all
essential preparations, the concentration of the attacking
troops.
The battalions holding the sector on the morning of the
12th were the Howe Battalion of the 188th Brigade (Com-
190
The Royal Naval Division


mander W. G. Ramsay Fairfax, R.N.) on the left, and the
Hawke Battalion of the 189th Brigade (Lt.-Colonel Leslie
Wilson, C.M.G., D.S.O.)* on the right. On the left, the Ist
R.M. Battalion (Lt.-Colonel Cartwright, R.M.L.1.) had to come
in between the Howe and the 51st Division, and on the right
the Hood Battalion (Lt.-Colonel Freyberg, D. 5.0.), with one
company of H.A.C. attached, had to fill the gap between the
Hawke right and the Ancre. Nominally, these four battalions
were to occupy the front-line trench on the left, and the new
assembly trenches on the right; but, in fact, they had for the
most part to lie in the open, so narrow and inadequate was the
available cover. Just behind, also in the open, the 2nd R.M.,
Anson, Nelson and Drake Battalions had to be assembled.
Further back, in the support line, was the station for the 10th
Dublin Fusiliers, the 7th Royal Fusiliers, the 4th Bedfords,
and the Ist H.A.C. (less one company).
To move all these different units by night to assembly
positions in the open called for efficient organization and for
first-class discipline. The slightest hitch in the arrangements
must have spelt confusion, and anything like a breakdown
meant an incalculable disaster. If any sound reached the
enemy, or if any man lost his way and got into the enemy lines,
few of the seven thousand men, lying out within rifle range of
the enemy, could have escaped, and the Battle of the. Somme
would have had a different issue which might have left its
mark on history. No one can look back on the anxiety of
that night without emotion. It was not only the culmination
of weeks of agonizing preparation; it was a gambler’s throw,
which would give or withhold the chance of putting to the
proof the capacity of the Division to keep that place in the
fighting line which it had won at such a price.
But Fate was benignant. There was no sign amid the
darkness of any watchfulness on the part of the enemy. Men
passed quickly and with confidence to their appointed places,
and the dawn was awaited in silence.
Then, at 5.45 a.m., the full strength of our artillery opened
on the narrow divisional front, and the first wave of our attack
moved out into the gloom. At their pre-arranged intervals
the rest followed.
Within seven minutes the whole of the two attacking
♦ Colonel Wilson had received the C.M.G. for his services in Gallipoli.


brigades had passed out of sight of our line, where were left
only the Headquarters of the Nelson, Hawke, Howe, Anson
and Ist and 2nd Marine Battalions (the Headquarters of the
Drake and Hood had turned a blind eye to the instruction
that Battalion Headquarters should not go forward till their
battalions had carried their first objective).
It was abnormally dark, and there was a thick mist. The
smoke and noise of our own barrage and the rattle of the
overhead fire of our supporting machine guns was such that
it was impossible to say whether the enemy retaliation was
severe, or even what form it was taking. Within a minute of
the beginning of the attack, the enemy artillery undoubtedly
opened, but, except on the right of our line, where something
in the nature of a barrage fell on no man’s land and on our
support line, the losses from shell fire cannot have been heavy.
For a brief half hour, the attack seemed to have succeeded
with miraculous ease, for during all this time, when our men
should have been capturing the German trenches which made
up the first and second objectives, the numbers of wounded
returning were negligible, of unwounded there were none, and
the available reports mentioned our troops as in the 3rd, 4th
and sth German lines.
These reports were true in detail, but the absence of any
authoritative messages from officers in command of the attack-
ing waves of the Hawke, Nelson, Howe, Anson and Ist and
2nd Marine Battalions, markedly contrasting with the con-
tinuous reports received from the Hood Battalion, told a different
tale.
On the right of the line the Hood Battalion, perhaps because
they kept closer to the barrage, reached the enemy front line,
and passed it without devastating loss, though it is significant,
in the light of what happened elsewhere, that having reached
the line in safety, all four officers commanding the first wave,
Sub-Lieutenants Hart, Hall, Chapman and Cresswell,* were
hit in the front trench itself; here, also, the adjutant of the Hood
Battalion, Lieutenant C. A. Edmondson, and Sub-Lieut.
Gealer (Signal Officer) were killed by a sniper in the enemy
third line.
The battalion was, however, able to proceed systematically
* To these four officers, who kept the line well up to the barrage, the initial
success of the Hood Battalion was largely due.
192
The Royal Naval Division


with the reduction of each of the first three lines, and the
destruction of the dug-outs in the railway cutting on their
right. This was of great, perhaps determining, importance,
for these dug-outs were part of the vast system of underground
works which ran from the Ancre to Beaumont Hamel. If the
entrances had been missed, the enemy would have come down
from the left, where our attack had been less successful and
the enemy were still present in strength, and would have cut
the communications of the Hood Battalion. In clearing up
the dug-outs in the enemy third line, Lieut.-Commander F. S.
Kelly, D.S.C., commanding “B ” Company (who had com-
manded a company of the Hood in Gallipoli), was killed,
leading a gallant and successful attack on a machine-gun
emplacement which threatened to enfilade the whole advance
on this flank.
On the third line (the Dotted Green. Line) the Hood advance
should have stopped, and the next objectives (Station Hoad,
the trench in front of it and the Green Line on the ridge behind
it) should have been captured by the Drake Battalion. This
Battalion, however, in crossing the three enemy fines carried
by the Hood Battalion, had been drawn into the battle which
was still raging in the first and second fines on the left of the
Hood front, and had lost more than half their effectives ; among
very many officer casualties were Lt.-Colonel Tetley, R.M.L.1.,
the commanding officer, and Lt.-Commander P. S. Campbell,
R.N.V.R. (killed) and Lt.-Commander Turrell, R.N.V.R.
(wounded). Indeed, the only Drake officers who had come
through behind the Hood in time to carry out the next step
of the attack, were Lieutenant C. C. Constable, Sub-Lieut. Fox,
and Sub-Lieut. Beak (who now, for the first time, had an
opportunity of displaying his fine quality as a regimental
officer). With these three officers were only some seventy-
eight petty officers and men. If this small force went on alone,
disaster seemed certain. Yet, if they waited, they lost the
barrage. This situation was critical. There was only a five-
minutes’ pause in which to make the decision, and considerable
confusion prevailed. The situation was, however, largely
determined by the prompt decision of Colonel Freyberg (com-
manding the Hood) to throw the whole weight of his battalion
into the next advance, instead of endeavouring to reorganize
in the mist and darkness, with the risk of being drawn into the
13
193
The Battle of the Ancre


costly and indecisive fighting which was going on in the centre
of the enemy first-line position.
The combined attack was brilliantly successful; the dug-
outs in Station Road yielded some four hundred prisoners
(including six officers), and by the scheduled time Colonel
Freyberg was on the Division’s second objective with a substan-
tial force of nearly four hundred men and nine officers. But
of this force, only three officers and some eighty petty officers
and men were of the Drake Battalion. The rest of this fine
battalion were scattered, and nearly half of the remainder
were killed or wounded. The explanation is to be found
in the still more tragic events in the centre of the battle
front.
Like the Hood and Drake Battalions, the Hawke and
Nelson had passed out into the mist at 5.45 a.m. When
the first wave of the attack came within sight of the
enemy, and while the barrage was still playing on the enemy’s
first line, a devastating machine-gun fire broke out from a
redoubt midway between the first and second enemy lines
opposite the Hawke Battalion front. On the flank of the Hood
Battalion, some twenty men of the right (“ C”) and support
(“ D ”) companies of the battalion fought through to the Green
Line , keeping up with the barrage, though isolated on their left
flank, and without officers, and for the remainder of the opera-
tion they fought under Colonel Freyberg’s command. Separ-
ated from this party in the course of the fighting, Sub-Lieut.
Stewart (also of “ C ” Company) with two men and a Lewis gun,
followed the barrage as far as Station Road, and kept the
gun in action against the enemy on the left of the Green Line
till it was reached on the right by Colonel Freyberg’s brilliant
attack. On the right of the redoubt, a portion of “ B ” Company
of the same battalion, finely led by Lieutenant the Hon. Vere
Harmsworth, passed the strong point and followed the barrage
to the second German line; here Lieutenant Harmsworth,
already once wounded, was wounded again, this time mortally,
and of his party the majority became casualties. Of the
remainder of the Hawke Battalion, all that is known is that
they fell round the redoubt which was in the centre of their
objective. In all, nearly four hundred of the officers* and
* For a complete list of the officers killed or mortally wounded in this terribly
costly engagement see Appendix E (i).
194
The Royal Naval Division


men of this battalion became casualties, and all within the
first half hour of the attack.
Following in the wake of such disaster the Nelson Battalion
fared but little better. While the garrison of the strong point
were engaged with the Hawke Battalion, the first two waves
of the Nelson, whose objective lay beyond, succeeded in
forcing their way through the mist and smoke without very
severe loss, but even they fell far behind the barrage, and lost
at least half their very slender effectives in assaulting Station
Road with bombs and bayonets, virtually without any assist-
ance from the artillery.* But the third and fourth waves
of the battalion, who should have followed them, suffered the
same fate as the Hawke, and fell almost to a man in the front
and second line trenches, either because the officers leading
their waves felt it their duty to attempt the impossible and
storm the redoubt, or because, in endeavouring to follow
their first waves who had passed to the far side of it, they
were observed by the garrison, then less actively engaged.
Probably the latter is the true explanation. General Shute,
in his report on the battle, attributed the failure of the
attack at this point to the mist, which he* thinks must have
concealed the whereabouts of the redoubt, and prevented its
being mopped up. The whereabouts of the redoubt was all
too plain, however, to the advancing infantry, and in, the light
of what is now known the more probable reason why it was
never successfully attacked is because no officers and men
got within bomb or bayonet range alive, while the artillery
barrage missed it altogether. The almost conclusive proof
is to be found in the disastrous losses of the Hawke Battalion.
Next to the Hawke and Nelson were the Howe and Anson
Battalions of General Prentice’s 188th Brigade. The leading
companies of the Howe Battalion, finely commanded by
Lieutenant Maynard and Lieutenant de la Motte, had kept well
up to the barrage and had entered the German lines. The
failure of the attack on the redoubt meant, however, that their
flank was uncovered. Despite this, the leading waves of the
Howe Battalion passed on with the barrage to the third line,
but their losses had been too heavy to enable them to hold
* Lieut. Dangerfield, Sub-Lieut. Mecklenburg and Sub-Lieut. E. V. G.
Gardner were among others of the Nelson Battalion who did fine work on this
occasion. These officers each received the Military Cross.
13*
195
The Battle of the Ancre


any considerable portion of it. In the fight leading up to this
line, Lieutenant Maynard and Lieutenant de la Motte were
killed and Lieut.-Commander Edwards* was wounded. One
company commander, Lieut.-Commander Sprange,f and some
twenty men were all that reached it alive. In the circumstances,
the enemy, moving from their centre behind the redoubt, re-
occupied most of this important position, and so cut the com-
munications between the garrison of the two front lines, which
were still in our hands, and the detachments of the Anson
who had been able to pass through the Howe Battalion and to
fight their way successfully to the Green Line , their allotted
objective. These detachments, nearly 180 strong as they passed
through the Howe, crossed the Station Road valley under
the active leadership of Lt.-Commander Gilliland, R.N.V.R.,
and reached the Green Line up to time, and without further
serious loss.
On the extreme left of the attack, the Ist and 2nd Marine
Battalions met with disaster at the start from the enemy
artillery, and the four company commanders (Captain Loxley,
Captain Hoare, Captain M. C. Browne, D.S.C., and Captain
H. H. Sulivan), with very many N.C.O.’s and men, were killed
crossing no man’s land in the first moments of the advance,
before the German front line was reached. The fighting even
then was extremely heavy, for the 51st Division on the left,
engaged in the historic and ultimately successful assault on
Beaumont Hamel, were behind the barrage. In the circum-
stances, the same fate overtook the Ist Marines as had overtaken
the Howe Battalion; the third and fourth waves established
themselves in the first two enemy lines, but the relics of the
first and second waves, advancing on the third line, melted
away before the fire from their flanks and reached their objective
only in isolated groups. The 2nd R.M. Battalion, following
behind, became involved in hand-to-hand fighting in the
third line and fell for the most part behind the barrage. Only
a few men joined up with Lt.-Commander Gilliland’s party,
and a slightly larger detachment was reported about 11 a.m.
as in touch with the 51st Division west of Station Road.
* This officer, who had served with distinction through the Gallipoli campaign,
was severely wounded but continued to direct the advance of his Company to
their objective. For his services he was awarded the D.S.O.
f This officer was engaged in the fighting in this line and on the Green Line
throughout the day, and was awarded the M.C. for his services.


At 6.30 a.m., the Headquarters of the Nelson and Hawke
Battalions went over to endeavour to clear up the position
in front of the redoubt, but the attempt failed, and Lt.-Colonel
Burge and his adjutant, Lieut. T. H. Emerson, R.N.V.R., were
killed, and Lt.-Colonel Leslie Wilson was wounded. On the
Howe Battalion front, Commander Ramsay Fairfax was more
fortunate and succeeded in establishing a brigade report centre
in the second German line. Soon after 7.30 a.m., while waiting
reports from the front, he proceeded to organize and consolidate
our hold of the first two enemy lines. On the left flank
Lt.-Colonel Cartwright and Lt.-Colonel Hutchison, also moved
forward, though a little later, to the second German line.
If we take the attack of the first two objectives (the German
front line system and the Station Road system) as the first
stage of the battle, it can be said that the progress made was
not unsatisfactory. Each brigade had effected a substantial
lodgment in the foremost objective, the Green Line , and, except
in front of the Hawke and Nelson Battalions, where, through
no fault of the officers or men, the attack had failed, we had
secured a substantial and increasing hold on the whole front
line system. In addition, the enemy dug-outs in Station Road
had been bombed and cleared by the Hood, Nelson and Anson
Battalions, and the ill-fated redoubt and the trenches imme-
diately round it thus formed the only serious threat to our
chances of maintaining our gains.
Of the two parties on the Green Line , however, Colonel
Freyberg’s alone was secure in its communications, adequate
in numbers and adequately officered. Between Lt.-Com-
mander Gilliland’s party and our forces in the front line system
were a large detachment of the enemy in their third line, and
between the 189th and 188th Brigades was the still undefeated
garrison of the redoubt. This meant that on the left of the
divisional front we had no very secure communication from
our old lines even as far as the enemy’s front line system* ;
the proof is to be found in the fact that, of General Heneker’s
190th Brigade, the 7th Royal Fusiliers were still in our old
front line, and only isolated detachments of the 4th Bedfords
and the 10th Royal Dublin Fusiliers had been able to get
♦ The position would have been no better on the right (for the redoubt was,
if anything, nearer to the right than to the left Divisional boundary) but for the
fact that on the right the ground drops down to the valley of the Ancre.
197
The Battle of the Ancre


forward to join the Howe and Marine Battalions. The remainder
of these Battalions were still held up by cross fire from the
redoubt. As in the case of the assaulting waves, the original
plan, whereby the reserve brigade was to occupy the enemy
front line system by 6.45, and so enable the whole strength of
the other two brigades to go forward at 7.30 for the attack on
the Yellow Line , had only been fulfilled on the right flank of
the Division’s attack. The prospects for our complete success
were thus still far from bright.
The pause on the Green Line of one hour and ten minutes
was observed, but punctually at 7.30 the barrage lifted for
the attack on the Yellow Line. On the extreme left, where
the Marines were in touch with the 7th Gordon Highlanders,
no advance was attempted; the party was already isolated,
and there was no sign of any other battalions of the 51st
Division.* Colonel Freyberg, however, and Lt.-Commander
Gilliland led two independent assaults on the Yellow Line ,
and both parties reached the neighbourhood of the line
without serious losses. Colonel Freyberg at once consolidated
his position (a little in rear of the actual Yellow Line , which,
though abandoned by the enemy, was still here being bom-
barded by our artillery as well as by that of the enemy), and
threw back his left flank to the Green Line. Once more, by his
prompt exploitation of a brilliant advance, he contributed
substantially to the success of the whole operation. Lt.-
Commander Gilliland’s advance was equally successful, but
the Yellow Line on this part of the front was not, as it was
opposite Colonel Freyberg, on high ground of the utmost
tactical importance, but on low ground commanded from all
sides; and not until later in the day, when information came
to hand of the advance on the right, was it considered safe to
risk a prolonged occupation of what was, at this point, a very
indefensible position.
While this advance was in progress, no change had taken
place in the first and second German lines, but behind, for the
brigade and divisional staffs, the battle was beginning in earnest.
The battle of the Ancre differs much from some other battles
on the Somme, and, indeed, elsewhere, in that, within four
* This fine Division fought the battle through to a brilliant conclusion, but
the exceptional difiiculties of the assault on Beaumont Hamel delayed the
advance of the Division for a very long time.
198
The Royal Naval Division


hours of the start, the situation was sufficiently clearly defined
to the directing staffs for decisive action to be taken.
The German hold on their third line had prevented any
authoritative reports either from the Marines with the 51st
Division, or from Lt.-Commander Gilliland with his mixed
detachment, or from the Nelson details which had captured a
portion of Station Road, from reaching their brigades, but
Colonel Frey berg’s messages on the right flank and Commander
Ramsay Fairfax’s reports from the left centre, confirmed by
detailed reports from Lt.-Colonel Higginbotham (the senior
artillery observation officer) and by numerous wounded officers
and men, gave a fairly accurate idea of the situation. General
Shute at once and wisely decided that the 188th Brigade, re-
inforced by the 190th, must fight their way across the German
front line system on the left of his front, before he could
safely exploit the success gained by Colonel Freyberg. The
result of this decision was the postponement of the attack on
the Red Line (Beaucourt village). Colonel Freyberg and his
officers were anxious to press on at 8.30 against this position, in
accordance with the original plan, but General Shute was
above all concerned with keeping open his communications
up the Ancre Valley. If the force advanced to Beaucourt, these
communications would be lengthened and the forces available
to protect them would be inevitably weakened. The resulting
risk was not a justifiable one while the Germans still remained
in force in the centre of their old front line system and, as
he thought, on Colonel Freyberg’s flank.* The attack on
Beaucourt was thus definitely postponed at about 9.15 a.m.
and the H.A.C. were sent up to reinforce Colonel Freyberg on
the Yellow Line. Meanwhile, reinforcements were sought from
the Vth Corps, with a view to extending Colonel Freyberg’s
left, with fresh troops brought up through the Ancre Valley,
should all attempts to reach the Yellow Line on the rest of
the front fail.
The Vth Corps at once placed the 111th Brigade (Brigadier-
General Barnes) of the 37th Division at General Shute’s disposal,
subject to prior reference to the. Corps staff as to its precise
employment.
The next stage of the battle, which may be taken as the
* This, of course, was not the case; no message, however, reached the 188th
Brigade from Lieut.-Comraander Gilliland, though many were sent.
199
The Battle of the Ancre


period from 10 a.m. on the 18th to dawn on the 14th, has
received too little attention. The dramatic interest of Colonel
Freyberg’s achievements has held the attention of writers as
well as readers, and most accounts of the battle pass straight
from the capture of the Yellow Line by the Hood Battalion
on the 13th to the assault of Beaucourt by the same battalion
on the morning of the 14th. Actually, in the course of this
day and night, the 188th Brigade were involved in continuous
fighting, and by 5 p.m. had occupied sections of all the
enemy lines on their front up to and including the Yellow
Line. Largely they were assisted to this advance by the
success of the Hood Battalion, but it called none the less for
very resolute and skilful leadership, as the advance was open
to enemy attack on both flanks. Moreover, even to maintain
our positions in the first three lines of trenches continuous
bombing attacks were necessary. The principal reason why
so little credit was gained by the Brigade for this achievement
appears to be that the reports of their advances only reached
Divisional Headquarters spasmodically and after long delays.
The nature of the fighting and the precarious communications
no doubt accounted for this.
The first move in these operations was made as early as
9.30 a.m. on the 15th, when General Prentice ordered all his
battalion commanders to advance from the second German line
and push forward if possible to the Yellow Line. Commander
Ramsay Fairfax was unable to comply, as he was actively
engaged in leading a bombing attack against the enemy, who
were attempting to move northward along their second line
from the redoubt. The other battalion commanders, however,
with all the men they could collect, pushed forward to the third
German line and held it, along the greater part of the Brigade
front, with a party of the Anson and the Marine Battalions
under Captain Gowney, D.S.C. Lt.-Commander Ellis himself,
with one man, got to the Green Line , and found there Lt.-
Commander Gilliland with his detachment of the Howe and
Anson, and details of the Hawke and Nelson, Battalions. This
party, now for the first time learning of Colonel Freyberg’s
success on the right flank, at once pushed on under orders
from Commander Ellis to the Yellow Line , and there remained
as an independent unit, though suffering severe losses, till
nightfall, when they joined up with Colonel Freyberg,
200
The Royal Naval Division


Brig.-General A. M. Asquith, D.S.O.
(From the portrait by Ambrose McEvoy in the possession of the Imperial War Museum.)




Meanwhile Colonel Cartwright and Colonel Hutchison with
Captain Gowney’s detachment in the third German line had got
the benefit of a barrage, put down on this line at 12.20 under
orders from Divisional Headquarters, and had to retire for a
few minutes. On returning Captain Gowney engaged the
enemy who were still in the trench to the right and left, and
established blocks which rendered his position tolerably secure.
Not informed apparently, of this lodgment in the German
third line to the left of his front, nor of the presence of Lt.-
Commander Gilliland’s party in the Yellow Line , the third
fine was re-bombarded at 3.45 p.m., with the idea that the
Howe Battalion would then be able to get forward. There
were, indeed, some enemy detachments still to the front, though
mostly to the right, of this battalion, but the orders for advance
never reached the Howe, and the barrage fell short. The
situation was not finally cleared up till a little later, when
Lt.-Commander Ellis, after going again to the Yellow Line and
seeing Lt.-Commander Gilliland holding the southern position
of the trench, with the enemy to his left front (in Muck trench),
but not otherwise pressed, returned through the German
front line system to our old front line and reported fully on
the situation. Captain Gowney, with men of the Marine and
Anson Battalions, ultimately advanced and dug in on the
Green Line at 4 a.m. on the 14th in touch with a battalion of
Gordon Highlanders of the 51st Division.
Meanwhile, more decisive action had been taken throughout
this day by General Shute in completing preparations for the
renewal of the attack at dawn the next day.
Six tanks had been allocated to the Division and then had
been within striking distance at Auchonvillers on the morning
of the 12th. For some obscure (but unsatisfactory) reason
they had been sent back to Beaussart on the eve of the attack :
they were now recalled, and it was arranged that they should
be brought up under cover of darkness and guided into action
at dawn against the redoubt. The details of this operation
were left to the 188th Brigade. For the main attack on Beau-
court the 111th Brigade was placed at General Shute’s disposal.
In the belief that the enemy were holding out on the Yellow
Line on Colonel Freyberg’s left, this attack was planned, after
discussion with Colonel Freyberg, in two phases. At 6 a.m.,
two battalions of the 111th Brigade, who were sent up at
201
The Battle of the Ancre


night on to the Green Line, were to attack the “ occupied ”
part of the Yellow Line. Then at 6.30 a.m., as soon as the
barrage lifted, Colonel Freyberg’s force, which was to include
one battalion of the 111th Brigade, and was to be supported
by the 7th Royal Fusiliers from the 190th Brigade, was to
advance on Beaucourt.
In the confusion of night, on a battlefield where trenches
were almost obliterated and distances were impossible to
calculate, it appears that the two battalions of the 111th Brigade,
who should have occupied the whole of the Green Line to the
left of Colonel Freyberg’s position, only occupied half of it.
The result was, that when they advanced at 6 a.m., they oc-
cupied only a further 500 yards of the Yellow Line to the
left of Colonel Freyberg’s force, leaving the remainder still
unoccupied and liable to be retaken by the enemy.
Colonel Freyberg had arranged to assault Beaucourt at
7.45 with the 13th K.R.R.C. and the Ist H.A.C., leaving the
Hood and Drake Battalions in support; but at the last minute
considerable confusion was caused by the unlooked-for arrival
behind the Yellow Line of the 7th Royal Fusiliers, who evi-
dently expected to find that the advance from there had already
taken place. They were, of course, heavily fired on from Beau-
court (where our artillery barrage was decidedly weak) and
forced to take cover with the assaulting troops. The result
was a considerable measure of confusion and a perilous delay.
Again at a critical moment in the battle Colonel Freyberg
retrieved the situation by himself leading the assault, followed
by a mixed detachment of his own men, details of Drake, Hawke,
Nelson and H.A.C., and the 13th K.R.R.C. In a moment
Beaucourt was ours, the garrison of eight hundred surrendering,
almost without a pretence of resistance.
Meanwhile a separate battle, no less successful, was being
fought by the tanks, which had been led against the redoubt by
Lieut. Alan Campbell, R.N.V.R.; and by the Howe and Anson
detachments in the second and third German lines, against
the enemy still occupying the trenches round the redoubt.
The leading tank was steered into position by Alan Campbell
himself, and a brisk bombardment by six-pounders soon brought
this formidable stronghold to reason. The whole garrison,
some six hundred strong, were marched back to our lines by
a party of the Dublin Fusiliers. At the same time Commander
202
The Royal Naval Division


Ramsay Fairfax* and Commander Ellis* to his left engaged
other detachments of the enemy, and 176 prisoners were taken.
Both Battalion Commanders then pushed on to the Green
Line , where the Headquarters of all Battalions in the Brigade
were finally assembled by 3.30 p.m.
After the capture of Beaucourt and the redoubt, and the
occupation of the Green Line on the left, it only remained to
consolidate our hold on Beaucourt and clear up the situation
on the flanks of the position. In the course of the afternoon,
these tasks, though under great difficulties and in the face
of a good deal of enemy activity, were accomplished.
Particularly good work was done by Sub-Lieut. Hill, R.N.V.R.
(Hood Battalion) in arranging the disposition of the eighteen
Lewis guns at the disposal of the force. The 189th Machine-
Gun Company and L.T.M. battery also assisted in the defence.
An officer’s patrol occupied the bridge across the railway
north of Beaucourt and made touch with the Ilnd Corps across
the river, and the remainder of the 111th Brigade (less one
battalion which constituted the only effective reserve and
was held in our old front line) pushed on west of Beaucourt
and reached the greater part of their objective. The extreme
left of the Division’s objective was not, however, at this time
achieved, perhaps because of some misunderstanding on the
part of the 111th Brigade as to the precise position of the
western boundary of the divisional front. The situation here
was finally cleared up, just as General Shute handed over
command to the 37th Division, on the morning of the 15th.
The much-needed relief had been arranged during the
operations of the afternoon of the 14th which we have just
described. In the second day’s fighting the casualties had been
far lighter than in the first, except during the bombardment
of Beaucourt following its capture. Here Colonel Frey berg
had been wounded for the third time, and this time severely.
Captain the Hon. Lionel Montagu, who had been at his right
hand throughout the operations,f and Major Norris, R.M., the
2nd in command of the Hawke Battalion, who had come up from
Hedauville during the night to join the small remnant of his
* Both these officers were awarded the D.S.O. for their services on this day.
So also were Colonel Hutchison, and Colonel Cartwright,
commanding the two Marine battalions.
f Captain Montagu was awarded the D.S.O.
203
The Battle of the Ancre


battalion, were also wounded. The result was that the command
of the Beaucourt sector passed to the Colonel commanding
the 13th K.R.R.C.,* Lt.-Commander Egerton, D.S.O.f took
over the Hood, and Lieut. Sterndale the Drake
Battalion.
At midnight the relief division began, the whole front
being taken over by the 63rd Brigade of the 87th Division,
the 111th Brigade remaining in support, and in reserve in the
old enemy front line the remains of the 189th and 188th Brigades.
In the afternoon of the 15th these Brigades were finally relieved
and marched back to Engelbelmer, the 190th Brigade remaining
temporarily to clear up the battlefield.
The two Naval Brigades had suffered the most severe
losses. Of the officers and men of the 189th Brigade who went
into the attack, there remained unwounded only Lieutenant
Morrison, Sub-Lieutenants Hill,§ Arblaster,§ Camall,§ Jacobs
and Surgeon McCracken and 250 petty officers and men of
the Hood Battalion, Lieutenant Sterndale Bennett and Sub-
Lieutenants Fox and Beak§ and some 280 petty officers and men
of the Drake Battalion, Sub-Lieutenant A. P. Herbert (who
had come up to Beaucourt with Major Norris on the night
of the 13th-14th), Sub-Lieutenant Rackham and Sub-Lieutenant
Bowerman and some 30 men of the Hawke Battalion, and
Lieutenant Dangerfield, Sub-Lieutenant Gardner, Surgeon Cox
and 100 men of the Nelson Battalion. In the 188th Brigade the
losses were equally severe, though the four commanding officers
survived to lead out the remains of their battalions. With
Commander Ramsay Fairfax there came back of the Howe
Battalion only Sub-Lieutenant Forrester§ and less than 100
men. Of the Anson the survivors were Lt.-Commander Ellisj|
and 166 petty officers and men without officers (and 80 rein-
forcements who had arrived late on the 14th). The Ist R.M.
Battalion, under Colonel Cartwright, came out with one officer
(Lieutenant Van Praagh, R.M.) and 138 N.C.O.’s and men,
* Colonel Freyberg remained, however, long enough to complete his dispositions
for the defence of the new positions.
f Lt.-Commander Egerton had received the D.S.O. for his services in Gallipoli.
J Lieut. Sterndale Bennett was awarded the D.S.O. for his services as
Adjutant of the Drake before and during this engagement.
§ These officers, in addition to others previously mentioned, received the
M.C. for their services in this battle.
U Who was awarded the D.S.O.
204
The Royal Naval Division


and the 2nd R.M. Battalion, under Colonel Hutchison, with six
officers and nearly 150 men. The 190th Brigade had suffered
only less severely.
The casualties in the Naval Brigades alone were not far
short of three thousand, and the strength of these brigades
as they marched back was under six hundred apiece. .Of
this strength more than a third was provided by the Hood
and Drake Battalions, whose successes had been the most
distinguished. Such is the fortune of war.
To attempt to describe in any detail an engagement so
protracted, so many-sided, as that fought by the Naval Division
on the Ancre is only to be reminded of the inevitable inaccuracy
of historical records. So much must be omitted because so
much can never be known, and, of what might be known if
all the actors could be assembled and examined, and if memories
were more perfect, only a small part can actually be discovered.
Even the official records are imperfect guides, where so many
of the principal actors on the scene became casualties and could
not tell their stories before the official reports were submitted.
Yet a fuller description of this engagement than has yet
appeared had to be attempted, for such accounts as have found
their way into the larger histories give a rather distorted picture,
and hardly do justice to the Division as a whole. The battle
(or rather the Naval Division’s share in it) has been represented
as a failure, redeemed by one brilliant, even astonishing, success.
The success of the Hood and Drake Battalions was both brilliant
and astonishing, and it was decisive. Yet by the time the assault
on Beaucourt was made at 7.45 in the morning of the 14th,
the redoubt had been captured, the 188th Brigade were on
the Green Line , and there was a road through to the Yellow
Line on the right as well as on the left of the attack. Colonel
Freyberg’s brilliant and gallant leadership will remain the
outstanding individual achievement of the Battle of the Ancre,*
* Colonel Freyberg was at once recommended for, and received the V.C.
The official account of his now historic achievement is as follows ;
“For most conspicuous bravery and brilliant leading as a Battalion
Commander.
“By his splendid personal gallantry he carried the initial attack straight
through the enemy’s front system of trenches. Owing to mist and heavy fire of all
descriptions, Lieut.-Colonel Freyberg’s command was much disorganized after the
capture of the first objective. He personally rallied and re-formed his men,
including men from other units who had become intermixed.
“He inspired all with his own contempt of danger. At the appointed time
205
The Battle of the Ancre


but, as ever, it was the patient, the unbelievable, obstinacy,
courage and endurance of the private soldier along the whole
line of battle which turned the scale.f Had the attack really
failed on the rest of the divisional front, had the men of the
Hawke, Nelson, Howe and Anson, and of the Marine Battalions
fallen back to their own lines in the face of their appalling losses,
which left them often entirely without officers, the history of
the Battle of the Ancre would beyond a doubt have been
different. As it was, the whole division won in this battle
not only a reputation, but a confidence in its own fighting
capacity which contributed much to its future efficiency. Such
confidence is not bred of a vicarious success.
Of the results of this battle on the general position, we
shall speak in the next chapter, when we shall find the Naval
Division once more alongside the Ancre under vastly changed
conditions which were largely the product of its own earlier
success.
Yet if there had been a triumph there had also been a tragedy.
In the month of November the Division had lost a hundred
officers and more than 1,600 men killed, and a hundred and
sixty officers and 2,377 men wounded. Almost the whole of
their casualties were in the twelve infantry battalions and the
machine-gun companies, and more than three-quarters of these
were in the two Naval Brigades, whose allotted task in the
Battle of the Ancre had inevitably exacted higher casualties
than those suffered by the four Army battalions. In the face
of such losses, congratulatory messages had an empty ring.
he led his men to the successful assault of the second objective, many prisoners
being captured.
“During this advance he was twice wounded. He again rallied and re-formed
all who were with him, and although unsupported in a very advanced position,
he held his ground for the remainder of the day, and throughout the night,
under heavy artillery and machine-gun fire. When reinforced on the following
morning, he organized the attack on a strongly-fortified village and showed a
fine example of dash in personally leading the assault, capturing the village and
five hundred prisoners. In this operation he was again wounded.
“Later in the afternoon, he was again wounded severely, but refused to leave
the line till he had issued final instructions.
“ The personality, valour and utter contempt of danger on the part of this single
officer enabled the lodgment in the most advanced objective of the Corps to be
permanently held, and on this point d’appui the line was eventually formed.”
f Unfortunately it has been found impossible to trace any complete records
of the numerous decorations conferred on non-commissioned officers, petty
officers and men of the R.N. and R.N.V.R. battalions in respect of this
engagement.
206
The Royal Naval Division


Those to whom they should have been addressed were beyond
reach of the benisons of distinguished generals.
For all, during many months, and for many, always, the
valley of the Ancre remained in the background of their
thoughts. Here, and on the now deserted shores of Gallipoli,
had fallen the flower of the Naval Division. And the valley
of the Ancre was the more symbolic resting-place. Over
Gallipoli, at any rate in the spring sunshine, there lingered
some faint illusion of romance ; over the valley of the Ancre
hung, like a pall, the unutterable ruin, the pitiful desolation,
of modern war.
207
The Battle of the Ancre


CHAPTER XII
THE GERMAN RETREAT
AFTER the Battle of the Ancre the Naval Division was with-
drawn from the battle area for two months’ rest in the
neighbourhood of Rue. The opportunity afforded by so many
casualties among the senior officers of the 189th Brigade was
used to attach to the Division a number of senior Army officers
as Battalion Commanders and Seconds-in-Command. Lt.-
ColonelD. Munro* was appointed to the Hood, Lt.-Commander
Asquith being detached for staff duties ; Lt.-Colonel Annesley,
later succeeded by Major Freeland, was appointed to the Drake,
and Lt.-Colonel Whiteman to the Hawke. Commander E. W.
Nelson, R.N.V.R., succeeded Lt.-Colonel Burge in command of
the Nelson, and was now the only R.N.V.R. officer commanding
a battalion in this Brigade. In the 188th Brigade Lt.-Colonel
Kirkpatrick took over the Anson Battalion. Other and more
sweeping changes were in the air. The comings and goings of
Army officers at this time were indeed so frequent that it is
impossible to detail them, and if the continual interchange and
supersession of senior officers which marked this period was at
all characteristic of the methods usual in army divisions, there
is little reason for wonder that the achievement of the Naval
Division on the Ancre had been genuinely unexpected.
The policy of infusing indiscriminately officers from other
formations was perhaps unfortunate. The battalions of the
Division had evolved their routine and their administrative
machinery under the stress of active service conditions. They
came under the army machine for the first time when they were
already in France. Odd scraps of naval routine and naval drill
and the whole naval system of ranks and ratings remained.
Added to this, the Division had never attained any exceptional
standard of proficiency in parade ground drill, a fact which,
* Actually Lt.-Colonel Creagh-Osborne was Lt.-Colonel Freyberg’s immediate
successor, but his period of service with the Division was brief.
208


perhaps more than anything else, roused in the minds of the
newly-attached officers suspicions of a deep-seated inefficiency.
The remedy for this deplorable state of affairs was at first sought
in proposals for the gradual militarization of the Division,
assisted, if possible, by voluntary transfers of officers and men
from Navy to Army engagements, and enforced by the gradual
removal of the majority of the senior Naval officers and N.C.O.’s
from responsible positions. The advantages to be derived from
this proceeding were highly speculative, while the disad-
vantages were glaring. It was, perhaps, in the circumstances,
fortunate that, for whatever reason, the zeal of the reformers
suddenly abated and allowed the work of training and re-
organization to proceed along more traditional lines. The
result was that, by the middle of January, the Division was again
ready to take the field, and the battalions fell short of their
newly-won reputation only in experience of the ever-changing
conditions of war, and in that mutual confidence between
officers and men which had been so marked a feature of the
Division for more than two years. Such confidence, bred
of long experience, could hardly be expected to spring up
spontaneously between the reinforcements- and their newly-
appointed leaders but recently transferred from the army.
The situation as the Division moved back to the line at the
beginning of 1917 was one of profound expectancy. In particular,
the question of the tactics to be pursued in the exploitation of
what had been publicly announced as a decisive victory on the
Somme was, at the beginning of 1917, of burning interest to the
infantry.
There was no weakening of the will to victory, but there
was without doubt a spirit of inquiry abroad. A return to the
methods of the Somme, involving as they did the over-straining
of fighting troops in innumerable fatigue duties, the costly
offensive, the fatal delay while the enemy rebuilt his line, spelt
for the infantry an indefinite period of discomfort broken only
by hours of extreme danger. Incidentally, it was safe to say
that no man could hope to come out of two battles of the Somme
type unhurt and that one man in three would lose his life. We
cannot wonder that the question whether it was possible, by
new methods aiming at a swifter decision, to avoid the sombre
prospect of unending battles of attrition, was one frequently
and keenly debated.
14
209
The German Retreat


The fact that new methods were ultimately adopted with
disastrous results does not in itself prove conclusively that an
escape from the policy of attrition was impossible at this stage
in the campaign. The actions now to be described, which
followed on the return of the Naval Division in January 1917,
to face a beaten enemy in the desolate valley of the Ancre,
are of historical importance chiefly for the light they cast
on this intricate problem. What was the situation created
by our victories of 1910, and was it exploited to the best
advantage ?
The battle of November 13th, had, as will be remembered,
been planned to dislodge the enemy from his positions between
Serre and the northern bank of the Ancre, which had threatened
the flank of our salient south of that river and had thus made it
impossible for us to continue our advance. The battle had
been wholly successful on the front from Beaumont Hamel to
Beaucourt, and when it was broken off, the enemy positions in
front of Bapaume depended for their security, no longer on three
successive positions opposing an advance north of the Ancre,
but only on the one line from Serre to Puisieux and thence
through Beauregarde Dovecote to Miraumont and Pys, with an
outpost at Grandcourt. The reduction of this line was thus all
that appeared necessary to give us a chance of dislodging the
enemy from his positions on a considerably wider front. The
prospect was all the more attractive since the depth of the
advance necessary to shake the enemy’s hold on the Pys-
Miraumont line was not very great. Any substantial advance
from Beaucourt would give us the ridge which commanded
Grandcourt, and, if Grandcourt fell, it needed only a further
short advance on either side of the Ancre to carry us on to the
two spurs which commanded the eastern and western ap-
proaches to Miraumont, and covered also the enemy artillery
positions which alone enabled him to retain his hold on Serre
and Puisieux.
Since the Division had been relieved on the morning of
November 15th our line north of the Ancre had been pushed
forward some distance beyond Beaucourt, but was still below
the crest of the ridge which commanded Grandcourt. On the
southern bank of the river the line was already on the outskirts
of Grandcourt. To ensure the protection of the river crossings,
the Vth Corps had handed over the brigade frontage im-
210
The Royal Naval Division


mediately north of the river to the Ilnd Corps, and the trenches
opposite Grandcourt and across the river in front of Beaucourt
now formed one divisional sector. It was this sector that the
Naval Division took over from the 11th Division, on the nights
of January 18th and 19th, the 188th Brigade going into the
line south of the river, with the 189th Brigade on their left in
front of Beaucourt. The 190th Brigade remained for the time
in reserve.
Since the middle of December the frost had been continuous,
and, as they had worked their way forward up the hill from
Beaucourt, our outposts had had to use and maintain themselves
in such cover as the frozen shell-holes of the battlefield provided.
No digging and no movement by day was possible, and by night
the ration parties visiting the outpost line were the objects of
continuous shelling. Virtually the occupants of these shell-
holes were isolated, dependent on themselves for their security,
and on the hope of early relief for their only consolation. The
lot of the support and reserve companies and of the artillery
was little better. The spacious dug-outs of Beaucourt pro-
vided for some, indeed, an estimable shelter, but they were too
far behind our front for any save the reserves, whose duties of
fetching and carrying over the shell-swept valley and up the
open slopes to the outpost line were inconceivably arduous, and
deprived them of leisure to profit by them. The support
companies in trenches beyond the village were tied to their
inadequate cover as closely as the outposts, and, like them, were
condemned merely to freeze in silence till relief came. The
artillery, in gun positions well known to the enemy, suffered
almost as severely, and the conditions were above all fatal to
the horses, for whom the rations, in the unprecedented severity
of a happily abnormal winter, were pitifully inadequate.
Conditions such as these are, in their kind, if not in their
degree, the inevitable lot of many infantrymen in many winter
campaigns. They are worthy of note here because it was in
this winter of 1917, and at this very time and place, that the first
and last winter offensive by our armies in France was launched,
and because it was in spite of these conditions that it succeeded.
These facts are of the first importance as an indication of the
demoralization of the enemy by the battles of 1916, of the
determination of the different British divisions which took
part in the renewed offensive, and of the very real chance that
14*
211
The German Retreat


existed at this date of proceeding to an even more substantial,
possibly to a decisive, success.
The concluding days of January were marked by only
two incidents outside the normal routine of stationary war.
The first occurred on the night of January 24th, on the left
brigade front, where the Hood Battalion posts in the Ancre
Valley were attacked and the enemy, coming down the frozen
river, effected a lodgment in our line. The attack was even-
tually driven back, though with loss, Sub-Lieutenant McCor-
mick, R.N.V.R., and seven men being killed in an anxious
engagement. The other incident occurred on the front held
by the 2nd Marines, across the river, when a German advanced
post was captured by Lieutenant Spinney (a Corps intelligence
officer, temporarily attached to the battalion) and two bombers
from the Marine Battalion. A similar attempt was made
the next night by Lieutenant Spinney, accompanied by Lieu-
tenant Wren, R.M.L.1., but the results inevitably were less
satisfactory, and, though many casualties were inflicted, the
brave organizer of these adventures was mortally wounded.
Towards the end of January, the first move was made,
and with a view to the renewal of the offensive at an early
date on the Beaucourt front, the 189th Brigade was relieved
by the 190th Brigade. The sequel was the issue of orders for
an attack by the former Brigade on the two enemy trenches
on the ridge commanding Grandcourt. The attack was to take
place on February Brd, and the Hawke and Hood Battalions
were chosen by General Phillips for the task. To make the
final preparations, these battalions returned to the front line
on the night of the lst-2nd February.
In the hope of effecting a surprise, the attack, which was a
simple trench-to-trench affair, was planned for 11 p.m. The
Hawke and Hood Battalions had each three companies detailed
for the attack and the fourth in support, the four companies
in the centre being in two waves of two platoons each and the
flanking companies in three waves on a narrower frontage.
The left Battalion (Hawke) had perhaps the harder task, as
their advance uncovered their flank and a defensive flank had
to be formed. “A ” Company of the support Battalion (Nelson)
was detailed to assist the support company of the Hawke
Battalion in this work. The Hood Battalion had no appreciably
lighter task, since their objective consisted not only of a well-
212
The Royal Naval Division


Scene of the Hood Battalion advance in the Ancre Valley,
November 13th, 1916.




defined sector of the enemy trenches, but of an ill-defined group
of posts in the valley. The capture of these necessitated a
half-right turn, an obvious source of confusion in a night
advance, by the platoons on the right.
An effort had been made to link up the line of shell-holes,
which constituted our first line, into a continuous trench to
form an assembly position for the first two waves, and, though
the shelter provided was negligible, it was here that the attack-
ing companies lined up at 9 p.m. on the evening of the 3rd.
There was a keen frost and a brilliant moon.
The distance to the first enemy line (Puisieux trench) was
three hundred yards, and to the second line barely another
hundred yards. The whole attack, from the time when the
barrage opened to the time when it lifted off the enemy’s second
line, was to last only eight minutes. In a local operation of
this character, the duration of the advance is no index of the
difficulty of the operation. With no advance attempted on
either flank, the enemy reaction must be easier and more
immediate, and the difficulties of consolidating the cap-
tured position correspondingly greater. So in fact it was
found.
Following close behind the barrage, which was exceptionally
accurate and effective, the leading waves entered the first
trench without great opposition except from a machine gun in
a fortified emplacement opposite the centre of the right (“ D ”)
company of the Hawke Battalion. This machine gun proved,
as it turned out, the pivot of a very vigorous defence by the
enemy. The chief lesson of the battle of November 13th had
been the futility of attempting to carry “ strong points ” by
frontal attack, and the simple corrective urged was to go round
them and so, by establishing positions ahead, to compel their
surrender. This method was carefully followed by the leading
platoons of the Hawke Company under Sub-Lieutenant Black-
more and Sub-Lieutenant Wilkes, but the result was unsatis-
factory. Partly owing to the darkness, and partly to the fact
that Sub-Lieutenant Blackmore.was wounded, these platoons
failed to join up in the enemy -second line. Instead, the
platoon on the right got carried away by the Hood Battalion,
who by mistake had turned half-right and followed their right
company in the attack on the posts in the valley. The result
was that the whole Hood Battalion and two platoons of the
213
The German Retreat


Hawke ended up on an alignment parallel with, instead of at
right angles to, the river.
Meanwhile the Hawke had scored a distinct success on the
left flank, where “ C ” Company, under Lt.-Commander Shelton,
R.N.V.R., had captured and were consolidating the important
flank position at the juncture of River trench and Artillery
Lane, where the enemy reaction was likely to be, and in fact
became, most severe. The consolidation of the defensive
flank was, however, proceeding under difficulties. The Nelson
company had failed to obtain a junction with the Hawke left,
and the enemy retained a lodgment between the two battalions.
Such was the situation half-an-hour after the attack,
when Lt.-Colonel Monro, commanding the Hood Battalion,
was wounded, and Lt.-Commander Asquith,* who had gone
forward on the heels of his old battalion in the slender disguise
of staff learner studying the effects of the artillery barrage,
took command. To his energy and enthusiasm the success
of the 189th Brigade’s operations on this occasion was largely
due. Well before 8 a.m. on the 4th, Lt.-Commander Asquith
had got the Hood Battalion back to their correct alignment, and
although touch could not be gained with the Hawke Battalion
(who had probably by now edged further to the left, assuming
the attack to have failed on the right) the situation was no
longer critical. Dawn saw us with a fair hold on all our ob-
jectives, but with an awkward gap in the first and second enemy
lines, and a machine-gun post still obstructing the consolidation
of the essential defensive flank.
The history of the rest of the battle is soon told. Several
attempts to subdue the two strong points and to close the gaps
were made during the morning of the 4th, but without success.
At 3.50 p.m., however, the enemy post on our left was rushed
by the Nelson and Hawke after an effective bombardment from
a Stokes gun, skilfully handled by Leading Seaman Wheeler,f
of the 189th L.T.M. battery. This rendered our position vir-
tually secure on the flank. The enemy still held out between
the Hawke and Hood Battalions, and General Phillips decided
to send up the Drake Battalion. Two companies were to assist
the Hawke to capture the strong point, one company was to
• Lt.-Commander Asquith had been, against his wishes, detached for staff
duties a few days before the battle of November 13th.
f This N.C.O. was subsequently awarded the D.C.M.
214
The Royal Naval Division


reinforce the Hood right (where the position was then
obscure), and one company to fill the gap between the Hawke
and Hood in River trench.
These last companies went up together to the Hood right,
about 7 p.m., but, as soon as the first of their companies arrived
in the line, a counter-attack developed, the enemy breaking
through on the right of the Hood and bombing our communi-
cations up the valley. At the same time an intensive bombard-
ment fell on each flank of the captured position. The casualties
were heavy; the rear company of the Drake was caught crowded
up in a narrow communication trench, and there was a certain
inevitable confusion. Meanwhile, one post on the flank of the
Hood had been surprised and captured by the enemy. On the
left, the situation, thanks to the screen of Lewis and Vickers
guns in front of the consolidating party, was more satisfactory.
Although the remaining company of the Hawke Battalion had
to be called on to assist in the defence, no footing was secured
by the counter-attack at any point on this flank.
By 8 p.m. the situation was quiet, and Lt.-Commander
Asquith proceeded to a fresh effort to join up with the Hawke
Battalion in River trench, and so cut off the garrison of the
strong point. This time ** B ” Company of the Drake (Sub-Lieut.
H. K. Lunn) was chosen for the task and was led some distance
up River trench without encountering opposition. Unfortu-
nately Commander Asquith, who alone knew well the lie of this
trench, now bombarded out of all recognition, and the direction
in which the Hawke right must be expected to be, was
wounded just as he was starting off to lead the Drake company
into position. Sub-Lieut. Lunn, taking on a patrol to find
the way, lost direction and found himself in the German lines,
where he was cut off, and the gap, though much reduced,
remained.
At dawn on the 4th, a final, and this time successful, attack
was made against the enemy who still held out in this gap ;
the original strong point was captured by Sub-Lieutenant
Bowerman, M.C.,* and a party of the Hawke Battalion,
and the remaining posts were- dealt with by the Hood and
Drake Battalions. It is interesting to note that the “ strong
point ” turned out to be a dug-out with a garrison thirty-two
strong, though the Brigade staff had reported almost hourly
* This officer had received the M.C. for his work in the attack of November 13th.
215
The German Retreat


that there was only a machine gun in a shell-hole, and no dug-
out and no garrison at all.
At 5.30 p.m. on the same day a counter-attack was organized
by the Hood on the right of their front, and the post which had
been lost was retaken without difficulty.
Throughout the day, the enemy infantry had delivered
several counter-attacks, especially against the Hood Battalion’s
front, but they had been beaten off by a very effective series
of artillery barrages (for which the 317th R.F.A. Brigade—
Lt.-Colonel Gosling—was responsible) and Lewis and machine-
gun fire.
The success of these operations, which were planned to take
eight minutes and were carried through in no more than fifty
hours’ continuous fighting, was due as usual pre-eminently to
the stubbornness with which the petty officers and men clung
on to the captured positions, without regard to the positions on
either flank. Secondly, it was due to the resolute leadership of
Lt.-Commander Shelton on the left flank, and to the initiative
and skill of Lt.-Commander Asquith in carrying out his self-
imposed task in command of the right flank of our attack.
Both these officers were awarded the D.S.O. Captain Barnett,
Brigade Major of the 189th Brigade, received a bar to his
Military Cross, and Sub-Lieutenant Fernie and Sub-Lieutenant
Robotti (the Brigade bombing and transport officers) and
Sub-Lieutenant Rackham (the Lewis gun officer of the Hawke,
to whose dispositions the defeat of the attacks on the left
flank was in no small measure due) were awarded the Military
Cross.*
The nature of the fighting, calling as it did for the greatest
initiative and endurance on the part of the N.C.O.’s in command
of the posts which formed our line of defence, is best reflected,
however, by the long list of awards of the D.C.M., among the
recipients being P.O. Bettridge, P.O. Callender and A.B.
Price of the Drake, P.O. Rosewame of the Hawke, P.O.
Simpson, P.O. Blair and A.B. H. G. Macaulay of the Hood,
P.O. Edgar and L.S. Pun ton of the Brigade Stokes Mortar
Battery, and P.O. Buckman, L.S, Tillings and A.B, Schol-
field of the Machine-Gun Company.
* Other officers to win this distinction were Sub-Lieutenants Blackmore and
Lyall of the Hawke; Bennett, Hilton, Clark and Ablett of the Hood, and
Pound of the Drake Battalion. Surgeon Lieut.-Commander Padwick of the
Hawke Battalion was awarded the D.S.O.


The conditions of the attack necessarily placed an almost
impossible strain on the administrative staff. The small area
of the attack was the chief difficulty, since our communications
were known and the enemy had nothing to do but shell them
consistently. In these circumstances very few men got
adequate rations, and as their iron rations and the water in
their water-bottles were frozen, the energy of the attack and
the subsequent defence were extremely remarkable. Even
more difficult than the supply of rations was the evacuation of
the casualties, and the high proportion of killed was perhaps
in itself due, to some extent, to the limitation of the front of
attack. The stubborn resistance of the enemy lessened the
advantage which it had been hoped to gain from a night attack,
but the experiment was on the whole successful, and the gaps
which occurred in our line were probably inevitable in the
light of the stubborn defence put up, which had, without a
doubt, been under-estimated. In any case, the test of the
fighting quality of troops is the ability to retrieve their mistakes.
Even taking into account the vigour of the enemy resistance
over more than two days, the casualties in the Brigade, which
amounted to 24 officers and 647 petty officers and men, were
exceptional, and the proportion of killed was lamentably high.
Among the officers killed were Lieutenant Ellis and Sub-Lieuts.
Collins and Rorke of the Hawke, and Lieut. Oliver and Sub-
Lieut. T. Jacobs of the Hood, Sub-Lieuts. W. J. Travers and
R. A. W. Robinson of the Drake, and Sub-Lieut. A. F. Wolfe,
of the Nelson Battalion. Our captures amounted to one officer
and 185 men unwounded, one officer and forty men wounded,
and two machine guns.
The success achieved, however, had been complete, and
its results were immediate. On the night of February sth-6th
(the next following on the complete capture of our objective),
while the relief of the 189th Brigade by the 190th was in
progress on the battle front, the Howe Battalion, on the other
side of the Ancre, pushed two patrols in Grandcourt under
Sub-Lieut, H. M. Graham and Sub-Lieut. Bunce.* They
found it deserted, and returned with captured rifles and
* Sub-Lieut. Bunce was severely wounded by a chance shot on the way
back to our lines and died the next day. The Howe Battalion lost two other
officers of fine promise on the previous and following days in Lieutenant Hum-
phries (commanding “C” Company), and Lieutenant Ellis (the adjutant of the
Battalion).


equipment. Commander Ramsay Fairfax immediately notified
his Brigade, and Lt.-Colonel Hutchison, on his right, and the 2nd
Marines entered Grandcourt at 9 a.m. on the 6th, and confirmed
the retirement of the enemy. The message to the 188th
Brigade on the night of February sth-6th is of historical
importance as the first notification of the beginning of that
German retreat, which was so profoundly to modify the whole
strategic situation on the Western front.
The next day (February 7th) the H.A.C., after a successful
reconnaissance by 2nd Lieut. Finch (who was awarded the
Military Cross for his exploit), advanced their line up the
Ancre Valley to Baillescourt Farm (some six hundred yards
ahead of the left of the line reached by the Hood Battalion in
the battle of the 3rd-sth). In this highly successful affair the
H.A.C. captured eighty-one prisoners, besides effecting a gain
on ground which enabled us to make good our hold on a line
in front of Grandcourt; but they suffered two severe losses in
the deaths of Colonel Boyle and Captain Bryant. Colonel
Boyle had commanded the H.A.C. from the time they landed
in France, and his loss was a severe blow to this fine and almost
uniformly successful battalion. He was succeeded in command
by Major Osmond.
Whether or no the retreat from Grandcourt was regarded
as of local significance only, it was not till February 17th that
a serious attempt was made to exploit our successes by launch-
ing an attack in force on Miraumont. The main operation was
to be undertaken by the 18th and 2nd Divisions south of the
Ancre, who were to attack roughly in a northerly direction,
and capture in three bounds the enemy position on the for-
ward slope, the crest and the reverse slopes of the hill covering
Miraumont from the west. Simultaneously, the Naval Division
had to complete the capture of the spur on the southern face
of which they had won a footing on February 3rd.
The advance was planned for 5.45 a.m., under the now
inevitable creeping barrage.
The Naval Division’s attack was carried out by the Howe
and Ist R.M. Battalions of General Prentice’s 188th Brigade,
which had handed over the Grandcourt sector to another
division a few days before. The Anson Battalion held the
already advanced posts on the right of the divisional front
next to the river, and the 2nd R.M. Battalion and two
218
The Royal Naval Division


companies of the Hawke Battalion held the left flank, which
rested still in Artillery Alley (the trench consolidated by Nelson
and Hawke Battalions in the first advance of the month).
The reserve battalion was the Hood. Two companies of the
2nd Marines were specially attached to their first battalion, to
help them in consolidating the extension of our defensive flank.
The attack was brilliantly successful, and in the case of
the Howe Battalion (on the right) the casualties were extremely
light, the flank of their objective being already covered by
the advanced posts of the Anson Battalion, who had relieved
the H.A.C. at Baillescourt Farm. The Ist Marine Battalion
had a harder task, with an open flank to protect, and with the
enemy resistance more formidable. While consolidating their
objective they experienced rather heavy losses, and they had
also suffered severely from the enemy’s barrage before the
attack began. The result was that two companies of the
Hood Battalion had to go up to reinforce them. Nevertheless,
they consolidated their objective, and the difficulties which
had arisen on the 3rd in safeguarding the left flank were on
this occasion avoided.
It remains a significant commentary on the evenly-balanced
chances of war that the casualties in this immediately successful
operation were almost precisely the same as in the earlier
engagement, when severe fighting had extended over a period
of more than two days. In that case, moreover, the enemy’s
resistance was appreciably more vigorous. The moral, perhaps,
must be drawn in favour of night operations, especially if it is
remembered that the risks of these are mainly due not to any
inherent difficulty but to the fact that they are so rarely
practised.
On the morning of February 18th, a counter-attack
developed, but it was annihilated before it reached our lines by
the extremely effective barrage of the divisional artillery and
the XBBth and 190th Machine-Gun Companies. On the night
of the 21st-22nd, the 188th Brigade handed over to the 190th
the new position consolidated and intact. In the course of
the operations the Marines had* lost severely in officers and
men. Lieutenant L. W. Robinson, 2nd Lieut. A. A. O’Kell,
2nd Lieut. C. H. Burton, 2nd Lieut. F. W. A. Perry, 2nd Lieut.
H. C. Brown and 2nd Lieut. T. Swale were killed, and the
casualties in N.C.O.’s and men were over four hundred. The
219
The German Retreat


Howe casualties were fortunately lighter, yet two officers
(Sub-Lieut. Shea and Sub-Lieut. Haines) and some twenty
N.C.O.’s and men were killed.
Like the earlier operation, that of February 17th had a
decisive result, and the enemy at once evacuated his positions
at Serre, Miraumont and Pys. When our patrols went forward
on the 23rd and 24th they met with no resistance, and the 190th
Brigade actually occupied Miraumont on the 25th without
firing a shot. Even on the 26th, when the H.A.C., the 7th
Royal Fusiliers (Lt.-Colonel Hesketh) and the 10th Dublin
Fusiliers (Lt.-Colonel Seymour) had orders to occupy Gudgeon
trench, a prepared position between Puisieux and Irles, on
which the enemy rearguard might be expected to stand, they
succeeded in capturing the position (and a few prisoners)
before nightfall.
The success of this operation was largely due to the skilful
work of 2nd Lieut. Baines, of the H.A.C., and 2nd Lieut.
H. W. Taylor, of the Fusiliers. The next day Gommecourt
and Puisieux were evacuated, and, by March 2nd, the enemy
had fallen back to the Le Transloy-Loupart line, except in the
neighbourhood of Irles.
At this point in the advance the Naval Division were
relieved from duty in the line, and their frontage was taken
over by the Vth Corps, who extended their line once more to
the Ancre.
The almost unbroken successes, achieved in turn by each
of the Brigades of the Division, makes this period a memor-
able one. Unfortunately, they had been bought at a heavy
price, and were destined to bring no such striking return in the
long run as seemed, and perhaps might have been, possible.
These successes, and those of the other divisions on the
flanks, appeared, indeed, to have created a situation for which
we were unprepared, and which had to be met as far as possible
by eleventh-hour efforts. We had forced the enemy to retreat
at a time when, in any case, effective pursuit must have been
peculiarly difficult. The frosts, which had prevailed through
the first three weeks of February, had given place to milder
weather, and the older roads behind our front were now
virtually impassable. Once it was decided that, as a
measure of precaution, our advance must keep pace with our
ability to move forward the normal proportion of guns, aramuni-
220
The Royal Naval Division


Railway Station at Beaumont Hamel, November, 1916.




tion and other supplies, the absence of preparation meant
that, before the advance could begin, new roads and railways
had to be hurriedly constructed.
To assist in this work the Naval Division were attached
during the first fortnight in March to the Canadian Railway
Company. No finer men could have been found for this work
than the north-country miners who formed so high a proportion
of the men of the division, for they possessed that rare com-
bination of skill and energy which is essential when work
has to be done against time. All the same, it was a curious
irony which made it necessary to call on the Division to do
the spade-work necessary to exploit their own hardly-won
victories, especially when it is recalled that the February
victories had been planned as long before as October.
As it was, despite the most continuous calls on the division
in the matter of working parties, the Ilnd Corps was not in a
position to move against Irles, the one outpost held by the
enemy in advance of the Le Transloy-Loupart line, till March
10th, and, by the time we were ready to attack that line itself,
the enemy were equally ready to retire from it.
By the middle of March, the Division was desperately in
need of rest. The camp near Ovillers, where they had been
since they came out of the line, had nothing to recommend it.
It was, in fact, in the battle area, as remote from all the
decencies of civilization as the lines of shell-holes which had
served them for trenches in February. When, about this time,
a distinct movement of men and guns away from the Ancre
front became noticeable, men’s spirits rose. Movement on
this scale, for heavy guns in particular were being withdrawn
daily, heralded indeed a new offensive in some other part of the
line, but such is the mood of fighting troops that any reversion,
even for a matter of two or three weeks, to comfortable sur-
roundings, any relief, however short, from the nervous strain
of the battle zone, is a thing so welcome that ultimate conse-
quences are not considered.
When the order came for the Division to move back to
Hedauville on the 18th March and to march thence behind the
lines to Busnes, north of Arras, there was nothing short of
rejoicing. As the Division set out on its first day’s march
from Hedauville to the neighbourhood of Contray Chateau,
the Battalion bands were heard for the first time since January
221
The German Retreat


at the head of the line of march, sick men began to recover
their health, and tired men to feel once more that life was good.
The Division at this time was commanded by Major-General
C. E. Lawrie, D. 5.0., who had succeeded Major-General Shute
on February 19th, and the 189th Brigade was much strengthened
by the return to the Hood Battalion of Lt.-Colonel Freyberg.
Major Freeland also had left the Drake Battalion to take up a
staff appointment and had been succeeded by Commander
Sterndale Bennett, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., who had served with
such distinction as Adjutant to Commander King and Colonel
Tetley in Gallipoli and France.
Going forward under these favourable auspices to the new
adventure, the Naval Division had no reason now to fear for
its future.
222
The Royal Naval Division




Operations at Gavrelle, April 1917.


CHAPTER XIII
THE SPRING OFFENSIVE OF 1917
AS the Naval Division reached the front north of Arras, in
the spring of 1917, popular expectation was at its highest
point, since the days of the Marne. The great German retreat,
of which we have told the beginnings was, by the end of March,
drawing to its close, and uneducated opinion had not hesitated
to draw conclusions the most favourable from its speed, its
extent and the absence of effective opposition to the later
British attacks. Military history will probably be less com-
placent in its judgment. It is at least not the whole explanation
of our almost bloodless advance that we were reaping at long
last the fruits of our victories on the Somme and the Ancre.
It was inevitable, however, that this first substantial advance
achieved by the British Armies since 1914 should be regarded
by many even at the front as a favourable omen for the spring
offensive, and that the troops concentrated behind our line
should been looking forward, if not to an equally bloodless,
at any rate to an equally successful achievement.
Recent disclosures suggest that the optimism of the staffs
was less definite and that no very great results were expected
from the Arras offensive. This contrast between popular and
informed opinion reflected justifiable doubts of the merits
of new plans not wholly military in their inspiration. It must
indeed be emphasized that, contributing to the allied defeats of
this unfortunate year, there was, as far as the British Army was
concerned, no weakening in the fighting spirit and no strategic
misconception calculable in its results. There was perhaps an
unfortunate lack of elasticity, of originality even, in our tactics
on the Ancre, at Arras and at Passchendaele, but for the real
cause of our failure throughout the year we must look elsewhere.
The 1917 plan of campaign as designed by General Joffre and
Sir Douglas Haig had been thrown contemptuously on one side,


and the r6le of the British Armies had been subordinated, with
the consent of the new British Government, to the requirements
of a great attack planned by General Joffre’s successor, General
Nivelle. This attack was fixed for May, 1917, and, to give it
the best possible chances of success, the Arras offensive had
to be pressed forward despite the new situation created by the
German retreat. Later, it had to be continued in spite of the
strengthening of the German resistance following on the French
defeat.
It was in these circumstances and for these reasons that
the British Army, for all their optimism, were to find themselves
engaged once more in what, virtually, was a holding battle,
and not sweeping forward to a decisive trial of strength. That
no better use was made of our superior resources and our
heightened moral at this critical date was nothing less than
a tragedy, but it was a tragedy for which, according to present
information, the British High Command was not even mainly
responsible.
The first attack on the Arras front was planned for April
9th, exactly a week before Nivelle’s major operation which
was to open on April 16th. The British front of attack ran
from Givenchy en Gohelle (a little to the north of Vimy Ridge)
to a point about eight miles south of Arras, the whole front
of attack being approximately fifteen miles. Our lines and
those of the enemy opposite lay, as on the Somme, almost due
north and south. The direction of our attack was thus from
west to east.
The enemy defences as far as Tilloy les Mofflaines, three
miles south of Arras, were of the type to which we were
accustomed on the Somme, and perhaps no stronger except on
the Vimy Ridge. There were three (and in places four) prepared
positions, one behind the other, forming a defensive zone
of from four to five miles, and each position consisted, again
as on the Somme, of a complete trench system providing lateral
communication between • endless “ strong points,” fortified
villages, and a number of more important miniature fortresses.
At Tilloy les Mofflaines the older positions joined the new
Hindenburg system. This historic fortification consisted of
two continuous trenches, at a distance from each other of
approximately 1,000 yards, with a chain of machine-gun posts
in concrete emplacements, in rear. The system had been built


German Barbed Wire at Beaucourt-sur-Ancre, November, 1916.




to meet the lessons of the Somme. It was, to all intents and
purposes, proof against bombardment; the machine guns were
in ferro-concrete emplacements, and the bulk of the garrison
lived beneath the support line in a continuous tunnel some
forty feet below ground, with exits to the trench every thirty
or forty yards. At the traverses of the support line were 9-inch
trench mortars in concrete emplacements, supplied with am-
munition from below ground. The whole system was so sited
that every part of the front line was enfiladed from some other
part of the system (a device first systematically employed by
the Turks).
The attack north of the Vimy Ridge was to be made by the
Ist Corps, and on the Vimy Ridge itself by the Canadian Corps,
of the First Army. South of the Vimy positions, the XVIIth
Corps of the Third Army was to carry on the attack on a front
extending to the Scarpe (which flowed at right angles to our
line a mile north of Arras). Below the river, the line of battle
was carried south by the Vllth and Vlth Corps. In general
reserve was the XHlth Corps, held behind the lines, on the
north of the battle front, in the Bruay-Barlin area. If any
exceptional success was achieved, this Corps was to go through
the Ist Corps in the direction of Lens.
The Naval Division was curiously dispersed on the eve of
the attack. Directly they came north from the Ancre, the
Divisional Artillery, though badly in need of rest and without
fresh horses (which, after the experiences of February and
March, were essential), joined the 3rd Canadian Division and
went into position behind Vimy Ridge. Almost at the same
time the 188th Brigade was attached to the sth Division of
the Ist Corps and went into the line opposite Lievin. The
balance of the Division —two infantry brigades without artillery
—was attached to the Xlllth Corps. Not since the early
days of Gallipoli, and then with greater justification, had the
Division been subjected to such a dispersal. The incident is
small but significant. The comparative immobility of our
armies was never more noticeable than in the early days of the
Arras offensive. It was not only the civilian soldier who had
to unlearn the paralysing lessons of defensive war.
The attack opened at dawn on the 9th in threatening
weather. Our maximum success was in the centre in front of
Arras, where the XVIIth and Vllth Corps carried the first
15


two positions on either bank of the Scarpe and effected a breach
in the enemy’s third position (their final objective) at Fampoux
and Feuchy. On the left and right we were less successful.
The Canadians could not at once complete the capture of the
German positions on the Vimy Ridge (the enemy were holding
out on the northern end of it), and the Vlth Corps made little
headway against the Hindenburg line in the south. The in-
tention had been that, directly the enemy’s third position had
been carried on a sufficiently wide front, the reserves should go
forward. As things were, the Germans clinging to the north
of Vimy Ridge denied us that full protection for the left flank
of our advance which the Canadian attack had been designed to
secure, and the enemy’s resistance at other points in his second
position was still to be reckoned with. The gap through which
our reserves must pass was in these circumstances judged to
be too narrow. This decision, certainly defensible and perhaps
inevitable, determined at this early stage the future of the
battle. Once it was decided to renew the battle on the whole
front and proceed methodically to the capture of the original
objectives before attempting to go beyond them, the issue
of the battle was left dependent on the fate of the impending
French offensive. Without effective support on another front,
the methods of the Somme could yield no immediately striking
results.
The definitive nature of this decision was placed beyond
doubt by the decision reached the next day to take the Xlllth
Corps out of general reserve, and bring them down to relieve
the left of the XVIIth Corps on the front south of Vimy. The
Naval Division was of course affected by the change of plan, and
moved south on the 12th, leaving behind the Anson and Ist
Marine battalions still in the line in the Angres sector, and the
Divisional artillery heavily engaged and earning warm tributes
from the Canadian infantry.
Meanwhile there had been steady progress on the front.
On April 10th and 11th, our capture of the first two enemy posi-
tions was completed except for three miles on the right, where
we were still held up by the Hindenburg line. More notable,
however, was our success in capturing Monchy le Preux, a
strong position behind the German third line south-east of
Feuchy. Many thought that this success, at least, should have
made it possible to force our way beyond the enemy’s defensive


zone. The weather, however, had now broken. We had not
sufficient troops available for an immediate renewal of the
attack on a wide front, and our artillery found it difficult to
get sufficiently far forward to give the infantry the necessary
measure of support.
In these circumstances, April 12th also was devoted to
clearing up the situation. The operations were again satis-
factory within their limits. We extended our hold on the
Hindenburg line in the south, and in the north we captured two
important heights on either side of the Souchez river, which
directly threatened the defences of Lens. The result was a
further retirement by the enemy, first detected on the sth
Division front by patrols from the Ist R.M. Battalion, under
2nd Lieut. Kenny and 2nd Lieut. Marsh, who were the first
to penetrate into Angres and Lievin. Colonel Cartwright
moved his battalion forward to the abandoned positions on
the night of the 13th-14th.
The first unit of the Xlllth Corps to go into the line was the
2nd Division on the right of the Canadians. On the night of
the 14th-15th April, the Naval Division came in on the right of
the 2nd Division and took over from the 34th Division the sector
due west of Gavrelle, a village in the third German position
which had so far resisted all attacks.
The new front was taken over by the 189th and 190th
Brigades on the right and the left respectively. The brigades
were covered by the 34th Divisional Artillery. The outposts
on the 189th Brigade front were already within striking distance
of the German trenches, and the first task of the Division
was to bring the outposts of the left Brigade sector into line.
The first attempt was made on the morning of the 15th by the
10th Dublin Fusiliers and the 4th Bedfords. The opposition
had, however, been under-estimated, and rather heavy losses
were incurred in an audacious attempt to advance our line in
broad daylight across ground commanded by the enemy. On
the night of. the 16th-17th these battalions were relieved, and a
more successful attempt was made by the H.A.C. and 7th Royal
Fusiliers, who on this and the two following nights not only
pushed their outposts forward but made them into a connected
line, within two hundred yards of the German positions. The
189th Brigade on the left had done the same and the two brigades
were now in touch.
15*


Our position was still unenviable. The weather was bitterly
cold, snow alternated with sleet, and the new front line lay on
the forward slope of the hill looking down into the plain of
Gavrelle. On the crest of this hill was the captured German
switch line from Fampoux through Point du Jour (a miniature
fortress now in the 189th Brigade sub-sector) to Farbus, and
our support troops in this line and our reserves on the reverse
slope (in what had been the second enemy position) were
screened from all observation. The position of the front line
troops was, however, deplorable. From the crest of the hill to
the enemy’s line in front of Gavrelle was a perfectly open belt
of country, more than 8,500 yards in depth. Not only, there-
fore, our front line but our communications were at the mercy of
an observant enemy who allowed no interval of immunity to
ration and carrying parties, engineers, signallers and runners,
on whose attentions the infantry in the trenches so implicitly
rely.
Facing a beaten enemy, the position would have been hard
enough, but the tidings from the south were not of victory.
The great French offensive, the most audacious effort of the
allied armies during the war (if we except the Gallipoli campaign)
had failed. The reaction on the Arras offensive had been
immediate. The enemy resistance was now vigorous, our
patrols reported that their front line was held in force, and it
became clear that no further success would attend the policy of
“ peaceful penetration ” and local offensives. We must get on
or get out. Strategy suggested that we should abandon the
offensive in this now unprofitable field and turn our attention
to Flanders. But the needs of the alliance and the fear of a
German counter-stroke on the Aisne were considerations which
could not, it was felt, be ignored. The German reserves must
be held at whatever cost on our own front for some days at
least, and there was nothing for it but a renewal of the frontal
attack on the enemy positions, now once more continuous,
formidable and extensive.
The attack was ordered for April the 23rd. The XVIIth
Corps (37th Division) was to co-operate on the right flank, and
the three objectives of the Naval Division were the enemy
trenches in front of Gavrelle, a clearly defined road running
roughly north and south through the centre of the village, and
a line three to six hundred yards beyond Gavrelle in touch with


the 37th Division, whose final objective was Greenland Hill.
Further south, the attack was to be continued by the 51st
Division of the XVIIth Corps, whose objective was Roeux, and
by theVlth Corps, whose objectives included Cherisy, Guemappe
and Infantry Hill east of Monchy. The Naval Division was to
attack with the 190th Brigade on the left and the 189th
Brigade on the right. After the capture of the first objective
(the trench system in front of Gavrelle), the 189th Brigade
only was to proceed to the further objectives, while the 190th
Brigade was to form a defensive flank.
The battalions allocated to the attack were, from right to
left, the Drake, Nelson, 7th Royal Fusiliers and 4th Bedfords,
with the Hood Battalion in close support. This battalion had
to follow behind the Nelson to the second objective and capture
the third objective in conjunction with the Drake. The Ist
H.A.C. were in support to the 190th Brigade, with orders to go
forward as the situation might require. The carrying parties
were found from the Hawke and 10th Dublin Fusiliers.* The
Howe Battalion of the 188th Brigade was attached as a reserve
battalion to the 189th Brigade, the remaining three battalions
of the 188th Brigade being held in divisional reserve. Two
sections from each of the 189th and 190th Machine-Gun
Companies were to go forward with the infantry, and the re-
mainder were to cover the advance with overhead fire. Medium
and light trench mortars were to follow up the advance. The
attack was to begin along the whole front at 4.45 a.m.
Two days before the attack, the news arrived that Colonel
Freyberg had been appointed to command a brigade of the
58th (London) Division. The news afforded reason alike for
pride and dismay. No promotion could have been more richly
earned, but the gain to the Army was the Naval Division’s loss.
Who was to command the Hood Battalion in the forthcoming
attack ? General Phillips decided at once that the appointment
of an officer strange to the Division and battalion at this
juncture might have unfortunate results, and, at his instance,
an urgent request was sent to Commander Asquith (who had
recovered from his wounds received on the Ancre and had been
appointed to the Intelligence Staff of the Third Army) asking
* The Drake, Nelson, Hood and Hawke battalions made up the 189th
Brigade (still under Brigadier-General Phillips), and the 7th Royal Fusiliers, the
4th Bedfords, the Ist H.A.C. and the 10th Dublin Fusiliers made up the 190th
Brigade (now commanded by Brigadier-General H. W. E. Finch).


him to get permission to rejoin his battalion. The permission
was granted, and, barely twenty-four hours before the attack
opened, Commander Asquith arrived to take over the battalion
which had such implicit confidence in his leading.
By midnight on April 22nd-23rd the troops were reported
in position, but the Drake patrols discovered that the wire
on their right front was mostly uncut, and a characteristic
message back to Brigade Headquarters announcing the fact
ended with the bland inquiry: “Is the attack cancelled ? ”
The message, so say the official records, was repeated to the
Xlllth Corps with the last sentence deleted. Commander
Bennett lost no time, however, in issuing amended orders to
his battalion. He decided to attack on a company front only,
and to cover his right flank with an intensive Stokes mortar
and machine-gun bombardment.
This manoeuvre proved entirely successful, and the Nelson
and Drake Battalions, advancing at zero under the creeping
barrage, reached and captured the first objective in ten minutes
with comparatively few casualties. Next to the Nelson, the
Bedfords were equally successful, but on the left the 7th
Fusiliers were held up by the enemy wire and by severe fire from
the flank where the enemy were not attacked. This battalion
secured, nevertheless, a small lodgment in the enemy front line.
The Hood Battalion had been ordered to wait till the Nelson
Battalion reached its first objective before leaving the assembly
position. This arrangement meant that it must almost
certainly fall under the enemy’s defensive barrage, and suffer
ruinous loss. To avoid this, Commander Asquith, with great
promptitude, decided to lead his battalion forward before the
scheduled time. The Battalion reached the German lines on
the heels of the Nelson Battalion.
The advance into the village began a quarter of an hour
after the capture of the first objective. The Nelson and Drake
Battalions led the attack with the Hood in support. The
Bedfords and the Royal Fusiliers should have remained on the
first objective, but actually not a few of the Bedfords followed
the Hood, and in the smoke and confusion of the fighting through
the village all units were considerably intermixed before the
advance was brought to an end on the second objective (the
street running north and south through the middle of the
village) by the halt in our barrage.
230
The Royal Naval Division


Major-General C. E. Lawrie, C. B., C.M.G., D.S.O.
(From the portrait by Ambrose MeEvoy in the possession of the Imperial War Museum.)




Following the practice usual in trench-to-trench attacks,
this halt on the second objective was a prolonged one, designed
to facilitate reorganization. In the vastly different conditions
of village fighting the halt in our advance was of greater benefit
to the enemy than to ourselves. Effective reorganization was
indeed impossible. The continuous sniping and machine-gun
fire from close quarters, the dense cloud of smoke and dust which
clung round the ruined houses, the danger from falling masonry,
as the buildings crumbled beneath the indiscriminate bombard-
ment of the heavy artillery of two armies, made it impossible
to find most of the men, or to concentrate and reorganize even
those who could be found. The most that could be done was to
keep the scattered groups where they were, and even this was
difficult. It was largely due to the personal initiative and
example of Commander Asquith and Commander Bennett that
the advance was resumed successfully when the barrage lifted.
From the middle of the village to the final objective, the
distance was nearly six hundred yards.
For the first 250 yards the advance continued through the
debris of the village, and without much further loss the Hood
and Drake Battalions reached the main Oppy-Gavrelle road,
which here crossed our line of advance. Beyond this road was
open country on the right, where the Drake Battalion were,
except for a walled cemetery just across the road at their point
of junction with the Hood, and an abandoned German trench
running from that point to the right. On the left the position
was very different. On the flank of the Hood Battalion the
Fresny road crossed the Oppy road, and on the further side
was a ridge commanding the exposed flank of our advance.
The chief tactical feature here was the famous Gavrelle wind-
mill on the highest point of the ridge. The capture of this
windmill, which was essential if our advance was to be pressed
any distance across the Oppy road, had been one of the tasks
assigned to the Bedfords, who were to carry their defensive
flank back from this point to our old front line. There was,
however, no sign of the Bedfords, and the enemy, confident of
the strength of his position, not only held the ridge beyond the
Fresny road but clung tenaciously to two trenches immediately
to the front of the Hood Battalion.
Partly as a result of the unfortunate pause on the second
objective, partly as the result of casualties, mainly because


the flanking movement by the 190th Brigade appeared to have
failed, Commander Asquith thus found himself with a very
small force in a perilous position, on the flank not only of the
Division but of the whole attacking force.
To push forward at once would, in the circumstances, have
been rash to the point of folly. Our barrage was as yet feeble
(we were beyond the effective range of our field guns) and the
men, tired in the unexpected heat, choked with dust, and
not yet fully rested after four strenuous days in the line
immediately before the attack, were strangely lethargic. The
utmost that could be done was to safeguard the gains already
won.
Our position was precarious. The enemy not only held the
ridge over our flank and the trenches immediately to our left
front, but on the right of the Hood, and on the Drake front they
were holding an undefined line, not more than three hundred
yards distant, from which all movements on our front could
be observed. Even consolidation was extremely difficult.
The first essential, if we were to hold our position, was to safe-
guard our left flank. To do so, however, without unnecessary
calls on the troops was equally essential, if we were to win a
tenable position before a counter-attack developed, and having
won it, to hold it. Commander Asquith set out at once with
Lieutenant Astbury (commanding “ A ” Company of Hood) to
reconnoitre the most advanced enemy trench, some hundred
and fifty yards to the east of the Oppy road on the left of his
front. Towards the right of this trench ran a narrow ditch
which he hoped might afford sufficient cover for a bombing
party to get forward unobserved, and up this ditch Commander
Asquith and his party crept forward. Unfortunately the
ditch, after some fifty yards, became too shallow to afford any
cover, and the party was observed by the enemy. It was
here that Lieutenant Astbury was killed. Failing to find a
way forward on this flank of the advanced position, Commander
Asquith returned and took his party to the left flank up the
Arras-Fresny road. A hundred yards up this road was the
Mayor’s house, assumed to be occupied by the enemy and
certainly commanding our own positions. Commander Asquith
made his way in, however, found the garrison asleep and made
them prisoners. He at once installed a Lewis gun and some
snipers in the top of the house, with orders to cover our flank and
232
The Royal Naval Division


to keep down the fire of the enemy in their trenches to our front,
while we pushed on the work of consolidation. In charge of
this garrison of the house he placed Sub-Lieutenant Cooke,
R.N.V.R., Brigade Intelligence Officer.
Returning to the main body of his battalion along the
Oppy road, Commander Asquith found the position appreciably
more insecure. His two senior Company Commanders (Lieuten-
ant Morrison and Lieutenant Tamplin) had been killed, and the
enemy shells falling along the line of the road with great regu-
larity were causing continuous losses both in his own and in
the Drake Battalion. He decided to send back Sub-Lieutenant
Matcham* with one company to the German second line (west
of Gavrelle), and sent orders to his adjutant (Lieutenant Hilton,
R.N.V.R.) to hold that line at all costs. The remainder of
his men (now no more than a hundred) Commander Asquith
disposed in shell-holes, as far forward of the road as our hold
on the Mayor’s house rendered possible. The line was
covered by machine guns which had been brought forward by
Sub-Lieutenant Exton and Sub-Lieutenant Barrow Dowling, j -
The move forward, so essential to the safety of the garrison,
was greatly assisted by the vigorous action of Lieutenant
Cooke and the Lewis Gun crew in the Mayor’s house, who came
out and engaged the enemy advanced position at close quarters.
Lieutenant Cooke and the whole gun’s crew except Leading
Seaman Charltonf were picked off by snipers and killed or
mortally wounded in the course of the morning, but the gun
remained in action and the enemy eventually withdrew. To
this gallant action undertaken on the initiative of Lieutenant
Cooke, and maintained by the men under his command, after
he was killed, with the utmost fidelity, the delay on the part
of the enemy in delivering their counter-stroke must be in no
small part ascribed.
The delay was all-important to us. The position on our
immediate front was indeed much clearer by 7 a.m. (the Mayor’s
house was captured at about 6.45 a.m.) and gradually improved,
but there was for some hours no real protection against an enemy
attack in force from the direction of the windmill. It was
* This officer for his work throughout these operations received the M.C.
fßoth these officers received the M.C. for their skilful handling of these
machine guns.
J L.S. Charlton was awarded the D.C.M.
233
The Attack on Gavrelle


this, indeed, together with the inadequacy of the available
cover on the eastern outskirts of the village, and the uncer-
tainty as to the general situation (for the view was bounded on
the north by the high ground on which the windmill stood),
which had led Commander Asquith to withdraw one com-
pany to the far side of the village. What had happened is
easily explained.
The 4th Bedfords (on the left of the Nelson Battalion in the
original advance) had, as we have seen, experienced no difficulty
in reaching and capturing their portion of the first objective,
but the 7th Royal Fusiliers on their left had been less successful.
“ A ” Company of the H.A.C. in close support of the Fusiliers
had done something to remedy the situation, and when they
sent back a message asking for further assistance, Lt.-Colonel
Osmond sent up “ B ” Company of the battalion just before
10 o’clock. By this time, however, the enemy had poured
reinforcements over the railway line from the left, and the
fighting had become a matter of bombing and counter-bombing
in which the 190th Brigade was only slowly driving the enemy
along his trenches to the left. The result of this check had been
that only the right of the Bedfords had been able to advance
in accordance with plan. This small party lost direction and
followed the Hood Battalion to the middle of the village instead
of making their way to the flank. There, suffering heavy casual-
ties, the party remained till found by Lt.-Colonel Collins Wells,
who at once went to the front to find out the situation.
At 9 a.m. Colonel Collins Wells met Commander Asquith at
the cross roads near the Mayor’s house, and at once arranged
to take charge of the left flank with such men as he could
find. It seemed clear, however, that any attempt to carry
the windmill, though in accordance with the original plan,
would fail, unless substantial forces could be brought
together, and that if it failed the essential weakness of our
position would become obvious and would invite retaliation.
This part of the original scheme was therefore abandoned.
Colonel Collins Wells could only muster some fifty or sixty
men to cover the flank of the 189th Brigade, and two platoons
of the Nelson Battalion were lent by Lt.-Colonel Lewis, at the
instance of Commander Asquith, to strengthen the line. Not
until noon was the position stable. At that time, however,
thanks to the energetic but prudent steps taken by the Battalion
234
The Royal Naval Division


Commanders on the spot, we had secured a position which
could be defended, and had still sufficient men with which to
defend it.
We had done so only just in time. At 1 p.m. the enemy
made their first counter-attack, principally on the Drake
Battalion front. The attack was broken up by rifle and machine-
gun fire and our artillery barrage, but the enemy throughout
the afternoon kept throwing reinforcements forward into their
improvised front line positions, and the slender garrison
holding the village had its work cut out to keep the enemy
from concentrating even nearer to our position. All the time
the Hood and Drake were suffering severe and continuous
casualties from the enemy’s heavy artillery, in dealing with
which our counter-battery organization proved for once in-
effective.
The intricate and continuous fighting put a heavy strain
on the Drake and Hood Battalions, and when, at 4.30 p.m., a
belated order arrived for a further advance to the originally
planned objective, Commander Asquith and Commander
Bennett, after consultation with Lt.-Colonel Lewis, decided to
ignore it. Their action was approved, and, on getting a full
report, General Phillips decided to put in the Howe Battalion
in the evening, and to withdraw the Hood to the old reserve
position. The Nelson Battalion at the same time took over
the left of our new line from the cross roads by the Mayor’s
house to the railway line, where they joined up with Colonel
Collins Wells on the flank. The Drake Battalion remained in
their original position on the right of the cemetery.
This relief was completed about 1 a.m., and the remainder
of the night was unexpectedly quiet.
At dawn, a few of the enemy surrendered to our advanced
posts, and a good many more from cellars in the village, where
they had remained concealed during the fighting of the previous
day.
During the morning of the 24th the enemy continued to
mass opposite our right, and from noon onwards the heaviest
shelling so far experienced by the Division developed along
our whole front. At 2.55 p.m., this increased to a maximum
intensity, and runners from the front line reported that the
enemy were advancing. This was a serious and determined
counter-attack, and between 8 p.m. and 4 p.m. the enemy
235
The Attack on Gavrelle


barrage noticeably lifted to the old German front line and
many attempts were made to enter our front line. The enemy
were in strength, and though they suffered under our barrage,*
their first wave being almost wiped out, they reached, and at
one point on the Howe front actually penetrated, our posts.
The prompt and energetic action of Commander Bennett and
his officers on the D~ake front, and of Lieutenant Mac-
kinlay and Sub-Lieutenant Lawrie of the Howe Battalion
prevented, however, any loss of ground and inflicted heavy
casualties on the enemy. Only once did the enemy look like
breaking through, at the junction of the Howe and Nelson
Battalions, when the position was safeguarded by “ A ” Com-
pany of the former Battalion. By 5.40 p.m., the Battalion
Commanders were able to report definitely that the attack
had failed and that all our positions were held.
In the meantime the H.A.C., who had relieved the 7th
Royal Fusiliers on the night of the 23rd-24th, had consolidated
a flanking position, which followed approximately the line of
the railway, and had established touch with the 2nd Division
at 2 a.m. The position on the flank was now as originally
intended, except that the original German first and second
lines had only been carried to within fifty yards of the intended
left limit of our advance, and that, on the flank of the advanced
position, the Bedfords had, as we have seen, been forced to
abandon all thought of capturing the windmill position. Much
excellent work of an individual character was done by Lieu-
tenant Pollard of the H.A.C. in these operations.
On the night of the 24th-25th the command of the battle-
field passed to the 188th Brigade, and the Drake and Nelson
Battalions marched back to rest. The 190th Brigade was with-
drawn at the same time.
So ended a battle which, if it served no great strategic
purpose, proved once more the superiority, man for man, of
the English private to the German, and still more the superiority
of the English regimental officer to the German professional
soldier. The engagement was a remarkable vindication of
the reputation which the Naval Division had brought with it
from the Ancre, and of the policy and practice of its new com-
mander. Village fighting by time-table was, indeed, a deserved
* The work of the Divisional Artillery on the 24th was described by the
infantry as extremely fine.
236
The Royal Naval Division


failure ; but the success, from first to last, was largely due to
the initiative of the newly-appointed leaders of the Hood and
Drake Battalions. This is not to say that the plans for the
attack were bad. It was once more, however, made clear that
the most careful preparations, the most precise instructions
go only a small way, and sometimes no way at all, towards the
final goal. But for the timely variations made in the original
plans, and for the exceptional resolution of many individuals,
the success would certainly not have been achieved. The
chief honours went without a doubt to Commander Asquith
and Commander Bennett, but their efforts were finely seconded
by many other officers and men, among whom Lt.-Com-
mander Funnell (commanding the 189th Machine-Gun Com-
pany), Surgeon McCracken, R.N.* (both of whom were awarded
the D. 5.0.), Lieut. Mackinlay of the Howe, Lieut. Hirschfield
and Sub-Lieut. P. R. H. Fox of the Drake, Sub-Lieut. Grant
Dalton of the Hood, and Sub-Lieut. Crosland Taylor of the
Nelson (all of whom were awarded the M.C.), in addition to
others previously mentioned, did especially well. The in-
dividual achievement of L.S. Charlton has already been told.
Others who equally distinguished themselves were P.O. Ross,
L.S. Gilgrass and A.B. Baldwin. A special feature of the
later operations had been the fine work of the medium trench
mortars under Captain Campbell.
In close fighting of this kind, with enemy resistance
exceptionally vigorous, casualties! were necessarily heavy.
Among others, the commanding officer of the Hawke
Battalion (Lieut.-Col. WhitemanJ), the Second-in-Command of
the Nelson (Major Wilkie), three company commanders in the
Hood, two in the Nelson and one in the Hawke had been killed.
The total casualties were over fifteen hundred, and this price
* Surgeon McCracken was working under heavy fire in Gavrelle throughout
the 23rd with the survivors of his own stretcher bearers and a party of German
Red Cross men whom he had captured. He removed to a cellar for first aid and
thence evacuated more than 120 officers and men who would otherwise, in all
human probability, have been killed either during the long-continued bombard-
ment or by the falling debris. He was recommended by Commander Asquith
for the Victoria Cross.
t For a full list of the Naval and Marine officers killed in the two actions
of Gavrelle see Appendix E (ii).
% The Hawke Battalion had been moved up to the first objective during the 23rd
and had suffered rather heavy losses. Among the wounded was the adjutant,
Lieutenant A. P. Herbert, R.N.V.R., whose wit was already famous outside
the Naval Division.
237
The Attack on Gavrelle


had been paid for what was but little more than a moral victory.
For more than a year, our line was to run where it had been
drawn in front of Gavrelle in the early hours of April 23rd.
The battles of April 23rd and 24th south of the Naval
Division had been equally severe, and not in all cases equally
successful. The lesson of the battle was clear : the enemy
was in adequate strength and fighting with an unimpaired
moral along the whole length of the line, and the battle had
unmistakably assumed the characteristics of a battle of attri-
tion. These characteristics, favourable in 1916, when our
strength was increasing while that of the enemy was diminish-
ing, were unwelcome in the late spring of 1917, when the
probability of the ultimate defection of Russia was growing
every day, and when already German divisions were being
transferred without any risk from the East to the West.
Nevertheless, the situation produced by the French failure
in Champagne was such that it was decided to continue the
battle, and to postpone still further the Flanders offensive.
The next attack was planned for the 28th, and was directed
against the enemy positions on the front from Monchy le Preux
to Arleux. The main objectives were the enemy position
on the left of Gavrelle through Oppy to Arleux, and his
positions on Greenland Hill on the right of Gavrelle (it was
from behind this hill that the majority of the enemy counter-
attacks had developed during the fighting of the 23rd and
24th).
The attack on the left of the Division was to be carried
out by the Canadian Corps and the 2nd Division (on Oppy).
On the right, Greenland Hill was to be attacked by the XVIIth
Corps. To assist these two operations, the Ist Marine Battalion
was to attack on the flank of the 2nd Division, and the 2nd
Marine Battalion had to push forward north-east of Gavrelle.
These attacks were separate and independent operations,
and to this the fact that they were not wholly successful should,
perhaps, be ascribed.
The battle of the 23rd and 24th had left the Naval Division
in a very pronounced salient. The left of their line, as con-
solidated by the 190th Brigade, ran at an angle of nearly sixty
degrees from the line held by the 2nd Division, for a distance
of nearly 2,000 yards to the Mayor’s house. From there, the
line ran more or less parallel to the 2nd Division line to the


junction with the 37th Division when it bent back behind
Greenland Hill. To push forward any distance from this line
till some progress had been made by divisions on the flanks
was clearly impossible, but it was hoped to secure the ridge
north-east of Gavrelle, and, in particular, the Windmill position.
This was the objective of Lt.-Colonel Hutchison’s battalion.
The attack by the Ist Marines was to be launched from the
2nd Division front, the first objective being the enemy trenches,
to the left of those which had been the Naval Division’s first
objective on the 23rd. The second and third objectives were
provided by enemy trenches further to the east, the capture
of which would, if all went well, bring the attacking troops
into rough alignment with those engaged north-east of Gavrelle.
The dangerous feature of the scheme was, of course, that
neither attack gave any effective support to the other, and
that in each case the battalions must find themselves, as they
advanced, with one flank in the air. Whether this would prove
fatal or not depended ultimately on the strength of the enemy
in the pocket between the two attacks.
The Brigade was in position for the operation at 2 a.m. on
the 28th, and, at 4.25, the advance began all along the line.
The 2nd Division (with parties of the Ist Marines on their
right) carried, it is believed, the whole of the German front line
system opposite them, but the main body of the Ist Marines
were held up on the German wire or killed in the German front
line trench, which was enfiladed from the right by the same
strong point on the railway which had held up the Fusiliers on
the 23rd. The position had perhaps been missed by the first
wave of the attack, but, more probably, the troops who attacked
it had been annihilated. At 8.50, a further attack on this
strong point was organized by 2nd Lieut. Hawes (commanding
“ C ” Company of the H.A.C.), which was successful, but there
had been some delay, and, by the time it was in our hands, the
Marines and the 2nd Division had fallen back. The enemy
advanced in their turn, and shortly before 10 a.m. re-entered
their original line. They then bombed the H.A.C. back from
the strong point along the first trench, captured by the Division
on the 23rd, for nearly a hundred yards, before a block could be
formed. The position by noon was that the attack had
definitely failed, and that we had lost some fifty yards of our
own line.


The 2nd Marines, fighting independently, had been more
successful. Though it is improbable that our full objectives
were ever secured, the most important of them, the Windmill
position, was captured and held by a platoon under Lieutenant
Newling, R.M.L.I. Especially vigorous counter-attacks were
made against this position at 11.50 a.m., at 2 p.m. and again
at 4 p.m., but each time they were beaten off, and, though
the remainder of the 2nd Marines, after suffering disastrous
losses, was forced to withdraw almost to our old line in front
of the Mayor’s house, the windmill was held. The with-
drawal of the main body of the Marines took place at dusk on
the 28th, and during the night of the 28th-29th, and was, in
the circumstances, unavoidable. The casualties in the many
counter-attacks had been heavy, and the enemy opposition
entirely miscalculated. The withdrawal, none the less, nearly
spelt disaster for the Anson Battalion on the right. “C ”
Company of this battalion had gone forward, immediately the
first success had been gained, to consolidate a defensive flank
for the new position. The company (commanded by Sub-
Lieut. C. S. Walker) found themselves isolated on the morning
of the 29th, and had to fight hard to extricate themselves.
They did so, however, and brought back with them a party
of 250 Germans, whom they drove before them into their
original line. This ingenious operation was planned and
carried out by P.O. Scott* and no more than fifteen men.
While these events were taking place, a new attack had
been organized, by General Lawrie and the G.O.C. 2nd Division,
on the objectives which the Northern attack had failed to hold.
The Naval Division’s share in this attack, which took place
at 4 a.m. on the 29th, was carried out by a composite battalion
of the 4th Bedfords and the 10th Dublin Fusiliers lent to the
188th Brigade for the purpose. The attack met with an early
success, but, as before, the strong point on the railway was not
at first carried, and, until the H.A.C. captured it for the second
time, at 7.15 a.m. on the 29th, and sent a company across the
railway to assist the composite battalion, the issue was very
much in doubt. Even later in the morning, there were lodg-
ments of the enemy not only in the line captured by the Naval
Division but in that held by the 2nd Division, and not till
12.80 p.m., when the H.A.C. sent a bombing party right up
• This Petty Officer was awarded the D.C.M.


The Ruins of Gavrelle.




this line, which was very broken and ill-defined, was the position
definitely reported clear of the enemy.*
The result of these operations was not wholly satisfactory.
We had captured another stretch of the German trench system,
which had once been their third and last line of defence, and,
by the capture and defence of the windmill (a very brilliant
operation), we had appreciably strengthened our hold on
Gavrelle itself. Our losses, however, had been heavy and our
gains not wholly proportionate ; while the blow to the enemy’s
moral dealt by an operation which fell so obviously short of
what had been intended cannot have been severe. The
plain fact is that the enemy’s strength had been under-estimated,
and that, in an attempt to engage the maximum number of the
enemy, we had taken on more than we could deal with. Probably
another Brigade, operating on the ground between the right
boundary of the Northern attack and the left boundary of the
Southern attack, would not have proved too strong for the
task. As it was, despite the continued excellence of the
artillery barrage, both Marine Battalions suffered disastrous
losses. In the Ist Battalion the commanding officer, Lt.-Colonel
Cartwright, D. 5.0., R.M.L.1., was mortally wounded. Six
other officers were killed, and the total casualties were more
than 500. In the 2nd Battalion ten officers and more than
200 N.C.O.’s and men were killed, and the total casualties
were nearly OOO.f
♦ This successful issue was largely due to the remarkable personal gallantry
and initiative of 2nd Lieut. A. O. Pollard, M.C., of the Ist H.A.C. This officer
was awarded the Victoria Cross. The official account of his exploit (taken from
the Gazette) is as follows:
2nd Lieut. Alfred Oliver Pollard, M.C., H.A.C.
“ For most conspicuous bravery and determination. The troops of various
units on the left of this officer’s battalion had become disorganized owing to the
heavy casualties from shell fire; and a subsequent determined enemy attack
with very strong forces caused further confusion and retirement, closely pressed
by hostile forces.
“ 2nd Lieut. Pollard at once realized the seriousness of the situation, and
dashed up to stop the retirement. With only four men he started a counter-
attack with bombs, and pressed it home till he had broken the enemy attack,
regained all that had been lost and much ground in addition.
“ The enemy retired in disorder, sustaining many casualties.
“ By his force of will, dash and splendid example, coupled with an utter
contempt of danger, this officer, who has already won the D.C.M. and M.C.,
infused courage into every man who saw him.”
f As in the case of the engagement of the 23rd and 24th, the fighting on these
two days was marked by many instances of personal gallantry. Lieutenant
Newling’s exploit has been mentioned. Captain Huskisson, R.M.L.I. (2nd
R.M. Battalion), was awarded the M.C. for his services in the Southern attack.
i 6
241
The Gavrelle Windmill


On the night of April 29th, the Naval Division handed
over to the 81st Division along the whole of their front and
retired to the Roclincourt area for a brief period of rest and
some very necessary reorganization. The total casualties of
the Division, in the almost continuous fighting from April
15th to the time of their relief, were 170 officers and
8,624 other ranks, of whom upwards of 40 officers and
1,000 other ranks were killed. The majority of these losses,
actually greater than those sustained in the more important
and successful battle of the Ancre, were incurred during the
operations of the 23rd-24th and 28th-29th, but the explana-
tion is to be found not in any greater severity of the infantry
battle but in the strength of the enemy’s artillery, the activity
of his aircraft and the exceptional length and exposed charac-
ter of our communications. With the enemy in strength
against us, the first necessity appeared to be to remedy this
defect, and, on May 4th, the decision to discontinue the offen-
sive was definitely reached.
The Naval Division was employed at once on the new
Corps and Army defence lines; the defence of the ruins of
Gavrelle, captured and held with such determination, became
in the changed situation of no more importance than that
of any other outpost of a position dictated to us by an
unbeaten enemy.
The successful German retreat to the Hindenburg line, the
decision of the Allies to persist in the face of a changed
situation in the ambitious offensive on the Aisne, the failure
of that offensive, and, above all, the now definite breakdown
of the Russian defensive, had turned the confidently awaited
victory into an unexpected defeat.
The battle would be renewed elsewhere. But meanwhile,
trench warfare re-established its reign, and on May 19th the
Naval Division re-entered the line in relief of the Slsfc Division
on its original front.
The trench strength of the three Brigades of the Division
(with the pioneer battalion) numbered at this date 203 officers
and almost exactly 6,000 men, an average of fifteen officers
and 460 men for each battalion. Among the leaders of the
and Lieutenant Barclay, R.N.V.R. (188th M.G.C.), Lieutenant Goldingham,
R.M., Lieutenant Westby, R.M. (190th M.G.C.) and 2nd Lieutenant Godfrey,
R.M. (190th L.T.M. battery), won the same distinction. Sergeant Booth and
Private G, Davies, R.M.L.1., were awarded the D.C.M,


Division, one or two important changes took place about
this time. Lt.-Colonel Hutchison, C.M.G., D. 5.0., R.M.L.L,
who had commanded the 2nd Marine Battalion with such
distinction in Gallipoli, on the Ancre and in the recently con-
cluded engagements, was appointed to command the 190th
Brigade, being succeeded in the command of the 2nd R.M.
Battalion by Lt.-Colonel Ozanne, D. 5.0., H.M.L.I. Brigadier-
General Phillips, D. 5.0., who had commanded the 189th
Brigade from the date of their arrival in France, was trans-
ferred to a higher appointment, and was succeeded by Brigadier-
General Coleridge. Lt.-Colonel Cartwright, D. 5.0., R.M.L.L,
whose death in the action of the 29th was a great loss to his
battalion and Corps, was succeeded by Lt.-Colonel Wainwright,
R.M.L.1., and Commander Ramsay Fairfax, C.M.G., D. 5.0.,
R.N.,* commanding the Howe Battalion, was invalided during
May, and was succeeded by Commander C. S. West, D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., who had gone out to Gallipoli as second in com-
mand of the unfortunate Collingwood Battalion. Another im-
portant change was effected when Commander B. H. Ellis,
D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., was appointed to command the Hawke
Battalion in place of Lt.-Colonel Whiteman, who had been
killed on April 23rd. Under this brilliant officer, the Hawke
Battalion was to prove itself second to none in the Division.
Lt.-Commander Lockwood, R.N.V.R., left the Hawke
Battalion at this time to take up an appointment under the
Admiralty, and was succeeded as second in command by
Lt.-Commander Shelton, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R. The Hood, Drake
and Nelson Battalions remained under Commander Asquith,
Commander Sterndale Bennett and Colonel Lewis.
So organized, so commanded, the Division entered on the
last prolonged period of trench warfare which they were destined
to enjoy. The conditions of the warfare a twelve-month
earlier have been already described, and in this curious anti-
climax of the summer of 1917, the conditions reverted almost
to those prevailing before the opening of the Somme cam-
paign. Noticeable, however, was the still greater depth of the
defences, and the greater thoroughness of the arrangements
for meeting attack, arrangements which entailed heavy and
systematic work for any first-line troops who might be sent to
rest behind the lines. In the front line too the work was
* This officer returned to France in command of a battalion of tanks.
i6*
243
Reorganization


arduous, it being necessary at once to consolidate and fortify
the rough line won from the enemy in the April fighting. At
no point on the divisional sector had we fully gained the
objectives of the second battle, and the task was therefore
not easy, but the success of the 2nd R.M. Battalion in winning
and holding the Windmill position, and the no less valuable
and more spectacular performance of the H.A.C, in the same
engagement in clearing the enemy from their posts on the
north-western flank of the Gavrelle position, made the task
possible. By the end of the Division’s first tour in the line,
which lasted till June 10th, the defences of what remained
an awkward salient had been sufficiently completed to win
a compliment from Lieut.-General Congreve, V.C., then
commanding the Xlllth Corps. On their relief by the 31st
Division, the Naval Division returned to work on the Corps
and Army lines of defence and on the improvement of rear-
ward communications.
Such was the position when, on the morning of June 12th,
the bombardment to the north reached its climax, and the
reverberation of the explosion of fifty mines told of the opening
of the Flanders offensive.




Operations oF Royal Naval Division,
October— November 1917.


CHAPTER XIV
OPPY WOOD, PASSCHENDAELE AND WELSH RIDGE
THE news of the splendid victory of Messines reached
the Naval Division while they were still behind the
lines, but it brought them no release from the prosaic tasks
in which they were employed. It added rather to their
burden.
With the object of holding the enemy in strength on the
front north of Arras while the sequel to Messines was being
staged, an attack was to be made on the front from Gavrelle
to Oppy by the sth and 31st Divisions on June 28th. For
the preparatory work of digging communication trenches
down the long forward slope which led from the Army line
of resistance (the old Fampoux-Farbus switch) ,to the forward
system the Naval Division infantry and engineers were re-
sponsible. Meanwhile the 63rd Divisional Artillery remained
in the line and took their full share of the artillery prepara-
tion. The attack was in great measure successful, and gave
us the enemy’s first line from the left of Gavrelle to Oppy
Wood, forcing him back to the village of Oppy itself and to
an ill-defined secondary position between Oppy and Gavrelle.
It was now that the importance of the successes achieved
by the 2nd R.M. Battalion and the H.A.C. on April 28th
became evident, for as long as we held the high ground north
of Gavrelle, which we won in that engagement, the enemy
could not counter-attack from Oppy with any hope of success.
The line won on June 28th was thus easily consolidated, and
the position was appreciably stronger when the Naval Division
took over, on July 4th and sth, not only their old sector (from
the 31st Division) but (from the sth Division) the brigade
sector immediately to the left of it. This new line was divided
into two brigade sectors, the left to be held by the 189th
Brigade with three battalions in the line, and the right (Gavrelle)
sector by the 188th Brigade on a two-battalion front. To the


189th Brigade were attached the 7th Royal Fusiliers and the
4th Bedfords. The 190th Brigade as a fighting organization
was temporarily out of action, for the 10th Dublins had left
the Division after the Messines Battle to provide reinforcements
for the 16th (Irish) Division, and the Artists’ Rifles, who had
arrived on the 2nd July to take the place of the H.A.C., were
short of training. The reorganized Brigade was to be com-
pleted by the sth King’s Shropshire Light Infantry, but this
battalion did not arrive till July 20th, and special arrange-
ments had even then to be made to give the men leave.
They had had none since mobilization.
The Flanders offensive was still unaccountably delayed,
and the Xlllth Corps was required to keep the enemy in
expectation of a further attack on Oppy. Their operations
thus took a form with which the Division had become very
familiar in the autumn of 1915 in Gallipoli, the orders being
to push out the line continuously, by the familiar methods
of establishing posts and consolidating sapheads in front of
the line, and then digging in at night.
The Divisional front was shortened after a week, when
the 31st Division returned to the left of the Corps front, and
the sth Division again took over the sub-sector handed over
by them on July 4th. All three Divisions of the Corps were
now in the line, and the confidence bred of a prolonged occupa-
tion of the same front enabled the Naval Division to carry
out a number of minor operations with complete success. On
the night of July 14th-15th, a new front line was dug in Oppy
Wood by the Hawke and Hood Battalions and in front of
the windmill by the 2nd R.M. Battalion, while on July 20th
a very successful raid was carried out on Gavrelle Trench by
the Howe Battalion. The raid was carefully planned and
rehearsed under the supervision of Commander C. S. West,
and commanded by Lieut. W. Marlow, R.N.V.R. Only in one
place did the enemy put up a vigorous resistance, and our
reported losses (seven men killed and one .officer and 25 men
wounded) were sustained mostly before and after the opera-
tion. The enemy losses in killed and prisoners alone ex-
ceeded our total casualties. The raid had found the enemy
generally listless and ill-prepared. Their trenches were ill-
constructed and badly tended, while many of the garrison
were caught without arms or equipment.
246
The Royal Naval Division


On July 23rd, the 189th Brigade were relieved by the
190th Brigade, and on July 30th they, in turn, relieved the
188th Brigade; the object of this triangular arrangement,
which was repeated at intervals throughout the following
weeks, was to keep the 188th Brigade in the Gavrelle sector
whenever they were in the line. It was important to garrison
the line with troops thoroughly familiar with it, as the front
was very thinly held and there were few reserves. Our
mastery of no man’s land could also be better maintained.
Towards the end of the month, the Division was asked
urgently to secure an identification of the enemy opposite
them, and on the night of 30th-31st an enemy post on the
left Brigade front was rushed by a battalion of the 189th
Brigade, but found to be abandoned. Fighting patrols could
do no better; the enemy remained strictly on the defensive,
and it was necessary to organize a minor raid, which was carried
out with complete success by thirty men of the Anson Battalion,
under Sub-Lieut. Russell* on September 7th.
Throughout this time the activities of the infantry had
been greatly assisted by the co-operation of the Divisional
Artillery and the machine-gun companies. A feature of their
operations was a series of hurricane bombardments, keeping
the enemy in constant anticipation of attack and destroying
his trenches. The Corps Heavy Artillery had by now -gone
north, and to do their work two batteries of the 223rd Brigade
(Lt.-Colonel the Rev. W. E. Wingfield, D. 5.0.) were sent
some two thousand yards forward. For every bombardment,
and, indeed, for every other offensive activity, the enemy
retaliated on our position round the windmill, and still more
on the artillery themselves. The infantry avoided serious
loss by the method, familiar from Gallipoli days, of pushing
forward our line too near to that of the enemy for them to
bombard it effectively. The artillery, however, had no remedy
except a constant change of gun positions, and after a time
the most forward sections, only maintained for so long by a
miracle, had to be withdrawn.
An interesting and fruitful experiment was made at this
time in the organization of the machine-gun companies (now
increased to four). These were now grouped for tactical
• In recognition of his fine leadership this officer was awarded the Military
Cross.
247
Oppy Wood


purposes as a Divisional unit, and the organization subsequently
adopted throughout the Army was thus anticipated by some
months. Lt.-Colonel Macready, who had commanded the
190th (Marine) Machine-Gun Company with distinction since
December, 1916, was the first Divisional machine-gun officer.*
Hitherto, the Army organization had operated through too
many different administrative units, a Division being thus
deprived of the cohesion which a war of movement would
demand. The system of brigade groups, which was adopted
whenever the Division had to move behind the lines, met the
difficulty administratively, but only by ignoring the tactical
requirements. The Divisional grouping of the machine-gun
companies, decided on by Major-General Lawrie in September,
1917, was a timely recognition of the need for a more scientific
organization.
Meanwhile negligible progress only had been made with
the Flanders offensive. The initial success at Messines had
been followed by a delay of six weeks, partly explained by
difficulties among the Allies. At last, on July 3rd, the offensive
had been resumed against the front east and north-east of
Ypres, the objective being the famous Passchendaele ridge.
By the middle of September we had not reached our objective,
and further progress was getting hourly more difficult as our
reserves became exhausted, the continuing bad weather and
the ordinary wear and tear of battle and bombardment made
our communications more difficult, and the ground to be
covered by the advancing infantry became more impossible.
On September 20th we did indeed make an appreciable advance,
which was followed up on the 22nd, but if the results were
sufficient, in the opinion of Sir Douglas Haig, to warrant the
continuance of the offensive, they made it also clear that fresh
divisions must be brought into the battle. One of the fresh
divisions was the Naval Division, who were relieved by the
47th Division on September 24th-25th, and entrained for
Casself and the neighbouring villages on October 2nd.
* Just before this the two R.N.V.R. Machine-Gun Companies (188th and 189th)
were disbanded for lack of reinforcements and their places taken by the 223rd
and 224th Companies of the Machine-Gun Corps under Captain Gants and Captain
J. O. Dodge, D.S.C. (who had won the D.S.C. serving with the Hood Battalion
in Gallipoli). The officers of the disbanded companies returned to the base, but
all in time succeeded in rejoining the Naval Division.
f The scene of their earliest activities under General Paris in 1914.


For a brief moment the front was quiet, but the final
collapse of Russia and the knowledge that a German offensive
against Italy was impending made it necessary to continue our
pressure on the Western front, and the difficulty of changing
the direction of our attack is the justification for the tragic
scenes which accompanied the remaining stages of the offensive.
History may judge that what appeared to be necessary was
not really so, and that what was admittedly difficult was not
impossible. Nevertheless, the official military view that the
decision to continue our advance along the Passchendaele
ridge throughout October and November was inevitable, must
be given due consideration.
The situation on the evening of October 4th was a simple
one. Before the battle opened, the allied line from the northern
arm" of the Ypres salient ran almost due north to Nieuport,
and the German line was parallel to our own. Both lines were
drawn across flat country intersected with innumerable dykes
and small streams, uniformly marshy and liable to flooding in
the event of heavy rains. Behind our lines the country was
equally fiat, but behind the enemy’s front was the Pass-
chendaele ridge, not parallel to their line but running north-
east from a point on their line opposite Ypres. This ridge had
thus menaced the flank of any advance from our line north of
Ypres, while it afforded corresponding protection to any
German attack on that line. Our advances since July had
been directed along it, our line to the north being brought
forward as far as possible in sympathy. By October 4th,
the main advance had reached a point 9,000 yards along
the ridge, and from here to the north our line was bent back
roughly north-west. Granted that, for reasons of high policy,
we had to continue our pressure on this front, it was clear that
a further advance along the ridge offered the best prospect of
embarrassing the enemy, while at the same time improving our
own defensive position. To secure the whole ridge, we had to
advance along it for another four thousand yards, and to the
north of it as far as was necessary to secure a tenable line.
The most difficult task was the advance across the western
slopes of the ridge and the particularly marshy country at the
bottom of those slopes. Unless, however, we could press
forward here, any advance along the ridge itself must have
created an almost impossible salient. On the ridge and down
249
Passchendaele


the western slopes lay the Canadian Corps. In the marshes
at the foot lay the XVIIIth Corps, to which the Naval Division
was attached. It was to assist the XVIIIth Corps in the
advance necessary to cover the flank of the Canadian Corps
that the Naval Division had come north, and for this advance
they were now to prepare.
The sector allocated to the Division was on the flank of
the Canadian Corps, where our front line of posts ran north-
west from Wallemolen Cemetery to the Lekkebokkerbeek.
This front was held on October 4th by the 9th Division, and
small advances were made by them on October 9th and
11th. The depth of the advance of the 9th Division was,
however, less than that achieved on the flanks, and on the
evening of October 11th the 9th Division line formed a rather
pronounced re-entrant, our line, across the Passchendaele ridge
on the right and towards Poelcapelle on the left, having gone
forward without any corresponding gain in the centre. A
further effort here was judged imperative, and the Naval
Division was asked accordingly to arrange for three successive
attacks, each by one brigade. The first attack was to be made
on October 26th by the 188th Brigade, and the second on
October 30th by the 190th Brigade ; the Division was to
relieve the 9th Division on the front of attack at such date,
prior to the first attack, as they chose.
It is safe to say that the Division was never confronted
with a task which, on the lines laid down for them, was more
impossible of fulfilment. Flanders mud had become pro-
verbial, and even under ordinary conditions exposed the
troops in the front system to exceptional hardships. Front
line and communication trenches were non-existent. The
forward system consisted of posts isolated from each other by
a sea of mud, and the support line of another line of posts,
the elements of a trench, or, more probably, of a ruined farm-
house and outbuildings where a company or so could be con-
centrated. These forward positions were scattered in depth
over a wide area, and each was dependent on itself for pro-
tection. The enemy posts lay often between our own, and
every ration and water party had to be prepared to fight its
way forward. Communication with the reserve positions was
equally dangerous, if less difficult. All supplies and reinforce-
ments had to be brought up on duckboard tracks, which with


every advance stretched further and further forward. Off
these tracks progress was impossible, yet the reliance placed
on them was an evil necessity ; they marked to the enemy, as
to ourselves, our line of supply, and, though used only at
night, they were a perilous substitute for the old communication
trench. From an accurate bombardment of these tracks no
party using them could escape. To turn aside by so much as
a yard was to plunge waist-deep in a sea of mud, where the
bodies of the dead were rotting unburied as in the primeval
slime.
The enemy positions were equally precarious, and we
know from General Ludendorff’s memoirs how bitter their
experiences were. The fact remains that the advantage lay
overwhelmingly with the defence. No comparable strain fell
on the enemy in these operations. Their lot was to live in
shell-holes or in verminous ruins, inadequately clothed and fed,
and to open fire periodically on an enemy vainly endeavour-
ing to move towards them across a sea of mud. The lot of
our troops was to suffer, under conditions hardly less revolting,
the risks of a continuous offensive across ground which made
our barrage virtually useless as a protection against the enemy’s
machine guns. Our barrage was slowed down, and the most
careful preparations were made whereby every known enemy
post, in the area to be crossed, was attacked by a separate and
self-supporting unit with no other objective. The mobility,
however, of the enemy posts, which were seldom where they
were expected to be, the impossibility of keeping down by any
barrage the enemy fire from positions scattered haphazard
over perfectly level country to a depth of a thousand yards,
and the difficulty of keeping up with our barrage, in those
exceptional cases where everything else proceeded in accord-
ance with plan, had in all the previous attacks neutralized,
to a very great extent, every modification of our tactics.
Training behind the line, learning from carefully-con-
structed models the supposed location of every enemy post
and trench on their prospective front, the 188th Brigade
was looking forward with confidence to the impending battle.
The Divisional Artillery, however, in’ the famous St. Julien
“ triangle,” and the 189th Brigade,* who had been working
* The Brigade, while engaged on this work, had suffered rather heavily.
Among those killed were Sub-Lieut. S. G. James and Sub-Lieut. F. J. Newell,
both of the Hood Battalion.
251
Passchendaele


on forward communications since October 10th, knew better.
Every gun position, every shell-hole, was under fire, and the
physical impossibility of a rapid advance made any very
substantial success unattainable.
The chief tactical features on the intended front of attack
were the Paddebeek, a flooded streamlet running parallel
to our front at a distance of some five hundred yards, and
some higher ground a thousand yards to the right front, on
which stood the ruins known as Tournant Farm. This side
of the Paddebeek, the main enemy posts were believed to be
in five groups of ruins and pill-boxes known as Berks Houses,
Bray Farm, Banff House, Sourd Farm and Varlet Farm, and
in an isolated trench, near our junction with the Canadians,
known as Source Trench. Across the stream to our right
were Source Farm and Tournant Farm, and on the right a
number of isolated pill-boxes and fortified shell-holes. The
first objective of the 188th Brigade included all the enemy
positions this side of the Paddebeek except Sourd Farm ;
the second objective comprised the remaining position, as far
as a line drawn north-west through Tournant Farm. The
first objective was to be attacked by the Anson Battalion on
the right and the Ist R.M. Battalion on the left. Through
these battalions, the Howe and the 2nd R.M. Battalions were
to advance across the Paddebeek to the second objective. The
attack was fixed for dawn on the 26th.
General Prentice decided to take over the front line on
the night of the 24th-25th, thus giving his battalions a day
to study, at first hand, the ground over which they had to
advance. The time was, of course, too short, but this was
only another instance of the impossibility of the conditions ;
no troops could stay longer in the line and be fit for an
advance.
The morning artillery barrage had become a matter of
habit for both armies, and this routine had the advantage
that we could make a good guess where the German counter-
barrage would fall and could fix our assembly positions accord-
ingly. When, however, we intended a serious attack the
addition of the machine-gun barrage relieved the enemy of any
uncertainty as to our intentions, and there could thus be no
question of surprise.
By 2 a.m. on the morning of the 26th, all battalions were
252
The Royal Naval Division


in position. The inevitable rain had begun at midnight and
continued steadily, and when the time for the advance was
notified to the enemy in the usual manner the ground was
as impassable as had been expected.
The advance was on a very wide front, the Ist Marines
having a frontage of nearly nine, and the Anson of nearly
six, hundred yards. Each battalion adopted much the same
formation : two thin lines of skirmishers went in front and
behind them were small columns of sections or platoons,
according to the objective to which each was detailed. Two
platoons from each battalion were required for duty as
stretcher-bearers, the normal complement being inadequate
to the nature of the fighting.
At 5.45, in heavy rain, the advance began. Our bom-
bardment of the enemy positions during the previous forty-
eight hours had turned the ground over which our troops
had to advance into a mass of shell-holes, flooded to a depth
of several feet ; between them, a path had to be picked over
ground only less impassable. Despite these difficulties, the
first waves kept fairly well up to the barrage, and especially
on the left (the Ist Marine Battalion) substantial gains were
recorded. Banff House (the last objective of the Ist Marine
Battalion) was reported at 7.20 a.m. as having been captured by
Lieutenant Careless, R.M., and the Anson Battalion were
reported in Varlet Farm.* This last report was in fact
incorrect, although, unknown to their battalion Headquarters,
Sub-Lieut. Stevenson and a platoon of the Anson Battalion
had occupied another group of ruins two hundred yards to the
east. These successes were, however, no indication of the
nature of the battle. The enemy machine-gun fire from across
the Paddebeek was extremely severe, and almost all the Com-
pany Commanders of the attacking battalions had become
casualties. They were but small parties who had reached
such of the enemy posts as had fallen, and there were other
posts, notably in the centre of the German outpost position,
which we had never reached. Here was the unsolved tactical
problem. The rigidity of our attacking formation was opposed
to a fluid defence. The troops who had reached their
♦ Varlet Farm itself was practically invisible and was only identified at the
close of the operations. It was never occupied, either by the enemy or by the
Anson Battalion.


objectives had, according to explicit orders, accomplished their
task. They expected to be isolated, and had no means of
knowing, under conditions which made swift movement of
patrols impossible, whether the parties detailed to capture
the other posts had succeeded. Company and Battalion
reserves were in a better position, but, by the time it was
clear that the enemy at a given point was still in possession,
and a fresh movement had been organized, we had lost the
barrage. And so by 8 a.m. the attack in the centre had died
down, and only on the flanks did the Howe and 2nd Marine
Battalions effect an advance towards the second objective.
One of the finest exploits of this second stage of the attack
was the crossing of the Paddebeek, by Captain Ligertwood’s
“A ” Company of the 2nd Marines. The platoons of this
company had gone into action under their own flags, strips
of red canvas nailed to a stick cut from the woods where the
company had done their training, solemnly blessed by the
Battalion Chaplain, Father Davey, and taken into action
with honour and reverence. These flags were carried through
the battle. Captain Ligertwood, three times wounded, led
his company to within sight of their goal, when he fell mor-
tally wounded, to rise only once to direct his men to their
objective. But on this front and at this time success was
denied even to the bravest. This company, staying on their
objective throughout the entire day, were powerless to lift
a finger to assist the main battle still being fought on the first
objective where the enemy centre held their ground.
So merciless was the position in the centre at 8 a.m. that
Commander Asquith, watching the attack from our old
front line, ordered up two companies of his battalion, which
had been attached for these operations to General Prentice’s
188th Brigade as a “ counter-attack ” battalion. Their func-
tion was to be in a position to deal effectively and without
delay with any counter-attack which the enemy might deliver
against the (possibly disorganized) assaulting troops. A little
later, a fine reconnaissance by Lieutenant Barclay, R.N.V.R.,
showed that the enemy were still holding their ground, and
threatening to get between our advanced troops and our old
line, and a third company was ordered up at 8.80 a.m. When
no reports came back from the 188th Brigade, and the
Canadians reported that they were not in touch on their left
254
The Royal Naval Division


Commander Asquith and Lieutenant Gamham, R.F.A. (forward
observation officer), with one man went forward to investigate.
Now for the first time the presence of Sub-Lieut. Stevenson’s
party near Varlet Farm was discovered, and the enemy who
were closing in on the party were dispersed. Stevenson was
promised relief, and Commander Asquith and his party, going
on to get in touch with the Howe and Anson on the right,
were able to inform them of the position and to establish touch
between them and the Canadians. This reconnaissance was a
decisive incident in the day’s fighting, for it enabled our
artillery to safeguard. the line won, and prevented any incur-
sion on the flank of the Canadians, who were thus able to make
a more appreciable advance. Plain facts are often obscured
by technical terms. A reconnaissance on this front meant
a two hours’ walk in full view of the enemy under heavy fire,
and such a prosaic description of the achievement of these
officers, with their solitary rifleman, gives a truer idea of the
quality of mind and spirit necessary to support it, than do the
more hackneyed phrases of the official reports.
No further advance was attempted in the afternoon of
the 26th. To renew the attack it would have been necessary
to bring up fresh troops, which could only be done by night,
or to throw once more against the enemy the disorganized and
cruelly depleted units clinging to their slender gains. This
would have meant risking the little that we had won. At
5 p.m. the wisdom of the decision was seen, for the enemy
counter-attacked in force on the right, and only the prompt
intervention of “ C ” Company of the Hood Battalion under
Lieutenant Arblaster averted a retreat. As dusk fell Com-
mander Asquith moved up his whole Battalion, which had
suffered heavy casualties during the day, to relieve the Anson
and Howe Battalions, and the Hawke Battalion was ordered
to relieve the two Marine Battalions. The situation on the
left flank was by now less satisfactory. The party which
had crossed the Paddebeek with such gallantry had been
forced to retire, being almost surrounded and without ammuni-
tion or water, and in their retirement had carried with them the
garrisons of Banff House, Bray Farm and Berks Houses.
Commander Ellis, however, quickly restored the position
this side of the Paddebeek, and “ C ” Company of the Hawke
Battalion (Lieutenant Bartholomew, R.N.V.R.) recaptured all
255
Passchendaele


three positions and established touch with the Hood Battalion.
It was only, however, thanks to another exploit by Com-
mander Asquith that this Battalion had established itself
with equal security. Scouts sent forward to see if Lieut.
Stevenson was still holding out, reported that they had
been fired on from the position formerly held by him. If so,
our front must in the long run have been untenable, but Com-
mander Asquith* was determined to investigate the situation.
He made his way personally to the position and found there
Sub-Lieut. Stevenson and seven men, all that were left of the
party which had rushed the post in the first minutes of the
attack. He then went back and led up the relieving platoon.
This incident, and the temporary confusion on the left
flank, were characteristic of the prevailing conditions. The
policy of delimiting the objectives deprived the attack of all
cohesion, and produced a sense of isolation. Many men were
lost through mistaking enemy posts for our own ; only inves-
tigation could show the truth; many, it is feared, reached
their objective and were cut off because no one knew of their
success. Only under cover of darkness could communications,
inevitably severed in a daylight advance against irregular
and discontinuous defences, be re-established. Yet without
the maintenance of communications enabling local success to
be exploited, nothing could in the prevailing conditions enable
us to reach and consolidate our objectives.
Nevertheless, the line finally won by the relieving bat-
talions comprised at least five strongly fortified enemy posts
and represented an advance of from three to four hundred
yards from our old front; and this in spite of the fact that,
in the words of Sir Hubert Gough, “no troops could have
had to face worse conditions.” Success achieved under such
conditions had to be bought dearly, and the four assaulting
battalions lost heavily in officers and men. Captain Pipe,
2nd Lieut. F. C. Balcombe, 2nd Lieut. D. J. Aldridge of the
Ist Marines, Captain Edwards, Captain Ligertwood and 2nd
Lieut. T. W. Brogan of the 2nd Marines, Lieutenant F. C.
Mundy, M.C., R.N.V.R., Sub-Lieut. W. Fraser and Sub-Lieut.
* For his fine exploits on this critical day Commander Asquith received a
second bar to his D.S.O. Lieutenant Bartholomew (Hawke Battalion) was
awarded the M.C. Others who won this distinction in the course of the
Passchendaele operations were Surgeon R. G. Morgan, R.N., Sub-Lieut. N. de
B, Browning, Sub-Lieut. W. H. Clarkson, Sub-Lieut. C. M. Perry, Sub-Lieut.
E. A. Elson, Sub-Lieut. K. I. M. Fegan, and Sub-Licut. K. M. Evans.
256
The Royal Naval Division


J. S. Russell of the Anson, Lieutenant F. L. H. Jackson,
R.N.V.R., Sub-Lieut. W. Douglas, Sub-Lieut. W. J. Shaw,
Sub-Lieut. E. C. Bonnet and Sub-Lieut. G. H. Hinde of the
Howe, were killed on the morning of this attack. Very many
more officers were wounded, among them Father Davey, the
Roman Catholic Chaplain of the 188th Brigade, Surgeon
Mcßean Ross,* the Medical Officer of the 2nd Marine Battalion
(who happily recovered to write a graphic volume of remi-
niscences of the Naval Division), and Lieutenant Newling, the
hero of the Gavrelle “ Windmill attack. The losses in
N.C.O.’s and men were equally severe, averaging more than
five hundred a battalion in the IBBth Brigade.
The Hood Battalion was relieved on the night of the 27th-
28th by the Nelson Battalion,f but, before the change was
over, the Hood patrols had got in touch with yet another
party of the Anson, who had been isolated for more than thirty-
six hours in front of the line taken by the Hood the previous
evening. These men were relieved and the new posts handed
over to the Nelson Battalion. A notable feature of almost
forty-eight hours’ continuous fighting by the Hood Battalion
had been the work of Surgeon McCracken, D.5.0.,J who saved
the lives of very many wounded, lying out exposed to view
on the forward slopes of our position under aimed fire from
the Passchendaele ridge. From here the enemy had direct
close-range observation of all that was happening on the scene
of the attack of the 26th (and of the next attack also). The
German field guns were indeed firing over open sights at every
sign of movement.
Notwithstanding the disastrous losses of the 26th, it was
felt impossible to modify our plans for the next attack, for
which the 190th Brigade had been training for the past three
weeks. This attack was launched accordingly at 5.50 a.m.
on October 30th, virtually against the same objectives as those
assigned to the 188th Brigade. Fate, however, which had been
hard before, was this time harder, for the enemy unexpectedly
♦ Surgeon Ross was awarded a bar to his M.C. for his services on this occasion.
Ilt was during this tour in the line that Sub-Lieut. W. E. Jerring, R.N.V.R.,
e Nelson Battalion, was killed.
J Surgeon McCracken had been with the Hood since the start of the Gallipoli
campaign, and his gallantry was a tradition of the battalion. For his services
on this occasion he received a bar to his D t S,O,
17
257
Passchendaele


altered their barrage line on the morning of the battle, and
our troops suffered cruel losses in the opening seconds of the
attack. When, after the initial disaster, the assaulting
battalions were reorganized, they had lost the barrage.
On the left of the front, the Artists’ Rifles, despite cruel
losses, advanced on Source Trench, but were held up in front
of it, knee-deep in mud, by close range machine guns. Here
one company of this fine battalion was annihilated. In the
centre, and on the left, the 7th Fusiliers and the 4th Bed-
fords could do no better; movement was in many places
literally impossible: in all, it was futile. The enemy’s machine
guns merely picked off the infantry one by one. Through
the day the Brigade had a hard struggle to hold their own,
but they gave little ground, and by holding on enabled the
reserve battalion, the sth K.5.L.1., fighting their first battle
in France, to perform valuable work which redeemed the day
from complete failure. The object of the attack, like that of
those that preceded and followed it, was primarily to protect
the Canadian flank. By Some miracle of endurance and
courage, a small party of Canadians had reached the right of
Source Farm, a German strong point some four hundred yards
east of Source Trench. If this gain was to be held, the Cana-
dians had to be reinforced and their flank secured. When the
Artists had done all that was possible by frontal attack, the
Division was asked early in the afternoon to try an attack from
the right. Two companies of the Shropshires were at once
sent off through the Canadian lines, and were at one time
reported to have captured the trench : this was not the case.
They had, however, joined up with a third company of their
battalion which had gone to reinforce the Canadians* at Source
Farm, and, at dusk, established a defensive flank from that
point to the Artists’ right at Varlet Farm.
The total casualties of the Division in their two advances
had been 32 officers and 954 men killed or missing, and 83
officers and 2,057 men wounded; and their task was still un-
completed. Without some further advance on their front,
the pressure of the Canadians on the Passchendaele ridge could
not be maintained. In these circumstances, it was the turn
of the 189th Brigade, who had relieved the 190th Brigade on
* What had once been a company in this position consisted at the end of the
day of one officer and eight men.


the night of the 30th-31st, to make a third attempt to get
across the Paddebeek.
This portion of the front had now been taken over by the
First Army, who gave instructions that the crossing was to be
secured under divisional arrangements before November 6th.
The operations of the next four days and nights, which
carried the Division’s task almost to completion at a negligible
cost, and resulted in gains greater than had been achieved
in the two previous attacks, form a dramatic chapter in the
history of the Naval Division. For the genesis of these
operations we must go back to that tragic morning of October
26th, when the Hood Battalion, from our old front line, watched
the pitiful slaughter of the men of the 188th Brigade struggling
vainly in the mud to find each other and their objectives.
Commander Asquith had watched one earlier attack made over
practically the same ground with the same disastrous result,
and his conclusion, after seeing and experiencing himself the
conditions of fighting, was definite. Absolute mobility, prior
reconnaissance, surprise, and personal leading by senior officers
were, he was convinced (and so suggested in his official report),
the indispensable elements of success against the enemy’s
new system. These conditions could not be Secured so long
as the normal tactics of attack at dawn under a barrage were
persisted in. The ease with which, on the occasion of the
relief of the 188th Brigade on the evening of the 26th, the line
handed over had been secured and extended, suggested, however,
that night operations might provide a satisfactory solution.
The consent of the XVIIIth Corps to an experiment in the
new tactics was readily given.
The 189th Brigade moved into the line, in relief of the 190th
Brigade, on the night of October 31st, with the Nelson Battalion
on the right and the Hawke on the left. The Hawke had the
same experience as on the relief of the 188th Brigade, our
advanced post at Banff House being found to have been aban-
doned. The essential feature of the new tactics was, however,
prior reconnaissance, followed by a surprise attack, so the
night of the relief was devoted to a thorough investigation of
the enemy posts on the front of the battalion and no immediate
attempt was made to restore the line. The Nelson Battalion
patrols at the same time located the enemy defences in the
neighbourhood of Source Trench.
17*
259
Passchendaele


The next night, at 6,10 p.m., operations began. On the
right, Sub-Lieutenant Brearly and eleven men of the Nelson
advanced in extended order on the German concrete position,
which was the centre of their resistance at Source Trench.
When they were about eighty yards from the position,
they came on wire entanglement and trenches (the same, no
doubt, which had held up the Artists in the daylight attack,
but which at night were not manned). Here the party divided
into three, one N.C.O. and three men going round to each
flank while Sub-Lieutenant Brearly and two men found a
way through the wire in front. After making another twenty
yards the party on the left were fired on, but the enemy had
not observed those in the centre and on the right. Lieutenant
Brearly* at once decided to draw the whole of his men on to
the right flank, and to attack the position from there. The
enterprise was a complete success, the post being surprised
and carried without a casualty. One under-officer, eleven
men and one machine gun were captured, the remainder
of the garrison being killed. So fell a post which, through
no fault of their own, two battalions had failed to capture in
the attack of October 30th.
Meanwhile, on the left, Lieutenant Stear’s “D” Company
of the Hawke Battalion had achieved an equal measure
of success. Here, the first enemy post attacked was on the left
of the battalion front, and was probably the same that had
held up the left of our attack on October 26th and had com-
pelled, twice already, the evacuation of Banff House. Sub-
Lieutenant Perry, with one and a half platoons, carried out the
initial operation, which followed the same plan as that adopted
by the Nelson Battalion and with the same results. Nine men
and a machine gun were captured and two men killed. Four
hours later the enemy ration party arrived and were also
captured. When the first post was secured, Lieutenant
Stear pushed out posts on either flank, and to the north of the
long-disputed Banff House, which was now definitely ours.
The only misfortune of this night’s operations was the enemy
retaliation with gas shells on the headquarters of the Nelson
Battalion. Lt.-Colonel Lewis, who had been gassed a few
days before, had been succeeded in command of this battalion
♦ This officer was awarded the Military Cross for his “ conspicuous gallantry.”
260
The Royal Naval Division


Passchendaele




by Commander Shelton, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R., and he and the
whole of his staff became casualties on this night.
The next night, the Hawke and Nelson Battalions were
relieved by the Drake and Hood Battalions and, as before, the
night of the relief was devoted to patrolling with a view to the
next day’s operations.
On the night of the 3rd-4th, the Drake Battalion (“ C ”
Company, Lieutenant Harris)* attacked and captured Sourd
Farm, the only remaining enemy post of importance this
side of the Paddebeek. The advance was made from the
neighbourhood of Banff House at 9 p.m., the main attack being
carried out by two and a half platoons. A smaller force of
one and a half platoons had to advance from the left of Banff
Hou§e to a position on the left of the objective, from which
they could give covering fire to the main party.
In this instance, the attacking parties were observed at
a fairly early stage of their advance (no doubt because our
previous success had made the enemy more vigilant), but the
advantage of darkness still remained decisive. The enemy
fire was unaimed, and the bulk of our men, keeping under cover
in shell-holes till Lewis gun and rifle grenade fire temporarily
silenced the enemy, sustained hardly any casualties as they
closed in on the position and finally rushed it. One prisoner
was captured, but the rest of the garrison escaped. This
operation, as successful as its predecessors, was in some ways
more remarkable. It showed that, even under the most
difficult conditions, comparatively large bodies of men could
be easily handled in the dark, and that, even where the enemy
are on the alert, the protection of darkness is often worth
immeasurably more than that of a barrage.
The same evening, the Hood Battalion, on the right of the
Divisional front, pushed their line forward to the Paddebeek
in touch with the Drake at Sourd Farm, and the first and most
important part of the Division’s task was accomplished.
Before dawn, as soon as the success of the Sourd Farm
operations was assured, Commander Asquith and Lieutenant
Harris reconnoitred the Tournant Farm position, which was to
be attacked the following night. This position was found to
be held in considerable strength with the main garrison in the
* Lieut. W. K. Harris was awarded a bar to his Military Cross for his share
in this successful operation.
261
Passchendaele


ruins and in pill-boxeS on the flanks, and the outposts in shell-
holes a hundred to a hundred and fifty yards in front. The
difficulty of the operation lay in the certainty that the capture
of these advanced posts —an easy matter if the tactics of the
previous nights were followed —would give the alarm to the
main garrison, who were in greater strength than at any other
point yet reconnoitred.
When the position was reported to the Corps, the Division
were instructed not to press on with the attack if, in the course
of the preliminary operations, it became clear that the enemy
would put up a strong resistance. With the line of the Padde-
beek secured, a further advance on the main ridge was to be
attempted shortly, and such an advance would afford, it was
thought, an easy opportunity of attacking the main position.
In the circumstances, the operations of the night of November
4th-sth were started in no very determined spirit, and when
the enemy posts in front of Tournant Farm had been success-
fully dealt with (a number of machine guns were captured),
and our line had been pushed forward round the right flank
of the main position, the attack was called off. The enemy
showed great activity throughout the operations and the
decision was, in the light of the Corps instructions, inevitable.
The next day the Naval Division were formally relieved
(though the artillery remained in the line), and the command
of the front passed to the Ist Division. The 188th Brigade
actually relieved the 189th on the night of the sth-6th, but
were relieved by infantry of the new Division within forty-
eight hours.*
So ended (as far as the infantry were concerned) the ex-
periences of the Naval Division at PaSschendaele. The total
casualties in the 189th Brigade during their advances in
November were no more than three officers (Sub-Lieut. Bolton,
Sub-Lieut. T. S. Collins and Sub-Lieut. R. Wyard, of the
Hood Battalion) and 14 men killed or died of wounds and 14
officers and 134 men wounded, contrasting with casualties
substantially in excess of 8,000 during the shorter period
from October 26th to October 31st. The maximum advance
achieved during the former period by the Naval Division was,
moreover, materially less, apart altogether from the fact
* Shortly before his battalion was relieved, Lieut. G. W. W. Denman-Dean,
H.M. (2nd B.M. Battalion), was killed.
262
The Royal Naval Division


that the most important tactical objective, the line of the
Paddebeek, was only secured on November 3rd. The 188th
and 190th Brigades had an impossible task, and though they
fulfilled no small part of it in the face of conditions wholly
unfavourable, it is altogether beyond doubt that the 189th
Brigade were right in insisting at the eleventh hour on a drastic
modification in tactics. Of this experiment, which saved,
without doubt, hundreds of lives, too little has been said in
published accounts of the battle, probably because, devised to
meet peculiar local conditions, it was not supposed to be capable
of wider application. The need for meeting peculiar con-
ditions by peculiar methods is, however, above all else, the
lesson of the Flanders offensive of 1918.
4 Hardly had the 189th Brigade reached the camp behind the
lines for a long overdue period of rest (this Brigade had had
only ten days’ rest since January 21st, 1918), than the news
came that Commander Stemdale Bennett, of the Drake Bat-
talion, who had been wounded during a hostile bombardment
on the 4th, had died of his wounds at a casualty clearing sta-
tion behind the lines. Sterndale Bennett possessed in rare
degree the qualities, so seldom associated, of energy and judg-
ment, and his death was a great loss. He was succeeded in
command of the Drake Battalion by Commander Pollock,
B.N.V.R. At the same time, Commander Jones, R.N.V.R.,
who had commanded the Anson Battalion in Gallipoli, in the
autumn of 1915, was given the command of the Nelson
Battalion.
While the Division remained resting in the neighbourhood
of Ledeszeele, the Divisional Artillery (the 223rd Brigade still
commanded by the Rev. Lt.-Colonel Wingfield and the 317th
Brigade by Lt.-Colonel Crofton) remained in their cruelly-
exposed positions in the St. Julien-Poelcapelle area. Movement
to the artillery positions was impossible except by trench-
board routes which were constantly shelled, and the range of
the gun positions was accurately known. Before the 188th
Brigade came into line, the artillery had had to cover an
advance by the 9th Division, and had earned a warm tribute
from Brigadier-General Tudor. Through the Naval Division
operations, the artillery had continued in the line without
respite, and now they had to cover the advance of the Ist
Division on November 10th. Only by keeping one-third of the


gunners at Brigade Headquarters and another third at the
wagon lines had sufficient officers and men been kept alive
to carry on. As it was, the strain of keeping the guns in action
with depleted teams under heavy shell fire was almost too
much. Yet they continued to fire. Major Hale’s “D ” Battery
of the 223rd Brigade was, perhaps, the worst sufferer, Lt.
Keeping, R.F.A., and one N.C.O. being the only unwounded
survivors in the gun positions at the close of the operations of
November 10th, yet the one howitzer still in action continued
to fire till orders to cease fire came through in the normal
course. The casualties of the two artillery brigades in this
period were heavier proportionately than those of the infantry
in the most disastrous battles of the war.
Not till December 6th were the artillery relieved, and
even this relief was not in accordance with the original inten-
tion. The Naval Division had been meant to go back into the
line in front of their artillery on this date, but developments
in the south involved a new disposition of our forces.
Since the relief of the Division on November 6th, important
events had been taking place on the Cambrai front, where
a tactical experiment of the most far-reaching character had
achieved a sensational success. The keynotes of the new
tactics were the substitution of surprise for preparation, the
use of tanks in advance of the infantry, with a view to the
seizure of tactical points being followed by immediate ex-
ploitation by fresh troops, and, as a logical corollary, the
abandonment of the gospel of the limited objective.
Unfortunately, this daring and fruitful experiment, which
might, in happier circumstances, have opened the way for
the first time to a war of movement, was ill-timed. Perhaps,
as in the case of the second and third battles for Passchendaele
in October and November, the necessity for taking the offensive
was judged to be imperative, but the fact remains that the
ill-luck which had made 1917 the most disappointing (having
regard to our opportunities and the relative strength of the
opposing Armies) of all our years of war held to the end, and
our one overwhelming tactical triumph (if we except the local
offensive of Messines) was made at a time when the troops
available were insufficient. Not only did we fail to exploit
our gains, but even to maintain them. The German counter-
stroke on November 30th and the following days had been
264
The Royal Naval Division


definitely successful. The vigour with which the enemy
pressed home their attack over a wide front took us, indeed,
by surprise. This was not unnatural, for, since the second
battle of Ypres, no determined attack had been made against
our lines by an enemy possessing anything but a local superi-
ority in numbers. German counter-attacks had come to be
derided as a characteristic display of racial insincerity. The
lesson of the Arras and Passchendaele offensives had not been
absorbed. The renewed vigour of the German resistance
had been too largely attributed to fortuitous circumstances,
to the French failure (in May), to the weather (in the autumn),
to indifferent staff work (according to the infantry in the
line), or to inadequately trained troops (according to the
directing staffs). This tendency to explain away one of the
most remarkable incidents in military history was, probably,
not confined to subordinate commanders and regimental
officers. This is suggested, not only by the facts of the case, but
by Sir Douglas Haig’s suggestion at the close of his Passchen-
daele dispatch that, as a result of those operations, the
additions to the enemy strength (due to the Russian defection)
had been “ already largely discounted.”
What is more important to our purpose, the very general
conviction among the front line troops that they had nothing
serious to fear from a German reaction was directly challenged
by the news of the set-back at Cambrai. When the full extent
of our losses became known, the Naval Division, who were on
the point of returning to the Passchendaele front, were ordered
on December 6th to entrain for the Third Army area, with a
view to taking over a sector of defence on the shattered front.
When they arrived, they found an atmosphere of disquietude
bordering on alarm, which was new in their experience, and
which reflected the gravity of the disaster by which the fighting
troops had been so nearly overwhelmed.
The gains remaining to us, after the German counter-attack,
from the Cambrai offensive, were represented by the
salient. Our offensive had opened with the capture of the
Hindenburg front and support lines on a front of six and a
half miles, south-east of Cambrai; this gain had been exploited
with a considerable measure of success on the left. After
the German counter-attacks, we still held four miles of the
Hindenburg front and support lines running east from a point
265
Welsh Ridge


half a mile north of Demicourt, in front of Flesquteres. In
advance of this position we held a discontinuous line of posts.
On our right, however, the Germans had achieved a break-
through, and had penetrated in part beyond our old front
line. We had been saved from a general withdrawal only by
improvising a defensive flank running south-west along Welsh
Ridge, at right angles to those sectors of the Hindenburg lines
which we still held. The result was that the residue of our
gains formed a very sharp salient which, in the event of a
serious attack, could hardly have been held. As, however, the
position was one of great natural strength, and as it com-
manded the approaches to Masni&res and Marcoing, two im-
portant enemy centres, it had been decided to maintain and
fortify it. This was the new task of the Naval Division, who,
between December 15th and 20th, took over the front of the
31st and 62nd Divisions.
The distance along the new front line was 6,800 yards,
held by three Brigades, each with two battalions in the front
line, one in support and one in reserve. The sector taken over
included the apex of the salient, where our line was on the
northern slopes of Welsh Ridge, and the whole length of the
eastern face of the ridge. On the right of the Division, the
southern slopes of Welsh Ridge ran down into a valley, across
which our front line, continuing on the line of Welsh Ridge,
fell behind our old front line. Approximately at this point
was the right Divisional boundary, which was also the Corps
and Army boundary. The Division on the left of the Naval
Division, who held the captured sectors of the Hindenburg
line forming the northern arm of the salient, was the 19th
Division. On the right, holding the re-entrant formed by the
German incursion behind our original front, was the 9th
Division of the sth Army. The new front, representing, as it
did, a position hurriedly improvised in the stress of battle,
was almost lacking in material defences.
The only incident of great note in the first fortnight of the
Division’s tenure of this line was the promotion of Commander
Asquith, R.N.V.R., to the command of the 189th Brigade on the
18th December.* Unfortunately, on December 20th General
* The vacancy occurred owing to the invaliding of Brigadier-General Prentice,
of the 188th Brigade, whose place was taken by Brigadier-General Coleridge,
from the 189th Brigade. When Brigadier-General Asquith was wounded he
was succeeded, after a short time, by Brigadier-General Bray.
266
The Royal Naval Division


Asquith was severely wounded. His loss was a serious blow,
not only to the Brigade. It was an open secret that for many
months his abilities had been generously appreciated within
the Division. Now, as the severest time of testing was ap-
proaching, the Brigade had to lose his services. The loss was
greater than that merely of a supremely competent officer. It
was the loss of an officer whom everyone recognized as supremely
competent, and who, for that reason, would always get more out
of his officers and men than anyone else. Above all, he was a
fighting soldier. His whole experience had been gained, not in
war, which is an affair of business where credit may go far
without much backing in realizable assets, but in battles, which
are affairs of art where none but the best can retain a
reputation.
The command of the Brigade passed temporarily to Lt.-
Colonel Kirkpatrick, Lt.-Commander Buckle taking command
of the Anson during his absence. The last fortnight of December
was bitterly cold, with many successive days of severe frost,
but work on the construction of a continuous front support line
on Welsh Ridge was pressed forward,* and, at one point, our line
was even extended on December 22nd, through the enterprise
of a company commander of the Drake Battalion. From
Christmas Day onwards, however, the enemy shelling markedly
increased, and at dawn on December 30th the enemy launched
a not unexpected attack against our whole front.
Every effort was made to effect surprise, the enemy even
going so far as to dress the leading waves in white to match the
snow. Nevertheless, the measure of success which the attack
met with was due rather to a stroke of singular misfortune than
to any display of cunning on the part of the enemy.
Our line was held, from left to right, by the 190th, 189th and
188th Brigades, the battalions in the line being the 1/5 K.5.L.1.,
7th Royal Fusiliers, Hood, Drake, Howe and Ist Royal Marines.
Under cover of the barrage, the leading waves effected a lodg-
ment in the front line of the 190th Brigade and at the junction
of the Hood and 7th Royal Fusiliers and of the Drake and Howe
Battalions. The right flank battalion, and most of the Hood and
Drake Battalions, stood fast. Elsewhere, on the right and
in the centre, the enemy penetrated only to the front line.
* During this period Sub-Lieut. C. R. Barker, of the Anson, and Sub-Lieut.
F. Hill, of the Hawke Battalion, were killed.
267
Welsh Ridge


The Hood Battalion at once counter-attacked, although their
commanding officer, Lt.-Commander Patrick Shaw Stewart,
R.N.V.R. (who had rejoined the Division from the staff at his
own request, and had assumed temporary command of the
Hood when Commander Asquith was promoted), had been
killed during the preliminary bombardment, and some dis-
organization might have been expected. Instead, the greatest
coolness marked the operations of the support companies of
this battalion, to whom the first news of the initial success of
the attack had been brought by the appearance of two German
officers in their line. These were met and killed by A.B. Brown,
the “B ” Company cook, who gave the alarm. Sub-Lieut.
Weir and P.O. Brown,* of the same company, at once led a
bombing attack up the communication trench to the front line,
and the remainder of the support companies moved up across
the open. By 8.25 a.m., the situation was completely restored - }*
on this front and one company of the Hood Battalion was
actually available to reinforce the 7th Royal Fusiliers. Very
severe losses had, however, been suffered by the Hood, whose
front line companies had been virtually annihilated; Sub-
Lieut. Lawrie, Sub-Lieut. Roberts and Sub-Lieut. Watkins
were among those killed in the course of the morning's
fighting.
The situation on the flank of the 190th Brigade was less
satisfactory, but the Brigade were able to hold the enemy on
their second line and the loss of their front line did not seriously
weaken their position.
On the Howe front, through no fault of the men on the spot,
the situation was more serious. Simultaneously with the loss
of the front line, a shell falling outside Battalion Headquarters
had killed Commander West and Lt.-Commander Alan Camp-
bell. Though Captain Pitcairn, Sub-Lieut. Kessen and Sub-
Lieut. Neal took very prompt and energetic action to localize
the attack (and thus prevented an irretrievable disaster),
the support companies could not be organized for a counter-
attack quickly enough to prevent the enemy securing a lodg-
ment in the second line, on the crest of the ridge itself. This
* This Petty Officer was later awarded the D.C.M.
f Lord Alexander Thynne, writing to a friend about these operations, refers
to the Hood Battalion as remarkably organized and with “ a splendid fighting
spirit.”


Commander A. W. Buckle, D.S.O., R.N.V.R. (Anson Battalion).
(From the portrait by Ambrose McEvoy in the possession of the Imperial War Museum.)




made the position of the right of the Drake Battalion* in the
front line untenable, and that position too had to be given up to
the enemy. Once the crest of the ridge was lost, the organization
of a daylight counter-attack became impossible, because of the
long, steep slope up which an advance would have to be made,
and Colonel Kirkpatrick wisely decided to postpone further
action till dusk, when his support Battalion (the Anson) would
make a carefully prepared counter-attack. In this the Nelson
Battalion were to co-operate, but unfortunately the detailed
orders failed to reach Commander Jones in time, and a pre-
mature and partial, though very gallant, attackf was launched
at 2.15 p.m. by this battalion against the positions lost by the
189th Brigade. Despite excellent work, particularly by Sub-
Lieut. Clerk and P.O. Winn (of “ C ” Company), the attack
failed. Everything now turned on that to be made by the
Anson Battalion under Commander Buckle, with which the
co-operation of the 189th Brigade must now inevitably be
less effective. General Hutchison arranged for the Artists’
Rifles to make a simultaneous attempt to regain the front line,
lost by the 190th Brigade on the left.
The Anson attack, led by “ A ” Company, with the Nelson
Battalion “B ” Company (Lieut. Biggs, R.N.V.R.') and elements
of the Drake on their immediate left, was a brilliant success,
and “ A ” Company of the Anson reoccupied the vital position
on Welsh Ridge with the loss of only three men. To Com-
mander Buckle and to the officers and men of this company
belongs most of the credit for what Sir Douglas Haig in his
dispatch described as an “ admirably executed counter-
attack ...” which “ regained all the essential parts of our
former positions.” J
* This battalion suffered serious losses throughout this engagement; among
those killed were Lieut. A. A. Johnson, R.N.V.R., Lieut. C. J. Woodford, D.S.M.,
H N.V.R.. Sub-Lieut. W. L. Burnett, Sub-Lieut. W. H. Clarkson, M.C., and
Sub-Lieut J. W. Cookes.
. t In this attack, and in the subsequent fighting, Sub-Lieut. R. Taylor, Sub-
Lieut. G. J. Robertson, Sub-Lieut. H. B. Cannin and Sub-Lieut. C. A. Clerk,
of the Nelson Battalion, were killed. Lieut. F. D. Purser, R.N.V.R., and Sub-
Lieut. T. White, of this battalion, had been killed in the days immediately
preceding the attack.
J Commander Buckle, Commander Pollock and Lieutenant Harris of the
Drake and Lieutenant Donaldson of the Hood each received the D.S.O. for their
work in the organization and leadership of the many counter-attacks on this
day. Lieutenant Maudsley and Sub-Lieutenants Hall and Kessen received the
M.C.


On the left the situation was still obscure. The Hood had
been forced earlier in the afternoon to withdraw their left com-
pany in order to maintain touch with the 190th Brigade, and the
counter-attack by the Artists had failed to make any ap-
preciable headway. The troops on this flank were, indeed,
only able with difficulty to hold the second line position to
which they had been driven back. On this line, which had been
reinforced by “ D ” Company of the Hawke Battalion (Lieut.
Stear, R.N.V.R.), at the point of junction of the two brigades,
a more or less continuous fight raged, till noon on the 31st
December, and during the night one or two posts were lost
and retaken by the Hawke company, to whom fell much severe
fighting. Substantially, however, the position was maintained
against very superior forces, and by the afternoon of the 81st
the enemy attacks died down.
From an analysis of the many prisoners captured on
different parts of the Division’s front, it appeared that the
attack had been made by at least fifteen battalions and a quota
of storm troops, and the defence of a very indefensible position
against such heavy odds was a creditable achievement. In
particular, the operations of the Anson and Hood Battalions
provided model examples of the organized and the improvised
counter-attack, each undertaken in appropriate circumstances
with wholly successful results. But if the Division had main-
tained its reputation, it had done so at a heavy price. The
casualties in killed, wounded and missing were 63 officers* and
1,355 men, and among them two battalion commanders and the
second in command of the Howe Battalion. Such losses in
defensive warfare impose a far heavier strain on the nerves of
fighting troops than losses in an attack, however unsuccessful.
The deaths, moreover, of Commander West, of Patrick Shaw
Stewart and of Alan Campbell, were in the nature of a grievous
personal loss to innumerable officers and men of the Division.
They had all served with the Division in the earliest Gallipoli
days, and had each contributed much to its reputation, not
only as a fighting organization but as the gathering place
of so many men who were at once remarkably good com-
* In addition to those already mentioned, Sub-Lieut. W. A. St. A. Clarke,
R.N.V.R., and Lieut. T. Westby, M.C., R.M., of the 190th M.G.C., Sub-Lieut.
W. Hunter, of the Anson, Sub-Lieut. W. Wilson, M.C., of the Hawke, and 2nd
Lieut. W. Jaques, R.M., of the Ist R.M. Battalion, were among those killed in
this costly engagement.


pany and of brilliant attainments. Of Patrick Shaw Stewart’s
end a full account is contained in a letter from Lord Alexander
Thynne, published in Father Ronald Knox’s biography. In
the first moments of the barrage preceding the German attack,
Shaw Stewart was slightly wounded, but he insisted on going
round his line and seeing for himself that everything was ready
in case the enemy attacked. Then a shell burst on the parapet
close by him, and death was instantaneous. Commander West
and Alan Campbell were killed by a shell falling at the entrance
of their headquarters as they too were moving up to their
front line.
Shaw Stewart was less well known to most of the Naval
Division than was Alan Campbell, who, with his genius for
friendship, his invariable high spirits, his audacious tempera-
ment, equally auspicious on the battlefield and at the card table,
was a tradition in a division where personalities were not rare.
Shaw Stewart’s death meant less, perhaps, to those in France
at this time, but it closed a brilliant and tragic chapter in the
history of more than the Naval Division. Of that small band
of scholars, musicians, poets and men of letters who had served
in the Naval Division in Gallipoli, he had been almost the last
survivor.
271
Welsh Ridge


CHAPTER XV
THE ALLIED DEFENSIVE OF 1918
THE bitter fighting of the closing days of 1917 was a truthful
presage of the impending struggle. For some weeks the
prospect of a vigorous German offensive in 1918 had been
defining itself ever more clearly. The lesson of the attacks on
our front at Cambrai was nevertheless more unpleasant than
we were prepared for. If we could hold our own so hardly and
with such heavy losses when confronted with a local attack, the
results of the expected offensive on a broad front, thinly manned
by exhausted divisions, almost all of whom had endured the
full strain of the spring, summer and autumn offensive of 1917,
could not be anticipated without anxiety.
The danger of the situation was many-sided. In the first
place the fighting strength of the British armies in the West was
inadequate to their responsibilities, and only by depleting the
long line from Arras to the French left of any reserves effective
to meet more than a purely local attack could the safety of the
Channel ports be in any way ensured. Whether more troops
were available at home or on other fronts is one of the great
controversies of the War from which the historian of a Division
will prudently stand aside. The facts as to the inadequacy of
the numbers available in France are no longer in dispute.
In the second place, the front held by the Third and Fifth
Armies, though it had been held by the Allies since the close of
the spring offensive, had not, by the late autumn of 1917, been
fortified with anything approaching German method and science.
In the third place, if the fighting quality of the infantry
remained in many formations unshaken, the experience of many
of the junior officers was very small. Between November 1917
and the opening of the German offensive the Naval Division
alone had lost five of its most brilliant battalion commanders ;




MAP
ILLUSTRATING OPERATIONS
OF
THE ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION.
March 21 st to 27 th 1918.


in the course of the retreat it was to lose four more. This rate
of wastage was typical of what was going on throughout the
army. The Naval Division had perhaps foreseen the officer
problem earlier than had the army as a whole, and certainly,
to the end of the war, it was never short of qualified senior
regimental officers. But of platoon officers the supply was
infinitely shorter. The army cadet schools, on which all
formations now had to rely for junior officers, appeared, perhaps
because of their system of mass training, to produce efficient
soldiers rather than efficient officers. Cadets were trained
more in the execution of orders than in the exercise of initiative,
the tactical handling of independent forces and the formation
of plans of attack and defence. In retreat even more than in
the offensive the initiative rests, time and again, with very
juhior officers, who by an error of judgment may render vain the
highest personal gallantry.
At the eleventh hour (the opening weeks of 1918 took on
this character in the light of the reports of ceaseless enemy
concentrations) little that was effective could be done to mitigate
these conditions, so threatening to the prospects of a successful
defensive.
The Naval Division was unable, after its heavy losses on
December 30th and 31st, to continue responsible for a three-
brigade sector, and on January 2nd the 190th Brigade, which
had suffered the most severely and had put up what was, having
regard to the difficulty of their position, a very fine defence,
were relieved by the 53rd Brigade of the 19th Division. On
the narrower front the Division spent a comparatively quiet
three weeks,* concentrating on the strengthening of their de-
fences. The enemy, equally engaged in preparing for the
coming battle, were inactive. On the 22nd and 23rd January,
the Naval Division was relieved by the 2nd Division, and put in
a month’s work on the strengthening and extension of successive
defensive positions, all of them unfortunately too close to our
front to be of much value when the crisis arose. Nevertheless,
they added something to the local security and so to the con-
fidence of the front line troops. It was otherwise with another
departure from practice which was made at the end of January,
* During which period, however, Sub-Lieut. H. B. Cannin, of the Nelson,
Sub-Lieut. W. Wilson, of the Hawke, and 2nd Lieut. R. H. S. Bailey, R.M., of
the Ist R.M. Battalion, were killed, and Lt.-Colonel G. L. Parry, R.M.L.1.,
sustained wounds from which he died in hospital on the 2nd February.
18


when infantry brigades were reduced to a strength of three
battalions apiece. This involved for the Naval Division the
disbandment of the Howe and Nelson Battalions, and the
transfer of the sth K.S.L.L to the 19th Division. The Nelson
and Howe personnel were absorbed in the four remaining
R.N.V.R. battalions.
In the middle of February the Division, strongly reinforced,
returned to the Vth Corps’ line, and after a series of inter-
brigade and inter-divisional reliefs found themselves in a three-
brigade sector on the Flesqui&res ridge, the northern arm that
is of the Flesqui£res salient, with the 47th Division (the right
Division of the Vth Corps) between themselves and the Fifth
Army. All three Brigades of the Division were in line, each
with one battalion in front, one in support, and one in
reserve. The 190th Brigade was on the right, the 189th in the
centre and the 188th on the left.
Till the end of the month things remained quiet, but the
early days of March made it clear that the enemy preparations
were almost complete. On the Bth March test barrages were
put down by them on the right and centre brigades, and on
March 12th a prolonged gas bombardment of the divisional
sector marked the final stage of the enemy’s methodical prepara-
tion.* The whole of the Flesqui&res salient was drenched with
gas shells for more than a day (200,000 shells was the official
calculation), and the resulting casualties, which had risen to
more than 2,000 by the day of the attack, were without doubt as
effective an aid to the enemy’s plans as our screen of tanks had
been in the Cambrai offensive. The gas used was chiefly
Yellow Cross (“ mustard ”) gas, and its greatest tactical value
was that the results were not, as a rule, instantaneous ; it hung
round every trench, every dug-out, every headquarter for an
indeterminate period, and no amount of gas discipline could
prevent a growing casualty list among troops bound to remain
in the infected area and to carry on their ordinary and laborious
duties. The chief sufferers among the different units of the
Division were the Hawke Battalion and Drake Battalion (which
lost respectively 15 officers and 532 men and 21 officers and
403 men from gas between the I2th and 21st March), the 223rd
* During the period to March 13th the Division lost many fine officers,
including Sub-Lieutenant A. E. Maloney (Hawke), Sub.-Lieut. G. J. Mitchell
and Sub-Lieut. J. F. St. C. Barton (Hood) and 2nd Lieutenant H. Fielden, R.M.
(2nd Marines), who were killed.


Brigade R.F.A.* and the 189th Brigade Headquarters, who
lost not only the Brigadier (Brigadier-General Bray) and the
Brigade Major (Major Barnett, D. 5.0.) but the entire subordi-
nate clerical staff and signal section. On the eve of active
operations, these losses were singularly inconvenient and added
immeasurably to the difficulties of the new Brigade Commander
(Brigadier-General de Free, C.M.G., D. 5.0.) and Brigade Major
(Captain Wright). Among the other casualties was Commander
Pollock, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R. (Drake Battalion), who was suc-
ceeded by Commander Beak, M.C., R.N.V.R., on the eve of the
enemy’s attack.
On March 21st the storm broke.
“At 4.50 a.m.,” writes General de Pree,f “ a terrific bom-
bardment of gas and high explosive began along the whole front.
There was no mistake about it, this was the real thing. It
included the front line, the gun positions and the back areas.
The roar and scream of the shells passing over and the explo-
sions all around were deafening and continuous, and to them in
a few seconds was added the still more terrific noise of our own
guns and their shells passing over in reply. The night had been
foggy and in a short time the gas and smoke of the bombardment
added so much to the fog that even when daylight came fully it
was impossible to see more than a few yards.”
At this time the Battalions in the line were, from right to
left, the 4th Bedfords, the Hawke and the 2nd R.M. Battalion :
in support were the 7th Royal Fusiliers, the Drake and the Ist
R.M. Battalion ; in reserve were the Anson, the Hood and the
Artists’ Rifles. The reserve battalions were under the orders
of the Divisional Commander in Havrincourt Wood, nearly
three miles behind the front line. Between the reserves and our
outpost lines were the second system (our original front line
prior to the Cambrai Battle) and the intermediate system (the
Hindenburg front line), in which were the support Battalions,
and the Hindenburg support system, which was the main line
of resistance for the front line battalions.
At 5.15 a.m., the bombardment lifted at certain points along
* Who lost their Brigade Commander, the Rev. Lieut.-Colonel W. E. Wing-
field, D.S.O. He was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel McClarety, R.A.
t 1 am very greatly indebted to Brigadier-General de Free for many of the
details which appear in the following pages as well as for permission to quote
freely from a written account of the operations which he kindly prepared for
my information.
iB*
275
The Allied Defensive of 1918


the front, and the enemy attacked. He effected a lodgment
in a small subsidiary salient (called the Premy salient) on the
189th Brigade front and at their junction with the 190th
Brigade on the right. Communication between the front line
and Brigade Headquarters was cut in the first few minutes, and
it was not known till 11 a.m. that the enemy had penetrated
our front. The commanding officer of the Hawke (Commander
Ellis, D. 5.0.) was, however, in touch with the situation and
organized the defence of a new position.
At 10 a.m. the Divisional reserves were moved up into the
second system, and a company of the Drake was moved up in
close support of the Hawke Battalion ; a third company was
moved up in the afternoon. When, by 4 p.m., the fighting had
died down, arrangements were made for the Drake to retake
that part of the outpost line which had been lost. This counter-
attack was, however, cancelled, on instructions from the Yth
Corps, and Commander Beak was ordered to relieve the rem-
nants of the Hawke Battalion in the Hindenburg support line ;
the Hawke was withdrawn to a position in rear.
The loss on the divisional front as a result of the day’s
fighting was not serious. A small local salient (always a
danger rather than an advantage) was gone, and the new front
could have been held with ease. The Corps on the right of
the Vth Corps had, however, fallen back slightly, and the
IVth Corps on the left had been very heavily attacked, and
had been driven in along the Cambrai-Bapaume road as far
as Beaumetz.
This news spelt not only a substantial enemy success on
the Third Army front, but the beginning of the historic retreat
of the Fifth Army. It was at once evident that, in the absence
of strong reserves to counter-attack on both flanks of the
Flesqui&res salient, the retreat could not be localized, but must
involve also the whole of the Vth Corps. The conclusion,
though obvious, was unwelcome, and it was reached only by
stages, and in each case (in the absence of earlier orders from the
Corps) very late. Not till midnight on the 21st was the Naval
Division ordered to withdraw to the intermediate system (the
Hindenburg front line), and even then the movement was
delayed, owing to the relief of the Hawke by the Drake Bat-
talion, which was in progress. Although it was clear that the
intermediate line could not be held, a further retreat to the
276
The Royal Naval Division


second (our old front line) position was not ordered till late in
the afternoon of the 22nd, and, before this withdrawal could
be effected, a withdrawal to a switch line further back became
necessary. This line was to be held by the 188th and 190th
Brigades. A position still further in rear was taken up by the
189th Brigade, with a view to covering a further retreat to the
Green line, a tolerably prepared position covering the whole of
the Third and Fifth Army front. The sector of the Green line
behind the Naval Division front was some six thousand yards
in length, covering the villages of Bertincourt and Ytres (the
latter an important corps centre with large dumps of ammuni-
tion and R.E. stores). The Green line to the left and right
of the Naval Division was to be occupied by the 2nd and
47th Divisions of the Vth Corps, in touch with the IVth Corps
and the Fifth Army respectively.
The move to the Metz defences occupied the night of the
22nd-23rd, and was not carried out without incident. In the
confusion of continuous movement, the orders for a retreat
beyond our old front line never reached the Drake Battalion,
and there they remained until, in the gathering darkness, the
German patrols came forward on the flanks. At this juncture,
Commander Beak came across a demolition party from the
Divisional Engineers, preparing with the utmost zeal to blow up
his battalion. In the special circumstances, he felt justified in
withdrawing, and, to prevent the enemy following up, he himself
stayed behind with a Lewis gun mounted on a limber, and kept
up a steady fire on those few of the enemy who showed any zeal
for the attack. Moving down.the road from Trescaut to Neu-
ville by easy, if anxious stages, he repeated the performance
sufficiently often to enable his battalion to get clear without
casualties. By the time the Drake arrived at the line held by
the 189th Brigade, it was 7 a.m. on the 23rd, and General
Lawrie had just ordered all three brigades to withdraw to the
Green line. The withdrawal was carried out at once by the
Drake and three companies of the Hood Battalion. The Hawke
and the remainder of the Hood remained in position in front of
Neuville, and covered the withdrawal of the 188th and 190th
Brigades from the Metz switch. The retirement was completed
by midday on the 23rd, when the rearguard was withdrawn.
The Hawke retired to Brigade reserve on Bus, and the Hood
company rejoined their battalion in the Green line. Here, from
277
The Allied Defensive of 1918


left to right, were now the Ist and 2nd Marines, the Hood, the
Drake, the Artists’ Rifles and the 4th Bedfords.* The Anson
were in reserve covering the Bertincourt-Bus road, and the
7th Royal Fusiliers in reserve at Lechelle. Covering the Bertin-
court and Ytres line, were the 317th and 223rd R.F.A. Brigades
(the 63rd Divisional Artillery) and the 88th Brigade R.F.A.
(attached).
From the local point of view nothing could have been more
satisfactory than the position on the morning of the 28rd.
Heavily attacked on the morning of the 21st, the Division had
held its own, losing only a portion of its outpost line. Its
casualties, though exceptionally severe prior to the attack, had
been light. When the Yth Corps found itself, as a result of the
withdrawal of the IVth Corps and the Fifth Army, in an
impossible salient, the Division had withdrawn, covered at
each point by its artillery, and had inflicted heavy losses on
the enemy; the Divisional Artillery in particular had found
fine targets, at 8 a.m. on the 22nd, when the enemy reserves of
infantry and artillery attempted vainly to advance west from
Marcoing. Now the whole Division were in touch with the
2nd Division of the Vth Corps on the left, and, so they were
assured, with the 47th Division on the right, and were standing
on a prepared line organized for defence.
It was, indeed, an excellent manoeuvre, and but for the
interference of the enemy it would have been successful. As
early, however, as 10 a.m. on the 23rd, the enemy were reported
in Fins, a small village near the boundary between the Fifth
Army and the 47th Division, and within sight of the Green line
at that point. The arrival of the Naval Division on the Green
line to the left at noon, and the activities of a detachment of
the Divisional Machine-Gun Battalion (Lt.-Colonel Macready,
R.M.),f sent out at 3 p.m. to keep the enemy from moving
from Fins against the infantry brigades, kept the enemy quiet
on the divisional front during the remaining hours of daylight.
The efforts of the divisions on the right appear, however, to
have been less successful. As early as 5 p.m. on the 23rd, the
* 1.e., two battalions of the 188th, two of the 189thand two of the 190th Brigade.
f A fourth M.G. Company (the 223rd) had been added to the Divisional
establishment in October, 1917, and at the beginning of March the four companies
in every division were formed into battalions and recognized officially as Divisional
troops. The new company was commanded by Lieutenant Dewhurst, R.N.V.R.,
and largely officered by officers of the disbanded R.N.V.R. companies.


7th Royal Fusiliers (Lt.-Colonel Malone) at Lechelle were
attacked from their right, and forced to fall back on the Bus-
Rocquigny road, in touch with the Headquarters of the 189th
and 190th Brigades. These activities of the enemy, several
thousand yards behind our front line troops, put a different
complexion on the situation. From now onward it grew
hourly worse.
After dusk on the 23rd, no effective touch could be main-
tained with the 47th Division, even on the Green line, though
several battalions of this division marched back past the
division’s flank, directed, it was learnt, towards a destina-
tion further west. To meet the situation, the battalion com-
manders of the Drake, Artists and Bedfords decided to with-
draw from the Green line on the right of the divisional front
and to form a defensive flank in front of the R.E. dump in
Ytres, and thence along the Ytres-Bus road. The Marine
Battalions, the Hood, and the right companies of the Drake
Battalion held their ground in the Green line. The left flank
of the Division was covered by the 2nd Division, while the
Anson and the reserve brigade of the 2nd Division were in
position to the north of the Bertincourt-Bus road, facing
south* (like the 190th Brigade) against an attack from the
direction of Lechelle.
By 10 p.m. on the 23rd it was discovered beyond doubt
that the 47th Division had withdrawn, and that the Naval
Division flank was exposed. Almost at the same time the
R.E. and ammunition dump in Ytres was blown up (whether
under Corps arrangements or not is uncertain), and the Artists*
Rifles suffered severely. This disaster, terrifying as it was
to troops compelled to hold the line in front of the dump,
probably prevented the enemy from exploiting their success
on the right by a frontal attack in the full light of the blazing
wreckage. They penetrated, however, into Bus, when the
Hawke Battalion Headquarters, who had been kept uninformed
of the situation, were inconsiderately interrupted at dinner,
and forced to withdraw their battalion to the outskirts. Here
they took up a position covering the exits from the village to
north-west, in which they were to* do valuable service a few
hours later.
Such, then, was the situation at midnight on March 23rd.
* See map. The Green line, of course, faced east.
279
The Allied Defensive of 1918


Deprived, without notice, whether by superior force, faulty
dispositions or the errors of subordinates, of all protection to
their right flank, the Division Still held a line of retreat
north of Bus along the Bertincourt-Barastre road. All
parties of the enemy striking northward against this line
were temporarily held by the Drake Battalion and the 190th
Brigade on the Ytres-Bus road, by the 7th Fusiliers on the
Bus-Rocquigny road, and by the Hawke Battalion, north-
west of Bus, covering the road from Bus to Barastre. Nor
were the infantry unsupported; with the Fusiliers and the
Hawke were the 249th and 248th Field Companies of Engineers,
and some of the 14th Worcesters (Pioneer Battalion); the
247th Field Company with the balance of the Worcesters were
at Barastre. The Divisional Artillery were still in action across
the Bus-Rocquigny road, and the Machine-Gun Battalion had
most of its guns in the Green line itself.
Nevertheless, as was pointed out to the Yth Corps, the
position, momentarily secured owing to the initiative and
tenacity of the officers and men on the ground, could not be
indefinitely maintained. On the other hand, a strong and
determined counter-attack in the direction of the exposed
flank might not only relieve the pressure on the Division itself,
but materially assist the 47th Division and the left of the
Fifth Army. The Corps’ answer was an instruction to the
Division to hold on, with information that the 17th Division
would counter-attack in the morning.
And, indeed, some such relief was sorely needed. The men
had been fighting, marching and digging since dawn on the
21st. By reason of the tactics decided on, and the fidelity
with which they had been carried out, the successive retire-
ments had all been difficult and dangerous, and the pressure
of the enemy constant. Now, sleep and hot food were the
essentials, and they were out of the question, with the enemy
attacking from the east, the south and the west, while only
the 2nd Division stood between the Naval Division and the
enemy to the north.
Seldom can any more dramatic change of atmosphere have
been experienced in war. The note of these days is not the
breakdown of the infantry resistance but of the elaborate
organization behind the lines, for which the fighting strength
of the front line troops had been ruthlessly sacrificed and on
280
The Royal Naval Division


which the infantry had been taught to rely. From a military
point of view the explanation was simple enough. The enemy
had cut across our communications. But it is worth while,
none the less, to try to realize what this actually meant to
the fighting troops. In the first place there were no rations ;
but for the fact that a reasonably stocked canteen at Ytres
had been abandoned by the men in charge, the shortage
of food would have been serious. More important, there
were no working parties, and no carrying parties. The trench
mortar batteries simply faded out of the picture, buried their
guns, and joined up as infantry. There was no place for
them in the warfare of the moment. The 47th Division
Machine-Gun Battalion had been able to cover the Division’s
flank for some hours on the 23rd because Commander Beak,
by force rather than persuasion, induced some infantry from
another division, who were retiring, to carry up ammunition
to them. But from now onwards, even machine guns could
only operate within distances over which men could carry
ammunition and remain fit, at the end, for active and con-
tinuous fighting. The difficulties of the artillery were even
greater, for they were cut off from their reserves of ammuni-
tion* and could not in the circumstances put down barrages
with the frequency or intensity to which the infantry had
grown perhaps too much accustomed. Still more extraordinary
in its effects was the breakdown of communications, either by
telephone or runner, which left the local commanders in ignor-
ance of the situation on the flanks, to their front and to
their rear. Even brigade staffs could not get in touch with
higher formations. From a great railway centre like Rocquigny
the whole of staff had withdrawn, taking
everything portable, and leaving not even a telephone behind.
The result was that the only people who knew from observa-
tion what the situation was could neither direct their own
troops how to meet it nor enable those with troops still under
their control to do so.
At 8 a.m. on the 24th, orders did indeed reach the Division
from the Vth Corps to withdraw, the intention being that
the line Rocquigny-Barastre should be held by the 17th and
* The Divisional Ammunition Column had lost their wagons at Etricourt,
which had been entered by the enemy before the Naval Division had retired.
The loss was in part due to the system, here proved to be mistaken, of having
the wagons and horses of the D.A.C. separate.


47th Divisions, while the 2nd and Naval Divisions withdrew to
an undefined position in the rear. The orders were issued
too late. At 5 a.m., long before they had reached the front
line troops (they never did reach the battalions of the 189th
and 190th Brigades in the Green line and only reached the
188th Brigade at 8 a.m.), the Germans put down a barrage
on Ytres, and a machine gun firing through the Nissen Hut
where the 189th Brigade Headquarters were breakfasting at
Rocquigny showed that the enemy meant to roll up the flank
of the division, long before these nicely calculated moves, which
looked so opportune from Corps Headquarters, could be
carried out.
The situation in the Green line was critical. On the
left of the line, the two Marine Battalions, though attacked
only from the front, had suffered heavily through the night,
from artillery and machine-gun fire at close range.* In the
centre and on the right the situation was even worse, for the
enemy were closing in on all sides, and the Hood Battalion, in
the Green line itself, were enfiladed from their right, and forced
to retire behind the village. By 7 a.m. on the 24th, as no
orders had been received, it was decided, at a conference of
the six battalion commanders, that a withdrawal could not
be longer delayed. How impossible the situation was can be
seen from the fact that an enemy observation balloon was
actually over Ytres at this time, and his artillery were able
to fire at our infantry over open sights at a few hundred
yards’ range. The decision arrived at was that the 190th
and 188th Brigades should retire first, moving north of Bus
and Barastre in the direction of Villers au Flos. The 189th
Brigade would follow after acting as a rearguard. Whether
the enemy were north of Bus was uncertain (as a matter of
fact they were not, except for an isolated patrol), but it was
evident that, even from Bus, the retreat would be seriously
interfered with. The battalions of the 190th and 189th
Brigades, moving from Ytres, had to cross a very open stretch
of ground north-west of Bus, where in happier days the divi-
sions in this part had been in the habit of holding their race
♦ Lieut.-Col. Farquharson (commanding the 2nd Marines) and Captain Gibbins
were killed at this time. 2nd Lieutenant E. W. Collier and 2nd Lieutenant
S. N. Witting of the same battalion had been killed during the retreat to the
Green line. Lieut.-Commander Coote, R.N.V.R., succeeded temporarily to the
command of the 2nd R.M. battalion.


meetings. To give what protection was possible to the
retreat, Colonel Macready sent eight machine guns under Major
Moir on to the Bus-Hocquigny road, and twelve guns under
Lieutenant Anderson, R.N.V.R., to the cemetery between Les
Boeufs and Le Transloy to prevent any sudden incursion of
the enemy from the east should the Corps fail, as might be
expected, to hold the Rocquigny line. The Anson, Hawke
and 7th Fusilier Battalions were also still in a position to assist
the retirement of their brigades, although the 14th Worcesters
and 247th Field Company of Engineers had been ordered back
from Barastre (where they had driven off the enemy patrols
from Bus at 2 a.m.) to Villers au Flos. The three Brigade
Headquarters had, while the fighting at Ytres was in progress,
moved to Beaulencourt, where was General Lawrie with his
staff. The Brigadiers themselves, north-west of Bus, were
waiting to direct their battalions to an appointed rendezvous
between Beaulencourt and Le Transloy.
It is curious to note that these dispositions, which enabled
the whole division to withdraw with no effective assistance
from other formations, were the result of no general orders, but
rather of independent action taken by many local commanders,
and by the Divisional and Brigade Staffs, acting at the time
independently, and in touch only with isolated bodies of troops.
The Commander-in-Chief singles out for special mention the
work of Lieutenant Anderson’s machine gunners* at Les Boeufs.
This detachment did heroic work, and not only assisted their
own division but covered the retirement of the guns, transport
and infantry rearguards of at least two other divisions.
But for the resolution of this detachment, a serious disaster
would have been inevitable. Equally important, however,
was the stand of the infantry in the Green line and on the
Ytres-Bus road; and the work of the Fusiliers and the 249th
Field Company on the Bus-Rocquigny road, to which position
they were withdrawn by General Hutchison, must not be
forgotten.
From 8 a.m. till noon on this morning of the 24th an
observer stationed on the outskirts of Bus could see small
bodies moving north-west from Bertincourt and Ytres in com-
panies, platoons, or sections, fired at by enemy machine
guns from Bus and other points to the north, but moving
♦ From the 190th Machine-Gun Company (Major Lindsay, M.G.C.).


steadily away from the immediate point of danger. To his
front in Bus and in the Green line, to his right in Lechelle,
and on the outskirts of Rocquigny, were the enemy; those in
Rocquigny, engaged till now by the 109th Brigade, being held
in check only by the individual efforts of a number of tanks,
and of isolated parties of the 47th Division and the 99th
Brigade. Behind him, near Barastre, were the 17th Division,
through whom the retirement was to take place. Gradually,
during the morning, the whole division was concentrated near
the Le Transloy sucrerie , the last to come in being the Hawke
Battalion, from their position on the outskirts of Bus, which
they had been ordered by General de Free to maintain, till the
Drake and Hood Battalions had filed past to the north of
them.
All three brigades of the Divisional Artillery had by now,
like the infantry, been forced to fall back, as the enemy were
active in all directions round their positions, and they were
short of ammunition. The 317th Brigade extricated them-
selves from their positions covering Ytres with the loss of
only one section, and took up a position covering Beaulencourt
and the appointed concentration area. The 223rd and 88th
Brigades, retiring across the exposed right flank by Le Transloy,
were less fortunate and, coming under machine-gun fire, lost
all their horses, suffered heavy losses and had to abandon
many of their guns.
The Hood, Drake, Artists and Bedfords had also suffered
serious losses, as the actual withdrawal had taken place in full
view of the enemy, and those wounded in the course of it
could not be brought away.* Moreover, at least two parties
moved away in the direction of Bus, and found themselves
caught between two fires and unable, at close range, to
make good their escape. Such incidents were, of course,
almost inevitable, since the enemy’s position and strength
behind the Green line was not known, and the first efforts to
find a line of retreat were in the nature of a leap in the dark.
The Hawke Battalion, too, had their own troubles, for in
rear of their position was a steep bank on which the enemy’s
machine guns in Bus were trained. The battalion crossed it,
• Lieutenant Nobbs, R.N.V.R., Sub-Lieutenant F. A. Taylor and Sub-
Lieutenant W. G. Simpson of the Hood Battalion were killed on the morning
of the 24th. Very many officers also had to be left behind wounded, among
them being Lieut.-Commander Turrell, R.N.V.R., of the Drake Battalion.


however, in single file under cover of their Lewis guns with
hardly a casualty, and were not otherwise pressed.
Between Villers au Flos and Le Transloy, covered by the
17th Division and 2nd Division, the different Brigades were
reorganized and re-formed. Men were able to fill their water
bottles and draw on an opportune dump of rations. A rest of
two hours was snatched by the rank and file and the junior
officers, while the next move was considered.
No definite plan appeared to have been formulated by the
Vth Corps, to whom General Lawrie telephoned and so, at
3 p.m., when the 17th and the 2nd Divisions were already
planning a further withdrawal, and the noise of firing from
Les Boeufs (where Lieutenant Anderson’s guns were in action)
showed that the enemy were pressing ever further to the south,
General Lawrie himself ordered the division to fall back. The
new line was to run from Martinpuich to Bazentin le Petit,
a defensible position six miles to the rear, on which it was
hoped to make touch with the right of the Corps and the left
of the Fifth Army. Optimistic though this view turned out
to be, the orders saved the division. The long distance across
the old Somme battlefield, which was covered in the next four
hours, could not later have been crossed without paralysing
loss, and if the Division had turned to fight far short of the
Thiepval heights it must have been cut off.
The march began at 3 p.m. with the three brigades in
parallel columns at 1,000 yards interval, the 188th on the left,
the 189th in the centre and the 190th on the flank, with the
7th Royal Fusiliers as flank guard. The columns moved
straight across country, passing just north of Gueudecourt and
Flers. Throughout the march, the enemy could be seen
pressing forward on the open flank, and, but for the machine
guns at Les Boeufs, which fired more than 25,000 rounds during
the afternoon and held up the enemy’s advance for at least
three hours, the bold manoeuvre would have been less com-
pletely successful.
As the Division was halted about 5 p.m. in the neighbour-
hood of High Wood, General Lawrie received orders from the
Vth Corps to take up a position, not in front of Martinpuich,
as he had proposed, but in front of High Wood. The 189th
Brigade happened to be halted almost exactly on the spot,
and were ordered at once to choose and take up a position.


The 188th Brigade were to come up on their left and get in
touch with the 17th Division round Eaucourt L’Abbaye. As
the 189th Brigade, with whom were still the 248th Field Com-
pany, R.E., were moving forward, they were met by a crowd of
six or seven hundred men of more than one division, retreating
with more haste than discretion, and threatening to spread
a general confusion. General de Free, who was standing by
talking to Commander Ellis and Commander Beak, stopped an
officer who was occupying a leading position in the retirement,
and asked him where he was going. The officer’s reply was that
he was looking for his revolver. His need was supplied, and
he and his party were fallen in on the left of the Division.
Hardly had this difficulty been overcome, when a large patrol
of the enemy crept up quite close to the 189th Brigade—
it was now dusk—as they were waiting to move off to the
new line, and began firing into them with machine guns and
shouting in the hope of spreading panic. The patrol was
apparently working in conjunction with enemy aircraft, for
they sent up coloured lights, and immediately their planes
swooped down and dropped six bombs on the brigade, causing
a good many casualties.
The manoeuvre, however, failed of its main purpose. The
patrol was driven off and the brigade got into position, the
Drake on the south-east corner of High Wood and the Hawke
on the left, in touch, in the early morning, with the Anson
Battalion of the 188th Brigade. With the Drake, in the
front line, were the 248th Field Company R.E., and, in support,
the Hood and Ist and 2nd Marine Battalions. The supports
with the Brigade Headquarters spent the night at Martinpuich,
but advanced at dawn to a position on a ridge half-way between
Martinpuich and High Wood. One company of the Hood
was detached to cover the Drake right flank, as the 47th
Division had retired during the night. The 190th Brigade,
who had continued their march the previous afternoon to Cour-
celette, were in divisional reserve.
So disposed, the Division was to sustain, again virtually un-
aided, the second attack in force directed against this part
of the British line.
“ At 0.80 a.m.,” writes General de Free, “ the enemy could
be seen advancing from Flers towards High Wood, and at
9 a.m, considerable movement was seen behind the enemy’s


line, and patrols were seen moving forward round our right
flank. At 10 a.m. the attack became general.
“ At this time there was very little artillery fire, and it
was quite possible to ride about on a horse fairly close up to
the front line, and to keep horses fairly close up under cover
in folds of the ground.
“ The advance of the German Army was very interesting
to watch and was exceedingly skilfully carried out. The front
was covered by large patrols each carrying one or two light
machine guns. The use of light signals by these patrols was
most remarkable. . They signalized each stage in their advance
by sending up a Verey light, with the result that the general
effect given was the advance of a line of light signals going
up as far as the eye could reach. There may have been some
slight disadvantage in this, in that it showed their position
to their enemy, but on the other hand it showed every man
that he was supported on his right and left, and this was a far
more decisive factor.
“ The large patrols mentioned above everywhere probed
our front, and if they found a gap, they at once pressed through
it and sent up a success signal. The troops in rear at once
moved to it and poured through the gap, and'in a few minutes
our flank was turned at that place. So far as could be seen
the majority of the enemy’s infantry on this part of the front
had abandoned their rifles and simply acted as ammunition
carriers to their numerous light machine guns. This seems to
be borne out by the extraordinarily persistent volume of fire
which they kept up from these guns. In no other way could
it have been accomplished. In keeping up this persistency of
fire they were aided by the very slow, but amply sufficient
rate of fire of their guns.”
At the beginning of this action, one of the most determined
and well-defined engagements of the many fought by the
Division in the retreat, they were supported on their left flank
by another division. About 9.30 a.m., this division withdrew,
and from that time till nightfall the infantry brigades of the
Naval Division were unsupported, except by their own machine
guns and the divisional artillery, who did fine work from their
new positions on Thiepval ridge. It remained none the less
an infantry battle of an old-fashioned character, with the
Divisional General and his staff directing operations from a


hill behind the front. In the earlier engagements the enemy
had been working round the right flank only and the brunt of
the battle had fallen on the 190th and 189th Brigades. Now
there was a gap in the British line on both flanks, and when
the Division on the right retired, “ C ” Company of the Anson
Battalion (Lieutenant Walker, R.N.V.R.), on the extreme left
of the Division, was immediately surrounded. A brilliant
counter-attack organized and led by Lieut.-Col. Kirkpatrick
enabled this company to fight its way out, but by 10.15 a.m.
the Brigade had had to fall back, and take up a position,
facing north-east, on the left flank of the Artists’ Rifles and
7th Royal Fusiliers at Courcelette.
On the right of the line, the enemy, though in equal strength,
could not get round the flank so easily, since the earlier develop-
ment of the situation had enabled full precautions to be taken.
At 10 a.m., four Vickers machine guns from the Divisional
Machine-Gun Battalion had been placed at the disposal of the
189th Brigade, and sent forward so as to cover the open flank,
and, at 11 a.m., the 4th Bedfords (190th Infantry Brigade)
were also sent by the Divisional commander to reinforce the
brigade. The Battalion was ordered to prolong our line,
echeloned behind the right of the Drake. The Drake and Hawke
carried out a local counter-attack to assist the advance of
the Bedfords, and captured two machine guns and some
prisoners, besides effecting an advance of some 250 yards.
This success was bought, however, at heavy price, as Com-
mander Ellis, R.N.V.R., here received a wound from which he
died a few days later. His work for the Hawke Battalion and
for the Division had been memorable, and is remembered.
For an hour and a half the 189th Brigade and the Bedfords
held on to these advanced positions. Though hard pressed,
they could have maintained themselves longer, but the situa-
tion on the left flank was more serious, and General Lawrie
ordered a withdrawal to a position in front of Courcelette, where
a further stand was to be made in conjunction with the 188th
Brigade. Owing to the conditions of the fighting, the ex-
haustion of the men, and the shortage of officers, the arrange-
ments for mutual support and withdrawal in stages proved
difficult to carry out, and heavy losses were experienced, but
the Brigade, halted on the Albert-Bapaume road with its
left at Courcelette Mill, was quickly reorganized, and another


stand was made, this time by the 188th Brigade.* Not until
8.30 p.m. was a further retirement on Thiepval decided on, as
there was no sign of support on either flank. In this retire-
ment the 190th and 188th Brigades bore the burden of the
fighting, the 189th Brigade being withdrawn first. The
rearguard to the 190th Brigade was formed by the 4th
Bedfords, the 249th Field Company (Major Edgar, R.E.) and
“ C ” Company of the 14th Worcesters.
While the infantry and engineers took up their new positions
at Thiepval, at last unmolested by the enemy, the Divisional
Artillery retired across the Ancre, and, at 2 a.m. on the 26th,
under orders from the Vth Corps, the whole Division followed.
They found themselves, by a curious stroke of irony, once more
im Hamel, from which they had advanced to their first victory
on French soil in November, two years before. The enemy
did not press the retirement and did not even attack our old
position at Thiepval, till noon the next day, but the retirement
was dictated by the position to the north, arising, in the words
of Lieut.-Col. Boraston, from “ the hurried falling back of
individual units ” between Hamel and Hebuterne, “ in what
came to be known among the irreverent as the Pys to Pas
Point to Point.” f To the south, moreover, the enemy were
already on the outskirts of Albert and threatening to repeat
their old manoeuvres of the early morning of the 24th, when
they had advanced from the south to strike at the Division’s
line of retreat. This movement had to be forestalled. We had
reached the limit beyond which anything in the nature of a
further general retreat was impossible, if the unity of the allied
line was to be maintained. A counter-attack in force -Was
out of the question. We had no alternative, therefore,
but to fall back to a position in which we could co-operate,
effectively and at once, with the divisions on the flanks in a
resolute defensive. Such a position was evidently the line of
the Ancre.
The line taken up by the Naval Division on the early
morning of the 26th was, on the left of the divisional front,
our 1916 front line running from the Ancre in front of Hamel,
and was held by the 189th Brigade. From Hamel, south, our
1915 line had crossed the Ancre on to the Thiepval Plateau.
* It was here that Lieut.-Col. Kirkpatrick was mortally wounded,
t “ Sir Douglas Haig’s Command.” Vol. 11.
19


The new position followed the line of the Ancre, and the out-
post line of the 188th and 190th Brigades was in Aveluy Wood.
The Divisional Artillery were in position at Engelbelmer, save
for one 18-pounder, concealed in the grounds of Mesnil Chateau
close to General de Pree’s headquarters. This gun carried
out effective sniping over open sights at any of the enemy
who showed themselves on Thiepval ridge.
About midday a very powerful attack from the north-east
was made on the 2nd Division, on the immediate left of the
divisional front. “ The attack,” says General de Free, “ must
have been carried out by a large force, as it stretched as far
as the eye could see and came on in two or three lines. It was
preceded by large patrols, and each line appeared to consist
of battalions with a wide interval between them, some moving
in a sort of scattered, irregular crowd, others marching in
fours down a road, as suited them best. On the high ground
on their right near Auchonvillers they seemed to come on
well, and to come right up to the New Zealand Division who had
just come fresh into the line there. Down near the river
they came on till they reached the crest of the ridge between
Beaucourt and Beaumont Hamel. There one of our Field
Batteries got on to them and burst some shrapnel in their
faces. At once the leading men ran back under cover. This
happened once or twice and they never came on again in num-
bers. They kept behind the ridge and from there for several
hours they dribbled their men in ones and twos into what was
known as the Station Valley. That seemed to finish the
attack for the day on this side.”
Another enemy attack had been delivered, and with greater
success, to the south near Albert, and the clear intention of
the enemy was to hold us on the Ancre front round Hamel,
and push out north-west from Albert and cut our communica-
tions once more. The plan almost succeeded, as we shall
see.
On the night of the 26th-27th the Naval Division handed
over their line to the 12th Division and retired to Engelbelmer
(189th Brigade) and Martinsart (188th Brigade), while the
190th Brigade took up a defensive position from Aveluy Wood
to Bouzincourt with the 17th Division on their left. The
object of this manoeuvre was to hold the enemy should they
attempt to debouch north from Albert, where the situation was


still obscure. The 188th and 190th Brigades, while in these
positions, were under the orders of the 12th Division.,
By 1 a.m., all three brigades were in position, and General
de Free, having handed over to the G.O.C. 37th Brigade,
started off on horseback with his Brigade Major for Engel-
belmer. What followed can best be told in his own words.
“We rode to the corner where the road turns out of Mesnil
village towards Engelbelmer, and as we reached it a party
of men, evidently a German patrol, fired into us from the
bank at about five yards’ range and began shouting. For-
tunately, no one was hit, and the party charged round the
corner only to find themselves held up by a wire stretched
across the road. We drove our horses into the wire and it
gave, and our whole party clattered down the road towards
Engelbelmer. On reaching that place it was found that one
battalion had already gone into billets, but that the other
two were still waiting to go in. Orders were issued to these
to stand to, and to put outposts on the roads coming into the
village from the east, as the situation was by no means clear.
In a short time an agitated officer, with thirty men of the
brigade which had relieved us, arrived and said that there were
2,000 Germans in Mesnil, and that they were marching on
Engelbelmer. This was very awkward, as the whole brigade
had less than a quarter of this number of very tired men.
Still, the situation had to be met, and the two battalions were
ordered to line up on each side of the Mesnil road a short
distance outside the village, with orders to let the enemy up
close in the dark and then fire into him and charge with the
bayonet. As it turned out the enemy never came on, owing
to a most gallant feat of arms by the 188th Brigade.
“ The enemy had crossed the Ancre in small parties at
Authville about 1 a.m., and penetrated to Martinsart and
Mesnil. The news reached Brigadier-General Coleridge (188th
Brigade), whose troops had been concentrated in Martinsart
in support of the 36th Infantry Brigade. He at once aroused
his brigade and arranged a counter-attack. The Anson
Battalion (Commander Buckle, R.N.V.R.) were to advance
on Mesnil, the 2nd Marines (Lt.-Commander Coote, R.N.V.R.)
were to clear Aveluy Wood on their right flank and the Ist
Marines (Lt.-Colonel Fletcher, R.M.L.1.) were to move in
19*


support. The attack was launched at 2.50 a.m. and met with
immediate success. The enemy, in spite of their numerous
machine guns, broke and fled in disorder, many screaming and
climbing the trees in Aveluy Wood in their panic. Fifty
prisoners and thirteen machine guns were taken and many
were killed. This frustrated the most dangerous attempt
which the Germans made to get through on this front. It
showed what could be done by a sudden and vigorous coun-
ter-attack, even under the most depressing circumstances. It
also spoke volumes for the men of this Brigade, that, worn
out with fatigue, after days of retirement in which there had
been little cause for encouragement, they could turn on their
pursuers and drive them before them like chaff.”
When the news of this success reached General de Free at
7 a.m. on the 27th, he withdrew his outposts from the ap-
proaches to Engelbelmer, and his brigade was able at last to
enjoy a few hours’ rest. So also were the 188th Brigade when
they returned to Martinsart. It was far otherwise with the
190th Brigade, who at 7.10 a.m. were called out, in conjunction
with the 17th Division, to drive back the enemy from the
Aveluy-Bouzincourt road on Albert.
The enemy were not in any great strength, but the confused
situation favoured their tactics, and they had moved out of
Albert in small parties, which were endeavouring to turn the
flank of our position on the Ancre. The ability of the Vth
Corps to spare troops to deal with the manoeuvre without any
pre-occupation for the continuity of our line determined the
all-important issue. In the course of a day’s fighting, severe at
times but not continuous, the enemy were driven back nearly
two miles to the very outskirts of Albert. The burden of the
fighting, as far as the Naval Division was concerned, fell on
the Bedfords* and the Artists’ Rifles, brilliantly supported by
machine-gun detachments under Major Denroche and Lieut.
Pearson, R.N.V.R.f
The importance of the success achieved in this part of the
front was made clear when the enemy, at 5.30 p.m. of the same
* In this attack the 190th Brigade suffered a severe loss in the death of Lieut.-
Col. Collins Wells, of the Bedfords. For his heroism throughout the retreat
this resolute officer was awarded the Victoria Cross.
f For his brilliant work on this occasion Lieutenant Pearson was awarded
the Military Cross.


day (the 27th), delivered a strong attack on our position in the
centre, in the neighbourhood of Hamel. Here the line was
held by the 36th and 37th Brigades of the 12th Division.
Had the flank of this division not been already safeguarded,
our whole line would have been involved in disaster. Even
as it was, Hamel was lost, and the enemy got within 1,000
yards of Martinsart, but for the second time in twelve hours
General Coleridge’s brigade came to the support of the front
line troops and the enemy were finally held on the Mesnil ridge.
After the fighting of the 26th and 27th, it was felt advisable
to relieve the 12th Division. After the 2nd Division had
done a brief turn in the line, the sector was taken over on
April 3rd by the Naval Division. On April 15th, however,
the reorganized 17th Division was ready to take its turn
“in the line, and the Division marched back to the Puchevillers
area to renew its acquaintance with civilization.
Almost at the beginning of their turn in the line, on April sth,
the Division had been subjected to a fierce attack, in which
the 7th Royal Fusiliers sustained very heavy losses, and had
to be reinforced by the Ist Marines. The next day the enemy
returned to attack, and got into our line on the left of the
47th Division, but the 2nd Marines were sent up to reinforce
the depleted Ist Battalion, and after a day’s hard fighting,
in which Colonel Fletcher, R.M.L.1., Major Clutterbuck,
R.M.L.1.,* and Captain Newling rendered especially distin-
guished service, the position was recaptured, and with it fifty-
six prisoners and ten machine guns. After this, the enemy’s
activity died away and the normal conditions of trench warfare
slowly re-established themselves. It was an uphill task,
much as it must have been in the first days of trench warfare
on the Aisne. All reserves of engineers’ stores had been lost
in the retirement, and trench boards, dug-outs, and all the
elaborate paraphernalia of stationary warfare were lacking.
The Division, however, had been strongly reinforced, and the
line was left more or less defensible by the date the Division
was relieved.
So ended on this front, in a return to the earlier methods
on the earlier battlefield, the first great German offensive of
1918. Looking back, even over four years of warfare, the
* Who had succeeded Lt.-Commander Coote in command of the 2nd H.M.
Battalion.


fifteen days of fighting, from March 21st to April sth, have an
outstanding importance. If our own earlier actions on the
same front had indeed been victories, we had suffered a defeat;
but there was not lacking the suspicion that we had yet been
victorious. The war of movement had opened ; and it was
clear once and for all that, man for man, officer for officer, the
British infantry were superior in tenacity, in resilience, in
personality, to the enemy. The Allies had not, of course,
by any means regained the initiative. To the north and south,
on the Arras front, on the Lys and in Champagne, the struggle
was to be renewed, perhaps even more bitterly. But the air
was cleared. The first German stroke had been parried, and
on this front at any rate there would be no further retreat.
The individual contribution to the general result, always
difficult to identify amid the too voluminous, uncritical and
ex parte records, is, in the case of the operations under review,
almost impossible to appraise. Never was there, however,
more scope for personal gallantry and initiative, and it is certain
that the hour usually found the man. To bring a brigade,
a battalion, or a company through a period such as that which
began on March 21st was, indeed, in itself a feat of arms.
Battalion commanders with their headquarters fought in
the line, but they did not sacrifice their responsibility, and this
dual r6le threw on them an especial strain which merits recog-
nition. The action fought by six battalions on the Green line
through the night of the 28rd-24th, and the rearguard action
of the Drake Battalion* on the Ytres-Bus road on the morning
of the 24th, are instances of initiative which had determining
results. The divisional retreat to High Wood and the stand
there made on the morning of the 25th were instances, on the
contrary, where the Divisional and Brigade staffs personally
directed operations “on the ground,” a practice too often
relegated to field days behind the lines. But always the main
burden fell on the junior officers and men of the infantry,
the engineers and the machine-gun battalion : on their
constancy depended the issue.
Never did the men of the Division show more clearly how
♦ For this skilful operation Commander Beak was awarded the D.S.O. The
same distinction fell to Lieut.-Col. Fletcher, and Major Clutterbuck,
for their handling of the two Marine battalions. Commander Buckle,
for his fine work in command of the Anson on the 27th and 28tb received a bar
to his D.S.O.


Thiepval Ridge.




superior was the quality of their discipline, than when the
189th Brigade were operating round High Wood on the evening
of March 24th. Details of at least two divisions came among
them in considerable disorder, and enemy patrols, firing on the
whole body of troops, endeavoured by every artifice to spread
the panic. During the first minutes when the confusion was
at its height the brigade, which had been formed up in mass
to be marched off to its positions, remained in parade formation,
apparently indifferent to its surroundings. Then, under
orders, detachments moved off to engage and drive off the
enemy. Such a quality is worth everything in the confusion
of a retreat, for it enables a battle to be fought to a finish,
even where the fine of retreat is open. The divisions who did
this, saved the British Army; where these divisions were,
there were no gaps.
The stand to which this incident was the prelude was one
of the two marked contributions of the Division as a unit to
the ultimately successful defensive. As Colonel Boraston
points out in his chapter on these operations in Mr. Dewar’s
book on “ Sir Douglas Haig’s Command,” the danger, in the
afternoon of March 24th, was acute, not only because of the gaps
between the IVth and Vth Corps and the Vth Corps and the
Fifth Army, but because of gaps in the line of the Vth Corps
itself. The Division on the right of the Drake Battalion
retired at 1 a.m. on the 25th; and the Division on the left
of the Anson Battalion at 9.30 a.m. The 2nd Division (accord-
ing to Mr. Everard Wyrall) retired at 1 p.m. The Naval
Division, covering the Courcelette-Pozi&res ridge, the Thiepval
plateau and the all-important Ancre crossings at Hamel, was
fighting in High Wood till 3.80 p.m., and between that line
and Thiepval, till 6 p.m. It is impossible to resist the con-
clusion that the halt called to the enemy’s advance by the
Naval Division on this afternoon was of real importance.
The other important incident in the week’s fighting was
the action of the Division, on the night of the 26th-27th and
throughout the following day, in counter-attacking the Germans
in Mesnil and Martinsart and the north of Albert, each time
with decisive results. These achievements were the more
remarkable because they were the climax to five days of in-
cessant fighting, which had left the battalions disastrously
depleted. Between the 13th and the 27th March, the losses of


the Division (including those from gas) were in the neighbour-
hood of 6,000 officers and men. In all this time no reinforce-
ments had reached the battalions. The average strength of
the battalions engaged in the counter-attacks of the 27th were
not more than 250, including transport and other headquarter
details ; yet they succeeded.
The price of victory was high. Four skilful, experienced
and intrepid battalion commanders, Lt.-Colonel Farquharson
of the Royal Marines, Lt.-Colonel Collins Wells of the Bedfords
(whose gallantry from the first hours of the offensive until he
was mortally wounded in the advance on Albert on the 27th had
earned for him the greatest of military distinctions), Lt.-Colonel
Kirkpatrick of the Anson, and Commander Bernard Ellis of
the Hawke, had been killed. Others who had fallen in the
later stages of the retirement were Lt. D. W. K. Hall and
Lt. G. Wharf of the Ist Marine Battalion, 2nd Lieut. J. A.
Smith of the 2nd Marine Battalion, Lieut. C. G. Walker, M.C.,
R.N.V.R. (whose company had so distinguished itself in front
of High Wood), Lieut. G. J. Ridler, R.N.V.R., Sub-Lieut.
A. H. S. Kenny, Sub-Lieut. Caton, Sub-Lieut. Dunning, Sub-
Lieut. Mallett and Sub-Lieut. Hepworth of the Anson, Sub-
Lieut. D. Beatty, Sub-Lieut. G. H. Powell and Sub-Lieut.
R. Pawson of the Drake, Lieut. F. C. Forrester, M.C., R.N.V.R.,
of the Hawke, and Lieut. Grant Dalton, M.C., of the Hood.
Among the wounded were Lt.-Colonel Malone, D.S.O.
(7th Royal Fusiliers), Major Leatham (2nd in Command of
the Artists’ Rifles, who had done fine service on the flank of
the Division in the Green line), Staff-Surgeon McCracken,
D. 5.0., R.N., of the Hood Battalion, who had served with
the Hood from the first days of the Gallipoli campaign, and
Lieut. B. B. Rackham, M.C., R.N.V.R., Adjutant of the Hawke
Battalion, who had served continuously with the battalion
since the autumn of 1915.
With such losses, the work of reorganization was heavy,
and was made no lighter by the inevitably constant demands
for working parties to construct defensive positions in depth
on the new front. The tasks of working parties were even
more arduous now than they had been in November, 1916,
although the weather was dry; for the increased artillery
activity, the constant menace of the hostile aeroplanes, and the
dangers of gas bombardments made it necessary to put reserve


divisions much further behind the lines, and so to increase the
length of the daily marches to and from the front. The Division
was, however, fortunate to find at Toutencourt the ranges and
equipment of the Fifth Army School, and the reinforced
battalions (at the end of April they had reached an average
strength of twenty-five officers and eight hundred men) were
able to get, for the first time since December, 1916, some
really useful training. A divisional musketry competition
even was held, and won by the Artists* Rifles, who thus
maintained their peace-time reputation.
With the completion of this training on May Bth, this
chapter will appropriately close. With the hardening of the
British front west of the Ancre and south of the Somme, the
first of the German offensives had ended, and, on this part of
the front, the work of organizing the army against the return
of the initiative had begun.


CHAPTER XVI
THE ADVANCE TO VICTORY
TO those who watched from across the Channel the tre-
mendous struggle on the Lys at the end of April, and
the no less anxious days at the end of May and the beginning
of June, when the enemy crossed the Aisne, the menace of
defeat first observed in the dark days of the March retreat
seemed to grow through the summer of 1918 ever more threaten-
ing. The climax of popular anxiety was reached in the middle
of July when the enemy renewed their attack on the French
on a front of fifty miles east and west of Rheims, and crossed
the Marne for the first time since 1914. The eye of the spec-
tator was riveted throughout these months on the threatened
areas, and missed the unbroken line of trenches from Arras to
Albert, and in the centre and on the right of the French line,
where many British and French Corps and the growing strength
of the American Armies were resting and reorganizing. In
the end these sectors were not the least important, for it
was here that the Allies were once more reasserting the superi-
ority of their unbroken determination against an enemy who,
as the price of his local successes, was visibly weakening over
a wider front in skill, material and resolution.
Among those to whom these summer months, for many so
anxious, were months of growing confidence and strength, was
the Naval Division, who on May Bth returned to the Hamel-
Aveluy Wood sector to relieve the 17th Division.
The period of transition from the resolute defensive, which
the enemy was still able to impose on the Division when it
first returned to the Hamel sector in May, to the resumption
of the offensive in August was not without incident, and it
remains of some historical importance even at this date.
Throughout May, Aveluy Wood was the scene of continuous




Operations
oF the
ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION
August 21st-ctober. 10th 1918.


raids by the enemy against the posts held by the 190th Brigade,
and, though no ground was permanently lost, the issue was
no better than a drawn battle. The same can be said of
the Artillery duels which made up the more serious part of
the fighting at this time. During the entire period from May
Bth to June 4th the enemy artillery activity was maintained,
and frequent and intensive bombardments were put down on
the trenches and the back areas. Raids on a large scale were
carried out by companies of the Hawke and Ist Marine Bat-
talions on May 18th,* and on the 24th by the whole strength
of the Anson, Hood and 4th Bedfords, but though the results
achieved by the Hawke and Anson Battalions were excellent,
the enemy resistance generally was such as to make raiding a
matter of hard fighting, in which the heavier losses fell as
often as not to the attacking party. This was particularly
the case with the Hood and the Bedfords on May 24th. The
results of these determined, if miniature, battles were, however,
far more than proportionate to our losses. The enemy learnt
that our strength was unbroken, and the knowledge was of
far-reaching political effect. In Germany their wives and
their children were on the verge of starvation, capable of
enduring further, but only within assignable limits of time.
The mere recrudescence of our activity, on the very scene of
their most striking success, was in the circumstances more fatal
to those hopes than many an earlier defeat. To the Division,
on the other hand, these raids, costly though they were (the
casualties in the raids of the 24th were 18 officers, f and 210
N.C.O.’s and men), represented a substantial achievement full
of promise. Actually more than half the effectives employed
had been raw recruits with no previous service in France.
That such men could take part with effect in night operations
of an intricate character against a still vigorous enemy was
as great a testimony to their own quality as to that of their
leaders. The result was all the more satisfactory, since the
heavy losses on the retreat, and still more in the subsequent
fighting for the line of the Ancre, had necessitated yet another
* In this otherwise successful operation-Sub-Lieut. R. S. Kelland of the
Hawke, and Surgeon A. L. Pearce Gould, M. 8., R.N. (Ist Marine Battalion), were
killed.
•f Of whom Sub-Lieut. J. Crowther of the Anson, and Sub-Lieut. P. W. Dann,
Sub-Lieut. E. W. Hulbert and Sub-Lieut. R. L. Stephenson of the Hood were
killed.
299
The Advance to Victory


reorganization and many changes of command. The difficulty
this time had been to find reinforcements for the Marine bat-
talions, and in the end these had been amalgamated under
Lt.-Colonel Fletcher, D. 5.0., R.M.L.L, and the 2nd Battalion,
Royal Irish Rifles (Lt.-Colonel Harrison, D. 5.0.), had been at-
tached to complete the strength of the 188th Brigade. In the
189th Brigade, Commander Jones succeeded to the command
of the Hawke, with Lieut.-Commander E. M. Lockwood as
second in command, and Lieut. R. Blackmore, M.C., R.N.V.R.,
as adjutant. In the 190th Brigade, Brigadier-General Hutchi-
son, C.M.G., D. 5.0., left the Division (in which he had served
with such distinction for almost three years), on his appointment
as Assistant Adjutant-General of the Royal Marines, and was
succeeded by Brigadier-General Leslie, D.S.O.
On June 4th, the Division were relieved and enjoyed three
weeks’ rest in the Toutencourt area. Then, moving back,
they took over the line in front of Auctionvillers, immediately
to the left of the Hamel sector. The period from June 28rd to
July 25th, which was spent by the Division on this front, was
noteworthy principally for its uneventful character, contrasting
markedly with the prevalent expectation of a further enemy
attack. To meet this a new defensive system was now in
practice; the chief feature was the abandonment of “ lines,”
and even of chains of posts, and the substitution of defensive
zones embracing a number of tactical features, the defence of
each of which was entrusted to a virtually isolated unit. This
system was, of course, never tested. There was no infantry
attack, the enemy artillery had greatly moderated their
activities, and under our own bombardments their defences
gradually crumbled away. Little or no effort was made by the
enemy to repair them. The culminating point of their de-
moralization was reached on the night of July 12th, when the
Drake Battalion, in a brilliant raid carried out by no more than
two officers (Sub-Lieut. Bolt and Sub-Lieut. Briddon) and fifty-
four men, captured twenty-two of the enemy and one machine
gun, and put out of action at least as many again, with the loss
of one man of the raiding party.* It was a fitting end to three
months of arduous training and reorganization, and a good
omen for the share the Division might expect to play in greater
* See Appendix F for a graphic account of this remarkable success kindly
furnished me by Brigadier-General dc Free.
300
The Royal Naval Division


The Church at Mesnil




events. These were now impending. On July 20th, when the
Division were still in the line, it became known that General
Foch’s counter-stroke on the Marne had thrown the enemy
back across the river, and on the 21st CMteau Thierry was
retaken. The enemy was in retreat.
From now onwards, the history of the Naval Division
assumes a new complexity. It is not only that in the great
battles which followed one another unceasingly from August
Bth to the end of the campaign the part played by any one
Division was necessarily small, but that any over-detailed
account of particular advances, however successful, would
give a false impression of the march of events. Moreover, the
events of these dramatic but laborious days were important
rather in their results, than in the manner of their achievement.
The days of attrition were over, and, in the face of a beaten
enemy, the war of positions had begun.
The historian must bow to the logic of events. His story
must move swiftly, and as the background for his narrative
must be traced the march of armies.
The first battle of the concluding allied offensive had been
directed against the enemy lodgment across the Marne. It
was a preliminary operation, fought while the Naval Division
were still in the line opposite Beaumont Hamel, with no thought
of an early close to the war. The enemy demoralization was
patent, but the extent of our own resources was naturally
unknown to the infantry in the front line ; 1919 was the
year to which the British infantry still looked for the final
offensive.
The first rumour of more dramatic events reached the
Division on August Bth, in the form of unexpected orders to
move to the Montigny area, just south of the Albert-Amiens
road. On that day the Fourth Army, in conjunction with the
French (whose advance, however, began actually a day later),
attacked the enemy salient south of Albert. The objective
was, roughly, our old 1916 line, the possession of which would
restore Montdidier and free the Paris-Amiens railway. By
August 12th, the objective had been gained, and the way was
clear for the second Battles of the Somme.
The first intention had been that the offensive should con-
tinue where it had been begun, against the enemy front south
of Albert, and it was with a view to protecting the flank of


the further advance that the Naval Division had been moved
south. As is now known, this project, after discussion, was
abandoned, and it was decided to turn the German positions
west of the Somme by striking above Albert, and directing the
main weight of our attack, from the north, on Bapaume. This
meant an attack on a front extending further north even than
Gommecourt (the northern limit of the attack of July Ist,
1916), and involved a few days’ respite for the enemy, while the
arrangements were completed with a speed, a precision and a
measure of secrecy which formed a welcome contrast to the
practice of the past.
The Naval Division was among those assigned to the new
offensive, and it was transferred for the purpose to the IVth
Corps, which held the front to the north of Beaumont Hamel,
through Bucquoy. Further to the north was the Vlth Corps
on the left of the Third Army.
Marching only at night, the Division moved north between
August 15th and 19th, and found themselves at Souastre, in
rear of the line held by the 37th Division, which ran through
the Western outskirts of Bucquoy. Here, for the first time,
detailed orders were received for the attack, which was to open
on August 21st, at 4.55 a.m. The first objective of the IVth
and Vlth Corps was to be Bucquoy, Ablainzeville and the
Ablainzeville Spur. Here were the German first line positions,
which they had held for some months. The next objective
was defined as the Irles-Bihucourt line, and then north along
the Achiet-le-Grand-Arras railway. The direction of the
attack was south-east. The first objective on the IVth Corps
front was to be taken by the 37th Division, already in the line,
and the sth and Naval Divisions were to go through to the
second objective. On the left of the Naval Division would be
the 3rd Division of the Vlth Corps.
General Lawrie, with his objective across the Achiet-Arras
railway, decided to attempt to reach the railway with the 188th
and 189th Brigades, and to send the 190th Brigade through
at that stage to complete the operation. An intermediate
objective, known as the Brown line, was arranged for the
188th and 189th Brigades a little to the east of Logeast Wood.
This line was to be attacked by two companies of the Anson,
the Marines, two companies of the Drake and the Hawke.
The line of the railway was to be attacked by the remaining


companies of the Anson and Drake, the R.1.R., and the Hood
Battalion. The limit of our barrage was the Brown line, and,
beyond that, the attack would be covered by tanks.
Shortly after midnight on the 20th, the Brigades moved
forward, their march being timed to reach our front line ten
minutes before the attack opened. Punctually at 4.55 a.m.
the advance of the 87th Division began, and immediately
behind followed the two Naval Brigades, a change in tactics
eloquent of the changed character of the German resistance
as experienced further south. There was a thick mist, and the
Division were in unknown country, but they kept their direc-
tion, and almost all units reached the Brown line with virtually
no opposition. An unfinished message found by the Hawke
Battalion in a captured dug-out revealed indeed that a very
sudden retreat had taken place, and that the enemy’s line of
resistance was further east.
By now, we were out of reach of our barrage, and in the
thick mist one of the tanks went over into the sth Division
area, taking a company of the Hood Battalion with it into
Achiet-le-Petit, which was captured. Two tanks, however,
maintaining direction, reached the Achiet-Arras railway, on
the right of the Divisional front, and here two companies of
the Hood with one company of the Drake on their left secured
a temporary lodgment. A similar success was achieved on
the extreme left of the Division’s front (actually in the 3rd
Division area), where “ B ” Company of the Anson Battalion
reached the railway embankment, with details of the Marines
and the R.I.R.
In the centre, the advance from the Brown line made less
progress in the face of strong opposition, and “A” Company
of the Anson Battalion, “B” and “D” Companies of the
Marines* (who had gone forward in place of the main body of
the R.1.R., which had lost direction), and the main body of the
Drake Battalion found themselves held up on the outskirts of
Achiet-le-Grand. At this place there was a cemetery, a brick
field, and the remains of one of our old hut camps west of the
railway. The floors of these huts had been lowered three or
four feet below ground level to give protection to our troops
against German aeroplane bombing, and these huts now
* The Marines lost very heavily in this advance ; Major R. A. Poland, R.M.
and Captain B. G. Andrews, R.M., were among the killed.


afforded a ready-made entrenched position for the enemy. The
Germans had placed machine guns and anti-tank guns in these
places, and established a strong line of defence, which could
be easily reinforced from the ample reserves which they had
in the railway cutting. It was evident that they had thinned
out their front lines, and concentrated a defence here, main-
tained by fresh troops. As our troops reached this place,
about 11 a.m., the sun cleared away the mist, and they found
themselves coming up against it without the help of a barrage
which had been left behind, the effective range of the Field
Artillery having been passed. The Tanks, which had come
up by now, tried to assist, but were disabled by the anti-tank
guns. The infantry made a most gallant attack, as the dead
lying out in line after the fight testified, but, in the absence of
artillery support, the enemy could not be dislodged except
by an enveloping movement, for which no preparations had
been made.
The result was that the troops in the centre of the divisional
front, falling back to a position a few hundred yards east of
Logeast Wood, compelled a retirement on the flanks. Ad-
vanced posts were finely maintained, ahead of the general line,
by the Anson and Drake,* and the former battalion actually
achieved a local advance in the afternoon. By 6 p.m., however,
the battle was at a standstill, and the line was consolidated,
the front being reinforced by units of the 190th Brigade and
held from left to right by the Anson (in advanced posts), the
7th Royal Fusiliers, the Drake (in advanced posts), the R.1.R.,
the Artists’ Rifles and the Hood Battalion. The night was
quiet, but on the 22nd, the enemy, still standing to their line
on the railway, made three determined counter-attacks at
5.55 a.m., at 10.30 a.m. and at 1.15 p.m. The Divisional
artillery had, however, by now come forward, and, thanks to
their barrage, to some excellent work by the 189th L.T.M.
Battery (in which Sub-Lieut. Telfer, R.N.V.R., especially dis-
tinguished himself), and to the effective machine and Lewis
gun fire from the flanking positions occupied by the Anson
and Hood, our line held. Only on the last occasion was even
a temporary lodgment effected in the line held by the 188th
* Commander Beak, by his skill and gallantry, contributed in no small
measure to the success of the operations in the centre of the line and Commander
Buckle rendered no less distinguished service on the left flank.


Brigade, and the position was at once restored by the Marines*
and the R.I.R.
During the night of the 22nd-23rd the remaining units of
the 188th and 189th Brigades were withdrawn, the front
being taken over by the 37th Division.f The 190th Brigade
remained in immediate support. Such things as inter-divi-
sional reliefs, which on the Ancre, at Arras and at Passchendaele
had marked the definite close of an attack, were henceforward
only incidents in a continuing battle. To the left, on the front
of the Vlth Corps, and to the right as far as Albert, the German
front line system had fallen, and from the north and the west
we were closing in on Bapaume. August 23rd provided an
interval of rest only for the Naval Division, while the 37th
Division moved forward in touch with the New Zealand
Division and the sth Division, and captured Achiet-le-Grand.
This drove the enemy back on to a line running through
Grevillers, Loupart Wood and Warlencourt. The operations
were here reaching their critical phase. Judged by the standards
of the past, a dramatic success had been achieved, but our
aim now was nothing less than to drive the enemy back at once
across the Somme. To accomplish this, it was necessary
to cut across the Albert-Bapaume road, before the enemy
could consolidate a new position against our attacks from
the north-west.
On the morning of the 24th the attack was renewed by the
37th and New Zealand Divisions against Loupart Wood, and
for some distance on either side, but the progress was not sub-
stantial. The wood, indeed, was captured, but isolated posts
were still holding out on the eastern edges, and the enemy
remained in Grevillers and Warlencourt, and their front from
Bapaume southward was still continuous. The attack had
to be pressed further.
At noon on the 24th, the Brigadier-General, General Staff,
of the IVth Corps, called at General Lawrie’s headquarters
just east of Bucquoy and gave verbal instructions for the Naval
Division to advance that evening on the right of the New
Zealand Division, who were to renew the attack on Grevillers.
* For his share in these operations, Lieut.-Col. Fletcher, R.M.L.1., was awarded
a bar to his D.S.O.
t A complete list of the officers killed in this and the succeeding operations
is given in Appendix E (iii).
20


The 47th and 21st Divisions would attack on the far right of
the Naval Division, advancing, between Warlencourt and
Courcelette, from their positions further west. When these
instructions were given, General Lawrie was out inspecting
the battalions after the recent fighting, and there was some
delay in issuing the orders, which, however, were communi-
cated to the brigades concerned at 8 p.m. The brigades had
been warned earlier that they might be required to attack
during the day, and had moved forward in front of Logeast
Wood in the morning. From here they were now moved off to
the valley north of Loupart Wood, from which they were to
advance, at 7.30 p.m., on le Barque and Thilloy, two villages
south-west of the wood, across the Albert-Bapaume road. If
the attack succeeded, it was to be pressed home to Riencourt.
The situation, as the brigades approached the assembly
position, was one of considerable confusion. No one appeared
to be sure whether Loupart Wood was held by the enemy or
not, and many even of the different battalion headquarters
had no maps showing the objectives. The Brigadier of the
189th Brigade decided, therefore, to ride ahead with his bat-
talion commanders to the edge of Loupart Wood to endeavour
to get a sight of the country over which the battalions had to
operate, but the party had to cross the wood (which, it had
been ascertained, was clear of the enemy) before they could
form any idea of the country. Even then they could not see
the objective. By now it was 7.15 p.m., and there was no time
left to explain the plans in any detail to the rank and file of the
brigade. The confusion on the assembly position had, mean-
while, been heightened by a severe bombing attack, directed
on the Hawke and Hood Battalions by a swarm of low-flying
aeroplanes, and it seemed doubtful if these battalions would
be ready to go forward at 7.30 p.m., which was the hour fixed
for the attack.
Having regard to all the circumstances, Brigadier-General
de Free, as the senior officer on the spot, decided that it was
his duty to stop the attack as far as the Naval Division was
concerned, and his decision was conveyed to the 188th Brigade
and to the New Zealand Division. In days when the German
resistance was still vigorous, the decision would have been
inevitable: in the conditions prevailing at the time it is im-
possible to say what the results of the attack might have been,


but it is sufficient to say that high authorities a few days
later came to the conclusion that the decision was justified.
The immediate result was, however, that Commander Egerton
of the Hood succeeded temporarily to the command of the
189th Brigade. As was, perhaps, inevitable when all units
were feeling the strain of continuous fighting, the breakdown
of the arrangements for the night’s attack caused a good
deal of unfavourable comment. The hypothetical advance
became, in retrospect, an assured success unreasonably pre-
judiced. For such laborious incursions into the domain of
constructive criticism there was, however, no time on this
anxious night. With the arrival of maps, later in the evening
came orders to advance on the same objectives at 6 a.m. the
next morning (August 25th). As in the original plan, the
attack was to be carried out from right to left by the Anson
and the R.1.R., the Marines, the Hawke and the Hood Bat-
talions. The Drake Battalion was to clear a communication
trench, which ran along the right Divisional boundary to
the German trenches half way between Loupart Wood and the
Albert-Bapaume road. They were then to operate on the
exposed flank of the further advance. During the night of
the 24th-25th, the 47th Division were reported to have reached
Warlencourt and the 21st Division to be between that village
and Courcelette; but the enemy certainly held the famous
Butte de Warlencourt on the Bapaume road, just to the right
of the Divisional boundary.
The total distance from the starting-off point to the first
objective beyond Thilloy was four thousand yards.
The advance started punctually, and in a thick mist the
188th Brigade, with the New Zealanders in their flank,
pushed forward without much opposition. So, too, did the
left companies of the Hawke Battalion. Two companies of
the Anson Battalion under Captain Scott and Lieutenant
Paterson, R.N.V.R., and two companies of the Hawke under
Lieutenant Dodds and Lieutenant Stevenson, actually reached
the high ground east of Thilloy and for a time maintained
themselves, but, on the right flank, the attack had been held
up, and in the centre the Marines had only made slow progress.
The enemy trench system facing the south-west comer of Lou-
part Wood was the scene of a vigorous resistance, entailing
grievous losses to the Hood and Hawke Battalions. Here fell
20*


the two battalion commanders, Commander Jones* and
Lieut.-Commander Fish, both survivors of many more des-
perate encounters, and Lieut.-Commander O. J. Wainright,
R.N.V.R., the senior company commander of the Hawke
Battalion. Taking cover in the numerous shell-holes, and rein-
forced by the Drake Battalion, the 189th Brigade set to work
with their Lewis guns to master the enemy’s fire. After a time
their efforts were rewarded, or else, perhaps more probably,
the enemy were fighting a rearguard action by time table :
in any case, at about noon the enemy resistance broke, and
the three battalions (the Hawke and Hood now commanded
by Lt.-Commander Blackmore and Lieut. Maudsley, R.N.V.R.)
pressed forward and seized the high ground on either side of
the ravine, known as the Yellow cut, east of the Bapaume road.
The Hawke Battalion extended the position to the outskirts
of le Barque, which the Marines had not yet reached. The
Artists’ Rifles, advancing on the heels of the 189th Brigade,
were probably the first to enter le Barque itself. On the left
of the Divisional front, the Anson and the R.I.R. were on
the outskirts of Thilloy. On this position fell back the relics
of the Anson and Hawke companies who alone had penetrated
Thilloy and Ligny Thilloy.
Here the attack died down. In the villages the enemy
were in great strength, and only the timely assistance of our
heavy artillery prevented a serious counter-attack developing
on the afternoon of the 25th. To carry the attack through
Thilloy to Riencourt, as had been hoped, was wholly impossible.
The success had, however, been a remarkable one. The enemy’s
communications were cut, and Bapaume was effectually isolated
from the enemy positions to the south-west. Particularly
remarkable, perhaps, was the achievement of the 189th Brigade,
largely due to the resolute leading of Commander Beak and
Lt.-Commander Blackmore. f This brigade, well outside the
* Commander Jones had been first wounded on June 4th at Gallipoli and
had since then served almost continuously with the Division, commanding at
different times the Anson, Nelson and Hawke battalions. The loss of an
unfailingly optimistic personality was much felt.
Another experienced officer killed in this engagement was Lieut.-Commander
E. A. Sprange, M.C., R.N.V.R., of the Anson Battalion.
f For his brilliant conduct of these operations, and of those immediately
before and after, Commander Beak was recommended for and received the
Victoria Cross. Lt.-Commander Blackmore received a bar to his M.C. Fine
work was also done by Sub-Lieut. J. W. Kerr of the Hood Battalion, who was
awarded the M.C., and by Lieutenant Biggs and Sub-Lieut. Wood of the Hawke
Battalion.


Divisional boundary, and without support in the first instance
on either flank, remained unsupported till nightfall on the 25th,
when the 21st Division came forward.
In the course of the operations 37 officers and 1,095 other
ranks had been captured. The next two days of this battle
were, however, less successful, for no fewer than four attacks on
Thilloy, by the 188th and 190th Brigades, were beaten off by
machine-gun fire. The Divisions on the flanks were no more
successful, and, on the night of the 27th-28th, the Naval
Division was relieved.
The first impression which is left by the operations is one
of great initial success, not carried to its conclusion. Such an
impression would, however, be hardly correct. The enemy
rearguards were fighting hard and scientifically, and would not
retreat until we had so manoeuvred as to threaten their line of
retreat. The spearhead had been thrust, however, into the
enemy position, and the fall of Bapaume, and, with it, the fall
of the enemy’s positions on the western bank of the Somme, was
only a matter of days. Bapaume actually fell on August
29th and Peronne on September Ist.
While the fruits of the successes of the IVth and Vth and
Vlth Corps were thus being gathered, the Naval Division were
transferred, on August 30th, to Sir Charles Fergusson’s XYIIth
Corps to take part in the new battle which had opened further
to the north on August 26th.
The immediate object of the second Battles of Arras was to
seize the northern end of the Hindenburg system and the Dro-
court-Queant system behind it. If we could carry these posi-
tions, we should have driven a wedge between the new positions
to which we were forcing the enemy to retire east of the Somme
and those to which the enemy was still clinging on the Lys.
We should thus compel him to evacuate the Lys salient and to
fall back in front of Cambrai to the lines of the Canal du Nord
and the Canal St. Quentin. We should, in this event, press on
against the line of the Canals, and endeavour, by seizing Cam-
brai and pushing forward to the east of it, to drive the enemy
back on Maubeuge before he could extricate his forces in the
south, which all the time would be pressed back on the Ardennes
by the Franco-American offensive.
This plan was fully carried out, and at its two most critical
stages, the attack on the Drocourt-Queant line and the attack


on the Canal du Nord-Canal d’Escaut position, the Naval
Division, fighting on the front of the XVIIth Corps, played no
small part. Their particular doings must be shortly described.
The Hindenburg line as designed had run, it will be remem-
bered, roughly north-west from the Somme front, till it joined
the old German position south of Arras at Tilloy les Mofflaines.
The line reduced considerably the salient in the enemy’s 1916
line, which had run north and south almost to Soissons, and
then turned sharply east to Verdun. But it still left a minor
salient south of Arras, which had been only slightly flattened
by our attacks in 1917. The enemy successes in the beginning
of 1918 had brought their line back almost to where it had stood
before the first Battle of Arras, but their position was now
strengthened by the Drocourt-Qu£ant line, a second prepared
position linking the centre section of the Hindenburg line with
the Lens defences. The battle which had opened east of Arras
on August 26th, on the First Army front, had carried us, by
August 31st, across the northen end of the Hindenburg line
and over the old battle grounds of 1917 to this new but formid-
able position. The decisive moment had now arrived when the
right of the First Army was to attempt to carry it from a point
two miles north of Qu£ant on a front of some five miles. To
assist in this operation, the left Corps of the Third Army (which
was the XVIIth Corps) was to co-operate with the 2nd Canadian
Division, who were the right Division of the First Army. The
XVIIth Corps had already made a substantial advance, but on
the evening of August 31st they were still west of Hendecourt
and Bullecourt, and were thus still some two miles distant from
the Drocourt-Queant line. The 57th Division was on the left
of the XVIIth Corps front, and the 52nd Division on the right.
The main (First Army) attack was to take place at dawn
on the 2nd, and, on the night of the lst-2nd, the 57th and 52nd
Divisions attacked and carried Hendecourt and Bullecourt,
and the 57th carried Riencourt, still further east. By the hour
fixed for the Canadian attack, the 57th Division was only
slightly in rear of the Canadians’ right. The plan for the
remainder of the attack was wisely indeterminate, but the main
feature was that the 57th Division was not to attack to its
front, but to follow the flank of the Canadians and exploit their
success by bombing south, down the Drocourt-Qu6ant line
from the position at which it was entered by the Canadians,


southward to Queant. They were then to press forward
north of Qu6ant. The Canadian objective was Magnicourt,
a mile and a half beyond the Drocourt-Queant line, and the
57th Division were ultimately to prolong the Canadian left. At
this point, if all went well, came the turn of the Naval Division.
At 6 p.m. on the 81st September the Division* was
6,000 yards west of Hendecourt. On October Ist, the 188th
Brigade, which was to lead the Division’s attack, moved up
to Hendecourt and arrived at 1.30 a.m. on the 2nd, just as
the 57th Division were moving off to attack Riencourt. Their
orders from the. G.O.C. (Major-General Blacklock, D. 5.0.,
had assumed command of the Division in place of Major-General
Lawrie, C. 8., D. 5.0., on August 30thf) were to pass through
the right of the Canadian Division’s area on receiving the word
“ Move,” and, sweeping round from the north, to cut the
Queant-Cambrai railway and seize the high ground east of
Queant. If the line of the railway was reached, the Division
was to press on to Inchy. The other brigades were to move
forward, behind the 188th Brigade, by pre-arranged stages.
Brig.-General Coleridge was in command of the operations
at the front, and was to have a call on the battalions of the
189th Brigade.
The astonishing feature of this battle is that, as far as the
Naval Division was concerned, every detail of this tremendous
programme, involving an advance of more than ten miles from
the first assembly position, was carried out.
The operative word of command, “ Move,” was given by
General Blacklock to General Coleridge, on receipt of infor-
mation as to the progress of the Canadian attack, at 7.45 a.m.
The 188th Brigade moved, in the first instance, due east on the
tracks of the Canadians to Callingcard Wood, and then struck
down, almost due south, on either side of the Magnicourt-
Qu6ant road.
From this point events moved with a bewildering rapidity.
By 1 p.m., the 57th Division had reached all their objectives,
and the 188th Brigade, thanks in great part to the fine leading
♦ Except, however, for Brig.-General de Rougemont and his staff, the Divisional
Artillery remained with the IVth Corps, and did not rejoin the Division till
November.
f The departure of General Lawrie was very widely regretted throughout
the Division, who had not only admired his personal gallantry but had experi-
enced his unfailing consideration for the officers and men under his command.


of Commander Buckle, D. 5.0., was approaching the line of
the Queant-Cambrai railway. The Drake Battalion was still
further east, having been ordered to make a wider turning
movement through the Bois de Bouche to assist the 188th
Brigade. By the afternoon, this movement had succeeded,
and the battalion was on the left of the R.1.E.. On the left
were the Canadians.
The next step was the advance on Inchy, but, before the
orders for this reached the battalions (the 189th Brigade were
chosen for this objective), Commander Beak had made, on his
own initiative, a dashing advance across the railway to Pron-
ville, actually south-east of Qu6ant, capturing on the way a
substantial portion of the Hindenburg support line. Com-
mander Beak crossed the railway at 4 p.m., and his patrols were
in Pronville at 6.30 p.m. The main body of his battalion
remained astride the Pronville-Inchy road, thus effectively
cutting off the enemy’s retreat, and ensuring the capture of a
substantial number of prisoners as well as many machine guns,
and several trench mortars and field guns.*
* The operations of this battalion were remarkable, not only for these
results, but for the brilliant leadership displayed by many individual officers
and men. Particularly noteworthy were the exploits of C.P.O. Prowse and Sub-
Lieut. T. Simmonds, the former of whom was awarded the Victoria Cross, and the
latter the D.S.O. The account of their exploits, taken from the Gazettes, is as
follows;
No. W.Z./424 Chief Petty Officer George Prowse, V.C., D.C.M., R.N.V.R.,
Drake Battalion (Landore).
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty. During an advance
a portion of his company became disorganized by heavy machine-gun fire from
an enemy strong point. Collecting what men were available, he led them
with great coolness and bravery against this strong point, capturing it, together
with twenty-three prisoners and five machine-guns.
Later he took a patrol forward in face of much enemy opposition, and estab-
lished it on important high ground. On another occasion he displayed great
heroism by attacking single-handed an ammunition limber which was trying
to recover ammunition, killing three men who accompanied it and capturing the
limber.
Two days later he rendered valuable services when covering the advance
of his company with a Lewis-gun section, and located later on two machine-
gun positions in a concrete emplacement, which were holding up the advance
of the battalion on the right.
With complete disregard of personal danger, he rushed forward with a small
party and attacked and captured these posts, killing six enemy and taking
thirteen prisoners and two machine-guns. He was the only survivor of this
gallant party, but by this daring and heroic action he enabled the battalion
on the right to push forward without further machine-gun fire from the village.
Throughout the whole operations his magnificent example and leadership
were an inspiration to all, and his courage was superb.
T/Sub-Lieut. T. Simmonds, M.C., D.C.M., R.N.V.R., Drake Battalion.
For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty during an attack. He
rallied his company under heavy fire and rushed a machine-gun nest, capturing


Meanwhile, orders reached Commander Egerton (still in
command of the 189th Brigade), shortly after 5 p.m., to move
the Hawke and Hood battalions from the Bois de Bouche to
Inchy. These battalions at once pressed forward in the face of
considerable opposition, and, assisted no doubt, indirectly, by
the earlier advance of the Drake Battalion, reached the junction
of the Hindenburg support line and the Buissy switch at dusk.
These lines, which were strongly fortified and manned, covered
Inchy from attack from the west or north-west, and it was clear
that they must be carried by an organized attack, before the
battalions could reach their final objective. In the circum-
stances, it was decided to take advantage of the night to re-
organize the battalions, which were in touch with the Canadian
Corps, and to attack the Hindenburg and Buissy switch lines at
9.30 a.m. the next morning. The position on the night of the
2nd-3rd was, therefore, that the whole of the assigned objectives
had been secured, and that the Hawke and Hood and Drake
Battalions were waiting for daylight to renew their rapid and
successful advance. They had advanced already six miles from
Hendecourt, which may be taken as the starting point of the
operations, and it needed only an advance of another mile to carry
them through Inchy to the western bank of the Canal du Nord.
In the morning, the advance was first resumed by the Hawke
and Hood Battalions, who carried the Hindenburg support line,
and reorganized on the southern outskirts of Inchy. Later in
the morning the Drake Battalion, coming forward on the right
of the Hawke, moved on Tadpole copse, which was carried by 1
p.m. This battalion then consolidated a position on the
western outskirts of Moeuvres, while the Hawke and Hood
endeavoured to consolidate their hold on Inchy and to secure a
bridgehead across the Canal du Nord. The Marine Battalion
and some cyclists went forward, during the afternoon of the
3rd, to support these efforts, but, despite the utmost gallantry,
the bridgehead, though rushed by a party under Sub-Lieut.
Harris* of the Hawke Battalion at 7 a.m. on the 4th, could not
many prisoners and machine-guns. After taking his final objective, he pushed
on and captured a convoy, consisting of two large field guns, ammunition
limbers and an ambulance wagon, together with many prisoners. He also
captured the whole of a party of one officer-and seventy men, with transport.
Throughout two days’ operations he was continually performing gallant acts,
and his courage and cheerfulness were a splendid example to his men.
* For his daring leadership, Sub-Lieut. Harris was awarded the D. 5.0.;
this fine officer was killed in the attack of October Bth on Niergnies,


be held. A position had thus to be consolidated on a line from
150 yards to 300 yards west of the canal in touch with the
Drake Battalion, who had now pushed forward into Mceuvres,
and were waiting for the Guards Division to come forward
on their right flank.
On the evening of the 4th the Germans came across the
canal on the left of the divisional front and re-entered Inchy,
but were thrown back, after hard fighting, by the Marine
Battalion.
During the night of the 4th-sth, the Hood, Hawke, Drake
and Marine Battalions were relieved by the 190th Brigade,
and the long-drawn-out battle slowly died down. On the night
of September 7th-Bth, the Division was relieved by the 57th
Division, and was withdrawn for rest, reorganization, and
training.
The outstanding feature of these operations was the swift
exploitation of the initial success of the First Army in breaking
the Drocourt-Queant line. The reaction on the strategic
situation was immediate. The rapid advance of the Canadians
and the XVIIth Corps sent the enemy back, in the south, on to
the Hindenburg system (east of Peronne and Bapaume), and in
the north it compelled him to surrender, not only his gains in
the Lys salient, but also Lens. The implications of the success
were far wider. It showed conclusively that at any rate the
more experienced of the British Infantry Divisions were fully
capable of exercising the initiative and the judgment called
for by a war of manoeuvre. The success of the Drake Battalion
was more than a brilliant local operation ; it was a movement
directed on the initiative of the battalion commander to an
important tactical point, and the fact that its execution was
as sound as its conception, showed that it was not only the
senior officers of the Division who could be relied upon in the
new warfare.
Naturally, the novelty of the conditions had had its in-
fluence. Communications had at times broken down, move-
ments had suffered at times from that over-organization which
is bred of trench warfare, and the infantry and the machine
gunners had at first hardly appreciated the value of their
weapons as weapons of offence. But by the close of the fighting
these defects had largely been remedied.
If the operations of the Drake Battalion were the most


spectacular, it must not be supposed that the leading of the other
battalions was not remarkably good. Commander Buckle*
had again shown inexhaustible determination in the final stages
of the advance; Lt.-Colonel Sandilands,* R.M.L.1., led the
Marines with distinction; and Commander Lockwood, leading
the Hawke Battalion for the first time, had contributed in no
small degree to the success of that battalion in the later stages
of the battle. Other officers whose achievements won recog-
nition were Lieutenant Gibson, Sub-Lieut. E. C. Barras, Sub-
Lieut. Brewer and Sub-Lieut. G. H. Carr of the Hood ; Surgeon
Leake, R.N., and Lieutenant Flowitt of the Hawke ; Sub-Lieut.
Barnett of the Anson ; and Surgeon Baxter, R.N., and Lieutenant
H. L. Hardisty, R.M., of the Royal Marine Battalion. The
losses sustained by the Division were infinitely lighter than
m the August battles. Then they had lost 27 officers and
358 men killed, 88 officers and 2,356 men wounded, and 9
officers and 486 men missing. Now their total losses were
under a thousand. The chief reason, without a doubt, was that
a timely halt was called to local operations on a narrow front
as soon as the German resistance hardened. For this wise
policy the Corps Commander (Sir Charles Fergusson) was re-
sponsible, as he gave instructions, early on the 4th, that nothing
in the nature of an organized frontal attack was to be attempted.
The explanation was, no doubt, that the tactical implica-
tions of the new situation were more fully realized. On a
narrow front, the enemy, still fighting gallantly under what
must have been the utmost difficulties, was still capable of a
tenacious resistance. On the other hand, his reserves were used
up, and his mobility was almost gone, owing to the dis-
organization of his railways, the wretched condition of his
transport, and the physical condition of his troops. It was now
definitely clear that by persistent offensives, distributed over
wide fronts, we could finally break, not his will, but his capacity
to resist.
The next stages of the advance to victory are known as the
Battles of the Hindenburg line.
The first of these battles was fought south of the XVIIth
♦ Commander Buckle received a second bar to his D.S.O. for his share in
these operations, and Colonel Sandilands received the D.S.O.


Corps front, round Havrincourt and Epehy, with the result that,
by September 26th, the line of the Third Army to the right of
the XVIIth Corps had been brought roughly into alignment
with that reached by the Canadians and the Naval Division
at the beginning of the month. It was now necessary to launch
the final assault on the line of the Canals which, opposite the
Inchy-Moeuvres line, covered the all-important road and railway
centre of Cambrai. For the new attack, the Naval Division,
rested and reinforced, came forward on September 26th to
assembly positions in and west of Moeuvres. The attack was to
start at 5.5 a.m. on the 27th.
The enemy had never been completely cleared from the
western bank of the Canal du Nord on this front, and not even
the crossing of the canal could be confidently reckoned on.
Behind the canal, parallel to it, lay the Hindenburg support
line, and more than three miles east of that line was the Canal
d’Escaut (which, unlike the Canal du Nord at this point, was
filled). The objective of the first day’s operations was a line
roughly a thousand yards west of this, the last organized
defensive in front of Cambrai. The Naval Division’s first task
in the operation was to secure the crossing of the Canal du
Nord opposite Moeuvres and the high ground immediately east
of it, which was the lower end of the spur running south-west
from Bourlon Wood. With this key position secure, the
Division were to turn south and secure the Hindenburg support
system. This was the second phase of their attack. The third
phase was an attack from the left of the captured position, in
a south-easterly direction against the high ground between
Anneux and Graincourt. The first two phases were to be
carried out by the 190th Brigade, and the last by the 188th
Brigade. The Canadians on the left of the XVIIth Corps were
attacking Bourlon, and the 52nd Division were to cross the
canal on the right of the Naval Division, but to go no further
than the Hindenburg line. The remaining Division of the corps
(the 57th) were to go through the 188th Brigade on the Anneux-
Graincourt line to the final objective, west of the Canal d’Escaut.
An interesting feature of the plan is its resemblance to
that which had been so successful on September 2nd. The
frontal attack on the Hindenburg line was avoided, and the
exploitation of the success was again to be from a flank.
Punctually at 5.5 a.m., under cover of an efficient Stokes


Mortar barrage, the 4th Bedfords (on the right) and 7th Fusiliers
crossed the canal opposite Moeuvres and seized the high ground
to their front. In their advance these battalions captured six
field guns and much other material. The brigade, now rein-
forced by the Artists’ Rifles, then fought their way south, along
the Hindenburg line, and met with a fair measure of success.
The enemy still held out, however, in many parts of the line
when the 188th and 189th Brigades crossed the canal on the
tracks of the 190th at 7 a.m., and the former brigade moved to
their assembly position on the reverse slope of the Bourlon ridge.
The Anson, in fact, had to deploy almost immediately after
crossing the canal, and some prisoners and machine guns were
captured.
The attack on the Anneux-Graincourt line was due to begin
at 7.58 a.m., and, punctually to the moment, the Royal Marines
(on the left) and the Anson went over to the crest of the Bourlon
ridge, leaving the Hindenburg system on their right. It was an
original and daring manoeuvre, and, for a short time, seemed
threatened with failure, for it became at once clear that the
Hindenburg line was still held in many places, and that the
190th Brigade had not yet finished their work. Moreover,
barring the way to Anneux on the Bapaume-Cambrai road
was a factory, strongly held by the enemy. In front of this,
and suffering badly from a galling cross-fire, the Anson were
held up, though one company, with almost reckless bravery,
made its way into the factory and for a short time held its
position. On the left of the Anson, the Marines along the
line of the Cambrai road effected a junction with the Canadians
on the south-west corner of Bourlon Wood, but they could go
no further without support on their right flank.
The probable cause of the check was that the 52nd Division
had been delayed in crossing the canal, and that the resistance
encountered by the 190th Brigade had thus been unexpectedly
severe. The check, however, was only temporary. The
Lowland Division came forward steadily, and yard by yard
the Hindenburg system was cleared. While this was being
done, between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m., the Drake and Hawke
Battalions came up on the right and left of the sunken road
leading to the factory, in support to the Anson Battalion.
At 2.15 p.m. a heavy bombardment was opened on the fac-
tory, and on Anneux and Graincourt, and in a dashing advance


the whole of the objectives were reached, the Drake, Hawke and
Anson capturing Graincourt, and the Marines, with the R.I.R.
in support, entering Anneux at the same time. A tragic incident
of the advance was the death of C.P.O. Prowse, V.C., of the
Drake Battalion, in the attack on the factory.
The line so finely won was at once consolidated, and by
6.30 p.m. the Division was reorganized in depth and waiting
for the 57th Division to go through them. A counter-attack
developed at 6.30 p.m., but was beaten off without loss, and the
night passed quietly. At dawn the 57th Division advanced,
and by 9 a.m. had secured the remaining objective of the corps.
Sir Charles Fergusson at once decided to push forward, and
the 57th Division were ordered to secure the crossings of the
Canal d’Escaut. The 189th Brigade were also ordered forward,
with a view to passing through the 57th Division on the further
side of the canal.
The remaining stages of the battle for Cambrai on the
XVIIth Corps front form one of the most splendid chapters in
the history of the Naval Division, and the most complete vindi-
cation of its training and its organization. The battle had
reached its climax and its issue must affect the history of Europe.
The success of no one Division, of no one Corps, could determine
the result, but the failure of one Division at a critical point might
have, indeed must have, involved delay, and delay was fatal
to the allied plan. We were fighting forward to Maubeuge, and
we should surely reach it. That was no longer in doubt. But
should we reach it before the Germans could extricate them-
selves from their front, west of the Ardennes. If not, we might
have to face a reorganized enemy on the Rhine. If, however,
we could cut off the retreat of the German left, the capitulation
would be signed in France. The answer to this question, so
vast in its implications, depended largely on the speed with
which we could reduce the German line west of Cambrai. Not
the least important part of that line was that still stoutly de-
fended by enemy opposite the XVIIth Corps on the afternoon
of September 28th.
When the 189th Brigade went forward, they came on a
scene of incalculable and dangerous confusion. Parties
of the 2nd Division, on the right of the 57th Division, were
reported to be across the canal and the river; parties of the
57th Division had certainly crossed the canal (though it was


feared that they had been cut off); but the enemy still held out
in La Folie Wood, this side of the Canal, on the left of the corps’
front. To clear up the position and to force the crossings of the
canal and river was the task definitely assigned to the 189th
Brigade at 4 p.m. on the 28th.
The Hood Battalion was directed by Brigadier-General
Curling * to La Folie Wood, and the Drake Battalion on
Cantignual Mill, where the enemy had retired from the canal,
but held the river crossings in strength. Here there was a
bridge, and a little further to the south, where the river crosses
the canal, was a lock gate, not at this time wholly destroyed.
At the mill, the 57th Division had already crossed the canal,
and the Drake Battalion moved forward into their position
and at once attempted the crossing of the river. The main
bridge was broken, but a wooden footbridge on a lower level had
escaped destruction. This, however, was commanded by the
enemy’s machine guns, and all attempts to cross it failed.
Then suddenly, whether by inspiration or mistake, a leading
seaman with a machine gun set out across the main bridge
which was broken, and, before the enemy had altered the angle
of their fire, had reached the gap : here, by some feat of agility,
he swung himself down and got across the rivef and brought his
gun into action. For a moment the enemy machine gunners
were silenced, and Commander Beak and a few men also came
across. Here till dusk the party maintained themselves, and,
under cover of darkness a few more stole across by twos and
threes.
Meanwhile, General Curling had sent Captain Wright and
Lt.-Commander Blackmore (again commanding the Hawke
Battalion since Commander Lockwood had been wounded in
the advance on Anneux) to reconnoitre the lower crossing.
This was found to have been secured by the 2nd Division,
and it was decided to bring two companies of the Hawke
Battalion forward to this point, as the Hood were still heavily
engaged in La Folie Wood. By the time the battalion arrived,
the bridgehead had been lost, and it was necessary to defer
the attack till dawn, when better support could be arranged.
At night, while the Drake were crossing in driblets, the
engineers, under a heavy fire (for the Drake had been unable
♦ General Curling had taken over command of the 189th Brigade from
Commander Egerton on September 3rd.


to reach any commanding position and the general line of the
river was still held in force by the enemy), put pontoon bridges
across.
At dawn the battle was resumed, and the Drake Battalion
succeeded in crossing in force, and advancing to higher ground.
The Hawke Battalion crossed by the pontoon bridges and the
lock gates at 10 a.m., and extended the flank of the Drake ; and
the Hood Battalion, whose hard fighting in La Folie Wood,
through the 28th, had saved the Division’s left flank, crossed on
the left of the Drake.
Here, at noon on the 29th, the line was taken over by the
R.I.R. and the Marine Battalions, who pushed forward on to
higher ground. They were well supported by two companies
of the Machine Gun Battalion, who got forward in time to harass
the enemy in his retreat on Cambrai and Niergnies.
• The position now won was on the very outskirts of Cambrai,
and only two positions, neither of them of great strength,
barred the entry into the town. It was decided to attack the
outlying line, between Pronville and Fog de Paris, on the 30th,
and for this advance the 190th Brigade came forward. The
Artists were to attack on the right, the 7th Fusiliers on the
left, and the Anson were to attack an enemy strong point on
the flank.
The first attack, on the morning of the 30th, was not wholly
successful, though some progress was made, but at 1 p.m.,
under a fresh bombardment, the line moved forward and all
objectives were secured, except that the enemy still retained
a lodgment in a strong point on the right of the line, till they
were ejected by the Marines and the Anson at 7 a.m. on the
morning of October Ist. The same day the Division was
relieved by the 52nd Division, who were understood to be going
to attack Niergnies.
In four days the Naval Division had advanced, fighting
almost the whole way, for a distance of over seven miles, and
had carried four successive prepared positions, the last held
by the enemy in front of Cambrai, and each one resolutely
defended. In their advance they had captured unwounded
63 officers and 2,138 men, five heavy guns and 51 field guns, 90
trench mortars and 400 machine guns. The Division’s losses
in killed were 21 officers and some 400 men, and in wounded
83 officers and 1,978 men. Considering the magnitude of the


operation, the importance of the results obtained, and the
vigorous character of the enemy resistance, it would not be
wrong to regard this engagement as one of the most successful
ever fought by the Division. As usual, the Division owed
much to the different battalion commanders, whose cool and
daring handling of their battalions during the August and
September operations had been one of the most memorable
features. Commander Beak had been awarded the Victoria
Cross for his magnificent leadership in the earlier battles,
culminating in the attack on the Drocourt-Qu£ant line; and his
leading in the subsequent battles was no less remarkable.* Lt.-
Colonel Sandilands, Commander Egerton, Commander Buckle
and Lt.-Commander Blackmore had set an equal example to
battalions. If the regimental leading had been good,
so also had the work of the Brigade and Divisional staffs and
of the administrative services. To General Blacklock, Colonel
Mackenzie and Colonel Smyth (now A.A. and Q.M.G. to the
Division, Colonel Foster having been promoted to a Corps
appointment), and to the staffs of the three brigades, the general
success of the operations was in a large measure due. No
longer, as in trench-to-trench warfare, was the quality of the
infantry, assuming the effectiveness of the artillery support,
the virtually decisive factor. The plan of attack, no longer
imposed by the necessities of stationary war, but a matter of
* The official account of Commander Beak’s exploits, which relates to the
engagements of August 21st, August 24th-25th and September 2nd-3rd, is as
follows :
T/Commander D. M. W. Beak, D. 5.0., M.C., R.N.V.R.
For most conspicuous bravery, courageous leadership and devotion to duty
during a prolonged period of operations.
He led his men in attack, and, despite heavy machine-gun fire, four enemy
positions were captured. His skilful and fearless leadership resulted in the
complete success of this operation and enabled other battalions to reach their
objectives.
Four days later, though dazed by a shell fragment, in the absence of the
brigade commander, he reorganized the whole brigade under extremely heavy
gun fire, and led his men with splendid courage to their objective.
An attack having been held up, he rushed forward, accompanied by only
one runner, and succeeded in breaking up a nest of machine guns, personally
bringing back nine or ten prisoners. His fearless example instilled courage
and confidence into his men, who then quickly resumed the advance under his
leadership.
On a subsequent occasion he displayed great courage and powers of leadership
in attack, and his initiative, coupled with the confidence with which he inspired
all ranks, not only enabled his own and a neighbouring unit to advance, but
contributed very materially to the success of the Naval Division in these
operations.
321
321
The Advance to Victory


choice, was of supreme importance, not so much in deter-
mining the result of the operations, as in providing the suc-
cessive opportunities without which subordinate commanders,
however able, could not have exercised their initiative. It
was not only the infantry and machine-gun battalion supports
and reserves and the artillery who had to be brought forward
stage by stage, so as to be at hand when the opportunity
presented itself, but the supply and transport services which
had to follow up the advance with complete thoroughness, if
lack of hot food or ammunition was not to call a halt to opera-
tions at a critical time. The Engineers had also a determining
part to play, since the immediate repair of roads and bridges
was indispensable if the vigorous advances of the infantry
were to be adequately supported. The responsibility for the
co-ordination of the movements of these different arms lay
with the Divisional staffs, and the credit for the uniform success
with which, in the September and October battles, the requisite
co-operation was achieved, must be divided impartially between
the staffs and the officers of the different departments. It
would be wrong to overlook the fact (alluded to in the very full
reports on these operations submitted by the Divisional com-
mander) that the smooth running of the machine, which sur-
prised even the staffs responsible, was incalculably assisted by
the peculiar organization of the Division, which was here put
to the test and which emerged triumphantly from the ordeal.
It is true that, in name, the Machine Gun Battalion and the
Engineers had ceased to be an integral part of the Division, but,
in reality, their identity with the old independent organization
had persisted, and this fact was of the greatest possible assist-
ance. The psychological factor is often too lightly regarded
by military writers. It should, perhaps, in a world of abstrac-
tion, be a matter of no account that the leader of a section
of a machine-gun battalion, of a section of a field company of
Engineers, of a company of the Divisional Train, should have
joined for service with a particular Division, have been trained
with that Division, and be personally known to the infantry
company commanders, adjutants and transport officers with
whom he has to co-operate. In practice, such a thing may
exercise a determining influence. Above all, the paramount
advantage secured was that, almost daily, the infantry were
receiving reinforcements of officers and men who had come


Commander D. M. W. Beak, V.C., D.S.O., M.C., R.N.V.R.
(Drake Battalion).
(from the portrait by Ambrose McEvoy in the possession of the Imperial War Museum.)




back to their old battalions and companies, and who fitted
at once into the organization. Successive engagements on
the scale attempted could not, but for this, have achieved so
uniform a success. A division filled up day by day with strange
reinforcements would in a week have lost its identity. Bat-
talion commanders would be ignorant of the capabilities of
their company officers, the men would have a diminished con-
fidence in the platoon commanders. The loss of each trusted
petty officer or subaltern would be a blow to the confidence of
the platoon or the company, and, in open warfare, where
platoons and companies must function often quite in-
dependently, the result must have been a constantly diminishing
efficiency.
- This definite advantage, derived from the Divisional organi-
zation, was exemplified, not only in the successes achieved
up to October Ist, but still more in the events of the next
few days.
Before the main body of the Third Army could advance on
the Beaurevoir line, their flank, menaced by the enemy con-
centration at Cambrai, had to be secured. The difficulty
resulted from the decision not to bombard'the town, which
made it hard to get forward immediately south of the city.
During the first days of October, the operations had flagged,
and finally, on October sth, the XVIIth Corps were informed
that the immediate capture of Niergnies and its defences was
of vital importance, and must be achieved. The Naval Division
was about to entrain for the St. Pol area, and Major-General
Blacklock had started on leave for England, but Sir Charles
Fergusson applied for the temporary return of the Division to
undertake the operation. The request was granted, the
transfer of the Division to the First Army was postponed, and
the Divisional Commander was recalled. No secret was made
of the reason for the decision, and the battalions were promised
relief the day Niergnies was captured.
The attack was carried out, like so many others, by the
188th and 189th Brigades, and, by the night of October 7th-
-Bth, they were in their assembly positions north-east of Rumilly,
waiting confidently for the opening of the barrage. Every
possible assistance was provided to ensure the success of what
was a difficult and critical operation. The Division was
supported by the artillery of the 52nd and 37th Divisions,
21*


which had co-operated so unfailingly in the previous battles,
and eight tanks were to go forward with the infantry.
The first objective, to be attacked by the R.I.R. (on the
right) and the Drake Battalion, was the enemy trench in front
of Niergnies. The second objective, comprising the village
and the enemy works immediately behind it, was to be attacked
by the Royal Marines and the Hood. The left flank was to be
covered by the Hawke Battalion, and the Anson were to attempt
to get round Niergnies from the south-east.
At 4.30 a.m. on the Bth the advance began, and, by 6 a.m.,
the first objective had been carried. The advance continued,
and by 8.40 a.m., the second objective also was in our hands.
The Anson and Marine Battalions had achieved the most
successful advance, though the Hawke Battalion was well
forward on the left flank.
At 9.30 a.m., the enemy counter-attacked in force, seven
captured British tanks moving forward against our line. For
a time the situation was doubtful, but Commander Buckle*
and Commander Pollock* (of the Hood) restored the situation,
each personally putting one tank out of action, by turning
on it a captured anti-tank rifle and a captured field gun
respectively.
By 9.55 a.m., Niergnies was again in our hands, though we
were still short of the final objective. After hard fighting all
the morning, during which the enemy counter-attacked more
than once on different parts of our line, a renewal of the advance
was planned for 3 p.m., when, under an effective barrage, the
line was once more pushed forward. Well to the east of
Niergnies, the battalions consolidated, and were relieved in
the evening by the 2nd Division, with the last formidable task
which was to be assigned to them triumphantly achieved, t
Twelve officers and 61 petty officers and men had been killed
in the hardly-fought battle of October Bth, and 27 officers
and 513 men had been wounded, but the results were of the
first importance. Not only had a strongly-defended position
been abandoned by the enemy, with a loss in captured alone
of 34 officers and 1,155 men, with 81 machine guns and 9
* Commander Buckle was awarded a third and Commander Pollock a first
bar to the D.S.O. for their exploits.
f Lieutenant Brackenbridge and Lieutenant Hilton of the Hood, and Lieu-
tenant Edwards and Sub-Lieut. Codner of the Hawke, were especially prominent
in this short engagement.


field guns, but the way was now open for the advance of the
left of the Third Army. The next morning the whole line
south of Cambrai moved forward. By October 10th Cambrai
had fallen, and the last of the enemy’s prepared positions was
definitely and finally broken.
In trying to fulfil the obligations of the historian, in select-
ing from the constant and even surprising successes achieved
by the Naval Division certain episodes which seem to have a
special importance in relation to the front as a whole, it is
difficult to avoid the appearance of overstating the individual
contribution to the general achievement. It must, indeed,
never be forgotten that the main task of the British and French
armies, the attrition of the armed forces of Germany till their
power for resistance was gone, had been, to a great extent,
achieved before the final offensive began. Whatever judgment
those competent to judge may, in years to come, when all the
facts are available, pass on the strategy or the tactics of the
Allies in the earlier periods of the war, there will never be
any doubt but that it was in the first three and a half years
that the foundations of victory were laid. So much for
the major consideration. As regards the particular achieve-
ments of the Naval Division, they formed but one series of
memorable incidents among others equally decisive. What is
proper to stress is no more than this, that among the Divisions
which in the concluding, as in the intermediate, stages of the
Great War made not only a material, but an individual, con-
tribution to its victorious conclusion the Naval Division was
one. There was a quality of temper and resolution, of
initiative, boldness and self-reliance which even the baldest
summary of its achievements makes tolerably plain. The
historian of an individual unit is always, and properly, open
to the suspicion of bias. But the achievement must be the
final test of efficiency in war, and judged by that test the Naval
Division did not fail.


I have avoided heretofore the quotation of congratulatory messages. Th
following messages received by all units from the Divisional, Corps and Army
Commanders at the close of the operations described in this chapter are,
however, of interest, and I reproduce them in full.
From the Divisional Commander :
“The Divisional Commander wishes to convey to all ranks of the Royal
Naval Division his greatest appreciation of the whole-hearted way in
which they performed their task yesterday.
“ Without the Division taking part, the Third Army would have been
unable to have participated in the general battle all along the line—
Niergnies being the key to the position.
“ The splendid success which the Division attained shows the highest
standard of leadership, and a whole-hearted discipline and willingness on
the part of the men.
“No better reward could have been asked for than the news published
in this morning’s communique.
“(Signed) R. R. Smyth, A.A. and Q.M.G.”
“ Oth October, 1918.”
From Commander XVII. Corps , 8-10-18,
“Warmest congratulations to you and the Division on their success
to-day AAA. I told the Army Commander they would not fail and my
confidence has been amply justified AAA. It is a fine finish to the exploits
of the Division while with XVII. Corps.”
From Commander XVII. Corps:
“ I wish to express to all ranks of the Royal Naval Division my apprecia-
tion of and sincere thanks for the splendid work which they have done
since joining the Corps on August 31st.
“ The Division has always been in the front of every fight, and has
never failed to get its objectives, however difficult the task—its final
performance, the capture of Niergnies with 1,000 prisoners, could only
have been effected by troops imbued with determination and soldierly
spirit.
“ I congratulate all ranks, and wish them all good luck and success
in the future. It will always be a matter of pride to me to have been
associated with the Royal Naval Division during their eventful period of
the War.
“(Signed) Charles Fergusson,
“Lieut-General, Commanding XVII. Corps.”
“ 9 th October, 1918.”
From the General Officer Commanding the Third Army :
“ Headquarters, Third Army, B.E.F.
“ 10-10-18.
“ I cannot allow the 68rd (R.N.) Division to leave the Third Army
without expressing my sincerest appreciation of the gallant behaviour
during the battle of Cambrai.
“In every operation success has crowned its efforts. This was brought
about by sound preparation on the part of its Staffs, by skilful tactical
handling by all leaders and by a determined resolve on the part of all
ranks to beat the enemy.
“ The Third Army’s record of ground gained and prisoners and guns
captured is a splendid one, and I owe my deepest thanks to all ranks of the
68rd (R.N.) Division for their fine share in the achievement.
“(Signed) J. Bynq, General.”
NOTE


CHAPTER XVII
CONCLUSION
* HRHE Belgian people will never forget that the men of the
X Royal Navy and Royal Marines were with them in their
* darkest hour of misery, as, please God, they may also be with
them when Belgium is restored to her own by the Armies of
the Allies.” So, it will be remembered, ended Mr. Winston
Churchill’s message to the Naval Division on the conclusion
of the Antwerp expedition. The hope which inspired it had
been fulfilled, when, on November 11th, the Naval Division,
in the forefront of the XXIInd Corps, entered on its first
experience of peace in the neighbourhood of Mens,
After a period of welcome rest at St. Pol—never before
since they landed in France had they been so far from the
battle front —the Division had come forward into the fighting
line on the 6th November, in relief of the 168th Brigade of the
56th Division, west of the Bois d’Audregnies. From then
onward, the advance of the XXIInd Corps front, as elsewhere,
was continuous, and almost unopposed by the enemy infantry.
Isolated machine-gun detachments, however, and sporadic
artillery fire exacted their toll of casualties in what was no
longer a battle, but a pursuit.
The progress of our advance was, indeed, governed mainly
by the state of the roads, and the difficulty of getting rations
to the troops in the forward area. Nevertheless, the morning
of November Bth saw the capture of Witheries, and, in the
afternoon, our line was carried east of Blaugies, the first advance
being made by the 189th Brigade and the second by the 190th
on November 9th. The advance of the 190th Brigade reached
as far as the road running north-east from Qu6vy le Petit,
and from there the pursuit was taken up by the 188th Brigade,


directed across the historic field of Malplaquet, past Har-
mignies, to the villages of Villers Saint Ghislain and Saint
Symphonien. Here, for the first time, the enemy made some
show of resistance, and only the bold handling of their units,
by the subordinate commanders of the Anson* and Royal
Irish battalions, enabled the brigade to reach the Mons-Givry
road by mid-day on November 10th, and the line Harmignies-
Malplaquet by the evening.
The advance was ordered to continue the next day to the
assigned objective on a two-brigade front, and so the 188th and
189th Brigades found themselves, on the day of the Armistice,
side by side in the front line. The advance carried them
through Givry, meeting with little opposition. Here the
189th Brigade outstripped the pursuit to the south, and mounted
troops were dispatched to protect their flank, while “ B ”
Company of the Machine Gun Battalion came into action at
10.45 a.m. against the enemy rearguards clearly visible to their
front. A quarter of an hour later, hostilities ceased.
Here this record, faithful as I could make it, comes to
its close. The Royal Naval Division had been brought into
existence in the stress of a great crisis, and when the crisis
was over it passed out of history. For some months, indeed,
it remained in Belgium, engaged in the humbler pursuits which
are the lot of armies in days of peace : actually after the final
demobilization, the War Office urged the Admiralty to re-form
the Division for service in the Army of the Rhine. It was
not, however, for the routine tasks of such a period of transi-
tion that the Naval Division had been formed, or was best
suited. Wider interests were calling to these personalities
who had made the principal contribution to the force and in-
dividuality of the Division, and one by one they passed on their
separate ways.
If the Royal Naval Division had not by now ceased to
exist, it would have ceased to be memorable. Its achievements
in war had been remarkable, but it owed its strength to its
* Sub-Lieut. J. M. Law, of the Anson Battalion, was awarded the M.C. for
his services on this occasion.


originality, grounded in traditions alien to regular formations.
It was always different. There were indeed, not a few* among
the officers and men of the Division, even at the close of the
war, who had been bred from their youth upward in the Naval
tradition, and to these faithful few the Naval Division owed
incalculably much. For the most part, however, the Naval
Division, alike in its qualities and its defects, was representative
of the stubborn individualism of the English character, only
moved to active co-operation in the pursuit of a common
objective by a great cause making a secret if unconfessed
appeal to the latent idealism of our race. The same cause may
see the Naval Division once more in the field ; but, without its
inspiration, they will never be found on the barrack square.
Let no one say that this savours of a complacent optimism, of
an unenviable readiness to resign to others the work of study
and training which is the essential foundation of success in war.
Success in war comes to those nations which devote themselves
with energy in time of peace to the legitimate occupations of
decent and Christian men. Among these occupations, the
profession of arms is but one.
And so it is not altogether with regret that we may contem-
plate the passing of the Royal Naval Division from the theatre
of action into the pages of history.
The Royal Marines, with their older traditions, carry on their
colours battle honours which will serve to keep alive, in the
memory of that historic Corps, the days when they were a part
of a more transient organization. The Royal Field Artillery,
the Bedfordshire Regiment, the Royal Fusiliers, the Artists’
Rifles and the Honourable Artillery Company may also not be
forgetful of an active comradeship which the Naval and Marine
Battalions at any rate will remember with gratitude. But
for the most part the Naval Division will live as a memory,
only to be rekindled when, in another great crisis, old traditions
are awakened and the familiar battle-grounds of the British
people echo again to the noise and rumour of war. The
* It would have been fitting to have placed on record here a full list of the
many faithful and experienced officers promoted from the Lower Deck who con-
tributed so much to the esprit de corps and to the naval tradition of the Division.
Unfortunately the records are not sufficiently complete. Lt.-Commander Turrell,
M.C., R.N.V.R. (Drake), Lieut. Charles Hoskyns, R.N.V.R. (Nelson), Lieut. F. C.
Hill, M.C., R.N.V.R. (Hood), Lieut. Stear, M.C., R.N.V.R. (Anson and Hawke)
are only four among many whose services deserve more than a mere passing
reference.


statesman who faces that crisis may be prudent if he weighs the
considerations of administrative convenience, and allows the
memory to slumber in the archives of his office. If he lacks
prudence, but possesses imagination, another chapter will be
added to this history.


LIST OF APPENDICES
PAGE
APPENDIX A
Extracts from Minutes of the First Lord of the Admiralty
(The Right Hon. Winston S. Churchill), dated 16th, 17th and
30th August, 1914, governing the formation of the Royal
Naval Division ........ 333-6
APPENDIX B
Composition of Staff of the Royal Naval Division, 1914-1919 . 337
APPENDIX C
Summary Statement of Royal Naval Division Casualties. . 338
APPENDIX D
Names of Officers of the Royal Naval Division killed in the
Engagement of June 4th-6th, 1915 ..... 339
APPENDIX E
Names of Officers of the Royal Navy, Royal Naval Volunteer
Reserve and Royal Marines killed :
(i) in the Engagement of November 13th-14th, 1910 840-1
(ii) in the Ist and 2nd Battles of Gavrelle, April, 1917 341-2
(iii) IN THE CONCLUDING ENGAGEMENTS OF AUGUST, SEPTEMBER,
October and November, 1918 ..... 842-4
APPENDIX F
Account of a Raid carried out by the Drake Battalion, July
12th-13th, 1918 345-6




APPENDIX A
EXTRACTS FROM MINUTES OF THE FIRST LORD OF THE ADMIRALTY (THE
RIGHT HON. WINSTON S. CHURCHILL), DATED 16TH, 17TH AND 30TH
AUGUST, 1914, GOVERNING THE FORMATION OF THE ROYAL NAVAL
DIVISION.
e w
Secretary.
First Sea Lord.
Second Sea Lord.
In order to make the best possible use of the surplus naval reservists of
different classes, it is proposed to constitute permanent cadres of one Marine
and two naval brigades. The Marine brigade has already been partially formed
in four battalions, aggregating 1,880 active service men. To this will be added
an approximately equal number of reservists, making the total strength of the
brigade 8,900, organized in four battalions of four double companies of approxi-
mately 250 men. The two naval brigades will also consist of four battalions,
each, if possible, of 880 men, organized in 16 double companies of 220. The
composition of each battalion should be as follows ;
R.N.V.R 375
R.F.R 815
R.N.R. (picked, under 80 years of age) 190
The total numbers required for the two naval brigades would, therefore, be :
R.N.V.R 3,000
R.F.R 2,500
R.N.R 1,800
The Marine brigade will be commanded by a Colonel, and each battalion by a
Lieutenant-Colonel; each company by a Major and a Captain. The means of
remedying the shortage of junior officers will be dealt with separately. About
SO new subalterns R.M. must be entered either permanently or on a three years’
or till the war stops engagement.
Each naval brigade will be commanded by a Captain, R.N., five of the battalions
by a Commander, or naval officer promoted to that rank, and three by R.N.V.R.
Commanders ; each company will be commanded by a Lieutenant-Commander,
R.N. or R.N.V.R., or, if these are not forthcoming, by a Major, R.M. The
auestion of making good deficiencies in these and in the Marine brigade will be
ealt with separately. There are, however, available 50 R.N.V.R. Lieutenants,
66 Sub-Lieutenants and 12 Midshipmen, total 128. About 50 more officers
will be required.
The use of these brigades need not be considered until the organization has
advanced sufficiently to allow of their military value to be judged.
The formation of these brigades should be completed, so far as resources allow,
in the present week. The officers commanding the companies and battalions
must be appointed forthwith. The first essential is to get the men drilling
together in brigades ; and the deficiencies of various ranks in the battalions can
be filled up later. It may ultimately be found possible in the course of the
war to build up all battalions of the Marine and naval brigades to the army
strength of 1,070, and the organization will readily adapt itself to this, and it
must be distinctly understood that this is the paramount claim upon them.
All the men, whether sailors or Marines, while training in the three brigades
will be available if required for service afloat; but in the meanwhile they will
be left to be organized for land service.
16. 8. 14. W. S. C.


(n)
Secretary and others.
The following is an amplification and refinement of my Minute of 16. 8. 14;
A camping ground has been selected near Deal.
The War Office have been asked for 700 tents : 160 marine tents will start
to-morrow. The War Office to be asked to assist in camping equipment
so far as possible. The Director of Victualling to make arrangements for vic-
tualling the men by contract.
The following will arrive at the camping ground on Friday next;—
Chief Petty Officers:
Active Service 32
R.F.R 64
Petty Officers:
Active Service 128
R.F.R 128
Leading Seamen, A.B’s and Ordinary Seamen :
Active Service 128
R.F.R 128
Total 608
The whole of the R.N.V.R., except those engaged on Tyne patrol and those
already embarked, a total of 3,400 with recruits, to arrive in camp on Saturday.
They are to retain their existing formations till the Monday, when they are to be
reorganized as follows ;
The cadres of 2 brigades, comprising 8 battalions and 32 companies, will be
formed. Approximately 106 R.N.V.R. will be assigned to each company
and 424 to each battalion.
The following C.P.O’s and P.O’s will also be added to each company :
Chief Petty Officers:
Active Service 1
R.F.R 2
Petty Officers:
Active Service 2
R.F.R 4
A.B’s and Leading Seamen ;
Active Service 4
R.F.R 4
17
These are additional to the R.N.V.R. petty officers.
The officers available include 128 Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants, and Mid-
shipmen, making 4 per company and 16 per battalion. These are to be dis-
tributed accordingly. Eight battalion commanders will be appointed on Thurs-
day next. A military officer will be appointed Adjutant to each battalion.
These officers will join on Saturday, the 22nd instant.
Thirty-two Instructors, R.M., will also join the camp on Friday next, the
21st.
Seventeen retired officers are also available and will be appointed shortly.
The appointment of all officers to special positions, like the command of
companies and battalions, must at this stage be regarded as provisional and
subject to confirmation at the end of the first month.
A band must be provided. The quality is not important. There must
be sufficient pupils under instruction at the Naval School of Music to provide
for this. The band is to join on Saturday next.
On Wednesday, the 26th, 2,000 R.F.R. stokers and 1,500 R.N.R. (the latter
picked and under 30 years of age) will join the camp from their respective home


ports and be distributed equally between the eight battalions. The composition
of each battalion will be approximately as follows ;—
R.N.V.R 424
R.F.R 324
R.N.R 187
and of each company :—
R.N.V.R 106
R.F.R 81
R.N.R. 46
The two brigades, aggregating approximately 7,500 men, should be complete
by Wednesday, the 26th, and will be inspected on Monday, the 31st, by the
Board of Admiralty.
R.N.V.R. will bring their own rifles. D.N.O. will arrange to issue 4,000
rifles for the use of R.N.R., R.F.R., and petty officers. All these rifles are long
rifles. Orders will be placed for short rifles to be delivered at the earliest
moment.
Forty Maxims have been ordered from Vickers, which, it is stated, can be
ready in 10 days. They are to be divided as follows ;—
To each battalion in the naval brigade 4=32
In reserve 4
To the Marine brigade to complete to full establishment 4
Each company throughout the naval and Marine brigades will detail a Maxim-
gun section.
D.N.O. will be responsible for the issue of the rifles, Maxims, and accoutre-
ments. Ammunition will be served out later.
M.D.G. has been directed to submit proposals for supplying each of the three
brigades with a brigade field ambulance column according to Army scale.
Major Ollivant will submit the necessary establishment of horses and mules.
The mounted officers will be supplied with their chargers and saddlery by the
Government free.
The pay of all ranks serving in the brigades will be uniform, and no distinction
will be drawn between the various classes of reservists.
The Director of Contracts will order 12,000 khaki kits, of which 4,000 will be
military for the Marines and 8,000 naval, according to directions given.
17. 8. 14. W. S. C.
(m)
Secretary.
Second Sea Lord.
R.N.D. Administration.
A.G.R.M. AND OTHERS CONCERNED.
*********
All appointments and the relative naval rank in the R.N.V.R. are made
provisionally from the 1st September, and are subject to confirmation during
the month.
Brigadiers should collect from their Battalion Commandants recommenda-
tions as to purging petty officers unsuited to field duties. This process should
be gradual during the month. The petty officers not required will be returned
to the Royal Naval and Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve depots, and be available
for general service.
♦ * ♦ ♦ *-* * * *
All military officers attached to the division will be given commissions appro
priate to their commands in the R.N.V.R.
Brigadiers are to enforce a selection upon their Battalion Commandants,
which is to operate during the month of September, so as to secure the best


men being appointed, irrespective of their origin and without regard to seniority,
to the non-commissioned ranks.
The junior commissioned officers, up to and including Company Commanders,
are to be selected on the same principle, no regard being had to seniority or to
the branch in which the officer has previously served, or to his personal feelings.
The sole object will be to secure the command of companies as of battalions
to the men best suited to lead the units in war.
Entire discretion in the matter of the Company Commanders is given to the
Brigadiers, but they will no doubt consult with the Battalion Commandants.
In the same way Battalion Commandants will deal with the seniority of the
junior officers in the companies, consulting of course the Company Commanders
in whom they have confidence.
30. 8. 14.
W. S. C.


!»-•
JiU
.din
Jilt 1
iiu>
ate
tt-kC- _
i- 3*-*
JkTw
m ■». a, (w
i#rtj - jr*. ifr *
U*--Bc±.£ tl^4»-
cTrCT,
*•■* --=. " ; iawar UU -«ms > - 'V^
USJJU. ....
UXk. K u -«4
l—m v a te-x
i - L wut
i-= -ic li » JBaitlUlL
u. Ui], u r. aiuuuL
U (1 |,w
— - \y. . Vito-
l_-_ai. -•. u»- —..
f
tet aau a 5ooi^
It
* t4V —
- . -tt— ■ _:
L J A' i. l>xauar.
R3AJL1
r fvMJu,
?*-'U V • 1»
(V hfti.
!>'• a. *-
OLUU, m a— «i
(y mm im u«j
wC |W;in
V uC WX" fJUCTU UXZJ 1
LT'^TSd
a*. v. .
*Jrrf*i, | . I>, <*»\
*►1* J*«w«a-U" *.!.•
i
n
Sts. 1- 5- -fetllj*.
• 'HUH*.
I r. . u
cO. >w X C. —n~Ji
C .-4W «- U aatlrilV.
r- * •-
1)1 L« ' 1 11 1 -»
.It J >rrii. U. jL "uoi-fc.
T ' r *. .
hi t ’'"tj j
>r<* **EL*-|i XPaite.
1 » *> / • * “'T«p«
*
(MMk
V*.- -w ■* % -
IvjUb
' ' ? *
/ - * «- =
rs
1 |l .
•-C. «. »,'.
llllw- < a.lr .Ml/,
» |< fn un
— J, —
~ f '.1 a*_
—
—
—
—
- oo— uJ i'o
—
—
• ’ i * —
kr)V«*"i *- —. II
► * -Mr- *
iv *
V. • V.
*w
T.t U-
if. *
Cti. ...
—
€r<
•v •_ a •»
• miuuum.A-
— r —
aj 1 *
nr- fi— r. it •
— t.
rxx _ _ _
a»i •»«, JliX ! ju^
| W flMHi
’ .1 1 - il 1 - 1 iW-.i.
r.i— rl *~m t m^
«l—. — — M
S7 r
;j— Ism
u
"aiir * *]
•— ■—• • • i
1-lW
i-vt.
r- ->
'-W k. «. aw II
APPENTDIX B
COM[?] NAVAL [?]


Killed.
Died of
Wounds.
Died.
Wounded.
Missing.
Prisoners
and Interned
Total.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Offi-
cers.
Other
ranks.
Antwerp
6
41
1
10
2
41
2
135
—
39
2,332
50
2,559
M.E.F.
102
1,551
26
574
5
233
199
4,838
—
—
—
2
332
7,198
B.E.F.
337
5,510
91
1,882
12
295
1,163
24,555
—
—
80
2,750
1,683
34,992
Died in United Kingdom
(other than those above)
— —
—
2
—
78
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
80
Total
445
7,102
118
2,466
19
647
1,364
29,528
—
—
119
5,084
1,965
44,829
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION CASUALTIES.
OFFICERS AND OTHER RANKS.
APPENDIX C


APPENDIX D
LIST OF OFFICERS OF THE ROYAL NAVAL DIVISION KILLED IN THE ACTIONS OF
JUNE 4TH-6TH, 1915, AT GALLIPOLI (2ND BATTLE OF KRITHIA).
Ist Royal Naval Brigade
Nelson Battalion.
Acting Lieut.-Commander H. C. Evans, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant J. A. R. McCormick, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. W. Edwards, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. P. Robley, R.N.V.R.
2nd Royal Naval Brigade
Howe Battalion.
Major S. J. Sparling, R.M.
Lieutenant H. B. Mclntosh, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant N. H. Miller, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. G. M. Callendar, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. A. Clifford, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. Norman, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. W. Ross, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. W. Stacey, R.N.V.R.
Hood Battalion.
Lieut.-Commander R. S. Parsons, R.N. '
Lieutenant the Hon. M. H. N. Hood, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant J. W. Ferguson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. Baker, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. D. Browne, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. J. Martin, R.N.V.R.
Anson Battalion.
Major R. A. Roberts, R.A.
Lieutenant J. C. Spencer-Warwick, R.N.V.R.
Acting-Lieut. W. F. Brown, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. T. M. Crowe, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. J. Henry, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. A. H. Richmond, R.N.V.R.
Collingwood Battalion.
Commander A. Y. C. M. Spearman, R.N.
Lieut.-Commander W. M. Annand, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant J. B. T. Church, R.N.
Lieutenant F. M. Badham, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant J. W. Hart, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant W. F. Hayes, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant F. A. Lowe, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. G. Bagshaw, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. Bolton, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. E. Davies, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. O. Freyberg, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. Jukes, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. McLeod, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. D. Milroy, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. Plunkett, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. L. E. Tucker, R.N.V.R


APPENDIX E (i)
OFFICERS OF THE ROYAL NAVAL, ROYAL NAVAL VOLUNTEER RESERVE AND
ROYAL MARINES KILLED IN THE BATTLE OF THE ANCRE, NOVEMBER
13TH-14TH, 1916
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Lieut.-Col. F. J. Saunders, D. 5.0., R.M.
Surgeon C. H. Gow, R.N.
Sub-Lieut. J. N. Bowden, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. J. Gee, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. A. G. Harvie, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. O. J. Hobbs, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. Johnston, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. Kilner, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. Lee, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. A. McMillan, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. W. A. Wauchope, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. C. Weaver, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. C. J. Williams, R.N.V.R.
Howe Battalion.
Lieutenant G. R. Airey, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant E. R. Aston, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant C. D. P. de la Mothe, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant A. F. Maynard, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. C. Hakin, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. E. N. Chance, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. G. O. Fletcher, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. Fry, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. V. Howard, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. N. Strang, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. H. G. Wagner, R.N.V.R.
Ist Royal Marine Battalion.
Captain M. C. Browne, D.S.C., R.M.
Captain H. Hoare, R.M.
Captain V. D. Loxley, R.M.
Captain C. L. E. Muntz, R.M.
Captain J. M. Pound, R.M.
Captain G. H. Sulivan, R.M.
Lieutenant F. J. Hanson, R.M.
Lieutenant J. W. Richards, R.M.
2nd Lieut. C. W. Martin, R.M.
2nd Lieut. H. E. R. Upham, R.M.
2nd Royal Marine Battalion.
Acting Lieut. H. B. Welman, R.M.
2nd Lieut. L. J. A. Dewar, R.M.
2nd Lieut. L. M. Stokes, R.M.
18 8th M. G. C.
Sub-Lieut. A. C. Hamilton, R.N.V.R
188 th T. M. B.
Sub-Lieut. L. J. Oates, R.N.V.R.
189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Acting Lieut.-Commander F. S. Kelly, D.S.C., R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant C. A. Edmondson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. J. Apthorp, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. Gealer, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. R. Hart, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. G. Watson, R.N.V.R.
340
Appendix E


Drake Battalion.
Lieut.-Col. A. S. Tetley, R.M.
Lieut.-Commander P. S. Campbell, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. W. R. Bradley, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. A. Foster, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. A. Langford, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. H. M. Newall, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Surgeon J. S. Ward, R.N.
Lieutenant the Hon. V. S. T. Harmsworth, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant W. Ker, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. A. Cook, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. C. G. Edwards, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. Gold, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. R. Knight, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. S. G. Poole, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. A. C. C. Turnbull, R.N.V.R.
Nelson Battalion.
Lieut.-Col. N. O. Burge, R.M.
Sub-Lieut. D. R. G. P. Alldridge, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. L. Ball, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. W. Cashmore, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. H. Emerson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. D. Francis, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. L. S. Gardner, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. Langstreth, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. A. Reddick, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. W. Squires, R.N.V.R.
189to M. G. C.
Sub-Lieut. E. M. Aron, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. D. Black, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. H. Brothers, R.N.V.R.
190 th M. G. C.
Acting Captain E. Bastin, R.M.
Lieutenant A. H. Chapman, R.M.
Sub-Lieut. H. W. Troughton, R.N.V.R.
1 at Field Ambulance.
Surgeon G. A. Walker, M.B., R.N.
APPENDIX E (ii)
Names of Officers op the Royal Navy, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
and Royal Marines killed in the 1st and 2nd Battles of Gavrelle,
April, 1917.
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. G. H. W. Hughes, R.N.V.R.
Howe Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. L. S. Savill, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. H. Sikes, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. R. Yeoman, R.N.V.R.
1st Royal Marine Battalion.
Lieut.-Col. F. J. W. Cartwright, D.S.O., R.M.
Lieutenant N. T. Lion, R.M.
Lieutenant E. L. Platts, R.M.
2nd Lieut. J. Fielding, R.M.
2nd Lieut. H. C. Holmes, R.M.
2nd Lieut. F. S. Marsh, R.M.


2nd Royal Marine Battalion.
Captain N. E. E. Burton-Fanning, R.M.
Captain J. Campbell, R.M.
Lieutenant H. E. Markham, R.M.
2nd Lieut. P. E. R. Hardy, R.M.
2nd Lieut. C. H. Kearney, R.M.
2nd Lieut. W. A. Lake, R.M.
2nd Lieut. D. H. Walker, R.M.
189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Lieutenant C. P. Astbury, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant J. W. Morrison, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant G. H. Tamplin, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. D. F. Bailey, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. R. V. Cleves, B.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. S. Cooke, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. T. K. Cross, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. C. Sennit, R.N.V.R.
Drake Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. A. H. Banning, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. C. Bowles, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. F. Neale, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. B. Wallis, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Lieutenant F. B. Melland, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. A. J. Burr, R.N.V.R.
Nelson Battalion.
Lieutenant C. A. Truscott, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant G. K. Turnbull, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. C. Hewitt, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. J. Palmer, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. A. Siddle, R.N.V.R.
IQOtfi M. G. C.
Sub-Lieut. F. L. Rees, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. E. Willis, R.N.V.R.
R. N. D. Engineers.
Lieutenant H. Shaw, R.M.
APPENDIX E (iii)
Names of Officers of the Royal Navy, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
and Royal Marines killed in the concluding Engagements of
August, September, October and November, 1918.
(a) Battles of August 21st to 28th (Attacks on Achiet-le-Grand,
Le Barque and Thilloy)
- 188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Lieut.-Commander E. A. Sprange, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant P. S. Luce, R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant G. Paterson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. F. Hardy, M.M., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. J. Dewdney, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. N. Nesbitt, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. T. H. Westbrook, R.N V.R.


Royal Marine Battalion.
Acting Major R. A. Poland, R.M.
Captain B. G. Andrews, R.M.
Captain E. L. Andrews, R.M.
2nd Lieut. C. A. Barber, R.M.L.I.
2nd Lieut. W. C. B. Matthews, R.M.
189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Lieut.-Commander S. H. Fish, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Lieutenant H. T. Ely, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. Menzies, R.N.V.R.
Drake Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. F. J. Philp, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. Barbour, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. G. Hunter, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. R. G. Love, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Commander S. G. Jones, R.N.V.R.
Lieut.-Commander O. J. Wainwright, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. H. Darrell, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. L. Willison, R.N.V.R.
(6) Battles op September Ist to Bth, 1918 (Attack on Drocourt-
Queant Line, Inchy, and Mceuvres)
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Lieutenant R. Donaldson, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Royal Marine Battalion.
Lieutenant J. R. Bates, R.M.
Lieutenant A. C. McAdam, R.M.
189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Surgeon A. R. MacMullin, D.S.C., R.N.
Sub-Lieut. J. E. Webber, R.N.V.R.
Drake Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. E. W. Fry, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Acting Lieut. H. B. Biggs, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. A. Leighton, D.S.M., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. Chapman, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. S. Strickland, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. G. C. Unwin, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. E. E. Wicks, R.N.V.R.
(c) Battles of September 29th to October Brd, 1918 (Attacks on Canal
du Nord, Graincourt, Anneux and Canal d’Escaut)
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. F. Southern, R.N.V.R.
Royal Marine Battalion.
Captain F. G. Eliot, M.C., R.M.
Lieutenant L. F. Albury, R.M.
Lieutenant A. W. Gregory, R.M.
Lieutenant G. R. B. Hollamby, R.M.


189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. L. H. Card, R.N.V.R.
Drake Battalion.
Surgeon F. G. Pocock, D. 5.0., M.C., R.N.
Sub-Lieut. C. E. Upson, M.C., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. C. Attfleld, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. P. Reeve, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. G. Todd, R.N.V.R.
( d) Battle of October Bth, 1918 (Attack on Niebonies)
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Acting Lieut. A. E. Ross, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. P. R. Shinkfield, R.N.V.R.
Royal Marine Battalion.
Lieutenant A. G. Bareham, R.M.L.I.
Lieutenant A. Wallis, R.M.
189th Brigade
Hood Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. J. C. Morley, R.N.V.R.
Drake Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. A. Ross, D.C.M., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. W. F. Benson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. A. J. Loutit, R.N.V.R.
Hawke Battalion.
Lieutenant A. O. Cookson, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. O. Harris, D. 5.0., R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. C. Harry, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. J. B. Johnston, R.N.V.R.
(e) Engagements of November 6th to 11th, 1918 (Final
Advance through Belgium)
188th Brigade
Anson Battalion.
Sub-Lieut. F. E. Brooks, R.N.V.R
Sub-Lieut. C. A. Richards, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. F. E. Trenholm, R.N.V.R.
Sub-Lieut. H. Young, R.N.V.R.
Royal Marine Battalion.
2nd Lieut. S. Goodwin, R.M.L.I.


APPENDIX F
RAID BY THE DRAKE BATTALION, JULY 12TH-13TH, 1918
“ Two German strong points, in which there were always a considerable
number of the enemy, were marked down by careful reconnaissance.
“ Air photographs were taken of them, and they were laid out with tapes
life size on the ground near Mailley-Maillet village. When the Battalion was
out in reserve the Company selected to carry out the raid practised it several
times on the tapes till every man knew exactly where he had to go, so as to find
his way in the dark.
“ The raid was under command of Lieutenant Robertson, 0.C., ‘ D’ Co., and
the actual raiding party consisted of 54 men under 2nd Lieuts. Bolt and
Briddon, who commanded the right and left parties respectively.
“ On the night chosen for the raid, July 12th, the party moved forward
three hours before zero, owing to the muddy state of the trenches. After
a rest of an hour and a quarter and a meal of hot tea and meat sandwiches
in the front trench, the men started to line out in the assembly position 45
minutes before zero.
“ Thanks to the careful preparation of the officers responsible, the spacing
out of the men was punctually carried out, and the whole party were in position
a quarter of an hour before zero. At midnight, the zero hour, a powerful bar-
rage of artillery and trench mortars opened to the second.
“ Besides heavy fire on the points to be attacked, a mine crater and a knot
of trenches, a box-barrage of artillery and machine-gun fire was put down on
three sides of the scene of operations, to prevent any of the Germans running
away or any reinforcements coming up to assist. The men were in excellent
spirits and confident of success.
“ When the barrage opened they automatically fixed bayonets, and moved
forward to within 30 yards of it. In doing this they had to pass through
the wire, which, despite a few gaps, caused some difficulty. It was fairly loose,
however, with few stakes, and the men were able to tread it down and pass
over it.
“ At zero and 4 minutes, when the barrage lifted, the men charged the
first objective with a lusty cheer. When ‘B ’ party (2nd Lieut. Briddon), on
the left, arrived at the trench, they found the Boches ‘ standing to,’ some on the
fire-step, and some in the trench. They showed fight and refused to surrender,
and were killed. In the trench were six dug-outs, the occupants of which refused
to surrender. ‘P ’ smoke bombs, followed by Mills grenades, were thrown
down the entrances and the inhabitants killed. Every dug-out was treated
like this, and one was actually in flames when the party returned to our lines.
“ They moved forward as arranged along Lounge trench until * A ’ party
was met. Here a Boche was found in the act of firing a light machine gun.
He refused to surrender, and tried to turn it on the party. The officer in com-
mand of the party killed him with his revolver. Another was found firing a
rifle, and he was overpowered and made a prisoner, and sent back to our trenches.
This man made two attempts to escape on the way back.
“ All the enemy dead were searched for papers useful to the Intelligence
Staff, but nothing was found.
“ ‘ A ’ party (2nd Lieut. Bolt), on the right, on reaching this first objective,
found no one in the trench. They carried on half-right ‘ over the top ’ to
Lounge trench. A bombing party, working up Lustre Support trench, met with
opposition and could not get on.


“ The rest of the party, on arriving at their second objective, met a Boche,
who immediately called down a dug-out, and two or three others came out and
surrendered. The party then worked along the trench and found 12 dug-out
entrances. The inmates were called on to surrender, which they did without
resistance.
“ When the prisoners had come out, ‘ P ’ bombs and Mills grenades were
thrown down all these entrances to set the dug-outs on fire.
“ In this vicinity ‘ A ’ party captured 21 prisoners, and destroyed one heavy
machine gun.
“ The officer in charge and 7 men were actually responsible. It was a
fine feat for eight men to bring this number of prisoners out of the enemy’s
lines, and 2nd Lieut. Bolt and these men deserve great credit for their coolness
and pluck. They returned to our lines at zero and 45 minutes, and joined
their comrades, who had already returned, the officers minus the greater part of
their breeches, which they had left on the German wire.
“ The total captures were 21 men and one light machine gun, and a con-
siderable number of the enemy were killed. Our losses were one man missing
and five slightly wounded.”


INDEX
A.
Abbeville (town), 170.
Ablainzeville (town), 203.
Ablett, Sub-Lt., (footnote) 216.
Achibaba, 69, 75, 77, 80, 81, 96, 97,
98, 101, 111, 112, 128, 129, 138,
139, 140, 142, 144, 153, 154.
Achiet-le-Grand (town), 303, 805.
Achiet-le-Grand-Arras Railway, 808.
Acbiet-le-Petit (town), 803.
Adams, Major, 47.
Adrianople, 74.
Advanced Base Force, planned by
C. I. D., and formed on outbreak
of War, 2,* for defence of Channel
Ports, 14.
Aegean Archipelago, 67.
Aegean Sea, 72, 165.
Aegospotami, 72.
Africa, 67.
Aisne (river,) 18, 16, 228, 242, 298,
298.
Albert (town), 18, 183, 289, 290, 292,
295, 298, 303, 805.
Albert-Amiens Road, 801.
Albert-Bapaume Road, 288, 805, 306,
307.
Albion, 89, 93.
Alcock, Lt., 118.
Aldridge, 2nd Lt. J. D., 256.
Alexandria, 70.
Alnwick (town), 46.
Alnwick Castle, 71.
Ambulances, R.N.D. Field, staffing of,
47 ; Commanding Officers appointed,
48; in France, 181.
Ist Field Ambulance, embarks at
Avonmouth, 59 ; sails from Alex-
andria, 71 ; lands at Anzac, 115 ;
share in Anzac operations, 126.
2nd Field Ambulance, sails from
Alexandria, 71; at Suvla, 152.
3rd Field Ambulance, sails from
Alexandria, 71; disembarks at Cape
Helles, 100 ; in engagement May
6th-Bth, 1915, 102.
Amiens (town), 18.
Ammunition Column, R.N. Divisional,
181, 281.
Ancre (river), Battles of, 183-207,
225, 236, 289, 242, 290, 291, 292,
295, 297, 299, 805.
Ancre Valley, 210, 212,
Anderson, Lt.-Comdr., 110.
Anderson, Lt., R.N.V.R., 283, 285.
Andrews, Capt. 8., 110, 803.
Angres, 174, 226.
Angres (town), 173, 174, 178, 227.
Annand, Lt.-Comdr., 134.
Annesley, Lt.-Col., 208.
Anneux (town), 316-319.
Anneux-Graineourt line, 816.
Anson Battalion. First appointments
to, 7; Arthur Asquith, Rupert
Brooke and Denys Brown appointed
to, 11; in barracks at Chatham,
46 ; commanded by Lt.-Col. Moor-
house, 46 ; ordered to Alexandria,
70; attached 29th Div., Gallipoli
landings, 77; at landings on
V, W and X beaches, 82, 85, 87,
89 ; in firing line April 25th-26th,
90; as beach parties, 93; rein-
force the French, 101,102 ; achieve-
ments to May sth, *l5, 103; in
engagement of May 6th, *l5, 104 ;
Gen. D’Amade’s tribute to, 109;
Major Roberts to command, 129;
in attack of 4th June, ’15,181-134 ;
reorganization of, 137 ; in Turkish
attack on 19th June, ’l5, 141 ;
detached for duty at Suvla, 142-
143; losses to 25th July, ’l5,
148 ; brigaded with Royal Marines
July, ’l5, 150; at Suvla, 152;
in evacuation of Gallipoli, 162;
decision to send to France, 170;
commanded by Lt.-Col. Saunders,
France, ’l6, 172; raid carried out
by on 10th Sept. ’16,178 ; in Battle
of the Ancre, 13th Nov. ’16,189-202 ;
command of taken over by Lt.-Col.
Kirkpatrick, 208; in attack of
17th Feb. ’l7, 218 ; at Angres, 12th
Ap. ’l7, 226 ; in second battle of
Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7, 240; raid by,
7th Sept. ’l7, 247; at Passchen-
daele, Oct. ’l7, 252, 257; com-
manded temporarily by Lt.-Comdr.
Buckle, 267 ; at Welsh Ridge, Dec.
’l7, 269; dispositions or, 21st
Mar. ’lB, 275 ; behind the Green
Line, 23rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 278, 279,
283 ; at High Wood, 286 ; counter-
attack of 26th-27th Mar. ’lB, 291 ;
raid by, 24th May ’lB, 299 ; attack
of, 21st Aug. ’lB, 802,804 ; in attack
of, 24th-25th Aug. 807, 308 ; in
attack on Drocourt-QuSant line,


Anson Battalion—continued.
317, 818; in attack on Anneux-
Graincourt, 820; in attack on
Niergnies, 324 ; in advance of 9th
Nov. ’lB, 328.
Antwerp. Legends about Naval Divi-
sion at, 1; merits of British
intervention at, 13 ; Belgian Field
Army falls back on, 16 ; Germans
break through outer forts, 19;.
plans for relief of, 20 ; Mr. Winston
Churchill arrives at, 21 ; Gen. Paris
receives orders to take Infantry to,
21 ; Marine Brigade enters, 21;
Belgian Field Army still in front
of, 23 ; Naval Brigades arrive at,
24; Belgian and British forces at,
27; situation on Oct. 6th, 27;
withdrawal to inner forts, 28;
conditions on Oct. 7th, 29 ; posi-
tion of Belgian rearguards, 31;
decision to withdraw R.N. Division
from, 82 ; experiences in retirement
from, 34-88 ; fall of, 38 ; losses of
Naval Division at, 40 ; Mr. Winston
Churchill’s message to Division
after, 40-41, 327.
Anzac, 75, 98, 103, 109, 115, 160,
153, 158, 160, 162.
Arblaster, Lt.-Comdr., 204, 255
Ardennes, 809, 318.
Arleux (town), 238.
Armies, British;
First Army, R.N.D. attached to,
at Passchendaele, 259 ; position
before attack on Drocourt-Qutont
line, 810.
Third Army, share in battles of the
Somme, ’l6, 183 ; R.N.D. trans-
ferred to, 6th Dec. ’l7, 265;
position of, 81st Aug. ’lB, 810 ;
position of, 26th Sept. 18, 316 ;
position in Oct. ’lB, 323, 825.
Fourth Army, share in battles of
the Somme, ’l6, 183 ; in attack
of Bth Aug. ’lB, 301.
Fifth Army, in battle of the Somme,
’l6, 183 ; position of, Dec. ’l7,
266 ; position of, Jan.-Feb. ’lB,
274; retreat of, Mar. ’lB, 276 ;
school of, at Toutencourt, 297.
Armstrong, Major H. G. 8., R.M.L.1.,
18, 118.
Army Corps, British;
Ist Corps, 188th Bde. attached to,
Ap. ’l7, 225 ; in attack of 9th
Ap. ’l7, 225.
llnd Corps, R.N.D. attached to,
Jan, ’17,211.
IVth Corps, R.N.D. attached to,
June ’l6, 178, 179 ; driven back
to Beaumetz, 21st Mar. *lB, 276 ;
R.N.D. attached to, Aug. ’lB,
• 802; objective of, 21st Aug. ’lB,
803; successes of, in Aug. ’lB,
309.
Vih Corps, in battle of the Ancre,
185, 199; R.N.D. attached to,
Oct. ’l6, 185 ; in attack of 13th
Nov. ’l6, 188; R.N.D. line
token over by, Mar. ’l7, 220;
in retreat of, Mar. 21st-27th,
18’, 276, 278, 281, 285, 289, 292 ;
successes of, in Aug. ’lB, 809.
Vlth Corps, in attack of 9th Ap.
’l7, 225, 226 ; in attack of 23rd
Ap. ’l7, 229; objective of, 21st
Aug. ’lB, 302, 803 ; successes of,
in Aug. ’lB, 809.
Vllth Corps, in attack of 9th Ap.
’l7, 225.
VlHth Corps, at Cape Helles, 161.
IXth Corps, suggested relief of
VlHth Corps by, 161.
XUlth Corps, in attack of 15th
Nov. ’l6, 188 ; share in attack
of 9th Ap. ’l7, 225, 226, 227;
task of, July, ’l7, 246 ; com-
manded by Lt.-Gen. Congreve,
V.C., 244.
XVIIth Corps, in attack of 9th
Ap. ’17,225 ; in battle of Gavrelle,
Ap. ’l7, 228, 229, 238 ; in attack
on Drocourt-Qu6ant line, 310;
in attack on Canal du Nord and
Canal d’Escaut, 816, 318 ; posi-
tion of, on sth Oct. ’lB, 323.
XVIIIth Corps, R.N.D. attached
to, Oct. ’l7, 250; new tactics
approved by, 259.
XXllnd Corps, R.N.D. attached to,
Nov. ’lB, 827.
Arras (town), 18, 173, 180, 221, 223,
224, 225, 228, 245, 265, 272, 294,
298, 305, 809, 310.
Arras-Bethune Road, 174.
Arras-Fresny Road, 232.
Artillery, R.N. Divisional, plans for,
48; 223rd, 315th, 317th Bdes.
R.F.A. join R.N.D., July, ’l6,
174; on the way to the Somme,
180; in support to 190th Bde.,
Oct. ’l6, 185 ; tactics of, Nov. ’l6,
190 ; in battle of the Ancre, 191-
192, 194, 196, 201, 202; success
of 817th Bde. in operations of
Feb. 3rd—4th, ’l7, 213, 216 ; effec-
tive action of, in attack of 17th-
18th Feb. ’l7, 218, 219 ; in attack
on Vimy Ridge, Ap. ’l7, 225, 226 ;
services in first battle of Gavrelle,
236; in second battle of Gavrelle,
241; in advance of 28th June, ’l7,
245 ; services of 223rd Bde., July-
Sept. ’l7, 247 ; 223rd and 817th
Bdes. at Passchendaele, 251, 262


264; casualties from gas, 12th-
21st Mar. ’lB, 276 ; actions fought
by 223rd and 317th Bdes. during
retreat of Mar. ’lB, 278, 280, 281,
284, 287; 88th Bde. R.F.A. at-
tached to, Mar. ’lB, 278 ; remain
with IVth Corps, Sept.-Oct. ’lB, 811.
Artillery, 84th Divisional, 227.
Artists’ Rifles, join R.N.D., July, ’l7,
246 ; in attack on Passchendaele,
30th Oct. ’l7, 258 ; at Welsh Ridge,
Dec. ’l7, 269 ; dispositions of, 21st
Mar. ’lB, 275; position of, 23rd
Mar. ’lB, 278; losses of, in retire-
ment, 24th Mar. ’lB, 284; at
Courcelette, 15th Mar. ’lB, 288;
in front of Albert, 26th-27th Mar.
’lB, 292 ; win musketry competi-
tion, Ap. ’lB, 297 ; in advance of
25th Aug. ’lB, 308 ; in attack on
Canal du Nord, 317 ; advance of,
29th Sept. ’lB, 320.
Artois, 181.
Ashton, Colour-Sergeant, 55 (and
footnote).
Asia, plans for landing in, 74,
Aspinall, Lt.-Col., C.M.G., D. 5.0., 172.
Asquith, Brig.-General A. M., D. 5.0.,
appointed Sub-Lt., 11; at burial
of Rupert Brooke, 78; as Lt.-Comdr.
in reorganized Hood Bn., 151;
reconnaissance on Aug. 27th, ’l5,
155; commands Hood Bn. in
France, May, ’l6, 170; detached
for staff duties, 208; in attack
of Brd-4th Feb. ’l7, 214-216;
awarded D. 5.0., 216 ; takes over
command of Hood Bn., Ap. ’l7,
229-230 ; in first battle of Gavrelle,
Ap. ’l7, 230-287 ; at Passchendaele,
26th Oct. ’l7, 254, 255 ; receives
bar to D. 5.0., 256 ; Passchendaele
operations, Nov. ’l7, 259-261 ; pro-
moted to command of 189th Bde.,
Dec. ’l7, 266; severely wounded,
267.
Astbury, Lt., 232.
Aston, Brig.-Gen. Sir George, K.C.8.,
takes command of Marine Brigade,
5 ; ordered to Ostend, 14; in com-
mand at Dunkirk, 17; invalided,
19.
Asirian, 59, 71.
Athenian Empire, 72.
Athens, 72, 73.
Attica, 67.
Auchonvillers (town), 201, 290, 300.
Australian Forces, at Mudros, Mar.-
’l5, 69.
Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, landings assigned to, 77;
reinforced by R.N. Brigades, 100 ;
in fighting of May 6th-Bth, ’l5,
103-107 ; casualties of, 114 ; action
of May 2nd-3rd at Anzac, 119-124 ;
Australian Light Horse at Anzac,
124-125.
Authville (town), 291.
Aveling, Major, 47.
Aveluy Wood, 290, 291, 292.
Aveluy-Bouzincourt Road, 292.
Avonmouth (town), 59.
Ayrshire , 71.
B.
Backhouse, Commodore Oliver, R.N.,
6, 26, 71, 100, 101, 106, 109, 181,
139, 143, 149.
Backhouse Post, 101, 181, 132, 137,
143.
Bailey, 2nd Lt. R. H. S., R.M., (foot-
note) 273.
Baillescourt Farm, 218.
Bailleul (town), 39, 180, 218.
Baines, 2nd Lt. 220.
Bajus (town), 180.
Balcombe, 2nd Lt. P. C., 256.
Baldwin, Lt., R.N.V.R., (footnote) 145
Baldwin, A. 8., 237.
Balkans, 62.
Ballance, Surgeon, (footnote) 107.
Banff House, 252, 253, 259, 260.
Bangor, Col. Lord (late R.A.), 48.
Bapaume (town), 210, 802, 305, 809,
314.
Bapaume Road, 208.
Bapaume-Cambrai Road, 317.
Barastre (town), 280, 283, 284.
Barclay, Lt., R.N.V.R., (footnote)
241-242, 254.
Barker, Major, R.M.L.1., 99.
Barker, Sub-Lt. C. R., (footnote) 267
Barnes, Lt., 110.
Barnett, Major, D. 5.0., 275.
Barnett, Capt., 216.
Barnett, Sub-Lt., 315.
Barque, le (town), 308.
Barras, Sub-Lt. E. C., 315.
Barry, Lt. Wolfe, R.N.V.R., 45.
Bartholomew, Lt., 255, (footnote) 256
Barton, Sub-Lt. J. F. St. C., (footnote)
274.
Bastian, Capt., R.M., 173.
Baxter, Surgeon, R.N., 315.
Bazentin le Petit (town), 285.
Beadle, Commander, R.N., 6.
Beak, Commander, D. 5.0., M.C.,
R.N.V.R., 275, 276, 277, 281, 286,
(footnote) 294, (footnote) 304, 308
and footnote, 312, 319, 321 and
footnote.
Beatty, Sub-Lt. D., 296.
Beaucourt (town), 185, 188, 189, 199,
202, 203, 204, 210, 211, 290.
Beaulencourt (town), 283, 284.


Beaumetz (town), 276.
Beaumont Hamel (town), 185, 188,
189, 193, 196, 198, 210, 290, 301,
802.
Beauregard (town), 210.
Beaurevoir (town), 323.
Beaussart (village), 201.
Bedell Sivright, Surgeon, M. 8., R.N.,
(footnote) 157.
Bedford Regt., 4th Battalion, join
R.N.D., 171 ; in battle of the
Ancre, 191, 197 ; in local advance
of 15th Ap. ’l7, 227 ; in first battle
of Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7, 229-236 ; in
second battle of Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7,
240 ; attached to 189th Bde., June,
’l7, 246; at Passchendaele, Oct.
’l7, 258 ; dispositions on 21st
Mar. ’lB, 275 ; on the Green Line,
23rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 278, 284; at
High Wood, 288 ; beforeAlbert,26th-
27th Mar. ’18; death of Lt.-Col.
Collins Wells, 292 ; raid by, 24th
May, ’lB, 299 ; in attack on Canal
du Nord, 317.
Beith, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 5.
Belgian Troops :
Belgian Field Army, 19, 27, 28.
Ist Carabiniers, 21, 22.
7th Regt. Belgian Infantry, 21.
21st Regt. Belgian Infantry, 21.
Belgians, H.M, the King of the, 27.
Belgium, 9, 13, 14, 41, 327.
Benbow Battalion. First appoint-
ments to, 6; at Antwerp, 26;
orders to retire delayed, 33, 86;
experiences in retirement, 86-39;
recruiting for new Bn., 41 ; re-
forming of, 44 ; Col. Oldfield takes
command of, 45 ; at Crystal Palace,
45 ; en route for the East, 111 ;
join Ist R.N. Bde. at Gallipoli,
129; in reserve in battle of 4th
June, ’l5, 135,137 ; disbanded, 137.
Bendyshe, Lt.-Col. R., R.M.L.1., 119.
Bennett, Comdr. Sterndale, D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., 151, 204, 222, 230, 281,
235, 236, 237, 243, 263.
Bennett, Sub-Lt., 216.
Berks Houses, 252.
Bertincourt (town), 277.
Bertincourt-Barastre Road, 280.
Bertincourt-Bus Road, 278, 279.
Bertincourt-Ytres line, 278.
Beseler, Gen. von, Commander-in-
Chief of German Armies in Belgium,
16, 20.
Bethell, Admiral, 14.
Betteshanger, 2nd R.N. Bde. move
from Walmer to, 6; orders for move
overseas received at, 9; 2nd R.N.
Bde. retunrto summer camp at, 40
Bettridge, P. 0., 216.
Beveren-Waes (town), 83.
Biggs, Lt., R.N.V.R., 269, 808.
Biles, Asst.-Paymaster H., R.N.V.R.,
145.
Birdwood, General Sir William, 20, 63,
69, 75, 76, 161.
Black, Lt. C. J., R.M., 119.
Black Lane, 59.
Blacklock, Major-General, D. 5.0.,
takes command of R.N.D. 80th
Aug. *lB, 811 ; share in successful
operations of Sept.-Oct., 321 ; re-
called from leave, Oct. ’lB, 328.
Blackmore, Lt.-Comdr. R., M.C., 213,
216, 300, 308, 319, 321.
Blair, P. 0., 216.
Blandford, training camp at, 42, 40,
48 ; Nelson Bn. enter camp at, 40 ;
Crystal Palace depot transferred to,
50 ; training at, 50-54, 67 ; inspec-
tion by H.M. the King at, 59 ;
inspection by Mr. Winston Churchill
at, 59 ; last days at, 59 ; Division
leave for the East, 59 ; drafts sent
from to France, 173.
Blaugies (town), 827.
Bligh, Sub-Lt., 157.
Blyth, Lt., 155.
Bois d’Audregnies, 827.
Bois de Bouche, 312, 818.
Boissier, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 108.
Bolt, Sub-Lt., 300.
Bolton, Sub-Lt., 262.
Bonnet, Sub-Lt. E. C., 257.
Bookless, Sub-Lt., 123.
Booth, Sgt., (footnote) 242.
Boraston, Lt.-Col., quoted 289, 295.
Border Regt., Ist Bn., 82.
Bouchout (town), 20.
Boulogne (town), 89.
Bourlon Ridge, 017.
Bourlon Wood, 316.
Bours (town), 180.
Bouzincourt (town), 290.
Bowerman, Sub-Lt., M.C., 204, 215 &
footnote.
Boyle, Lt.-Col., 218.
Brackenbridge, Lt., R.N.V.R., 824.
Bradbury, Staff-Surgeon W., D. 5.0.,
R.N., 157.
Braemar Castle, 59, 71.
Bray, Brig.-Gen., 266, 276.
Bray Farm, 252.
Brearly, Sub-Lt., 260.
Breton (town), 180.
Brewer, Sub-Lt., 315.
Briddon, Sub-Lt., 800.
Bridge, Comdr. C. D,, R.N., 6.
Bridges, Col. T., 31, 86.
Bridges, Major, R.M.L.1., 138, 141,
172,
Bridgland, Sub-Lt. C., (footnote) 160
Brogan, 2nd Lt. T. W., 256.


Brooke, Rupert, appointed Sub-Lt., 11;
experiences on the way to Antwerp,
24-25 ; quoted, 66 ; illness of, 70 ;
death of, 78.
Brown, 2nd Lt. H. C., 219.
Brown, P. 0., 268 and footnote.
Brown, A. 8., 268.
Browndown, Marine Bde. at, 46.
Browne, Denis, appointed Sub-Lt., 11;
at burial of Rupert Brooke, 78.
Browne, Capt. M., D.S.C., 145, 196,
Browning, Sub-Lt. N. de 8., (footnote)
256.
Bruay (town), 180.
Bryant, Capt., 218.
Bryce, Major (Scots Guards), 6.
Buckle, Comdr., D. 5.0., 267, 269, 291,
294, 304, 812, 815 and footnote, 824
and footnote.
Buckman, P. 0., 216.
Bucquoy (town), 302, 805.
Buissy Switch, 313.
Bulair, 73, 74, 77, 79, 80, 81, 97.
Bulgaria, Armies of, 61,170.
Bulkeley, Sir R. Williams, R.N.R., 4,
7, 42, 50, 56.
Bullecourt (town), 310.
Buller, Major J. D., A.S.C., 69.
Bulling, Capt. C. G., R.M., 138.
Bully Grenay, 178.
Bunce, Sub-Lt., 217.
Burge, Lt-Col. N. 0., R.M.L.1., 189,
150, 151, 158, 197, 208.
Burght (town), 31, 32.
Burmester, Capt., R.N., 70.
Burnett, Sub-Lt. W. L., (footnote) 269.
Burton, 2nd Lt. C. R., 219.
Bury, Major Viscount (Scots Guards), 7.
Bus (town), 280, 282.
Bus-Rocquigny Road, 279, 280, 283.
Busnes (town), 221.
Byzantine Empire, 72.
C.
Ccesar, 14.
Calais (town), 17, 89.
Callender, P. 0., 216.
Callingcard Wood, 811.
Calonne (town), 174.
Calonne Ricquart (town), 180.
Cambrai (town), 265, 272, 274, 809,
316, 318, 820, 323, 325.
Cambrai Front, 264.
Cambrai-Bapaume Road, 276.
Campbell, Comdr. V. A. L., D. 5.0.,
R.N., 83, 46, 99, 106, 141.
Campbell, Lt-Cmdr. Sir J.H.,R.N.V.R.,
146.
Campbell, Lt-Comdr. Alan, R.N.V.R.,
173, 202, 268, 270, 271
Campbell, Lt-. Comdr. P. S., R.N.V.R.,
193.
Campbell, Capt., R.F.A., 237.
Campbell, Lt. M. D., R.N.V.R., 108.
Canadian Army Corps, 63rd Divisional
Artillery attached to, 225 ; in second
battle of Gavrelle, 238 ; at Pass-
chendaele, 250, 255, 258 ; in attack
on Drocourt-Qu6ant line, 310, 811,
813, 316; in attack of 27th Sept.
’lB, 316, 817.
Cannin, Sub-Lt. H. 8., 269, 278.
Canopus, 79.
Cantignual Mill, 319.
Carabiniers, Ist, see Belgian troops.
Carden, Vice-Admiral, commands in
Eastern Mediterranean, 62, 68.
Careless, Lt., R.M., 253.
Carey, Lt.-Col., C.M.G., R.E., 47, 172,
174.
Carnall, Sub-Lt., 185, 204.
Carpenter, Capt. E. 8., R.M., (foot-
note) 157.
Carr, Sub-Lt. G. H., 815.
Carter, Major, 69.
Cartwright, Lt.-Col., D. 5.0., R.M.L.1.,
191, 197, 201, 203, 204, 227, 241,
243.
Casement, Capt., R.A.M.C., 47, 48.
Cassel (town), 19, 248.
Casson, Lt.-Col., C.M.G., 103.
Caton, Sub-Lt., 296.
Cavalry, 19, 48 ; 3rd Cavalry Division,
19 ; 7th Cavalry Division, 19 ; R.N.
Divisional Cavalry, 48.
Cawdor Castle, 71.
Chamblain Chatelain (town), 180.
Champagne (district), 238, 294.
Chanak, 64, 78.
Channel Ports, 19-20, 272.
Chapman, Sub-Lt., 192.
Charlton, L.S., 233, 237.
Chateau Thierry, 801.
Chateau Weyninex, 26.
Chatham (town), 18.
Chatham Battalion, R.M.L.1., forma-
tion of, 5 ; embarks for Ostend, 14; in
battle on Nethe, 22, 26 ; ordered to
the East, 58 ; share in Naval at-
tacks on Dardanelles, 63 ; sails for
Mudros, 71 ; position of, at Anzac,
116 ; in attack of 30th Ap. ’l5, at
Anzac, 118 ; share in operations at
Anzac, May 2nd, 3rd and later, 122,
123, 124 ; share in action of 6th and
7th June, ’l5, (footnote) 137 ; in
trench warfare at Cape Helles, 141 ;
in battle of 12th-13th July ’15,143,
144, 146 ; merged in Ist Marine Bn.
149.
Chatham Division, R.M.L.1., 5.
Chaytor, Lt.-Col., 47, 172.
Cheetham, Lt. J., (footnote) 118.
Cherisy (town), 229.
Cherry, Lt. M. D., R.N.V.R., 107, 110.


Chivers, Major, 47.
Chunak Bair, 153.
Churchill, The Rt. Hon. Winston S.
First Lord of the Admiralty, 2;
decision to form brigades from
Naval Reservists, 2 ; chairman of
Admiralty Committee in charge of
R.N.D., 4 ; visit to Antwerp, 20;
promises Marine and Naval Brigades,
21, 23 ; visits Naval Brigades at
Vieux Dieux, 25 ; confers with Gen.
Rawlinson and Belgian authorities
at Antwerp, 27 ; written instruc-
tions of, to Gen. Paris, 32 ; decision
to retire from Antwerp reported to,
32 ; message to Division after fall
of Antwerp, 40 ; inspects Division at
Blandford, 59 ; tribute to Rupert
Brooke, 78 ; quoted, 327.
Clark, Major J. A. M., R.M.L.1., 118.
Clark, Sub-Lt., 216.
Clarke, Sub-Lt. W. A. St. A.,R.N.V.R.,
270,
Clarkson, Sub-Lt., M.C., (footnote)
O OAQ
Clerk,’Sub-Lt. C. A., 269.
Clutterbuck, Maj., D. 5.0., R.M.L.1.,
293, 294.
Clyde Division, R.N.V.R., 11.
Cockey, Sub-Lt., 134.
Codner, Sub-Lt., 324.
Coleridge, Brig.-Gen., appointed to
command 189th Bde., 243 ; replaces
Brig.-Gen. Prentice in command of
188th Bde., Dec. ’l7, 266 ; share in
actions of Mar. ’lB, 291, 293 ; in
operations of 2-3 Sept. ’lB, 311.
Collier, 2nd Lt. E. W., 282.
Collingwood Battalion, first appoint-
ments to, 6; at Antwerp, 26;
orders to retire delayed, 33 ; ex-
periences in retirement from Ant-
werp, 34-36; interned, 41 ; re-
formed, 44-45; in training at
Crystal Palace, 49 ; at Blandford, 59;
en route for the East, 111 ; joins
2nd Bde. at Gallipoli, 129; in
attack of 4th June, ’l5, 131, 132 ;
advance of in attack of 4th June, ’l5,
133, 134; casualties in attack of
4th June, ’15,185 ; disbanded, 137.
Collins, Comdr., R.N.V.R., 46, 137.
Collins, Sub-Lt., 217.
Collins, Sub-Lt. T. S., 262.
Combles (town), 183.
Congreve, Lt.-Gen., V.C., 244.
Constable, Lt. C. C., R.N.V.R., 193.
Constantinople, 66, 67, 68.
Contray Chateau, 221.
Conway, P. 0., 156.
Cooke, Sub-Lt., 123, 233.
Cookes, Sub-Lt. J. W., 269.
Coote, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V R., 282, 291.
Corbett, Sir Julian, 15, 20, 63.
Courcelette (town), 138, 286, 288, 806,
807.
Courcelette-Pozi6res Ridge, 295.
Courtenay’s Post, 116, 124.
Courtrai (town), 18.
Cox’s Indian Brigade, 102, 103, 128.
Crauford-Stewart, Lt.-Col., 133.
Creagh-Osbom, Lt.-Col. f 208
Cresswell, Sub-Lt., 192.
Crofton, Lt.-Col., 263.
Crossman, Lt., R.N., 37.
Crowther, Sub-Lt., 299.
Cunningham, Major, 6.
Curling, Brig.-Gen., 319 and footnote.
Curtin, Lt. M., (footnote) 125.
Curtiss, L.S., 87.
Crystal Palace, Divisional depot
opened at, 7 ; depot under Sir R.
Williams Bulkeley, 7; recruiting
at, 8 ; training at, 44-46 ; medical
unit, first training at, 48.
Currey, Rear-Admiral, 14.
Curzon, Comdr. Viscount, R.N.V.R., 6.
Cyclist Company, R.N. Divisional,
formed Ist Dec. ’l4, 48 ; sails for
Mudros, 71 ; in fighting of 10th
May, 111 ; trained in bombing, 139.
D.
Dallas, Col., 88.
Dalton, Sub-Lt. Grant, M.C., 237, 296.
D’Amade, Gen., 77,103, 104, 105, 106,
109, 110.
Dangerfield, Lt., R.N.V.R., 195, 204.
Dann, Sub-Lt. P. W., 299.
Dardanelles, 61, 62, 66, 72, 92, 161.
Dardanos, Fort, 64.
Dartmouth , H.M.S., 79.
Davey, The Rev. Fr., 254, 257.
Davidson, Lt., D.S.C., R.N.V.R., 103.
Davies, Pte. G., 242.
Deal (town), Marine Bde. at, 46, 48.
Deal Battalion, at Antwerp, 22 ; on
board Franconia , 59; embarks
for Mudros, 71 ; at Anzac, 116,
126; rejoins Marine Bde. end of
May, ’l5, 129; in battle of 12th-
14th July, ’l5, 143; merged in
Ist Marine Bn., 149.
Deane, 2nd Lt., T. A. D., 123.
Deguise, Lt.-Gen., 27.
Delville Wood, 183.
Demicourt (town), 266.
Denholm, Lt., R.N.V.R., 85.
Denman-Dean, Lt. G. W. W., R.M.,
262.
Denroche, Maj., 292.
Dent, Capt., R.N., 164.
Dewar, Mrs. G. A. 8., quoted, 29
Dewhurst, Lt., R.N.V.R., 278.


Dickson, Sub-Lt. J. M. F., (footnote)
145.
Dieval (town), 180
Divion (town), 180.
Divisions, British Army:
Is* Division, at Passchendaelc, 263.
2nd Division, in attack on Mirau-
mont, 17th Feb. ’l7, 218 ; in
battle of the Ancre, April, ’l7,
227, 286, 238, 240 ; relieve R.N.D.
22nd-23rd Jan. ’lB, 273 ; position
of, 22nd Mar. ’lB, 277 ; position
of, 23rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 280;
position of, pen. 24th Mar. ’lB,
285; on left of R.N.D. 26th
Mar. ’lB, 290 ; relieved by R.N.D.
3rd Ap. ’lB, 293 ; in attack of
27th Sept. ’lB, 318 ; relieve
R.N.D. at Niergnies, Bth Oct.
’lB, 324.
3rd Dixnsion, in attack of 13th
Nov. ’l6, 188 ; in battle of 21st
Aug. ’lB, 203.
sth Division, at Oppy, June and
July, ’l7, 245, 246; in attack
of 21st Aug. ’lB, 802, 303;
further advance on 23rd Aug. ’lB,
805.
oth Division, at Passchendaelc, 250,
263.
ll*ft Division, relieved by R.N.D.
Jan. ’l7, 211.
12 th Division, relieve R.N.D. 26th-
27th March, ’lB, 290; 188th
and 190th Bdes. under orders of,
291 ; 86th and 37th Bdes. rein-
forced by 188th Bde., 291-293.
13 th Division, in evacuation of
Gallipoli, 162.
IGth (Irish) Division, 10th Dublins
transferred to, 246.
17/ft Division, R.N.D. retire through,
24th Mar. ’lB, 284, 285 ; in action
near Albert, 26th-27th Mar. ’lB,
292 ; relieve R.N.D. 15th April,
’lB, 293; relieved by R.N.D.
Bth May, ’lB, 298
18 th Division in attack on Mirau-
mont, 17th Feb. ’l7, 218.
19 th Division, on left of R.N.D. at
Welsh Ridge, 266; 53rd Bde.
relieve 190th Bde. Jan. ’lB, 273;
sth K.S.L.I. transferred to, Jan.
’lB, 274.
21s* Division, in action of 24th-
25th Aug. ’lB, 806, 307, 809.
29*ft Division, decision to send to
Gallipoli, May, 65; delay in
arrival of, 69 ; plan for landing
of, at Gallipoli, 77; share in
southern landings, 82-93; ad-
vance on 27th April, 96; in
battle of 28th April, ’l5, 98-99 ;
in attack of lst-2nd May, 101;
in battle of 6th-Bth May (87th
and 88th Bdes.), 104-107 ; posi-
tion held at end of May battles,
128 ; in attack of 4th June, 131 ;
relieved by R.N.D., Aug. ’l5,
154 ; 87th Bde. take over R.N.D.
rest camps, Dec. ’l5, 159; in
evacuation of Gallipoli, 162.
81s* Division, in attack of 13th
Nov. ’l6, 188; on the Oppy
front, 242, 244, 245, 246 ; R.N.D.
relieved by, at Welsh Ridge,
Dec. ’l7, 266.
34 th Division, relieved by R.N.D.
14th-15th April, ’l7, 227.
37 th Division, relieved by R.N.D.
16th Sept. ’l6, 179; 111th Bde.
of, reinforce R.N.D. at Beau-
court, 199, 201, 203, 204 ; relieve
R.N.D. 15th Nov. ’l6, 203; in
battle of Gavrelle, April, ’l7,
229, 238, 239 ; in attack of 21st
Aug. ’lB, 303; take over front
from 188th and 189th Bdes.
22nd-23rd Aug. ’lB, 305 ; further
advance of, 23rd Aug. ’lB, 305 ;
artillery of, in attack on Niergnies,
323.
40 th Division, relieved by R.N.D
80th Aug. ’l6, 174.
42nd Division, task in attack of
6th May, ’l5, 103 ; relieve Com-
posite Div. 12th May, ’l5, 111 ;
position of, after May battles,
128; Manchester Bde. of, in
attack of 4th June, ’l5, 131, 135,
136 ; in fighting of 6th-7th June,
’l5 (footnote), 137; relieve R.N.D.,
Ist Aug. ’l5, 147 ; in Dec. ’l5,
159 ; in evacuation of Gallipoli,
163.
47th Division, R.N. Bdes. attached
to, for training, 1916, 173; re-
lieved by R.N.D., July, ’l6, 174 ;
condition of trenches of, 175 ;
relieve R.N.D. at Oppy, Sept.
’l7, 248 ; on right of R.N.D.,
March, ’lB, 274; position of,
22nd-24th Mar. ’lB, 277, 278, 279,
282 ; in action of sth Ap. ’lB,
293 ; in advance of 24th Aug.
’lB, 306, 807.
51 st Division, in battle of the Ancre,
188, 196, 198, 199, 201.
52 nd Division, relieve R.N.D. 6th
July, ’l5, 142 ; 156th and 157th
Bdes. of, in battle of 12th July,
’l5, 148, 145, 146; relieved by
R.N.D. 15th July, ’l5, 147; in
evacuation of Gallipoli, 162; in
attack on Drocourt-Qu6ant line,
810 ; in attack on Canal du Nord,
23


Divisions, British Army—continued.
816, 317; relieve R.N.D. Ist
Oct. ’lB, 320; artillery of, in
attack on Niergnies, Bth Oct.
’lB, 323.
56 th Division, 168th Bde. of, relieved
by R.N.D. 6th Nov. ’lB, 827.
67 th Division, in attack on Dro-
court-Qu£ant line, 810, 311; re-
liev R.N.D. sth Sept. ’lB, 814 ;
in attack of 27th Sept. ’lB, 316,
318 ; position of, 28th Sept. *lB,
319.
62nd Division, relieved by R.N.D.
15th-20th Dec. ’l7, 266.
63rd ( 8.N .) Division, Royal Naval
Division renamed, 171.
188 th Infantry Brigade, formation
of, 171 ; Brig.-Gen. Prentice
appointed to command of, 171;
position of, Aug. ’l6, 174; on
the way to the Somme, 180;
conditions experienced by, Oct.
’l6, 187 ; disposition of, before
battle of the Ancre, 191 ; share
in battle of the Ancre, 195, 196,
199-201, 202-203 ; losses in battle
of the Ancre, 204; achievements of,
in battle of the Ancre, 205-206 ;
reorganization of, Dec. ’l7, 208 ;
in line south of Ancre, ’l7, 211 ;
reports beginning of German
retreat, Feb. ’l7, 218 ; in attack
of 17th Feb. ’l7, 218-219; re-
lieved by 190th Bde. 21st Feb.
’l7, 219 ; attached to Ist Corps
at beginning of battle of Arras,
April, ’l7, 225; in first battle
of Gavrelle, 229, 236 ; in second
battle of Gavrelle, 239, 240 ; in
the Oppy-Gavrelle sector, June,
’l7, 245; trench reliefs, July
and Aug. ’l7, 247; in attack
at Passchendaele, 250, 252, 254;
losses at Passchendaele, 257;
relieve 189th Bde. sth-6th Nov.
’l7, 262; achievements of, at
Passchendaele, 263; on Welsh
Ridge, 267; position of, before
retreat of March, ’lB, 274; line
held by, 22nd Mar. ’lB, 277;
withdrawal of, 23rd Mar. ’lB,
277; withdrawal of, 24th Mar.
’lB, 282; action of 24th-27th
Mar. ’lB, 285, 286, 288, 293 ; 2nd
Bn. Irish Rifles attached to,
May, ’lB, 800 ; in attack of 21st
Aug. ’lB, 302-805; attack of
24th Aug. ’lB, postponed, 806 ;
in attack of 25th-27th Aug. ’lB,
307, 809; position of lst-2nd
Sept. ’lB, 811 ; in attack on
Drocourt-Qu6ant line, 311, 812;
in attack on Canal du Nord,
Anneux and Graincourt, 316, 317 ;
in attack on Niergnies, 323 ;
advance of, on lOth-llth Nov.
’lB, 827, 828.
189/A Brigade, formation of, 171 ;
Brig.-Gen. L. F. Phillips, D. 5.0.,
appointed to, 171 ; on the way
to the Somme, 180 ; conditions
experienced by, in Oct. ’16,187 ;
dispositions of, before battle of
the Ancre, 191; action of, in
battle of the Ancre, 191-204
(see under Drake, Hawke, Hood
and Nelson Bns.); losses of, in
battle of Ancre, 204 ; reorganiza-
tion of, Dec. *l6, 208 ; in line
north of the Ancre, Jan. ’l7,
211 ; relieved by the 190th Bde.,
212; attack by, 2nd-3rd Feb.
’l7, 212-216; relieved by 190th
Bde. 217 ; before Gavrelle, April,
’17,227 ; local advance of, on 16th-
17th April, ’l7, 227; in first
battle of Gavrelle, 229-236 ; Brig.-
Gen. Phillips succeeded by Brig.-
Gen. Coleridge, 243 ; trench war-
fare in the Oppy-Gavrelle sector,
June, ’l7, 245, 246 ; trench re-
liefs, July and Aug. ’l7, 247;
operations of, on 80th-81st July,
*l7, 247 ; conditions experienced
by, at Passchendaele, Oct. ’l7,
251, 252 ; operations of, 81st
Oct.-sth Nov. ’l7, at Passchen-
daele,2s9-268 ; Brig.-Gen. Asquith
to command, 18th Dec. *l7, 266 ;
German attack on Welsh Ridge,
Dec. ’l7, 267-270; position of,
before beginning retreat of March,
’lB, 274; casualties from gas,
12th-21st Mar. ’lB, 275 ; with-
drawal of, 22nd-23rd Mar. ’lB,
277; actions of 24th-26th Mar.
’lB, 282-290; at Engelbelmer,
26th-27th Mar. ’lB, 290 ; achieve-
ment of, in March retreat, 295;
reorganization, May, ’lB, 800;
plans for, in attack of 21st Aug.
*lB, 802 ; in attack of 21st-28rd
Aug. ’lB, 802-805 ; temporarily
commanded by Comdr. Egerton,
24th Aug. ’lB, 807; in attack
of 25th Aug. ’lB, 807-308 ; in
attack on Drocourt-Qudant line,
813-815; in attack on An-
neux-Graincourt and the Canal
d’Escaut, 817-319; Brig.-Gen.
Curling succeeds to command of,
3rd Sept. ’lB, (footnote) 819;
in attack on Niergnies, Oct. ’lB,
823 ; advance of, on Bth Nov.
’lB, 327-328.


190/fc Brigade , formation of, 171;
in Calonne sub-sector, Aug. ’l6,
174; on the way to the Somme,
180; in the Serre sector, Oct.
’l6, 185 ; dispositions before the
battle of the Ancre, 197 ; share
in battle of the Ancre, 197, 199,
202, 204 ; losses In battle of the
Ancre, 205 ; trench relief on the
Ancre, Jan.-Feb. ’l7, 211, 212,
217, 219 ; advance to Miraumont
and beyond, 25th-26th Feb. ’l7,
220; before Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7,
227; in first battle of Gavrelle,
23rd Ap. ’l7, 229, 232, 234, 236 ;
Brig.-Gen. Hutchison appointed
to command, 243 ; reorganization
of, June, ’l7, 246 ; trench reliefs
in Oppy-Gavrelle sector, 247;
attack by, at Passchendaele,
250, 257, 258 ; relieve 189th Bde.
81st Oct. ’l7, 259 ; achievement
of, at Passchendaele, 263; on
Welsh Ridge, 267-270 ; relieved
by 53rd Bde. Jan. ’lB, 273 ;
before beginning retreat of March
’lB, 274, 275; withdrawal of,
23rd March, ’lB, 277 ; actions of
28rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 279, 280, 282 ;
actions of 24th-26th Mar. ’lB,
282, 284, 285, 280, 288, 289 ;
before Albert, 26th-27th Mar.
’lB, 290-292 ; enemy raids against
posts held by, May, ’lB, 299;
Brig.-Gen. Leslie, D. 5.0., succeeds
to command of, May, ’lB, 800;
in attack of 21st-28rd Aug. ’lB,
302, 804, 305 ; in attack of 25th-
27th Aug. ’lB, 309 ; relieve 189th
Bde. on Canal du Nord, Sept.
’lB, 814; in advance of 27th
Sept. ’lB, 316, 317 ; advance of,
on 29th Sept. ’lB, 320; advance
of, on 9th Nov. ’lB, 827.
Divisional,train, R.N.,formed at Crystal
Palace, 48; troops at Blandford
camp, 49 ; in France, 180.
Dodds, Lt. 807.
Dodge, Sub-Lt. (later Lt.-Col., D.S.C.)
J. 0., 79, 85, 86, 248.
Donaldson, Lt., R.N.V.R., 269
Doris, 79.
Douai (town), action near, 18.
Dougherty, Lt., 145.
Doughty-Wylie, Lt.-Col., 86.
Douglas, Sub-Lt. W., 257.
Dovecote (town), 210.
Dover (town), camp of Div. Engineers, -
near, 47, 48.
Dowling, Sub-Lt. Barrow, 233.
Drake Battalion, first appointments
to, 6 ; at Antwerp, 26 ; front held
by, 30; retirement from Antwerp,
83-84 ; arrival at Blandford, 49 ;
on board Franconia , 59 ; ordered
to Kantara, 70 ; sails for Mudros,
71 ; lands at Cape Helles, 93 ; in
advance of Ap. 28th, ’l5, 98, 99 ;
on beach duties, 100; bivouacs
at W beach, 102; attached to
Composite Div., Cape Helles, 108 ;,
In advance of May 6th-Bth, ’l5
105; in attack of 4th June, ’l5,
134, 185 ; in attack of 12th July,
’l5, 143, 144, 146 ; losses of, by 25th
July, ’l5, 148 ; transferred to Ist
Marine Bde., 150; Lt.-Comdr.
King takes command of, 150 ; in
first stages of evacuation, Gallipoli,
Jan. ’l6, 162, 164; at Imbros,
Jan. ’l6, 109; man A.A. guns,
Jan. ’l6, 169; decision to send
to France, May, ’l6, 170; com-
manded by Lt.-Col. Tetley, 172;
in attack on Beaucourt, 13th Nov.
1916, 189-202 ; commanded by
Lt. Sterndale Bennett, 204 ; losses
of, at Beaucourt, 204 ; achievements
at battle of Beaucourt, 205 ; new
appointments to, after battle of
Ancre, 208 ; in first battle of
Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7, 229, 237; at
Passchendaele, 261 ; Comdr. Pollock
assumes command of, 263; at
Welsh Ridge, 267, 269 ; casualties
from gas, 12th-21st Mar. ’lB, 274 ;
dispositions of, 21st Mar. ’lB,
275, 276; retirement of, 22nd-
23rd Mar. ’lB, 277, 278 ; on the
Green Line, 23rd-24th Mar. ’lB,
279, 280, 282, 284 ; at High Wood,
24th-25th Mar. ’lB, 280, 288 ;
achievement of, in March opera-
tions, 294; raid carried out by,
12th July, ’lB, 800; in advance of
23rd-25th Aug. ’lB, 802, 807, 808 ;
in attack on Drocourt-Qu6ant line,
818, 314; in attack on Anneux-
Graincourt and Canal d’Escaut,
817-320; in attack on Niergnies,
324.
Drocourt-Qu6ant line, 809, 810, 314,
821*
Dublin, H.M.S., 67.
Dublin Fusiliers, Ist Bn. at Gallipoli
landing, 82, 85.
Dublin Fusiliers, 10th Bn. join R.N.D.
in France, 171 ; at battle of the
Ancre, 191, 197, 202; in attack of
26th Feb. ’l6, 220 ; in first battle
of Gavrelle, 23rd Ap. ’l7, 229, 230 ;
in second battle of Gavrelle, 240;
leave R.N.D., July, ’l7, 246.
Duncan, Lt., 110,
Dundas, Lt. the Hon. K., 137, (foot-
note) 152.
23*


Dunkirk (town), 5, 17, 18, 19, 20, 39.
Dunning, Sub-Lt., 296.
Durham Light Infantry, 10.
Durham miners,fighting qualities of, 53.
Dyke, Capt., 6.
E.
Eaucourt L’Abbaye (town), 286.
Edeghen (town), 21.
Edgar, Major, R.E., 289.
Edgar, Lt., 110.
Edgar, P. 0., 216.
Edmondson, Lt. C. A., 192.
Edwards, Comdr. P. H., D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., 134, 151, 196.
Edwards, Capt., R.M., 256.
Edwards, Lt. (Hawke Bn.), (footnote)
324.
Edwards, Sub-Lt. W. H. (Nelson Bn.),
145.
Egerton, Comdr. W. M., D. 5.0., 151,
204, 307, 813, 319, 321.
Egypt, 69, 71, 89.
Elliot, 2nd Lt. W. C. A., 178.
Ellis, Cmdr. Bernard, D.5.0.,R.N.V.R.,
138, 151, 200, 201, 203, 204, 217,
243, 255, 276, 286, 288, 298.
Ellis, Lt., 217.
Elson, Sub-Lt. E. A., (footnote) 256.
Emerson, Lt. T. H., R.N.V.R., 197.
Engelbelmer (town), 187, 204, 290,
291, 292.
Engineers, R.N. Divisional, available
for training 28th Jan. ’l5, 49;
3rd Field Coy., at Blandford, 59 ;
embark for the East, 71 ; Ist Field
Coy., at Anzac, 115 ; special parties
of, in evacuation of Gallipoli,
Jan. ’l6, 166 ; Hdqtrs. of, at
Bajus, Sept. ’16,180 ; tribute to for
services in Gallipoli, 155; 247th,
248th and 249th Field Coys, in
retreat of Mar. ’lB, 278, 280, 283,
286,289 ; share in final advance, 322.
Epehy (town), 316.
Erskine, 2nd Lt. F. A., 125.
Escaut, Canal d’, 316, 318.
Eski line, 162, 163, 164.
Essex Regt. (Ist Battalion), landing on
W beach, 82, 88.
Etricourt (town), 281.
Evans, Lt.-Cmdr. H. C., R.N.V.R.,136.
Evans, Sub-Lt. K. M., 256.
Eveleigh, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 46, 126,
136, 145.
Expeditionary Force, 39.
Exton, Sub-Lt., 233.
F.
Failes, Rev. 8., 157.
Fairfax, Commander Ramsay, C.M.G.,
D. 5.0., R.N., 45, 151, 156, 191,
197, 199, 200, 203, 204, 218, 243.
Fairholme, Col., 31.
Fampoux (town), 226, 228
Fampoux-Farbus line, 245.
Farbus (town), 228.
Fargus, Comdr. R.N., 6.
Farquharson, Lt.-Col. H. D., 17,
(footnote) 282, 290.
Farrow, Sub-Lt., 157-
Fay (town), 183.
Fegan, Sub-Lt. K. I. M., 256.
Ferguson, 2nd Lt. D. H. G., R.M.,119.
Fergusson, Lieut.-Gen. Sir Charles,
K.C.8., 309, 815, 318, 323.
Fernie, Sub-Lt., 216.
Testing, Capt. M. C., R.M.L.1., 58.
Feuchy (town), 226.
Fielden, 2nd Lt. H., R.M., 274.
Finch, Brig.-Gen. A. W. E., 229.
Finch, Fleet-Surgeon, R.N., 30,48,172,
174.
Finch, 2nd Lt., 218.
Fins (town), 278.
Firth, Brig.-Gen., 137.
Fish, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 308.
Flanders, 228, 246.
Fleming, Staff-Surgeon, R.N., 48, 115,
174.
Flers (town), 188, 286.
Flesquteres (town), 266, 274, 276.
Flesquifcres Salient, 265, 274.
Fletcher, Lt.-Col., D. 5.0., R.M.L.1.,
6, 291, 293, 294, 800, 805.
Flood, Sub-Lt. C. E. C., (footnote) 138.
Flowitt, Lt., R.N.V.R., 815.
Foch, Marshal, 16, 301.
Forceville (town), 185.
Forrester, Lt. F. C., M.C., R.M.L.1.,
296.
Forrester, Sub-Lt., 204,
Forster, Lt.-Col., 8.
Forton Barracks, Cyclist Coy. at, 48.
Foster, Lt.-Col. R. F., C.M.G.,
R.M.L.1., 172, 821.
Foster, The Rev. H. C., 89,167.
Fox, Sub-Lt. P. R. H., 193, 204, 237.
Franconia, sails from Avon-
mouth for the East, 59, 71.
Fraser, Sub-Lt. W., 256.
Freeland, Maj., 208, 222.
French, Sir John (see Ypres, Earl of).
French, Major, D. 5.0., R.M.L.1., 37-
38, 48, 172.
French Expeditionary Corps, plans
for landing, 77 ; disembarkation at
Cape Helles and Sedd-el-bahr, 93,
96 ; in Turkish attack of May 3rd,
102 ; in advance of May 26th, *l5,
at Cape Helles, 96 ; driven back to
Sedd-el-bahr, 09; engagement of
May 6th-Bth, 103-107; counter-
attack, May 10th, 108 ; sector held
by, 13th May, ’15,127.
Fresnicourt (town), 180.


Fresny Road, 231
Frfrvillers (town), 180.
Freyberg, Lt.-Col. B. C., V.C., C.M.G.,
D. 5.0., appointed to Hood Bn.,
11; at burial of Rupert Brooke, 78 ;
in command of Hood Bn., 147, 150,
151; exploits in Gulf of Xeros, 25th
April, 79-80 ; commands Hood Bn.,
battle of Ancre, 12th-14th Nov. ’l6,
191,193,194,198,199,200, 201,202 ;
at capture of Beaucourt, 203-206 ;
returns to Hood Bn., March ’l7,
222 ; appointed to command a Bde.
of the 58th Div., 21st Ap. ’l7, 229.
Fulton, 2nd Lt. T. H. C., R.M., 123.
Funnell, Lt.-Comdr. H. E., D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., 178, 237.
G.
Gaba Tepe, 75, 77,100,115, 117.
Gallipoli (town), 74, 80.
Gallipoli Peninsula, legend about
Naval Div. at, 1; expedition,
plans for, 61 ; suggested landing,
62 ; first plans for final attack on,
68 ; historical associations of, 72,
78; strategic importance of, 78,
74; final decision to land on, 76 ;
plan of attack, 77 ; Turkish tactics
on, 90; end of first phase of cam-
paign, 109 ; description of south of,
111, 112 ; closing stages of cam-
paign on, 150.
Gamage, Messrs., 139.
Gants, Capt., 248.
Gardner, Sub-Lt. E. V. G., 195, 204.
Garnham, Lt. P. C., R.N.V.R., 123.
Garnham, Lt., R.F.A., 255.
Gaskell, Fleet-Surgeon, F.R.C.S., R.N.,
9, 47, 172, 174.
Gavrelle (village), 227, 228, 229, 238,
239, 241, 242, 244, 245.
Gavrelle Trench, 246.
Gavrelle Windmill, 231.
Gealer, Sub-Lt., 192.
Gemmell, Lt.-Col., R.F.A., 174.
Ghent (town), 18, 21.
Gibson, Comdr. the Hon. Victor, 45.
Gibson, Lt.-Comdr. 123.
Gibson, Lt., R.N.V.R., 315.
Gibson, Sub-Lt. E. H., 157.
Gilbert, Sub-Lt., 129.
Gilgrass, L.S., 237.
Gilliland, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 138,
151, 169, 198, 199, 200, 201.
Givenchy (town), 224.
Glory, 67.
Gloucester Castle, 59, 71.
Godfrey, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 144.
Godfrey, 2nd Lt., R.M., 241-242.
Goldingham, Lt., R.M., 241-242.
Goliath, 14.
Gommecourt (town), 183, 220, 302.
Gordon Highlanders, 7th, battle of
the Ancre, 189, 201.
Gosling, Lt.-Col. S., 174, 216.
Gough, Gen. Sir Hubert, 183, 187, 256.
Gould, Surgeon A. L. Pearce, R.N.,299.
Gowney, Capt. D. J., D.S.C., 37, 1 8,
145, 200, 201.
Graham, Sub-Lt., 217.
Graincourt (town), 316, 317, 818.
Grandcourt (town), 210, 217.
Grant, Lt.-Comdr. Gordon, D.S.C,
R.N.V.R., 38, 89.
Grantully Castle, 59, 71.
Gravesend, 46.
Gray, C.P.0., 156.
f«TPPPP IAQ
Greenland Hill, 229, 238, 239.
Grfrvillers (town), 305.
Grinling, Lt., 123.
Grover, Major, R.M.L.1., 141.
Gudgeon Trench, 220.
Gudmappe (town), 229.
Gueudecourt (town), 285.
Gully Beach, 81, 97, 98.
H.
H. A. C., Ist Battalion joins R.N.D.
June, ’l6, 171 ; in battle of the
Ancre, 191,199, 202 ; in advances of
Feb. ’l7, 218, 220 ; in local advance
on Arras front, 16th-17th Ap. ’l7,
227 ; in first battle of Gavrelle, Ap.
’l7, 229, 234, 236 ; in second battle
of Gavrelle, Ap. ’17,240,244 ; leaves
R.N.D., 2nd July, ’l7, 246.
Haig, Field-Marshal Earl, 223,248,265,
269.
Haines, Sub-Lt., 220.
Hale, Major, 264.
Hall, Lt. D. W. K., 296.
Hall, Sub-Lt., 192, 269.
Hamel (town), 183, 187, 289, 293, 295,
298, 300.
Hamilton, Gen. Sir lan, appointed
Commander-in-Chief of M.E.F., 65 ;
quoted on Govt, policy in Near
East, 66; instructions from Lord
Kitchener, 68 ; learns of decision to
discontinue Naval attacks on Dar-
danelles, 68 ; rejects plan for land-
ing on Gallipoli, March ’l5, 69;
inspects R.N.D. at Port Said, 70;
considers alternative plans for forc-
ing the Dardanelles, 73-77, 81 ;
sees withdrawal from Y beach, 92;
quoted on advance of May 2nd, ’l5,
102 ; orders for battle of May 6th-
-Bth, 104, 106 ; asks for reinforce-
ments, 109 ; orders 2nd Naval Bde.
to revert to Gen. Paris’s command,
. 109; dispatch of 12th June, ’l5,


Hamilton, Gen. Sir lan—continued.
118 ; quoted on need for reinforc-
ing R.N.D., 149 ; hands over com-
mand of M.E.F., 154.
Hamilton, Major Dalrymple (Scots
Guards), 6.
Hampshire Regt., 2nd landing on V
beach, 82; on River Clyde , 85;
reinforces Hood Bn. on 2nd May, ’l5,
102.
Hancock, Sub-Lt., 150, 178.
Hardisty, Lt. H. L., R.M., 315.
Harmignies (town), 828.
Harmsworth, Lt. the Hon. Vere, 194.
Harris, Lt. W. K., D. 5.0., M.C.,
R.N.V.R., 261, 269.
Harris, Sub-Lt., D. 5.0., 313 and foot-
note.
Harrison, Brig.-Gen. G. H., R.E., 47,
172.
Harrison, Lt.-Col., D.S.O. (R.1.R.),300.
Hart, Sub-Lt., 192.
Havre (town), 15.
Havrincourt (town), 316.
Havrincourt Wood, 275.
Hawes, 2nd Lt., 289.
Hawke Battalion, first appointments
to, 6; at Antwerp, 20; order
to retire from Antwerp, 88;
experiences in retirement, 86; in-
terned, 41 ; new Bn. raised, 41, 44 ;
absorbs Public Schools Bn., 45 ; at
Crystal Palace, 49 ; en route for the
East, 111 ; joins Ist R.N. Bde.,
129 ; O Coy. of, relieves Nelson Coy.,
180; in action of 19th June, ’is,
189; in attack of 13th-14th July,
’l5, 143; in reorganized Ist R.N.
Bde., July, ’l6, 150; Lt.-Col.
Wilson, D. 5.0., M.P., in command
of, 150 ; in action on 27th Aug. ’l5,
155 ; operations in Nov. ’l5, 156 ;
C Coy. in battle of 4th-oth June,
’l5, Gallipoli, 186 ; in evacuation of
Gallipoli, Jan. ’lO, 162-109 ; goes
to Imbros, (footnote) 169 ; decision
to send 2nd Bn. to France, 170 ; in
attack on Beaucourt, 12th-14th
Nov. ’l6, 189-202; losses of, at
Beaucourt, 204 ; new appointments
to, 208 ; in attack of 3rd-4th Feb.
’l7, 212 ; in attack of 17th Feb. ’l7,
219 ; in first battle of Gavrelle, Ap.
’l7, 229 ; Comdr. Ellis succeeds Col.
Whiteman in command of, May ’l7,
243 ; in front of Oppy Wood, 14th-
15th July, ’l7, 246 j at Passchen-
daele, 26th Oct.-sth Nov. ’l7, 255,
259, 261 ; at Welsh Ridge, Dec. ’l7,
270; casualties from gas, 12 th-
21st Mar. ’lB, 274; dispositions of,
21st Mar. ’lB, 275, 276 ; actions of
22nd-23rd Mar. ’lB, 277; at Bus,
23rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 280, 282, 284;
at High Wood, 286,288; raid by, 18th
May, ’lB, 299 ; in attack of 21st
Aug. ’lB, 802 ; in attack of 24th-
25th Aug. ’lB, 806, 308 ; attack on
Drocourt>-Qu6ant line, 313, 314 ; in
attack on Anneux-Graincourt and
Canal d’Escaut, 317, 318, 320 ; in
attack on Niergnies, 824.
Hayward, Lt. A. F., R.M., 125.
Hayward, Sgt.-Maj., 119.
Harebrouck (town), 18.
H6buterne (town), 289.
Hedauville (town), 203, 221.
Helles, Cape, 81, 92, 93, 96, 100, 125,
126, 138, 150, 153, 158, 161.
Hendecourt (town), 810, 811, 813.
Henderson, Commodore, R.N., 6, 26,
83, 36, 87, 46.
Heneker, Brig.-Gen., 197.
Henin (town), 811.
Hepworth, Sub-Lt., 296.
Herbert, Sub-Lt. A. P., 204, 237
Herford, Lt., 118.
Hermin (town), 180.
Hersin (town), 180.
Hesketh, Lt.-Col., 220.
Higginbotham, Lt.-Col. 199, (foot-
note) 174.
Higgins, Lt. K. M., R.M., (footnote)
119.
High Wood, 188, 285, 286, 294, 295.
Highland Light Infantry (sth Bat-
talion), 145.
Hill, Lt. F. C., M.C., R.N.V.R., 203,
204, 829.
Hill, Sub-Lt. F., 267.
Hilton, Lt., M.C., R.N.V.R., 216, 233,
824.
Hinde, Sub-Lt. G. H., 257.
Hindenburg Line, 226, 227, 242, 310.
Hirschfleld, Lt., 237.
Holmes, Major F., R.M., 48.
Homer, C.P.0., (footnote) 184.
Hood Battalion, first appointments
to, 7, 11 ; in barracks at Plymouth,
46 ; sails for Mudros, 71 ; plans for
demonstration in Gulf of Xeros, 79 ;
detachment provided for beach
duties at Gallipoli landings, 79 ; in
early fighting, 88, 100 ; in action of
lst>-2nd May, 101,102 ; in battle of
6th-Bth May, 104, 105; Gen.
D’Amade’s tribute to, 109; in
battle of 4th June, ’l5, 131, 183 ;
absorbs some officers and men of
disbanded Benbow and Collingwood
Bns. 187 ; in attack of 12th July,
’l5, 143; commanded by Lt.-
Comdr. Freyberg, 147, 150; opera-
tions of 13th-14th July, ’l5, 147;
losses of, by 25th July, ’l5, 148 ;
transferred to Ist R.N. Bde., 150 ;


in evacuation of Gallipoli, Jan. ’l6,
162, 164; at Tenedos, 169 ; de-
cision to send to France, May ’l6,
170 ; in battle of the Ancre, 12th-
14th Nov. ’l6, 189, 204 ; in attack
of 3rd Feb. ’l7, 212, 216 ; in attack
of 17th Feb. ’l7, 219 ; Col. Freyberg
returns to, 222; Comdr. Asquith
succeeds Col. Freyberg as C. 0., Ap.
’l7, 229 ; in first battle of Gavrelle,
Ap. ’l7, 229-237 ; in front of Oppy
Wood, July ’l7, 246 ; at Passchen-
daele, Oct.’l7, 257; operations of,
in Nov. ’l7, 261, 262; at Welsh
Ridge, Dec. ’l7, 267, 268 ; disposi-
tions of, 21st Mar. ’lB, 275; in
actions of 22nd-23rd Mar. ’lB, 277 ;
on the Green Line, 23rd-24th Mar.
’lB, 277-284 ; at High Wood, 286 ;
raid by, 24th May, ’lB, 299 ; in
attack of 21st Aug. ’lB, 303, 804 ;
in attack of 24th-25th Aug. ’lB,
306, 807, 308 ; in attack on Dro-
court-Qu£ant line, 813, 814; in
attack on Canal d’Escaut, 820 ; in
attack on Niergnies, 824.
Horsfleld, Lt., R.N.V.R., 140.
Hoskyns, Major A. C. H., R.M.L.1.,
125.
Hoskyns, Lt. C., R.N.V.R., 829.
Howe Battalion, first appointments
to, 6 ; in barracks at Portland, 46 ;
ordered to Kantara, 70; sails for
Mudros, 71 ; provides detachment
for beach duties at Gallipoli on
landings, 79, (footnote) 85 ; in
early fighting at Gallipoli, 100,
101 ; in action of lst-2nd May,
’l5, 102 ; advance of 6th-Bth May,
’l6, 105 ; Gen. D’Amade’s tribute
to, 109 ; in attack of 4th June,
’l5, 181, 183 ; absorbs officers and
men of disbanded Bns., 137; in
attack of 12th July, ’l6, 148;
losses of, by 25th July, *l5, 148 ;
transferred to reorganized 2nd
R.N. Bde., 150; operations in
Sept. ’l5, 166 ; in evacuation of
Gallipoli, Jan. ’l6, 162, 164;
temporarily commanded by Maj.
French in France, ’l6, 172; in
attack on Beaucourt, 12th-14th
Nov. ’l6, 189-192; losses of, in
battle of Beaucourt, 204 ; at Grand-
court, 6th Feb. ’l7, 217 ; in attack
of 17th-18th Feb. ’l7, 218-220 ;
in first battle of Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7,
229, 235, 236 ; Comdr. West succeeds
Comdr. Fairfax in command of, May,
’l7, 243 ; raid by, 20th July, *l7,
246; at Passchendaele, 26th Oct.
’l7, 252, 254,255; at Welsh Ridge,
Dec. ’l7, 267, 270; disbanded, 274.
Hulbert, Sub-Lt. E. W., 299.
Humphries, Lt., 217.
Hunter, Capt., R.N., 50, 170.
Hunter, Sub-Lt. W., 270.
Hunter Weston, Lt.-General Sir A.,
K.C.8., 75, 84, 92, 100, 101.
Huskisson, Capt., R.M.L.1., 241.
Hutchison, Brig.-Gen., C.M.G.,D.5.0.,
R.M.L.1., 149, 197, 201, (footnote)
203, 205, 218, 239, 243, 269, 283,
300.
Hyland, Lt. J. F., (footnote) 125.
I.
luff, Sub-Lt. A. C., (footnote) 138.
Imbros, 67, 125, 139, 169.
Imperial Defence, Committee of, 2.
Implacable, 84.
Inchy (town), 311, 812, 313, 314, 316.
Inflexible, 67.
Inkonka, 71.
Inniskilling Fusiliers, Ist Bn., landing
on X beach, 82.
lonian Greeks, 72.
Irles (town), 220.
Irles-Bihucourt line, 802.
Isgar, Lt.-Comdr., D. 5.0., R.N.V.R.,
156.
Ismail Oghi Tepe, 153.
Italy, intervention of on side of
Allies, 61, 72; impending German
offensive against, Sept. ’l7, 249.
Iwerne Minster, 49.
J.
Jackson, Lt. F. L. IL, R.N.V.R., 257
Jacobs, Sub-Lt., 204, 217.
James, Sub-Lt. S. G., (footnote) 251.
Jaques, Lt. W., R.M., (footnote) 270.
Jed, 79.
Jermain, 2nd Lt. P. L., 141.
Jerram, Capt. F. C., R.M.L.1., 46, 58
Jerring, Sub-Lt. W. E., R.N.V.R., 257.
Joffre, Marshal, plans for 1917, 223.
Johnson, Lt. A. A., R.N.V.R., 269.
Jones, Comdr. S. G., R.N.V.R., 133,
184, 188, 151, 263, 269, 300, 308.
K.
Kantaha, 69, 71.
Keeping, Lt., R.F.A., 264.
Kelland, Sub-Lt. R. S., 299.
Kelly, F. S., Lt.-Comdr., D.S.C.,
R.N.V.R., 11, 78, 151, 193.
Kemseke-(town), 87.
Kennett, 79.
Kenny, Sub-Lt. A. H. S., 296. * /
Kenny, Sub-Lt. B. W., 160, -83*
Kephez Point, 64,
Kereves Dere, 97, 99, 106, 107, 111,
127, 130, 133, 140.


Kerr, Sub-Lt. J. W., M.C., 308.
Kesson, Sub-Lt., 268, 209.
Kilid Bahr, 73 (and footnote), 75, 77,
80, 109.
King, Capt. H. D., C.8.E., D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., succeeds to command of
Drake Bn., 141 ; awarded D. 5.0.,
146 ; promoted to Comdr., R.N.V.R.,
150, 151 ; leaves R.N.D. for duty
under the Admiralty, 172.
King’s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry,
recruits drawn from, 10.
King’s Shropshire Light Infantry,
6th Bn. in attack of 30th Oct. ’l7,
at Passchendaele, 258 ; on Welsh
Ridge, Dec. ’l7, 267 ; leaves R.N.D.,
Jan. ’lB, 274.
Kirkpatrick, Lt.-Col., 208, 267, 269,
288, (footnote) 289, 296.
Kitchener, Field-Marshal Earl, forma-
tion of R.N.D. approved by, 3;
plan for relief of Antwerp, 19 ; sends
Sir Henry Rawlinson to Antwerp,
27 ; share in early discussions on Dar-
danelles, 02, 64 ; attitude in regard
to 29th Div. and Eastern opera-
tions, 05, 66, 69; instructions to
Sir lan Hamilton, 68.
Knox, The Rev. Fr. Ronald, quoted,
271.
Krithia, 81, 83, 84, 88, 97, 99, 103,
104, 112, 129.
Koja Chamen Tepe, 151.
K. 0.5.8., 83, 91, 92, 145.
K.R.R.C., 18th Battn. in battle of
the Ancre, 202, 204.
Kum Kale, 64, 74, 90, 97.
L.
La Comt6 (town), 180.
La Folie Wood, 819, 820.
Lancashire Fusiliers, Ist Bn. in land-
ing on W beach, 82, 87, 88 ;
attached to Composite Div. for
battle of 6th-Bth May, ’l5, 103;
share in battle of 6th-Bth May, 105.
La Vielfort (town), 180.
Law, Lt. F. C., R.M.L.1., 91.
Law, Sub-Lt. J. M., M.C., 828.
Lawrence, Maj.-Gen. the Hon. H. A.,
163.
Lawrie, Maj.-Gen. C. E., C. 8., D. 5.0.,
succeeds Gen. Shute in command
of Naval Div., 19th Feb. ’l7, 222;
at second battle of Gavrelle, 240 ;
plans for grouping of M.G.
Coys., Sept. ’l7, 248 ; in retreat of
March, ’lB, 277, 283, 285, 288 ;
plans for attack of 21st Aug. ’lB,
302; receives instructions for
attack of 24th Aug. ’lB, 305 ; in-
spection of Bns. by, Aug. 24th,
’lB, 306; succeeded in command
of R.N. Div. by Maj.-Gen. Black-
lock, 30th Aug. ’lB, 311.
Lawrie, Sub-Lt., 236, 268.
Leake, Surgeon, M.C., R.N., 315.
Leatham, Maj. 296.
Le Barque (town), 306.
LSchelle (town), 278, 279, 284.
Ledeszeele (town), 263.
Lekkeboterbeek, 250.
Lemnos, 68, 78.
Lens (town), 19, 178, 174, 225, 227,
814.
Les Boeufs (town), 183, 283, 285.
Leslie, Brig.-Gen., D. 5.0., 300.
Le Transloy (town), 220, 221, 283,
284, 285.
Levey, Lt.-Col. J. H., D. 5.0., 42, 45,
55, 67, 170.
Lewis, Lt.-Col. 234, 235, 243, 260.
Liddell, Lt.-Col., A.S.C., 172.
Lierre (town), 21, 22.
Li6vin (town), 225, 227.
Ligertwood, Capt., R.M.L.1., 254, 256.
Ligny-Thilloy (town), 308.
Lille (town), 19, 20.
Lindsay, Maj., 283.
Lintott, Lt. W., R.N.V.R., 145.
Lister, Lt. the Hon. Charles, 78, 102,
147, 157.
Little, Sub-Lt., 140.
Lockwood, Comdr. E. M., D. 5.0.,
R.N.V.R., 243, 300, 315, 319.
Logeast Wood, 303, 304, 306.
Lokeren (town), 21, 33, 37.
London Regt., at Gallipoli, October,
’l5, 157 ; 2/2 and 2/4 Bns. of, in
evacuation of Gallipoli, Jan. ’l6,
162, 163.
Lord Nelson, 93.
Lorette (town), 174, 178.
Lough, Maj. H. D„ D. 5.0., R.M.L.1.,
174.
Loupart (town), 220.
Loupart Wood, 305, 308, 807.
Love, Sub-Lt. T. E., 188.
Loxley, Capt., R.M.L.1., 196.
Luard, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 5, 36, 88,
118, 145.
Ludendorff, Gen., quoted, 251.
Lunn, Sub-Lt. Hugh, quoted, 65-57,
in attack of 3rd-4th Feb. ’l7, 215.
Lyall, Sub-Lt., M.C., 216.
Lys (river), 294, 298, 309.
Lys Salient, 314.
M.
Macaulay, Able Seaman H. G., 210.
Machine Gun Companies, 63rd (R.N.)
Divisional, organization of, 173;
task in battle of the Ancre, 189 ;
189th M.G. Coy. at Beaucourt,


203 ; in attack of 3rd-4th Feb. ’l7,
216; 188th and 190th Coys, in
attack of 17th-18th Feb. ’l7, 219 ;
189th and 190th Coys, in first
battle of Gavrelle, 229, 233 ; 188th
and 190th Coys, in second battle
of Gavrelle, 242 ; services of, June-
Sept. ’l7, 247; reorganization of,
248; tactics at Passchendaele,
252; formed into Divisional Bn.,
278.
Mackenzie, Lt.-Col., 321.
Mackinlay, Lt., R.N.V.R., 230, 237.
Maclagan’s Ridge, 115, 116.
Macready, Lt.-Col., R.M.,248,278,283.
McCausland, Maj.-Gen., 5.
McClarety, Lt.-Col., R.A., 276.
McCormick, Surgeon, 107, 204.
McCracken, Staff-Surgeon, D. 5.0.,
R.N., 237 (and footnote), 257,296.
McGeorge, Capt., 178.
McHardy, Sub.-Lt., 108.
McKirdy, Lt.-Comdr. P. M., R.N.V.R.,
89, 129.
Magnicourt (town), 180, 311.
Magnicourt-Qu6ant Road, 811.
Magrath, Lt., R.N.V.R., 108, 141.
Maidos, 64, 74, 80, 153.
Maisonnette, La (town), 183.
Malia, Leading Seaman, 87.
Malines (town), 20.
Mallett, Sub-Lt., 296.
Malone, Lt.-Col., D. 5.0., 279, 296.
Maloney, Sub-Lt. A. E., 274.
Malplaquet (town), 828.
Malta, 67, 75.
Manoury, General, 16.
Marcoing (town), 266, 278.
Marine Brigade, see Royal Marines.
Marine Battalions, see Royal Marines.
Marine Office, administrative control
of Naval Div. transferred to, 9.
Marlow, Lt. W., 246.
Marmora, Sea of, 72.
Marne (river), 13, 16, 298, 301.
Marquay (town), 180.
Marsh, 2nd Lt., 227.
Martin Hill, 47.
Martinpuich (town), 183, 285, 286.
Martinsart (town), 290, 291, 292, 293,
295.
Masefield, John, quoted, 67.
Masnteres (town), 266.
Mason, P.O. W., 108
Massey, Sub-Lt., 157.
Matcham, Sub-Lt., M.C., 233.
Matthews, Lt.-Col. C. 8., R.M.L.1.,
5, 71, 83, 84, 91, 02, 149, 156.
Maubeuge (town), 809, 318.
Maudsley, Lt., M.C., R.N.V.R., 269.
Maxim Machine Gun Squadron, 115.
Maxwell, Lt.-Col. Aymer (Coldstream
Guards), 6, 30.
Maxwell, Lt.-Col. W. L., 6, 8,101,108,
129, 131.
May, Lt. J. F., R.M.L.1., 91.
Maynard, Lt., R.N.V.R., 195-196.
Mead, Capt. C. F., R.M.L.1., 160.
Mecklenburg, Sub-Lt., M.C., 195.
Melland, Sub-Lt. Bryan, 110.
Melland, Sub-Lt. T. F., R.N.V.R., 88.
Medical Unit (R.N. Division), 48.
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force,
61.
Mercer, Major-Gen. Sir David, K.C.8.,
takes command of Ist R.N. Bde.,
47, 49 ; sails for the East on board
Franconia, 59; in command of
Composite Bde. at Kantara, 70;
supervising embarkation from
Alexandria, 71; ordered to Gaba
Tepe, 100 ; . commands Ist Bde. at
Anzac, 116 ; in operations at Anzac,
125 ; sees Sir lan Hamilton, 154 ;
appointed A.G.R.M., 171.
Mersey Division, R.N.V.R., 11.
Mesden, Fleet-Surgeon, R.N., 9.
Mesnil (town), 187, 291, 295.
Mesnil Chateau, 290.
Mesnil Ridge, 293.
Messines (town), 245, 246, 248.
Metz (town), 277.
Metz Switch, 277.
Miall-Green, Lt.-Comdr. W. S,, 157.
Micklem, Major, R.E., 8.
Milvain, Sub-Lt., 140.
Minnetonka, 59, 71.
Miraumont (town), 210, 218, 220.
Mitchell, Sub-Lt. G. J., 274.
Mitylene, 170.
Mobile Veterinary Section (R.N.
Division), 69, 181.
Modin, Sub-Lt., D.S.C., 88.
Moerbeke (town), 33, 37.
Moeuvres (town), 313, 314, 817.
Moir, Major, 283.
Moir, Sub-Lt. W. 8., 178.
Monash, Lt.-Gen. Sir John, 119, 121.
Monchy (town), 180, 229.
Monchy le Preux (town), 226, 238.
Monro, Gen. Sir Charles, G.C.8., 161,
214.
Mons (town), 13, 327, 328.
Montagu, Capt. the Hon. Lionel,
D. 5.0., R.M., 203, 204.
Montdidier (town), 301.
Montigny area, 301.
Moorhouse, Lt.-Col., 46, 87, 93, 129.
Morbecque (town), 18.
Morgan ..Surgeon R. G., R.N., 256.
Morgan, Lt., R.N.V.R., 140.
Morgans, Major, R.E., 47, 115.
Morrison, Lt., 204, 233.
Morto Bay, 04, 81, 82, 83, 88, 93, 96,
111, 159.
Morval (town), 183.


Mothe, Lt. de la, 195-196.
Motor Machine Gun Squadron,
R.N.A.S., 71.
Moxham, Lt. J. F., R.M., 119.
Mudros, 67, 69, 71, 79, 94, 143, 168,
169.
Muller, Maj. G. F., R.M.L.1., 119.
Mundy, Lt. F. C., R.N.V.R., 256
Munro, Lt.-Col. D., 208.
Munster Fusiliers, in V beach landing,
82, 85 ; in advance of 28th April,
’l5, 99.
Muntz, Lt. F. C., R.M.L.1., 178.
Murray, Major (Grenadier Guards), 6.
Myburg, Major, R.M., 187, 138, 147.
N.
Naval Brigades, see Royal Naval
Brigades.
Neal, Sub-Lt., 268.
Nelson, Lt.-Comdr. E. W., R.N.V.R.,
147, 150, 156, 208.
Nelson Battalion, first appointments
to, 6 ; in barracks at Portsmouth,
46; transferred from 2nd to Ist
Bde., 49 ; at Blandford, 49-51;
leaves for the East on Franconia,
59 ; ordered to Kantara, 70 ; sails
from Alexandria, 71 ; at Ajizac, 116-
126 ; share in operations at Anzac,
2nd-Brd May, ’l5, 122; losses of,
123; in attack of 4th June, ’l5,
186; in attack of 12th July, ’l5,
143; in attack of 13th July, ’l6,
144-140 ; losses of, by 25th July,
’l5, 148 ; Maj. Burge takes com-
mand of, 150; in reorganized Ist
R.N. Bde., 150; at evacuation of
Cape Helles, 162; in attack on
Beaucourt, 189 ; at battle of Beau-
court, 191-202; losses of, at Beau-
court, 204; new appointments,
Dec. ’l6, 208 ; in attack of 3rd-
6th Feb. ’l7, 212-213 ; losses of,
in attack of 3rd-sth Feb. ’l7, 217 ;
in first battle of Gavrelle, 23rd
Ap. ’l7, 229, 230, 234-236 ; at
Passchendaele, 31st Oct. ’l7, 257,
259-261 ; Comdr. Jones, R.N.V.R.,
takes command of, 263 ; at Welsh
Ridge, Dec. ’l7, 269 ; disband-
ment of, 274.
Nethe (river), 19, 20, 21, 22, 25.
Neuville (town), 277.
Nevinson, Mr. H. W., quoted, 154.
New Zealand Troops, N.Z. Bde. at
Cape Helles, 103 ; N.Z. Div. near
Auchonvillers, Mar. ’lB, 200; in
advance of 23rd Aug. ’lB, 808.
Newell, Sub-Lt. F. J., 251.
Newenham, Col., 84.
Newling, Capt., M.C., R.M.L.1., 240,
241, 257, 293.
Newman, Lt., 87.
Niergnies (town), 313, 820, 323, 324.
Nieuport (town), 249.
Nissen Hut, 282.
Nivelle, Gen., 224.
Nobbs, Lt., R.N.V.R., 284.
Nord, Canal du, 309, 313, 316.
Norris, Maj., R.M., 203, 204.
Northbourne, Lord, 6.
Northumberland Fusiliers, recruits
drawn from, 10.
Northumberland miners, quality of, 53.
Noulette Wood, 178.
Noyon (town), 10.
O.
Oakden, Lt. A. M., 129.
Oakey, Sgt., 122.
O’Kell, 2nd Lt., 219.
Oldfield, Col. J., C. 8., R.M.L.L, 45,
188.
Oliver, Lt., 217.
Ollivant, Lt.-Col., R.A., 4,8, 28, (foot-
note) 33, 79, 172.
Oppy (town), 238, 245, 240.
Oppy Road, 231, 232.
Oppy-Gavrelle Road, 231.
Ordnance Company (R.N. Division),
48,181.
Orlencourt (town), 180.
Osmond, Lt.-Col., 234.
Osmond, Maj., 218.
Ostend (town), 3, 14, 20, 27.
Ourton (town), 180.
Ovillers (town), 183, 221.
Oxfordshire Hussars, 17.
Ozanne, Lt.-Col., D. 5.0., R.M.L.1.,
248.
P.
Paddebeek (stream), 252, 253, 255.
Paddebeek (town), 259, 261, 202, 203.
Padwick, Surgeon Lt.-Comdr., D. 5.0.,
R.N., 216.
Paris, Major-Gen. Sir A., K.C.8.,
takes over Sir George Aston’s com-
mand, 19; receives orders to take
Infantry to Antwerp, 21; forces
under his command, 21; in action
on the line of the Nethe, 22;
decides on withdrawal, 23 ; learns
of arrival of Naval Bdes., 26;
orders Ist Bde. to come forward to
intermediate position, 26 ; promoted
to Major-General, 28 ; orders with-
drawal to line of inner forts, 28 ;
decides to withdraw, 82; receives
reports of Staff on retirement from
Antwerp, 35 ; handling of troops at
Antwerp, 38 ; takes up residence at
Stud House, 40; sails for East on


board Franconia, 59; receives in-
structions to send detachment to
Kantara, 69; views on Gallipoli
landing, 75, 76; asked to supply
ratings for beach duty, 79; on
board H.M.S. Canopus, 79; lands
at Cape Helles, 100 ; takes command
of Composite Div., 103 ; in battle of
6th-Bth May, 104, 106, 107 ; 2nd
Naval Bde. reverts to command of,
109, 111; site of Headquarters of,
112 ; units under command of, 13th
May, ’15,127 ; in battle of 4th June,
’l5, 131, 133, 187; disbands Ben-
bow and Collingwood Bns., 137;
goes to Mudros, Bth July, ’l5, 143 ;
returns from Mudros, 147; task
after battle of 12th-14th July, ’l5,
147; visits trenches with Sir lan
Hamilton, 154 ; receives orders for
evacuation of Gallipoli, 29th Dec.
’l5, 161; at evacuation, 167;
receives K.C.8., (footnote) 174;
takes command of Angres-Souchez
sector, 174 ; at chateau near Ourton,
180 ; wounded 14th Oct. ’l6, 185 ;
appreciation of, 186; change after
departure of, 188.
Paris (city), 13.
Paris-Amiens Railway, 301.
Parker, Surgeon, D.S.C., R.N., 157.
Parker, Lance-Corporal, V.C., 117.
Parkinson, L.S., 87.
Parry, Lt.-Col. G. L., R.M.L.1., 273.
Parsons, Lt.-Col., R. McN., R.M.L.1.,
5, 141, 144.
Passchendaele (town), 181, 223, 249,
264, 265, 305.
Passchendaele Ridge, 248, 257.
Paterson, Lt., R.N.V.R., 307.
Paton, Sub-Lt., 123
Pawson, Sub-Lt. R., 296.
Pearson, Lt., M.C., R.N.V.R., 292.
Perkins, Lt. G. S., R.M., 157.
Peronne (town), 309, 814.
Perring, C.P.0., 87.
Perry, Lt., R.N.V.R., 260.
Perry, 2nd Lt. F. W. A., 219.
Perry, Sub-Lt. C. M., (footnote) 256.
Phillips, Brig.-Gen. L. F., D. 5.0., 171,
212, 214, 229, 235, 243.
Pierce, Admiral, 70.
Pierce, The Rev., 157.
Pierce, A. 8., 134.
Pimperne (town), 49, 57.
Pipe, Capt., R.M.L.1., 256.
Pitcairn, Capt., 268.
Playne, Surgeon, D. 5.0., R.N., 118.
Plymouth (town), 46.
Plymouth Marine Battalion, formed,
5; in action on river Nethe, 22;
ordered to the East, 58 ; in Naval
attack on Dardanelles, 63 ; landings
at Kum Kale and Sedd-el-bahr,
64; sails from Alexandria, 71;
attached to 29th Div., 77, 100;
landing at Y beach, 83; assigned
to beach duties, 100; part of
Composite Div., Cape Helles, 103;
in attack of 12th-14th July, ’l5,
143, 144 ; amalgamated with Ports
mouth Bn., July, ’l5, 149.
Poelcapelle (town), 250.
Point du Jour, fortress at, 228.
Poland, Major R. A., R.M.L.1., 803.
Pollard, Lt. A. 0., V.C., 236, 241.
Pollock, Comdr., D. 5.0., R.N.V.R.
263, 269, 275, 824.
Pope’s Hill, 115, 119, 120.
Pope’s Post, 124.
Port Said, 69, 70.
Portland (town), 46.
Portsmouth (town), 46, 49.
Portsmouth Battalion (Royal
formation of, 5; ordered to Lille,
19 ; in reserve at battle of Nethe,
22; rearguard in retirement from
Antwerp, 82, 87; detrained at
Kemseke, 87; escapes to Salzaete,
88 ; sails from Alexandria, 71 ; at
Anzac, May ’l5, 116, 121, 124;
in attack of 12th-14th July, ’l5,
148, 144, 145,146; amalgamate d
with Plymouth Bn., 149.
Pound, Sub-Lt., 216.,
Powell, Sub-Lt. G. H., 296.
Pozteres (town), 183.
Praagh, Lt. van., M.C., R.M.L.1., 204.
Pratt, Surgeon, D.S.C., R.N., 126.
Free, Brig.-Gen. de, C.M.G., D. 5.0.,
quoted, 275 and footnote, 284, 286,
290, 291, 292, 806.
Premy Salient, 276.
Prentice, Brig.-Gen., D. 5.0., 171, 195,
200, 218, 252, 254, 260.
Price, Lt.-Comdr. T. L., 123.
Price, A. 8., 216.
Primrose, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 123.
Prince George, H.M.S ., 14.
Pronville (town), 812, 820.
Pronville-Inchy Road, 312 j
Proserpine, H.M.S. , 14.
Prowse, Chief Petty Officer, V.C., 312,
818
Public Schools Bn., R.N.V.R., 45.
Puchevillers (town), 293.
Puisieux (town), 220
Puisieux Trench, 213
Punton, L.S., 216.
Purser, Lt. D. F., R.N.V.R., 269
Pys (town), 210, 220.
Q.
Qu6ant (town), 811, 812.
Qu6ant-Cambrai Railway, 311,


Queen Elizabeth, 67, 73.
Qu6vy le Petit (town), 827.
Quilter, Lt.-Col. A., 7,8, 102, 110, 181.
Quinn’s Post, 116,124.
R.
Rackham, Lt. B. 8., M.C., R.N.V.R.,
204, 216, 296.
Ramsden, Lt.-Col., R.M., 42,45,56,170.
Rawlinson, General Lord, K.C.8., 27,
31.
Reas, Fleet-Surgeon F. H., R.N., 138.
Rennie, Sub-Lt. E., 129.
Reserve Bn., 4th R.N.V.R., 50.
Reserve Corps, 12th German, 178.
Revel, Major, R.E., 47.
Rheims (town), 298.
Rhine (river), 318.
Rice, Lt. E. V., 145.
Richards, Capt., R.M.L.1., 122, 123.
Richardson, Lt.-Col. G. S., C.M.G., 8,
18, 25, 28, 79, 172, 174.
Ridler, Lt. G. J., R.N.V.R., 296.
Riencourt (town), 306, 308, 310, 811.
River Clyde, 85, 86, 87, 89, 93.
Rivers, Staff-Surgeon, R.N., 100,107.
R.N.A.S., armoured cars, 17 ; Machine
Gun detachments, 22; Motor
Machine Gun detachments on board
Franconia, 59; A.A. guns taken
over from, Jan. ’16,169.
Robeck, Vice-Admiral Sir John de,
succeeds Admiral Carden, 66 ; con-
sulted about future of R.N. Div.,
140; Naval Div. comes under
command of, 168.
Roberts, Maj., R.A., 129, 133.
Roberts, Sub-Lt., 268.
Roberts, Sgt., 102.
Robertson, Sub-Lt. G. J., 269.
Robinson, Lt. L. W., 219.
Robinson, Sub-Lt. R. A. W., 217
Robotti, Sub-Lt., 216.
Roclincourt (town), 242.
Rocquigny (town), 281, 282, 284.
Roeux (town), 229.
Rooke, Capt., R.E., 22.
Rorke, Sub-Lt., 217.
Rosewarne, P. 0., 216.
Ross, Surgeon Mcßean, M.C., R.N.,
152, 257.
Ross, Petty Officer, 237.
Rougemont, Brig.-Gen. H. de, 174.
Royal Engineers, 17, 22.
Royal Fleet Reserve, personnel at
Walmer, 5 ; characteristics of men
of, 10.
Royal Fusiliers, 2nd Bn., landing of, on
X beach, 82.
Royal Fusiliers, 7th Bn. joins R.N.
Div. 171 ; in battle of the Ancre,
191, 197; in battle of Beaucourt,
202, 220 ; in local advance of 16th-
17th Ap. ’l7, 227 ; in first battle of
Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7, 229, 234, 236;
attached to 189th Bde., June, ’l7,
246 ; at Passchendaele, 30th Oct.
’l7, 258 ; at Welsh Ridge, Dec. ’l7,
267, 268 ; dispositions of, 21st
Mar. ’lB, 275 ; behind the Green
Line, 23rd-24th Mar. ’lB, 278, 280,
283, 285 ; at Courcelette, 288 ;
attacked on sth Ap. ’lB, 293 ; in
attack of 21st Aug. ’lB, 804; in
attack on Canal du Nord, 817;
position on 29th Sept. ’lB, 820.
Royal George, 71.
Royal Irish Rifles, 2nd Battn. joins
R.N.D., 300; in attack of 21st
- Aug. ’lB, 303 ; in advance of 24th-
25th Aug. ’lB, 807, 308 ; in attack
on D rocourt-Qudant line, 312 ; in
attack on Anneux and on Canal
d’Escaut, 29th Sept. ’lB, 818, 820 ;
in attack on Niergnies, 824.
Royal Marines;
Royal Marine Brigade, formed from
R.M.A. and R.M.L.1., 2 ; forms
part of Naval Division, 3; dis-
bandment of R.M.A. Battalion-
formation of Chatham, Ports-
mouth, Plymouth and Deal
R.M.L.I. Battalions, 5; under
Sir George Aston, 5 ; ordered to
Ostend, 3, 14; operations at
Ostend and re-embarkation, 14-
15; ordered to Dunkirk, 17;
detachments man R.N.A.S.
armoured cars, 17 ; motor omni-
bus drivers enlisted in, 18 ; opera-
tions round Dunkirk, 17-20;
reinforce line of Nethe, 21;
in action under Gen. Paris, 21 ;
operations on Nethe, 21-23 ; retire
to Vremde-Bouchout line, 26;
in retirement from Antwerp, 83 ;
Gen. French’s Antwerp dispatch,
88; placed under Brig.-Gen.
Trotman, 46; supply personnel
for Divisional train, 48; go to
Blandford, 50; Staff ordered over-
seas, 58; Marine Bns. sail for
the East, 59-62; assist in Naval
attack, 62 ; embark at Port Said
for Mudros, 71; ordered to Gaba
Tepe, 100 ; disembark at Anzac,
April 28th, ’l5, 115 ; operations
at Anzac, 116-125 ; reorganization
of, May, ’l5, 129; in local ad-
vances of 18th-27th May,’15,129;
position after attack of 4th June,
’l5, 139 ; in local attack, 22nd
June, ’l5, 141 ; position on 14th
July, ’l5, 147; amalgamated
with Anson and Howe Bns., as


2nd R.N. Brigade ( q.v .), July, ’l5,
150.
Chatham, Deal, Plymouth and Ports-
mouth Battalions, R.M.L.I. (see
under Chatham, Deal, Plymouth
and Portsmouth).
Ist Royal Marine Battalion, formed
from Chatham and Deal Bat-
talions, 149 ; cases of frost-bite
in, Nov. ’l5, 158; at evacua-
tion of Gallipoli, Jan. ’l6, 164;
in battle of the Ancre, 13th Nov.
’l6, 189, 190, 192, 196, 205; in
attack of 17th Feb. ’l7, 218-
219 ; at Angres, 12 Ap. ’l7, 226,
227 ; in second battle of Gavrelle,
Ap. ’l7, 238-241 ; at Passchen-
daele, 26th Oct. ’l7, 252 ; on
Welsh Ridge, Dec. ’l7, 267 ;
dispositions of, 21st Mar. ’lB,
275 ; on the Green Line, 23rd-
24th Mar. ’lB, 278 ; at High
Wood, 286 ; in counter-attack
of 26th-27th Mar. ’lB, 291, 292 ;
counter-attack by, on sth Ap.
’lB, 293; losses of, in March
retreat, 296 ; raid by, 18th May,
’lB, 299; amalgamated with
2nd R.M. Bn., 300 (see Royal
Marine Bn. below).
2nd Royal Marine Battalion, formed
from Portsmouth and Plymouth
Bns., 149; at evacuation of,
Gallipoli, 164; in battle of
the Ancre, 18th Nov. ’l6, 189;
191, 192, 196, 198, 201, 204;
minor operations by, Jan. ’l7,
212 ; in attack of 17th Feb. ’l7,
218, 219; in second battle of
Gavrelle, Ap. ’l7, 238, 240, 241 ;
Col. Hutchison leaves to com-
mand 190th Bde., succeeded by
Lt.-Col. Ozanne, 243; achieve-
ment of, in April, ’l7, 244; at
Oppy Wood, July, ’l7, 246 ; at
Passchendaele, 26th Oct. ’l7,
252, 254; dispositions of, 21st
March, ’lB, 276; on the Green
Line, 23rd-24th Mar. ’18,278,279,
282 ; at High Wood, 286 ; counter-
attacks by, 26th-27th Mar. ’lB,
291; counter-attack by, sth Ap.
’lB, 293; losses of, in March
retreat, 296 ; amalgamated with
Ist R.M. Bn., 800 (see Royal
Marine Bn. below).
Royal Marine Battalion, formation
of, 800 ; in attack of 21st Aug.
’lB, 802-803 ; in attack of 24th-
25th Aug. ’lB, 807; in attack,
on Drocourt-Qu6ant line, 317,
318, 320 ; in attack on Niergnies,
824
Royal Naval Brigades (for operations
of individual Bdes., see Ist and 2nd
Naval Bdes. below), formation
of Naval Bdes., 2 ; difficulties in
training, 7-9 ; ordered to Antwerp,
9, 21 ; experiences before reaching
Antwerp, 24; go into trenches,
29 ; take over forts from Belgians,
30; Gen. French’s Antwerp dis-
patch, 38.
Ist Royal Naval Brigade, first
appointments to, 6; arrive at
Antwerp, 24 ; meet Mr. Winston
Churchill at Vieux Dieux, 25 ;
in advanced trenches, 26 ; on line
of inner forts, 29 ; order for
retirement issued to, 32 ; order
not received, 33 ; order for retire-
ment issued by Commodore Hen-
derson, 36 ; experiences on
retreat from Antwerp, 37; re-
organization of, under Gen.
Mercer, 46, 47; Nelson Bn.
transferred to, 49 ; embark at
Avonmouth, 59 ; at Kantara, 70 ;
embark at Port Said for Mudros,
71 ; ordered to Gaba Tebe, 100 ;
disembark at Anzac, 116 ; com-
position and disposition of, Ap.
’l5, (footnote) 116; operations
of, at Anzac, 125-126 ; re-embark
for Cape Helles, 125 ; in local
advance of 18tlf-27th May, *l5,
129; reorganization of, 129;
position after attack of 4th June,
’l5, 139; position on 12th-14th
July, ’l5, 147 ; reorganization of,
150 ; casualties of, 15th Aug.-30th
Nov, ’l5, 156-157; at Maidos
and Tenedos, ’l6, (footnote) 169 ;
renamed 189th Bde., 171 (for
doings of 189th Bde. see under
63rd (R.N.) Division).
2nd Royal Naval Brigade, first
appointments to, 6; arrive at
Antwerp, 25-26; on line of
inner forts, 29 ; orders for retire-
ment issued to, 82 ; retreat from
Antwerp, 33-35 ; movements on
return to England, 46 ; arrival at
Blandford, 49 ; embark at Avon-
mouth, 59 ; at Kantara, 71; em-
bark at Port Said for Mudros,
71 ; disembark at Cape Helles,
100; in action at Cape Helles,
2nd-3rd May, ’l5, 101, 102 ; lent
to Gen. D’Amade, 103 ; in attack
of 6th-Bth May, 103-107 ; Gen.
D’Amade’s tribute to, 109 ; losses
of, 10th May, 110; position of, 13th
May, ’l5, 128 ; in local advances
of 18th-27th May, 129; re-
organization of, May, ’l5, 129;
365
Index


Royal Naval Brigades—continued,
in attack of 4th June, ’l5, 181-
135; losses of, on 4th June,
’l5, 187 ; reorganization of, July,
’l6, 149-160; lent to Salonica
Army, Jan, ’l6, 169 ; renamed
188th Bde. 171 (for doings of
188th Bde. see under 63rd (R.N.)
Division).
Royal Naval Hussars, 48.
Royal Naval Reserve, personnel at
Walmer, 6.
Royal Navy, personnel at Walmer, 6.
R.N.V.R., personnel at Walmer, 5;
difficulties in training of, 8; types
comprised in its ranks, 10 ; charac-
teristics of officers of, 11; esprit de
corps of, 12 ; transfer of officers of,
to sea service, 46.
Rue (town), 208.
Rugg, Capt., 47.
Rumania, army of, 61.
Rumilly (town), 823.
Russell, Sub-Lt., 247, 257.
Russell Top, 115.
Russia, 149.
S.
Saint-Gxllae3-Waes (town), 38, 85,
87.
Saint John Ambulance Corps, 47.
Saint Julian “ triangle,” 251.
Saint Julian-Poelcapelle area, 263.
Saint Margaret’s Bay, 47.
Saint Nazaire (town), 17.
Saint Nicholas (town), 21, 87.
St. Pierre Divion (town), 185, 188.
St. Pol (town), 827.
St. Pol area, 823.
St. Quentin Canal, 309.
St. Symphonien (town), 828.
Saintsbury, Professor, 178.
Salonica, 153, 169.
Salt Lake, 125.
Samothrace, 125.
Samson, Commander, D. 5.0., R.N., 18,
20.
Sanders, Gen. Liman von, 81, 103.
Sanders, Lt. W. R., R.M., 118, 123.
Sandilands, Lt.-Col., D.5.0.,R.M.L.L,
815, 821.
Sanitary Section (R.N. Div.), 69, 181.
Sari Bair, 74, 75.
Saunders, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 172.
Saunders, Capt., R.M., 6.
Saxon Regt., 103rd, 178.
Saxon Reserve Division, 23rd, 178.
Scarpe (river), 225, 226.
Scheldt (river), 21, 27.
Schlesinger, Surgeon, R.N., (foot-
note), 107.
Scholfield, A. 8., 210.
Schoonaerde (town), 27.
Schuler, Mr. Philip, 117,119,124.
Scott, Capt., 807.
Scott, Petty Officer, 240.
Scyros, 71, 77, 79.
Sedd-el-bahr, 64, 81, 84, 85, 86, 88,
89, 92, 96, 99, 112.
Seely, Col., 28.
Selzaerte (town), 81, 88, 88.
Serbia, 60-61.
Serre (town), 185, 188, 210, 220.
Seymour, Lt.-Col., 220.
Shadbolt, Sub-Lt., (footnote) 85.
Shaw, Surgeon, R.N., 102.
Shaw, Sub-Lt. W. J., 257.
Shaw-Stewart, Lt,-Comdr. Patrick,
R.N.V.R., 78, 268, 270, 271.
Shea, Sub-Lt., 220.
Shelton, Comdr. R. H., D.S.O ,
R.N.V.R., 214, 216, 243, 201.
Shillingstone (town), 49.
Shute, Major-General Sir Cameron,
K.C.8., succeeds General Paris
in command of R.N.D., 187;
decides to dig assembly trenches,
Nov. ’l6, 188; explanation of
failure of Hawke and Nelson Bns.,
195; postpones assault on Beau-
court, 199 ; arranges for attack on
14th Nov, ’l6, 201 ; 111th Bde.
lent to, 201 ; hands over Beau-
court sector to 87th Div., 203 ; suc-
ceeded by Gen. Lawrie in command
of R.N. Div., 19th Feb. ’l7, 222.
Signal Company (R.N. Divisional
Engineers), formed, 49 ; sails from
Alexandria, 71; in France, 180.
Simmonds, Sub-Lt., D. 5.0., 312.
Simpson, Sub-Lt. W. G., 284.
Simpson, P. 0., 216.
Sketchley, Major Powys, D. 5.0.,
R.M.L.1., 17, 28, 144, 185.
Skew Bridge, 101.
Smallwood, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 85,
86.
Smith, 2nd Lt. J. A., 296.
Smith, P. 0., 134.
Smyth, Col., 821.
Smyth, Lt. B. W., 145.
Soissons, 810.
Somali, 71.
Somerville, 2nd Lt. J. W., (footnote)
178.
Somme (river), 178, 182, 183, 184,
188, 191, 198, 209, 225, 226, 243,
285, 297, 302, 805, 809, 310.
Somme, second battle of, 801.
Souastre (town), 802.
Souchez (town), 178, 174.
Souchez River, 227.
Source Trench, 252, 258, 260.
Sourd Farm, 252, 261.
South Wales Borderers, 2nd Bn.,
landing at Y beach, 83 ; landing at
366
Index


Morto Bay, 83; re-embark from
Y beach, 02 ; in advance of 28th
Ap. ’l5, 99.
Sowerby, Lt. F. W., R.N.V.R., 122.
Sparling, Major, R.M.L.1., 133.
Sparrow, Surgeon, R.N., 152.
Sparta, 72.
Spearman, Commander, R.N., 45, 131,
134.
Spinney, Lt., 212.
Spittle, Major, R.M., 47.
Sprange, Lt.-Comdr., M.C., R.N.V.R.,
196.
Stanford, Staff-Surgeon, R.N., 48.
Startin, Lt. F. H. J., R.N.V.R., 145.
Stavros, Gulf of, 169.
Stear, Lt., M.C., R.N.V.R., 183, 260,
270, 329.
Stekene (town), 83.
Stephenson, Sub-Lt. R. L., 299.
Stevenson, Lt., R.N.V.R. (Hawke Bn.),
807.
Stevefason, Sub-Lt. (Anson Bn.), 253,
255, 256.
Stewart, Surgeon, R.N., (footnote) 188.
Stewart, Sub-Lt., 194.
Stroud, Lt-Col. C. 8., R.M.L.1., 150,
156.
Stud House, 49.
Suez Canal, defences at, 69.
Sulivan, Capt. H. H., R.M.L.1,196.
Sulla, 72.
Supply Column, joins Div., 69.
Suvla, 74, 125, 150, 153, 158, 160, 162.
Swale, 2nd Lt. T., 219.
T.
Tadpole Copse, 313.
Tamplin, Lt., R.N.V.R., 233.
Tavistock (town), 46.
Taylor, Sub-Lt. Crosland, M.C.,
R.N.V.R., 237.
Taylor, Sub-Lt. F. A., 284.
Taylor, 2nd Lt. H. W., 220.
Taylor, Sub-Lt. R., 269.
Teague, Capt. J. C., R.M.L.1., 119.
Teale, Major, D. 5.0., R.E., 47, 174.
Tekke, Cape, 64, 67, 81.
Tekke Burnu, 88.
Telfer, Sub-Lt., R;N.V.R., 804.
Tenedos, 169.
Termonde (town), 21.
Tetley, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 108, 172,
193, 222.
Thiepval (town), 183, 185, 289, 295.
Thiepval heights, 285,
Thiepval Ridge, 287, 290.
Thilloy (town), 306, 307, 808, 809.
Thucydides, 67.
Thynne, Lord Alexander, quoted,
268, 271.
Tierchon, Col., 2nd Chasseurs, 22.
Tillings, L.S., 216.
Tilloy les Mofflaines (town), 224, 810.
Tisdall, Sub-Lt., V.C., R.N.V.R., 85,
86-87, 110.
Tollast, Lt. R. 0., 129.
Tournant Farm, 252, 261, 262.
Toutencourt (town), 297, 800.
Townes, P. 0., 156.
Toy, C.P.0., 108.
Travers, Sub-Lt., 217.
Trebuki Bay, 71, 78.
Trefusis, Major, 6.
Tremayne, Sub-Lt., 140.
Trench Mortar Batteries (63rd (R.N.)
Division), formation of, 173 ; task
in battle of the Ancre, 189 ; 189th
L.T.M. Battery, in attack of 3rd-
4th Feb. ’l7, 214 ; in first battle of
Gavrelle, 229, 230 ; work of Medium
T.M.’s at Gavrelle, 237 ; in retreat
of Mar. ’lB, 281 ; in attack of 21st
Aug. ’lB, 804 ; at crossing of Canal
du Nord, 816.
Trescaut (town), 277.
Treves, Lt., R.N.V.R., 129.
Trimmer, Sub-Lt., (footnote) 85.
Trotman, Brig.-Gen. C. N., C. 8., R.M.,
Marine Bde. placed under command
of, 46 ; ordered to the East, (foot-
note) 58 ; sails from Alexandria,
71; ordered to Gaba Tepe, 100;
Bde. of, in action .at Anzac, 116;
commands support Bns. in action
2nd-3rd May, at Anzac, 119 ; takes
over sector of Anzac defences, 124 ;
in command of Div., battle of 12th-
13th July, ’l5, 143, 144; falls ill,
156 ; share in operations preceding
evacuation, 162 ; to command 190th
Bde., 171; takes over Calonne sub-
sector, 174.
Troy, 72.
Tschischwitz, Erich von, (footnote) 20.
Tudor, Brig.-Gen., 263.
Tupman, Major, R.M.L.1., 119, 171.
Turkey, military power of, 60.
Turkish Divisions, dispositions of, 75,
77.
Turrall, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 193,
284, 829.
Tyneside Division, R.N.V.R. officers
drawn from, 11.
U.
Unwin* Comdr., V.C., R.N., 86.
V.
Vauennes (town), 185.
Varlet Farm, 252, 253, 258.
Vengeance, 14.
367
Index


73
Verdun (town), 184, 310.
Vieux Dieux (town), 25.
Villers au Flos (town), 282, 283, 285.
Villers Saint Ghislain (town), 828.
Villiers, Sir Francis, K.C.8., 10.
Vimy Ridge, 173, 174, 182, 224, 225,
226.
Vremde (town), 26.
W.
Wainwiught, Lt.-Comdr. O. J.,
R.N.V.R., 173, 308.
Wainwright, Lt.-Col., R.M.L.1., 243.
Walford, Capt., 86.
Walker, Lt. C. G., M.C., R.N.V.R.,
240, 288, 296.
Walker’s Ridge, 115, 125.
Wallemolen (town), 250.
Waller, Lt.-Comdr., R.N.V.R., 105,110.
Walmer (town), 2,5, 9, 48.
Warlencourt (town), 305, 306, 307.
Warlencourt, Butte de, 307.
Warwick, Lt. Spencer, D.S.C.,
R.N.V.R., 89.
Watkins, Sub-Lt., 268.
Watts, Lt., R.M., 118.
Way, Lance-Corporal, 144.
Weaver, Sub-Lt., 145.
Weir, Sub-Lt., R.N.V.R., 268.
Wells, Lt.-Comdr. N., 146.
Wells, Lt.-Col. Collins, V.C., 234, 235,
292, 296.
Welsh Ridge, 266, 269.
Wemys, Admiral, 69.
West, Lt.-Col. George Cornwallis (Scots
Guards), 7.
West, Comdr. C. S., D. 5.0., R.N.V.R.,
45, 131, 151, 246, 268, 270, 271.
Westby, Lt. T., M.C., R.M., 241-242,
270.
Wharf, Lt. G., R.M., 296,
Wheeler, L.S., 214.
Whitaker, Sub-Lt., 123.
White, Capt. F. N., R.M.L.1., 150.
White, Lt., R.M., 129.
White, Sub-Lt. T., 269.
White, Quarter-master-Sgt., 122.
Whiteman, Lt.-Col., 208, 237, 248.
Wilkes, Sub-Lt., 213.
Wilkie, Major, 237.
Williams, Lt., R.M.A., 18.
Willis, Sub-Lt., R.N.V.R., (footnote)
85.
Wilmot-Sitwell, Lt., R.M., 145.
Wilryk (town), 24.
Wilson, Lt.-Col. Leslie, C.M.G..D.5.0.,
M.P., R.M., takes command of
Hawke Bn., 45; in command of
Hawke Bn. at Gallipoli, 140, 150,
151 ; invalided, 7th Oct. ’l5, 156 ;
in battle of the Ancre, 191,197.
Wilson, Major F., R.M.L.1., 6,129.
Wilson, Capt. F., R.M.L.1., 47.
Wilson, Sub-Lt. W., (footnote) 273.
Wilson, Sub-Lt.W.,M.C.,(footnote) 270.
Wingfield, Lt.-Col. the Rev. W. E.,
D. 5.0., 247, 263, (footnote) 275.
Winn, Petty Officer, 269.
Witheries (town), 327.
Witting, 2nd Lt. S. N., (footnote) 282.
Wolfe, Sub-Lt. A. F., 217.
Wood, Sub-Lt., (footnote) 808.
Woodford, Lt. C. J., D.S.M., R.N.V.R.,
(footnote) 269.
Worcester Regt., 4th Bn. at Gallipoli
landing, 82, 88.
Worcester Regt,, 14thBn., join R.N.D.
as pioneer battalion, 181 ; in retreat
of Mar. ’lB, 280, 283, 289.
Wray, Comdr. Roberts, R.N.V.R., 56.
Wren, Lt., R.M.L.1., 212.
Wright, Capt., 275, 319.
Wyard, Sub-Lt. R., 262.
Wyrall, Mr. Everard, 295.
X.
Xeeos, Gulf of, 74, 125, 151.
Y.
Yeni Shehk, 64.
Ypres, Earl of, his concern for
Channel Ports, 16 ; quotation from
dispatch of, 38.
Ypres, 248, 249, 265. '
Yser Canal, 39.
Ytres (town), 277, 279, 281, 282, 284.
Ytres-Bus Road, 279, 280, 294.
Z.
Zwyndheciit (town), 82.
Printed at The Chapel River Press, Kingston, Surrey.
368
Index
