





CHEAP REPOSITORY
THE
GAMESTER.
Sold by J. MARSHALL,
(Printer to the Cheap Repository for Religious and
Moral Trafts) No, 17, Queen-Street, Cheapfnlc, and No. 4,
Aldermary Church-Yard; and R. WHITE, Piccadilly,
London.
By S. HAZARD, at Bath ; and by all Bookfellers, Newfmen,
and Hawkers, in Town and Country;
'Great Allowance will be made to Shopkeepers and Hawkers.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
Or 4s. 6d. per 100. —2s. 6d. for 30. —is. 6d. for 25.
[Cntevrfc at gtattoners


THE
STORY
/ ,\ ; ...
Poor THICKET the GAMESTER.
SHEWING
How he ftrft loft his place by gaming, and then
had well nigh been the death of his wife through,
the fame caufe, and how laftly, his gaming was
the occafion of his being tranfported as a coh-
vift to Botany Bay.


is *
( 3 )
the
GAMESTER.
T CAN’T, for my life, imagine (faid Mr. Smith
-L to his oppofite neighbour Mr. Tomfon) what
thofe fellows can be about on the top of ray houfe.
They have been thefe two days employed there lu
repairing the damage done by the high wind t’other
night} a job which I think might have been done
in a very few hours.” 44 Step over the way to my
-door,” faid Tomfon, 44 and I will prefently explain to
you why the job is fo long in hand.” Smith did fo—
“ Turn about and look up,” faid Tomfon, 44 and you
will fee the two men fitting over againft each other
on the ridge of your houfe.” 44 Why they are playing
at cards!” faid Smith— 46 no wonder my bufmefs is
.” Away went Smith to the matter
omplain of his men. The matter
as he well might be, and di funded
was v
the idle fellows from his fervice; and as he made
known the ftory, the men found no one willing to
employ them, fg they had full leifure for their gam-
ing, and Betfworth loft all his money to Tricket—■
Betfworth’s wife in vain afked him for cafti, pro-
vifions were fcarce, and they had lived on fhort
commons feveral days. On Saturday Betfworth had
A 2


. (4 )
no wages to receive, neverthelefs, he defired hrs
wife would get a bit of meat for a hot Sunday’s
dinner; 44 for,” faid he, 44 we have lived hardly
enough this week, and I fhall afk my friend
Tricket to eat a bit with us.” The wife faid no-
thing, but when her hufband and Tricket came in
to dinner on Sunday, fhe laid the doth, and fet
upon the table a difh with a cover. 44 What haft
thou got under thy cover, wife??” faid Betfworth,
44 fomething nice I hope.” 44 As good as I eould
get,” faid the wife, “ had you brought me money
you fhould have had fomething better.” Upon
this he lifted up the cover, and behold! the difh
contained nothing but fome dirty old cards fcat-
tcred about it! 44 Ts this,” faid Betfworth, “what
you provide for me and my friend?” 44 It is all that
you and your friend have left us,” faid fhe, 44 I have
nothing to eat myfelf, and thefe are the only tools
you work with to provide for my maintenance and
your own.” 44 Burn the cards,” faid Betfworth,
44 they have been the ruin of me; forgive me, wife,
i defervc a more bitter reproof.” Tricket,” added
he, 44 my poor Molly has ferved us rightly enough
for my part I am refolved to go to my mailer to-
morrow, confefs my fault, and try to get his work
again; and I hope God will pardon me for the dif-
trefs I have brought upon my family by my love
of gaming; and that he will mercifully ftrengthea
me to refill every temptation to return to fuch a
horrid praflice.’’ Tricket did not relifh the jeft
but went furlily out of the houfe. Betfworth how-
ever is laid to have taken a hint from this little
trick of his wife, and, as far as I have heard, he
has never fmcc been found amongft the Gangers,


(5 ) , '
I mud now proceed to tell you fomethmg wore
of Tricket, who continued his evil practices, and
who is the oiily one of thefe two Gamefters waoie
Jiiftory I mean to fpeak of any farther.
Having loft his former gull whom he tried once
or twice to draw to another game, by faying that
the man wanted fpirit. Tricket happened to light
upon a fecond brother Gamefter, whom he hoped
to drain as he bad done Betfworth; but either
through a fad run of ill luck, or, as I rather think,
by his being not a little cheated, he loon loft
every farthing of his former booty; and he had
nothing now left for him to' ftake at the next gam-
ing party, except what little he could get by drip-
ping his poor wife of the earnings of her hard la-
bor. She had two children of four and five years
of age, for whom, as well as herfelf, fhe contrived
to get bread by taking in waffling.
She bore with patience her hufband’s fpending
all he got upon his own pleafures, and leaving her
to fhift for herfelf; but when he came home, and
tore from her what ftie had worked fo hard for.
fhe could not help weeping and complaining,
though her complaints were mild and far from the
language of fcolding: but her brutal hufband, in-
ftead of being moved by her tears, only made them
a pretence for running from her to the alehoufe;
ss fince,” as he laid, “ he could not have comfort
at home.”
One of the families for which fhe wafhed, would
often carelefsly make her wait a month or two for
the payment of her bills; inllcad of difeharging
them weekly, when fhe brought home the linen.
This is a cruel inconfideratency, and very contrary
to the merciful fpirit of the law of God, which for-


( 6 )
bids to keep back the hire of the labourer. The
truth is, perfons whofe only fupport is hard labour*
can feldom do more than live from hand to mouth,
and whilft their pay is kept back by a thoughtlefs
cuftomer, they are likely enough to be ftarving for
want of it.
It happened that fhe had juft received a wafhing
bill of fix weeks Handing, which fhe had long been
fighing for, and was counting her money, when her
hufband came home in a terrible humour, declared
he had not a farthing in the world, and laid his vio-
lent hands on this money, every Chilling of which he
carried off. She fcreamed after him, begging that
he would leave her fome of it at leaft, or how
could Che get bread for her children ? But he was
quickly out of hearing, and haftily returned to his
play mate, who waited for him at the alehoufe.
Tricket’s cruelty ftruck his wife to the heart; Che
fat down in dumb defpair, and could not cafe her
full heart by weeping; the children looked up in
her face with terror, and foon began to cry*
and to tell her they were hungry; this gave a free
paffage to her tears; Che hugged them both to her
breaft, and told them that they fhould have all the
food their cruel father had left them; Che brought
out the remainder pf her loaf, and divided it be-
tween them; for her part die could fwallow none.
By being obliged to truft her cuftomers, fhe had
been reduced to borrow a little from her landlady,
and fhe owed fame rent befides, fo that fhe was
afhamed to apply to her again, and fhe had not fix-
pence in the world to fupply fpod or to buy fbap
for her wafhing. He who Jhould aflift her was her
worft enemy, and, carelefs of her wants, took from


r 7 ).
her the fruits of her induftry to throw it away in
gaming and drinking.
This barbarous treatment hurt her the more be-
cause, with all his faults, fhe retained more affec-
tion for him than he deferved; and had often chcar-
fully fupplied his extravagance with a (hare of
what fhe got, when fhe could do it without ftarv-
ing herfelf and her children. But now all provi-
fions were fo dear that fhe found it not eafy to get
neceffaries even by working early and late at her
laborious bufinefs. No money could fhe get from
her hufband, and this day his antagonift had re-
fufed to play with him any longer upon tick; and
the alehoufe-keeper, at whofe houfe this gaming
commonly went on, would draw no more beer
without prefent pay. His charafter was become
fo bad, that he could not get employed when ne-
ceffity would have urged him to work. In this
fituation he had come home defperate and pro-
voked at his ill-fortune, when he found his wife
with two guineas and a good deal of filver before
her. The fight of this money renewed his hopes,
and his eagernefs for trying once more to recover
his lofings. With this only objeft in view, he flew
like a vulture on his prey, and without a thought
of the diftrefsful ftate of thofe who Jliould have
been dear to him as his life, fnatched from them
all the means of fubfiflence. Thus does gaming
harden the heart and fwallow up every good affec-
tion! whilft the hateful paflions of avarice and
envy are continually fed and ftrengthened by it!
Poor Mrs. Tricket, cold and farting, put her
children to bed, and Tat weeping over them, whilft
her hufband fpent his hours in greedy wifhes, hope':
apd fears; in rage, in oaths, and curfes, over his


( 8 ).
cards, with the tankard at his fide, often drained
by the thirdy paffion burning in his ftomach, and
raging in his mind. At paft midnight he came
daggering home, and found his wife fitting up tor
him, pale and fhiyering, and her face fuelled with
weeping.— 44 I thought you had left us for good and
all,” faid (he, 44 left us to perifh : how could you
be fo barbarous as to rob me of all, and leave me
without a penny in the houfe P I befeefh you to
give me back fome of that money, which was all I
had in the world, unlefs you do'indeed defire to.
fee me, and your children die with want.” If that
was your all' ’ he replied, 4 die you mujl ; for it is
every penny gone, and more after it than I (hall
ever be able to pay.” So faying, he turned his
pockets infide out, to fhew her they were perfeftly
empty. At this fight the poor woman, whofe fpi-
rits were before nearly exhauded with grief and
fading, fell in a fainting fit at his feet: as he had
never feen her fo before he thought die was dead,
and alarmed the houfe with his cries; though he
was much in liquor, and his mind almoli didra£led,
yet the idea of having been the caufe of her death
druck him with horror. The children, awakened
by his out-cry, darted up, and feeing her on the
floor, cried, 44 Mammy! Mammy!” with all their
might.
This dreadful noife awakened both the landlady,
who flept above dairs, and alfo a widow lady who
lodged on the fird floor, but before either of Ihefe
could run down dairs. Tricket was at their doors,
crying in a horrible tone, 44 My wife! my wife!
come to her if you have any pity ! I have killed
her! help! help!” He then ran back, and found her
tying where he had left her, and the two children ory


f 9 )
the ground with her, luffing her cold hands and face*
fobbing and drowning her with their tears. The
lady and landlady reached Tricket’s room at the
fame inftant, and looked with amazement on this
wretched groupe; whilft the man cried out, “ See!
fee! what I have done ! I have murdered my wife !’*
“ Sure you could not be fuch a monfter;” faid the
lady, “ how have you murdered her? where is her
wound? help to raife her up, and let us fee the
hurt.” They then lifted her up, and perceived
returning life in her. “ Where is your hurt my
poor dear creature?” faid the landlady; 4! where
did that inhuman villain ftrike you ?” The poor
woman looked wildly: 44 what do you mean?”
faid ffie, he did not ftrike me, though I almoft
wifti he had to the heart.” Her hufband now, with the
mod; lively joy and gratitude, thanked God that ffie
was alive, and on his knees begged her forgivenefs.
She affured him, as well as her weaknefs would al-
low, that ffie forgave him all.
The good women now haftened to make a fire,
and to warm her bed, for they found flie fhivered
violently; when they had put her into it, the lady
brought her a glafs of warm wine and water, fome
of which ffie prevailed on her to fwallow. Tricket,
whofe anguifh had taken oft' his intoxication, put
his children again into their little bed; he gazed
upon them and their mother by turns; whilft his
heart was wrung with the fenfe of their wants and
his own wickednefs. His wife fell afleep foon after
the rcfrefhment fhe had taken; but in a few hours
awoke in a burning fever. Tricket watched by her
fide; when he felt her hand and head as hot as fire,
his fears returned, and he ran out of the houfe to
fetch an apothecary; though he recolle&ed that


f 10 )
he had nothing to pay for help, or even neceflary
food for her: however he went into the ftreet, tak-
ing a club ftick in his hand, and had not gone half
■way to the apothecary’s, when, on turning a cor-
ner, be faw a gentleman walking alone before him.
Tricket at that moment looking round the ftreet
faw no creature near. Suddenly it darted into his
mind, that he might now get bread for his wife and
children, and that he could efcape home again be-
fore any one could deleft him; he ftopt not for
recolleftion, but ftriking the gentleman with all his
force on the back of his head, felled him to the
ground, and was rifling his pockets, when a watch-
man, turning the fame corner Tricket had done,
ran up, winding his rattle as he ran.
Tricket tried to efcape; but the rattle brought
■watchmen from fo many quarters, that he was foon
fecured; whilft fome of them conveyed him to the
round-houfe, others aflifted the gentleman to rife;
having been only ftunned, he foon recovered his
ipeech, and direfted the men to lead him to his
houfe, which was not far off. There they afked
him whether he was robbed? and, on examining his
pockets, he found that he had loft his watch, and
his purfe, both of which he particularly deferibed.
The watch he could fwear to, if he faw it; and he
told the colour of the purfe, and what money it con-
tained, of which he gave the watchman a memo-'
ralidum. They then returned to the round-houfe,
where, on fearching the prifoner, the watch and
purfe were found upon him. He would not anfwer
any of their queftions, but remained in gloomy
filencc.
When the day was more advanced, tVey carried
him before a Juftice of the Peace, and gave in their


( .“ )
information. Tricket was now obliged to fpeak;
and feeing clearly that he mull be convifted, he
burll into an agony of grief, and confelfcd the
whole; but he pleaded the diilrefs to which his
wife and family were reduced; which alone,” he
faid, 44 had led him to this rafli aiilion; and he re-
peatedly obferved, that fince he was driven to it
by necejfity , he hoped that both his Worfhipand the
Gentleman would let him go: and he proteftcd,
that, till the fatal moment when he faw the Gentle-
man, and thought he might refcue his wife from
death, and his children from ftarving, he had never
entertained a thought of committing fuch a crime.
In anfwer to this fpeech of Tricket, the Jullice,
(who was well acquainted with Tricket’s whole cha-
racter and hiltory) remarked, 44 that although the
prime in queftion was committed on the bidden,
and though it arofe out of the man’s diilrefs, yet,
that diilrefs had been brought upon him evidently
by gaming.” 44 My friend,” faid he, 44 you have gone
from one Hep to another, as almoll
perfon has done, that has been brought before me.
Firll, when you were in a good place you were
negligent of your work through the love ojgam-
ing; and when for this caufe you 101 l your em*
ployment, you then took to gambling more defpe-
rately than ever, through a necejfity which you
brought upon yourfelf. Your neceJJitiesntXi led you
to take from your wife her little earnings, and when
you had thus nearly driven her to dillraClion, then
it was that you began to feel for the wants of your
wife and children; and thus you were driven by
another necejfity of your own making to rob on the
Jiighway for her relief.


( )
i6 l cannot help therefore tracing your crime entirely
to your gaming, for it is this which has brought you
into temptation; and no man pan tell when he has
once trefpatted, as you have done, to whatlengthsthe
Devil at one time or other mayfuddenly drive him.
In head, therefore, of cxcufing yourfelf, let me
advife you to confider how happy for you it is 9
that the gentleman whom you ftruck is not killed;
for in that cafe you would have been brought be-
fore me, not for the robbery and affault only, but
for murder
Poor Tricket was muchatte&ed by thefe remarks,
and did not utter a word more in the way of excufe
lor his crime; but he begged and prayed the Gen-
tleman, for his dear wife’s fake, not to hang him.
Upon which the Juftice interfered, and told Tricket,
that “ as to the nature of his punifhment, that
muft depend upon circumftances that would ap-
pear on the trial;” and he immediately bound the
Gentleman over to profecute.
While this feene was patting at the Juftice’s, poor
Mrs. Tricket was left in a doleful cafe. She was
told by her hufband, when he went away, that he
was only going to run to the apothecary’s, in order
to bring fome help to her, and that he would be
back inftantly: two hours patted and fhe heard no.
thing of him : fhe began to fufpeft fomething dread-
ful, and her mind grew fo agitated, that her brain
feemed on five, and her fenfes forfook her. It hap-
pened that a gentleman who had been preferit at the
Juftice’s having been drawn thither by the croud)
called, from motives of humanity, in the courfe of
the day, to inquire into the ftate of Tricket’s fami-
ly; and he was the firft perfon who brought inteU
ligence of the horrible event that had taken place,


( <3 )
As Mrs. Trieket was fo ill, the only ftep that could:
be taken at prefent, was to bring the apothecary to-
iler; who,, by laying on a blifter, and giving her
proper medicines, abated the fever, and took off
the delirium: but as her reafon returned, her
anxiety about her hufband returned alfo, and fhe
rnGeffantly begged to know what was become of
him. Still it was thought that the dreadful truth
mu ft not be told her, left it fhould bring back her
diftraftion; and it was not till three days after,
when the apothecary declared her to be much bet*
ter, that the fad condition of her hufband was re-
vealed to her.
No fooner was this affeffting difcovery made to*
Mrs. Trieket, than fhe grew eager to get out of bed*
to go to her hufband in the prifon; but her weak-
nefs made it impoffible. It was with great difficulty
that fhe was kept in the houfe after fire was able to
rife;, and the firft moment that fhe could extort
from the apothecary permiflion to ftir out, fhe put
herfelf into a coach (for fhe had not ftrength to
walk) and leaving her children in the care of her
humane landlady, arrived at the prifon. The fight
of her threw Trieket into an agony, yet he was
glad to fee her alive, and by degrees was foothed
and comforted by her kindnefs and affe&ion. She
entreated him with many tears to make his peace
with God by fincere repentance, and to truft in his
mercy for forgivenefs. She then through her na-
tural fondnefs and partiality for her hufband, en-
deavoured to find out fome eircumftances of miti-
gation; and particularly remarked, “that fince it
was his affeftion for her and for his ftarving family,
that had put him on this rafh aftion, fhe hoped
that when the trial came on, the Judge would fhev^r


{ <4 ) ...
mercy to Mm.” ct Oh! If that could be,” Paid
Tricket, “ I think I fhould never again fall into
my former vices; but I dare not hope it; the rob-
bery is fully proved, and it is no thanks to me,
as his worfhip very juftly obferved, that murder
was not alfo the confequence of my villainous ac-
tion; my trial foon comes on; prepare your mind
for the fad fentence, and pray for me that I alfo
may be-prepared for a more awful trial after death.”
She now fell on her knees, and he knelt by her,
and both implored forgivenefs at the throne of
Grace with fuch feelings of contrition,' that they
rofe up, hoping that their prayers had been heard
through the great Savior of mankind; and their
minds now became more calm and more refign'ed
to the event, whatever it might be.
Tricket was convifted at the next aftizes on the
cleareft evidence, and fentenced to death; but
fome favourable circumftances in his cafe were re-
ported to his Majefty, by the Judge, and the fen-
tence was in confequence .changed from death to
tranfportation.
The fear of death at firft made even Botany Bay
appear a deliverance, but when he was to depart thi-
ther, bitter indeed, was the affli&ion of his faithful
wife; for fince he had appeared a penitent fhe had
become fo much endeared to him, that all his pall
injuries being quite forgotten, his leaving her was
worfe than death.
She was earneftly defirous to go with him, but
finding that fhe could not be allowed to take her
children, ihe thought it her duty not to forfake
them; at lead under the prefent circumftances,
nor indeed would he confent to her departure.
The excellency of Mrs, Tricket’s chara&cr was the


(‘S')
occafion of raifing her up many friends, who fur-
nifhed her with work, and who aflifted both in edu-
cating and apprenticing her children.
Her miild was reftored in fome meafure to peace
and tranquility; and ftie found that they who faith-
fully do their own duty and put their truft in God
are not forfaken by him, however unhappy they
may be in their outward circumftances.
Such is the fad ftory of poorTricket the Game-
fter! Let each reader lay to heart the dreadful con-
fequences of gambling: for, by firft bringing a
man to want, it will harden his heart even againlt
his molt beloved wife and children; and who knows
whether it may not alfo drive him to thofe criminal
a£ts, for which his very life may be juftly forfeited
to the laws of his country.


On the \jl of Augtfl , 1795, was puhlifhed,
Hints to all Ranks of People.—The Happy
The Riot, a Ballad.—ThePlowboy’s Dream, a Ballad.
On the \JI of September ,
Tom White, Part ll.—Noah’s Flood.-—Dame Andrews, a
Ballad.
On the \JI of OflobeY.
Harveft Home.—-Two Farmers, Part L—Honeft Miller,
a Ballad,
On the \JI of November,
The Parable of the Vineyard.—The Two Farmers, Part 11.
—The Sorrows of Yamba, a Ballad.
On the \f of December ,
The Troubles of Life.—-Sorrowful Sam.—Merry Chrifl-
mas, a Carol/
On the \ji of January , 1796,
Jtfew Thoughts on the New Year.—The Hiftory of Mary.
Wood, the Houfemaid.—Robert and Richard, a Ballad.
On the \fl of February,
The Touchflone ; or, the Way to know a good Chriftian,
—The Apprentice turned Mailer; or, the Two Shoe-
makers; Fart ll.—The Story of Sinful Sally. Told by
herfelf a Ballad.
On the if of March.
Onefimus; or, the Run-away Servant converted,—ldle Jack
Brown; or, the Two Shoemakers, Part lll.—Shop-
keeper, Part I.
On the I ft of April ,
Converfion of St. Paul.—Jack Brown in Prifon; or, the
Two Shoemakers, Part IV.—Shopkeeper, Part 11.
On the \Ji of May , <
The General Refurreftion, Part. I.—The Fliflory of Charles
Jones the Footman, written by Himfelf.—The Hackney
Coachman; or, the Way to get a good Fare, a Ballad.
On the I fl of June,
Carrying Religion into the Common Bufinefs of Life.—
The Cheapfide Apprentice. The Ele6lion Song, a
Ballad. 8
And other Pieces on a fmilar Plan i on the 1/? f every Month ,




