

THE
Union of the Colonies.
SPEECHES
DELIVERED IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
MAY 16th and 23rd, 1895,
BY
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G.
PRICE - - - SIXPENCE.
Sydney:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.
1895.




THE
UNION OF THE COLONIES.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
THURSDAY, 16th MAY, 1895.
Mr. Speaker took the chair.
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS.
Mr. Reid : I am sorry to say that there will be a slight
interruption in the answering of questions on the part of the
Government. We hope to resume that business next week.
MOTION OF CENSURE.
Sir HENRY PARKES (St. Leonards) ; I move:
That an address be presented to the Lieutenant-Governor, respectfully
informing his Excellency that the continuance in office of his present advisers will
retard the progress of much-needed legislation, and seriously prejudice the cause
of Australian federation.
In supporting this resolution I shall endeavour not to enter
the realm of personalities, but to adhere—and I think I shall be
able to do so—to the broad truths involved in the question
which I have the honour to raise. I shall of necessity have to
ask the indulgence of hon. members because the task before me
is one which cannot be discharged under some considerable time,
but I will not encumber the question with unnecessary speech,
and I will endeavour, in dwelling upon each separate subject,
to be as brief as possible. Now, I was struck the other night
very forcibly by the singular allusion which was made by the
Prime Minister to the financial statement of Sir Stuart Alexander
Donaldson. I could hardly conceive of anything more out of
place in the mouth of a minister who professes to lead a demo-
cratic government, because the ministry of Sir Stuart Alexander
Donaldson was formed distinctly to preserve the influence of the
old tory party of this country which existed before responsible
government. We have never had any ministry so distinctly
formed with that intention.


Mr. Reid : Does the hon. member not know that he himself
is a bigger tory than ever Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson was?
Sir HENRY PARKES : I may as well refer at this early
stage to the disorderly conduct of the Prime Minister of this
country. I listened to him the other night for more than two
dreary hours and never murmured a single interruption. Surely
in his place he could listen to me now in my exercise of the
highest right of a member of a representative assembly ? The
highest right of a House like ours is to challenge at any time the
title of ministers in office to the seats they hold. And if there
be any one duty more than another which pertains to an inde-
pendent deliberative body it is that. Now, I ought to know in
regard to the ministry of Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson what
took place, because the plan was to induce some two of the
popular members to join in doing what recently was done here :
that is, to chouse the electors out of the verdict of the general
election under responsible government, and I happened to be
one of the members who were invited to join Sir Stuart
Alexander Donaldson. The person who was the bearer of that
message to me forty years ago, is still living—Sir Charles
Nicholson, who had just retired from the chair of the old
Council; and Sir Charles Nicholson, in presenting the names of
the new Government to me, mine included, used these words,
which have never faded from my memory, “ This Government
would last for twenty years.” New as I was in those days to
the vicissitudes of political life, I knew very well what an
egregious mistake was being made, and the Government in
reality only lasted eighty days. By the Constitution Act five
offices were comprised in the new Ministry—one was that of
Colonial Secretary ; another that of Colonial Treasurer; a third,
that of Attorney-General; a fourth, that of Solicitor-General; and
a fifth, that of Auditor-General; and Sir Stuart Alexander
Donaldson’s ministry was actually composed of those particular
officials, with the Auditor-General a member of the Government
and the Treasurer occupying a seat in the Legislative Council —
showing the newness and immaturity of our thoughts in those
days as to how we were to carry out responsible government.
When it was discovered that it would be a gross anomaly
to place the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the House of Lords,
he was requested to retire, and the late Mr. Thomas Holt took
his place as Colonial Treasurer in the Legislative Assembly.
The object in forming that Ministry was to checkmate Sir
Charles Cowper and his friends, who were at the head of the
liberals of the country in those days. So that the hon. member’s
reference was most unfortunate. It reminds me of another


singular reference made by the hon. member sitting near me,
the Secretary for Lands, in moving either the introduction or the
second reading of his Land Bill. He quoted largely from a
speech which was delivered by Mr. Disraeli at a time before
he was well-known in political life, and when he with Lord
John Manners and one or two other young English noblemen
was forming a party called Young England, by which they
sought to redress the grievances of the working-men of England
by reviving the maypole dances ; and to show the unfortunate
character of the quotation made by the hon. gentleman, one of
these members of the Young England party, Lord John Manners,
published a volume of verse under the title of “ England’s
Trust,” in which he said :
Let laws and learning, trade and commerce die;
But leave us still our old nobility.
That is the character of the party from which the hon. member
derived his inspiration in his new Land Bill. Passing away from
that, which struck me as very singular —that all the political
literature of England could only afford this example by Disraeli
when he was publishing his triune political novels, “Coningsby,”
“Sybil,” and “ Tancred,” to illustrate the policy of “Young
England ” restoring the maypole dance as an amusement for the
people —coming at once to the budget, I notice that the Premier
particularised some three or four, possibly five, of the measures
of this Government. The first is, the Mercantile Marine Bill;
the second, the Coal-mines Bill; the third, the Industrial Dis-
putes Bill; and the fourth, the Local Government Bill. He then
went on to give us a kind of delineation of a free-trade tariff,
which is projected far into the next century, and which, if per-
sisted in, would exclude this country from entering into the work
of Australian federation for years to come. It would be utterly
impossible to reconcile it with any honest endeavour to federate
these colonies. Cne word about the reference the hon. member
makes to the duties of past years. Some considerable time ago
—I should think about forty-five years ago —the late Sir Edward
Deas-Thomson framed a tariff, which was for many years re-
garded as a model free-trade tariff. It levied duties on very few
articles —tea, sugar, spirits, tobacco, and one or two other
articles. In the consideration of the principles of taxation, all
authorities with whom I am acquainted lay it down that one
element in a taxable commodity is the diffusion of it in general
use, and the tax on tea —a light tax on tea —has generally been
defended by mere economists, because tea is held to be a luxury,
because it is everywhere consumed, and because a light tax,
while bringing in a large revenue, would be scarcely felt. That


is one of the canons of taxation. Tea formed part of this free-
trade tariff of Sir Edward Deas-Thomson. In the year 1855, the
then Colonial Treasurer, the late Mr. Merewether—l do not
mean Mr. Edward Merewether, who died the other day, but a
gentleman who held office in the old days for a number of years,
the late Mr, Merewether—l am speaking now in the presence of
several ex-treasurers delivered the most eloquent financial
statement that I ever heard in New South Wales. He was a
scholarly man, well primed with the principles of public finance,
and his statement in the year 1855—the last year of the old state
of things—was the most beautiful exposition of finance that I
ever heard in this country. Mr. Merewether proposed to increase
nearly all the duties embraced in Sir Edward Deas-Thomson’s
tariff. I, for my part, contended against those increases tooth
and nail. That is the occasion referred to; but it was hardly
worth while to refer to Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson, seeing
that after he had delivered his financial statement he was imme-
diately put out of office.
Mr. Crick: That is what will happen here.
Sir HENRY PARKES :I do not know—it might so happen;
but it seems an unfortunate allusion. I proceed at once to make
a few observations on the statement of the hon. gentleman at the
head of the Government. I shall not quote from the early issue
of his speech, because I think it better to quote from an issue of
his speech which he has had an opportunity to revise. I find
that the Colonial Treasurer described the circumstances to which
I have referred in these terms:
Until the year 1865 ad valorem duties were practically unknown to the fiscal
policy of this country. Then, in a time of financial embarrassment they were
imposed. As soon as the revenue permitted —in the year 1873—they were repealed,
until 1886, when again financial embarrassments arose, and again they were re-
sorted to. Within a very few months from the date of placing them upon the
statute-book, there was a general election in this country, and the first thing that
was done after that appeal to the people was this : that they were again effaced
from the statute-book.
Now, this description, which substantially is a fair one,
would have been more interesting if the hon. and learned
member had explained that one of the parties to the imposition
of those ad valorem duties was his present Attorney-General,
Mr. Want. I think that that ought to have been explained.
Mr. Reid : Life is too short for that!
Sir HENRY PARKES : But it does not very well argue in
favour of the freetrade simplicity of Mr. Want that he was a
party —a very active party, to the imposition of ad valorem


duties by the Jennings Government, and not only so, but that he
defended them on all occasions, resisting their repeal, by the
contention that they were not protectionist duties at all, and
quite consistent with the policy of free-trade. There is another
little complaint. The Premier, for once in his life, might have
been generous; he might have informed the House who it was
that repealed those duties. In both cases it was my Government
that repealed those duties, both in 1873, when an ad -valorem
customs bill had been passed by Sir James Martin, and again in
1886, when similar duties had been passed by the Jennings
Government. One of the complaints which free-traders make
against the hon. and learned gentleman is that whilst he informed
the public that he would lose no time in abolishing these duties,
I think on one occasion he said he would do it in a day.
Mr. Crick : Twenty-four hours !
Mr. Reid ; The hon. member invented that!
Mr. Crick : The Daily Telegraph reported the hon. member
as having said so !
Sir HENRY PARKES: Yet we have arrived, I think, at
the tenth month of his ministerial life, and until now, no attempt
has been made to repeal those duties. I repealed the duties
which were imposed by the Jennings Government, I took office
on the 25th January 1887, and the act repealing the greater
part of the tariff was assented to on the Bth July, five months
and thirteen days afterwards. At all events there was something
like decision, something like promptitude, something like deter-
mination, in repealing those duties on that occasion. Remember,
I am not raising the question in this narrative—l should be
ashamed if I did so—of free-trade and protection ; but I am
showing that when I was at the head of a free-trade government,
and undertook to repeal the tariff, I did repeal it in a little over
five months. I did not begin to talk about it at the end of nine
or ten months. The Prime Minister has made a dolorous com-
plaint, quite unworthy of ministers, of the action of the Legislative
Council. The Legislative Council is a co-ordinate part of the
Parliament of the country. As everybody knows, I have,
throughout my life, been opposed to the principle of nomination.
I have brought in more than one bill to place the Council on an
elective basis, but I have never forgotten that the Council is a
co-ordinate branch of the Parliament of this country. There it
is—a living institution. It is there with the authority of the
great author of our Constitution. It is there embedded in the
constitution of the country, and it would be a very difficult thing
to get rid of this body by any means short of violent measures.


I, for one, am still in tavour of some severe modification in the
constitution of that Council. If there is to be anything short of
the principle of election, I certainly would favour the limitation
of the nominations to a short period of time—to a period not
exceeding seven years. Ido not think it is a wise and whole-
some principle that that body should exist without any sense of
accountability for the natural term of human life, and I have seen
so many evils arising from it that I think some change ought to
be made. But there it is, under the same constitutional law as
the Assembly. Now, how has the Prime Minister gone about
passing his measures? He cannot force them. He may rest
assured of that. He may play the wild bull, and run at a gate,
but he cannot force this body, which stands in the Constitution
with equal status to our own House in point of law. This body
is very largely composed of gentlemen who have, time after time,
been elected by the electors of this country. I find that, at the
present time, the Council consists of fifty-eight members. Only
fourteen of these gentlemen are men who have never been
elected by their fellow-citizens, while forty-four of them have
held seats in this House, several of them having been elected
time after time.
Dr. Hollis : How many were sent up after rejection ?
Sir HENRY PARKES: I only want hon. members to listen
to me, and they can say what they like afterwards. I want to
state the facts of my case. Forty-four of these gentlemen have
been elected by the electors time after time, some of them for a
long series of years; and, again, some of them have held the
highest offices in the government of the country. Personally,
these gentlemen deserve to be treated with respect. They hold
their seats under the Constitution of the country as prescribed
by the very letter of the law, and they are just the class of men
which Mr. Wentworth, the great author of our Constitution, said
ought to form the senate of the country —men who have had
experience in the popular branch of the Legislature. Now, I
want to know whether a minister, be he who he may, is likfely to
succeed in passing his measures through the Legislative Council
if he goes out of his way unnecessarily to denounce these
gentlemen as mummies and as slaughterers, and who can find no
words to describe them without going to the abattoirs. Abuse of
this kind would fall very badly, even from my lips, but, from a
model prime minister, who has come into office to redress the
wrongs of the people, who has come here to point out the errors
of all his predecessors, who has come here to inaugurate a new
era of reform


Hon. Members : Hear, hear.
Sir HENRY PARKES : I think I shall be able to make the
gentlemen who utter that cheer ashamed of their voices before I
sit down. I have not come to that part yet, and perhaps I may
be permitted to go on. I now proceed at once to notice
passages in the financial statement to which I think it is
necessary to make allusion. First of all, and it is the only
trifling thing I shall indulge in, I cannot refrain from pointing
out the elegancies of the Prime Minister’s language.
Mr. O’REILLY : Personalities !
Sir HENRY PARKES; I should advise the hon. gentleman
behind me to go home to his mother. In the financial statement
the Prime Minister says that a measure is mutilated in the
Legislative Council. This is how he describes it. He says:
The bill has been seriously amended
I do not know whether any hon. member on either side of the
House, whether any of those accomplished free-traders can
appreciate that. The bill has had its very heart torn out, but it
has only been “ seriously amended” according to the Prime
Minister.
He goes on in this strange use of language to talk thus :
I deliberately placed first on the programme of this Government the urgent
question of land reform.
“ I ” —not the Government, mind.
I deliberately placed next in the programme of this Government the urgent
question of local government.
One would have thought that an ordinary man would have said
the Government had placed the one first, and the Government had
placed the other second, without all this useless verbiage. I
point out that as a singular instance of the kind of verbiage
which we have in every attempt the hon. member makes to
address this House on any subject whatever. But mark what
follows. He says ;
One law has passed ; the other has unhappily failed.
The bill that was thrown out he described as a law which he says
has unhappily failed. How can he make out that the bill was a
law ? I should have thought that these were two bills which the
Government were trying to make into laws. But he says that
one of these laws has succeeded and one of them, which he still
calls a “ law,” has failed. Then, again, he gives as his reason


for postponing the Landand Income Tax Assessment BilJ untilthis
late date, this curious reasoning :
But entering on this question of fiscal reform as one which, once taken up, must
not be abandoned, I was anxious to clear the way, if possible, for the inevitable
contest, by dealing with those measures which were matters of general concern.
The grammatical construction leads us to infer that the land and
income taxes were not matters of general concern. He has got
rid of the measures of general concern, and has now come to
something which, presumably, is not a matter of general concern.
To impose a tax on land is not a matter of general concern ; to
impose an income-tax is not a matter of general concern, accord-
ing to the construction of this language. lam nearly done with
these tedious references. I invite both sides, I invite the free-
traders especially, and I invite the gentlemen sitting on the
opposite side, if they are protectionists, to note the peculiarity
of the final sentence of the peroration to the financial statement.
To-night, on behalf of the mother colony of the Australias, instead of offering
blow for blow, instead of offering border duty for border duty, I offer our Austra-
lian brethren the free use of all our boundaries ; and that message of peace and
goodwill will touch a chord in every true Australian breast, more powerful than
any suggestion of self-interest, or policy of revenge.
I was some time trying to understand what this meant. I
suppose it means this: that all duties are to be taken off the
admission of commodities from other countries into New South
Wales. I suppose it means that Victoria, South Australia, and
any conterminous part of Australia may deluge our colony with
untaxed grain, while Victoria stops our farmers by a duty of
Is. 9d. per bushel. If that is the free-trade notion, I do not
belong to that free-trade party. I can understand well enough
removing the border duties altogether. I can understand well
enough opening all the markets of Australia to our colonists, and
giving our markets to all the colonies of Australia, but I am not,
and never was, a free-trader in the sense of making everything
more favourable to our enemies than to our own people.
Dr. Hollis : [ lnaudible .]
Sir HENRY PARKES : My course is quite plain, because
in the years 1872 and 1873, I actually persuaded Victoria and
South Australia to join with us in passing acts making trade
between these great colonies absolutely free.
Mr, Young : No. It was only across the border, not across
the coasts!
Sir HENRY PARKES : Of course I mean across the border,
Mr. Haynes : The hon, member is a fair-trader not a free-
trader!


Sir HENRY PARKES : I am afraid I am hardly a fair-
trader in the sense of the hon. member for Wellington. I will
tell you what lam before I have done, if you will allow me. I
am not likely to shrink from that.
An Hon. Member : He is a true protectionist!
Sir HENRY PARKES; I am not a protectionist, that is
certain.
To-night, on behalf of the mother colony of the Australias, instead of offering
blow for blow, instead of offering border duty for border duty, I offer our Australian
brethren the free use of all our boundaries; and that message of peace and good-
will will touch a chord in every true Australian breast, more powerful than any
suggestion of self-interest, or policy of revenge.
I unhesitatingly say that that is a doctrine that every free-trader
in the world would repudiate. Every free-trader in the world
would repudiate any attempt to make the laws more favourable
to a protected country than to our own free-trade people. Turn-
ing now to the administration of this Government, ofte of my
most serious grounds of complaint is their thoroughly dishonest
and dangerous administration of the government of this country.
I will give you one notable example. Fully four months ago the
Prime Minister —and the Prime Minister in my estimation
occupies a position which ought to inspire respect in all of us,
whatever our opinions may be—the Prime Minister, with his
great influence, with his great power of wielding the authority
of Government, made a strange agreement with the Chief Com-
missioner for Railways.
An Hon. Member ; He sold him. He never attempted to
carry it out!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I cannot for a moment think that.
It is bad enough as it stands, and I cannot believe that the hon.
gentleman never intended at that time to carry it out. But lam
going to ask both sides of the House to listen to a clear and
short statement of this case. Mr. Eddy, the Chief Commissioner,
as far back as the 31st of October, 1894, wrote to the Prime
Minister stating that he did not desire to renew his engagement,
and that he desired at the end of his term of seven years to
resign. Remember that was on the 31st of October. Well, on
on the 22nd of January last the Prime Minister wrote this letter
to Mr. Eddy:
Referring to our interviews of Friday and Saturday last, I have great pleasure
in stating that the Cabinet, at its meeting to-day, cordially confirmed my action in
pressing you, on behalf of the whole community, to reconsider your determination
to retire from the office of Chief Commissioner for Railways. As the head of the
department with which the railway service is connected, I can assure you that the
prospect of your services being continued for the benefit of New South Wales has
been a great relief, for no one knows better than I do the value which a good and
economical management of our railways will be in the years immediately before us.


To this, Mr. Eddy returned an answer—that reluctantly, and
in consideration of the cordial terms with which he was treated,
he would withdraw his resignation. The agreement was made
four months ago to retain the services of Mr. Eddy for another
seven years at an increased salary of £4,000, and with some
other conditions. lam not raising the question now as to the
value of Mr. Eddy, or the propriety of re-engaging him, or the
propriety of increasing his salary; but I assume that, when the
Prime Minister of this great country took this step, he did so
in the interests of the entire people—that he believed that, placed
as he was, he was serving the people by retaining this officer’s
services at a higher salary. He told Mr. Eddy, in the name of
the Government, in the name of the country, that he re-engaged
him for seven years at an increased salary of £4,000 a year.
Mr. Newman : Subject to the approval of Parliament!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I assure the hon. member that
when I want his help I will apply to him. This agreement was
to be subject to the approval of Parliament. I now come to the
conduct of the Prime Minister in this transaction. If he believed
that he was doing right, that he was acting in the best interest
of this country when he made that agreement, I ask the gentle-
men sitting on the Government benches, and the gentlemen
sitting on the Opposition benches, and the gentlemen sitting
below the gangway, whether he was not bound to take steps to
test the opinion of Parliament? There are gentlemen here who
approve of what the Prime Minister did ; there are gentlemen
here who disapprove of it. I am dealing with something much
more important than the salary of £4,000 a year. What lam
dealing with is the way in which the honour of this country is
bandied about by the Prime Minister. I say that it was his
bounden duty—a duty from which he could not escape—having
made this agreement, to take the earliest possible opportunity to
seek the approval of Parliament. It is due to those who believe
he did right, it is due to those who disagree, it is due to those
gentlemen who do not believe the salary ought to be voted, it is
due to one and all, that Parliament should at the earliest date be
enabled to express its opinion. But it is due to something more.
It is due to the country which the hon. gentleman represents,
It is due to the public honour of the country that this matter
should not be dallied with for four long months after the chief
commissioner has gone away to Europe. If it be the case that
the Prime Minister has by some means found out how the
Assembly is likely to vote, then I say that his drawing back on
that account is utterly unworthy of any man who ought to be
allowed to hold his great office. In the first place, he is supposed


to know the feeling of Parliament In the next place, he is
supposed, whether the feeling be in his favour or not, to do what
he honestly believes to be right for the country, and having put
his hand to this re-engagement, he was bound to submit it to
Parliament at the earliest possible moment, and if he shrinks
from that obligation because he finds it difficult, then I say the
whole transaction is branded with a mark of dishonour which
never fell upon a minister in this country before. There is a
striking example of how our Government is trifled with at every
stage. There is nothing done which is not done after feeling
the pulse of influential There is nothing which is based
upon a conscientious conviction and proceeded with at all
hazards. That is one of my most serious complaints against
this Government. I now come to the question involved in the
motion I have made as far as it concerns myself. lam now for
the first time face to face with the party who are known as the
protectionist party in this country. They know that I meet them
in this open way for the first time. They know well enough,
whatever ill-minded people may say, that I have had no secret
or private communication with the influential people of the
Opposition.
Mr. Miller : Where has the hon. member for Lismore
been ?
Sir HENRY PARKES: I have been on terms of personal
intimacy with the hon. member for Lismore for a long time. Am
I to give up my friendly relations with that gentleman because
he sits on the Opposition side of the House? But I have also
known the hon. member for Flinders Division longer, I think,
than anybody here. I formed his acquaintance while he was at
Oxford.' I formed his acquaintance in London before he had
left the university. Yet it is considered an offence that I should
be in consultation with my friend of many years’ standing. I
now come to the great question which weighs with me, and I
suppose weighs with hon. members on the protection and free-
trade sides of the House —the great question of federation. I
am about to quote the opinions of the Sydney Morning Herald.
The Sydney Morning Herald has given a very general support
to this Administration ; and it is a journal, whatever some of us
may think of it, above the suspicion of any improper conduct in
its management. The proprietors are quite and
they have conducted their journal from first to last in an inde-
pendent manner. I find that the Sydney Morning Herald ex-
pressed its opinion in respect to federation on the 9th June,
1893, in these terms:


As to the leader of the Opposition, Mr. Reid, if he is to be taken seriously, he
is not to be looked to as the man to lead the movement of federation to a satisfac-
tory end.
Then, after the notable conference of Premiers at Hobart, the
same great journal speaks thus of the enabling bill of the con-
ference :
The Federation Enabling Bill may, we think, be described as a bill to post-
pone the federation of the colonies indefinitely. It breaks absolutely with the
past, and it makes inadequate preparation for the future.
I have never entertained any stronger opinion of the Govern-
ment in regard to federation than the one expressed by this
journal. But what is to be thought of the sincerity of the Prime
Minister in the cause of federation when he proposed to us the
other night to construct a provincial free-trade tariff which, if
carried out —which it certainly never will be—would project the
construction of his tariff well into the next century ? How can
any man be believed by men with their eyes open and their
brains clear to be in earnest in federation, who proposes to con-
sume the next six or eight years in building up a barrier against
the union of the colonies? I moved a resolution on the 13th
November last which had the cordial concurrence, appar-
ently, of the Prime Minister. He voted for it, and spoke in
support of it. That resolution of mine advisedly declared that
the question ought to be taken up at an early date by this
Parliament, and, of course, only the Government can take it up.
It is impossible for a private member to deal with this great
question.
Mr. MILLER : Why did not the Government of which the
hon. member was the head take it up when they had the chance?
Sir HENRY PARKES : The hon. member who interrupts
me, and whose soft voice I am always glad to hear, asked me
why I did not deal with the question myself. Well, I am under
the impression that I did more than all other people put together
during the time I was in office in advancing the cause of union,
and I think the intelligent people of this colony will say the same.
My resolution was in these words:
(1.) That in view of the rapid growth of Australia in the elements of national
life, and the number of questions arising out of that growth which can only be
dealt with adequately by a national legislature, it is in the highest sense desirable
that Parliament, without loss of time, should resume the consideration of the
federation of these colonies under one national government.
The Premier, as the responsible Minister in this country, has
done nothing. He voted for this motion, and, really, he ought
to have taken up the question. I come now to the question,


“Who are the free-traders and who are not?’’ I suppose Mr.
William McMillan will be accepted as a leading free-trader, and
I feel quite certain that if he were here to-night he would side
with me.
Mr. STOREY : I am certain he would not.
Sir HENRY PARKES : The hon. member for Randwick
knows very little about it. Mr. McMillan did me the honour or
visiting me on the eve of his departure for England, and I had
lately, within the last day or two, a conversation with one of his
most trusted friends. I have every reason to believe Mr.
McMillan, if he were here, would vote for my motion to-night.
Here, however, is his opinion. Mr. McMillan, speaking at the
Town Hall in Sydney on the 3rd July, 1893, used these words :
He stood there that night on no party platform. He stood there as a federa-
tionist above everything else. He sank free-trade and he sank protection for the
sake of union.
Certainly I have said nothing more than that. I have not said
anything that can by any interpretation be more distinct than
Mr. McMillan’s words.
Mr. Reid : When was that speech delivered ?
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have quoted from a report
published on the 3rd July, 1893. I presume the speech was
delivered on the previous night.
Mr. Reid : He made a different speech at the general
election !
Sir HENRY PARKES : However, leaving this question of
free-trade and protection for a moment, I am going to inform
the House that the authority who has counselled me to take this
course is the Daily Telegraph. That newspaper of June 30th,
1893, has an article on federation from which I am about to
quote, and in this passage they themselves acknowledge that
they had published many leading articles of the same tenor:
We have never ceased to regard federation as a greater question than either
free-trade or protection, and we cannot regard without regret any attempt on the
part of the free-trade party to discount the federation enthusiasm of two or three
years ago in favour of snatching a free-trade victory.
Surely, then, this newspaper will cease bespattering me with
abuse, because I have never said so much as this. I have never
said so much as this in favour of the course which I think it right
and wise to take. Now, will hon, members permit me to pause
for a moment to ask, for all of us, what federation means ? I
think it is time the question was asked in the interests of truth.


It means nothing short of this : that the six states of Australia,
with the moral certainty of their developing into ten states in a
very few years —that these states are prepared to cast in their
lot in forming one powerful Australian nation. It means nothing
less than that which includes each state giving up the custom
house to the federal government, and anyone who is not
prepared for the full significance of that situation ought not for
a moment to pretend to be a federationist. Well, federation on
this scale—and nothing on a smaller scale will do—cannot be
carried into effect by a faction—by a part of the people of New
South Wales ; neither the free-traders nor the protectionists can
carry this great question of a federated Australia. The whole
people united—free-traders and protectionists alike—must join
before it will be morally possible to bring about the union of
these colonies. The question is so plain, so simple, so concise
that I cannot imagine how anyone can possibly misunderstand
it. A federation of Australia means the bringing in of all the
separate colonies to form one great national people, and it cannot
be done in New South Wales, or in Victoria, or anywhere else,
by a mere section of the people. It is, therefore, that for three
years past I have invited what I am happy to think has come
about—a union between the two great parties in this country to
insist
Hon. Members: Oh, oh!
Sir HENRY PARKES : If any other course is taken,
either by the gentlemen behind me or the gentlemen on these
benches, they must at once raise the disunionist standard; they
are not free-traders; they are not federationists ; but they are
disunionists, revelling in the idea of perpetuating in these
colonies a condition which will make them foreigners to each
other, and imperil the future prosperity and safety of all. There
is no escape from that. You cannot federate except with the
consent of all sections of the people—the whole united people
of Australia. Your leader in the free-trade cause, Mr, McMillan,
sees this as plainly and as clearly as I do, and any one who
really understands what union means must believe that the old
provincial parties called free-trade and protection must be turned
over, must be destroyed, or this country can never succeed in
creating a united Australia.
Mr. Lyne: Nonsense!
Sir HENRY PARKES : It is as clear as daylight that it is
impossible for these colonies to unite on any narrower footing.
Now, with regard to free-trade. I stand here as a free-trader, as
true a free-trader as ever breathed the breath of life; and when


the time comes for electing a federal parliament, I shall take my
part, and use the utmost energies of my life to send in free-
traders to that parliament. But I know well enough that so long
as this broil is continued as a provincial struggle, federation can
never take place. I have now to say to these gentlemen on the
left of the chair that I do not want them to vote for my motion
under any misconception or delusion. I can never help them in
the cause of protection. And I can never help the mock free-
traders in their efforts to destroy all prospect of a united
Australia in the near future. If they choose to vote for me now’
or at any other time, I shall accept their votes, as I shall accept
votes from any quarter to bring about a united Australia. But I
wish them to understand that, though I am ready to cease this
humiliating work of tinkering with the provincial tariff—let me.
repeat the words, this humiliating work of tinkering with the
provincial tariff—though I am willing to cease that, and am
willing to make a truce with them, so long as they do not
attempt to restore their protectionist doctrines —it must be on
the distinct understanding that when we arrive at the great
consummation of a united Australia we part as generous
opponents. I cannot go with them any further. I am no
renegade. lam not made of the stuff of which renegades are
made. lam here believing in my conscience before everything
that is sacred that the best interests of Australia will be best
promoted by our joining hand in hand to bring about a great
united Australian nation, which is needed to do things which no
separate provincial government can do, which is needed in the
fast-developing national interests of the country, and which
cannot be delayed without a national sin. There is nothing new'
in what I say. I say no more than this paper, the Daily
Telegraph says. I say no more than Mr. McMillan said at the
Town Hall. I say no more than every intelligent man who
wants a united Australia would say, anywhere, and at any time.
To say that we should enter upon the construction of a
theoretical provincial tariff which is to occupy several years, is
to tell me that those w'ho propose that are not favourable to
federation, because federation is impossible in connection with a
course of that kind, as the tariff question must go to the federal
parliament. Just one or twm words on the necessity for early
federation. There are questions of the most momentous con-
sequence staring us in the face —we are on the threshold of
no one government can deal with, which only a
federal government can deal with. One is the great develop-
ments of civilisation, the great developments of commerce in
the Pacific Ocean. If any gentlemen here will turn to the
North American Review, in the last issue, they will find an


article on the new national life of the Pacific Ocean which will
astonish them. There are none more entitled than the people of
Australia to be the leaders of this new movement in the Pacific.
The Pacific islands have grown into importance under the light
which the larger colonies have shed upon them, and there is no
one more entitled to benefit from the new commercial life in that
myriad of fertile islands on the bosom of the Pacific than the
mother colony of Australia—New South Wales. Her port is
the most central. We have the most abiding and the closest
interests in the civilisation expanding there. Then comes the
question of the influx of alien races. Only a federal govern-
ment can effectually deal with that great absorbing question.
Then comes the question of the great fisheries of these seas, the
question of lighting the coasts, the question of making many of
our laws the same in all the colonies, and, above all, comes the
question of developing new fields for the employment of our
citizens. Perhaps I ought to say —P do not desire to say it
unless members wish me —what I think ought to be done at the
present time. I disapprove of nearly everything that has been
done by the present Administration.
Mr. Levien ; You can soon do that, because they have done
nothing yet!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I think I have very nearly done
with the Government. I have shown their strange conception
of duty in administration by their treatment of the Chief Railway
Commissioner, and I have shown their inefficiency in some other
respects ; but coming to the bills which are paraded before us,
the Arbitration and Conciliation Bill is a bill for a most merito-
rious object, because if any one thing ought to be done it is
some legislative effort to prevent the disturbing influence of
strikes, and if possible to induce employers and employees to
settle their differences by a just method of conciliation and
arbitration; but I should like to know when the bill of the
Government was in the other Chamber where were the Govern-
ment ? The Government were represented by two ministers in
the Council—one of them fled and only one was left. I should
like to know how it is that the fate of that bill has never been
reported to this House. If it was intended bond fide as a
necessary measure its fate ought to have been made known to
hon. members who passed it in this House. But the measure
itself was so thoroughly defective that it well deserved the fate
which it met with. But that in no way removes the necessity
for legislation in that direction, and I am clearly of opinion that
some measure suited to the occasion which would not inflict
injustice on anybody ought to be passed to try and avoid the


disastrous effects of industrial strikes. In my judgment, it
would be even now a much wiser employment of public time
than tinkering with the tariff which is fast receding from our
observation, because in view of the early achievement of federa-
tion it is impossible for a provincial tariff to live. I should have
thought it would have been a far wiser thing to have introduced
some measure for improving the public estate in the way that I
have repeatedly indicated so as to absorb the class of our fellow
citizens who are called the “ unemployed.” I think that is one
of the most necessary of all measures. I think it was a blessing
that the Local Government Bill of this Ministry failed because it
was so incomplete, so calculated to impose unjust penalties
upon the people of the country that I think if it had passed by
any possible means into law its authors would have been cursed
throughout the length and breadth of the land. Certainly the
measure introduced by myself in 1891 was a far better measure,
and I know that some of the ministers say the same thing. I
know that some of the colleagues of the Prime Minister say that
they did not want his bill, but they wanted the bill which I intro-
duced in 1891. And certain lam that no bill which does not
contain in its provisions all that is required for the self-govern-
ment of the persons living in the interior will be acceptable by
the large bodies of our fellow citizens who live in the remote
parts of the country. We must not forget that in many parts of
the country you will have to journey 50 miles to find a man
capable of paying a tax, and that condition of the interior ought
to be considered fully in any bill for establishing local self-
government. I invite the attention of gentlemen on those
benches and I invite the attention of gentlemen sitting here, and
ask them to bear with me for a moment, whilst I try to explain what
the “ free-trade ” or “ protectionist ” tariff really is. In every
community, even one not removed from a state of savagery,
there must be some form of government, there must be some
chief, some potentate, to execute the laws; and, if we depart
from this embryo state of government to any of the eastern
despotisms, or to any of the constitutional governments of
Europe, we shall still find that there is a distinct form of execu-
tive power residing in every government, we shall still find that
in the political organism which is supreme, a power reaching to
every one of the citizens it overshadows. It is the thing supreme
above everything else. A customs tariff is only one of many
things which flow from this organism. It is not the most
important thing whether we should have free-trade or protection.
The most important thing is to have a lofty, pure, efficient
system of jurisprudence—a system that will deal out justice to
all men alike, a system that will see to the strict enforcement of


the laws. That is infinitely more important than any tariff, call
it what you will. In this country a sound system of land admin-
istration is more important than a tariff. While I am on that
point I must say that, whilst giving the Minister for Lands credit
for his measure, that measure stopped far short of what is wanted
in this country.
What is wanted in this country is an enlightened consoli-
dation of the law with the easiest provisions for bond fide settle-
ment. In my judgment it is an iniquity little short of a public
sin to induce persons to go upon the land who are unfit for rural
pursuits. What is really wanted is not to induce persons unfit
to occupy the land to swarm upon it, but to afford every facility
to industrious thrifty men who know what they are about, and
who are fitted to turn the soil to the best account for the whole
community, to clear away all obstacles in the way of their going
upon the land. If any one will refer to my speeches contained
in the volume in the library on the first Land Act of this country
they will see that I entertained those views then. I entertain
them now. It has never fallen to my lot in a very busy life to
pay much attention to the framing of land laws, but I know well
what is wanted. What is wanted is the simplest provisions to
afford an opportunity on easy terms for men who understand
what rural life is to occupy the land for industrial purposes; at
the same time affording security for the employment of capital
in developing the pastoral lands of the country. Once more,
this question of federation can never be advanced by the
so-called free-trader sitting here. When the Prime Minister in
his financial statement, or in some other statement, talked of
carrying the flag of free-trade into the port of federation he
simply flaunted the flag of hostility in the face of all the other
colonies. It is impossible to hoist either the flag of protection
or the flag of free-trade. You must, as I have said before, unite
as one people, and is it not right and just that the persons who
entertain protectionist views as well as those who entertain free-
trade views should be parties to this pact of federation ? It is
just and right and reasonable that it should be so, and what is
more, it cannot take place unless this union and good feeling are
brought about. There is another thing which I think little time
should be lost in bringing about, and that is the establishment of
some great controlling bank. Call it a State bank if you like.
Of course, I mean that any bank of that kind must have its
currency based either upon bullion in its coffers or Government
bonds, and I would have nothing to do with, I would give no
countenance to, any proposal to establish a bank of issue on the
basis of landed possessions. We have arrived at a state of
growth when it is high time that we should have some great


bank, possibly one of the banks now in existence affiliated with
the Government in some similar way to the Bank of England,
which, as we all know, is strictly a private bank, though perhaps
the most powerful national bank in the world; or possibly
assimilated with some of the best types of the United States.
The time has arrived when the currency of the country should
have an institution of this kind for the sake of regulating it, and
for the sake of keeping the banking operations of the country
in a sound, legitimate, and healthy state, suited to the growing
demands of the population and the multiplying interests of the
country. A suggestion has been made to me since I undertook
this task, which I would like to refer to. It has been suggested
to me that I should say something about the introduction of
coloured labour to compete with the labour of our own country.
I declined to incorporate any such question as that in any motion
I made here ; but perhaps I may be permitted to remind hon.
members that I think my voice alone was raised in protest against
the introduction of the islanders into Queensland at the time
they were introduced, and I, for one, announce here to-night, as
I have expressed myself on all occasions, that, without any ill-
will to the inferior peoples of the eastern countries, without any
pretensions to look down on them, I am in favour, and have
always been in favour of keeping these colonies for the people
of the Anglo-Saxon race. Why do I hold these views ? Not in
derogation of the inferior races that seek to come amongst us ;
but because I believe the democracy which I appreciate—l should
like the Minister of Education to take his hand from his shamed
face. Here is a case where I have never said a word, or done
an act adverse to the hon. member, and yet he cannot refrain, I
suppose, from sneering at my sincerity, when I declare what you
all know I have declared at all times
Mr. GARRARD : What justification has the hon. member for
attacking me in this way ? Have not I a right to do as I like ?
Sir HENRY PARKES : Most certainly. I desire to call
attention for a few moments to the strange position which this
Parliament and this country are in. It is now ten months—l
think to-day or to-morrow—since this Parliament was elected.
The hon. member could not content himself without altering the
fiscal year. There are three reasons in favour of this change,
and there are ten reasons against it; but I cannot stop to argue
that now. He altered the financial year. We are within six
weeks of its termination. The estimates have hardly been dis-
tributed amongst hon. members, and what possible chance has he
to deal with any of his multitudinous measures and to get his


supply before the 30th June? Are we not in a position both
lamentable and unprecedented when we are in this state, with
the new financial year, altered to meet his own convenience,
slipping away, and no attempt made to do the business which
must be done, if we act constitutionally, before the 30th June?
Is this session to be continuous? Is it go on without interruption
for years and years ? I venture to say that I shall be supported
by the best authorities in the world when I say that a session of
Parliament ought to be brought to a close every year about
the same time. In England, the mother of all parliamentary
governments, however severe the labours of ministers may be,
however bitter party conflicts may be, the session is brought to
a close about the same time, and Parliament as a rule never sits
during one half of the year, so that ministers may be at liberty to
understand the country and its foreign relations, and to properly
administer the offices for which they are responsible. The only
exceptional session of late years was the terribly trying session
in which Mr. Gladstone introduced his Home Rule Bill. That
certainly was extended beyond the regular time. I think there
were more sittings in that session than in any other session
within the memory of man. But as a rule the session ought
to be always closed before the financial year expires ; but here
are we with no provision made for the public service. Hon.
gentlemen will want to seriously examine the estimates. It
cannot be expected that members who represent labour will
be remiss in subjecting the estimates to the severest scrutiny,
and they ought to do it, whoever may be the minister in power.
But how can that be done if we are to be deluged with needless
measures which we know we cannot complete, which we know
of a certainty we can never consider, which we know of a
certainty we can never pass into law? I have tried to be frank
in the position I occupy here. It is a position in which I have
invited friends to federation from all sides to join me in trying to
bring this great consummation about. I have invited them in all
parts of the country, and I feel assured that I shall have the
support of the country in what I am doing now from one end of
it to the other.
Mr. HoGUE: Not much !
Sir HENRY PARKES : The detractions of newspapers
cannot affect me ; they cannot injure my reputation amongst the
living, and they cannot touch my memory when I have passed
away. There are thousands upon thousands of men from twenty
to fifty years of age, scattered all over the face of this country, in
whose minds my name has been a living principle from the day
they left the cradle. My name has been familiar to these men—


some of them now fifty years of age —from the time when they
were in their cradles. I need only go into any part of the country
to be made aware of this, and I have support here which depends
on no conventional circumstance, which depends on no man’s
opinion. With regard to those gentlemen who, as I believe,
sincerely hold protectionist proclivities, and with regard to those
gentlemen who are true free-traders, but who, like McMillan, are
bold enough and intelligent enough to place federation above
everything else : these gentlemen who are, in reality, the friends
of federation, who place it as the first question, with a determin-
ation when the time comes to maintain their own opinions, and
assembled here to-night, will, I have no doubt, give a vote which
this country will stamp with approval throughout the land ; I
have spoken to them with all candour and implicit trust. As to
me, personally, it matters but little. No man can possibly accuse
me of greed for office ; no man can possibly accuse me of that if
he speaks the truth. I have shown on many occasions my readi-
ness to retire. I have shown no eagerness at any time to retain
office except on honourable terms. Ido not care if I never obtain
office if a government can be brought into existence who will
brush away these stage garments and machinery of a bastard free-
trade policy, of a bastard protectionist policy, for neither the one
nor the other could live under the future federation, and if the
gentlemen who hitherto have trodden in this direction are now
sincere in trying to bring about the union of these great colonies,
they will fight with me, they will go on with me, and the next
election will be decided under our banner. As I have said, it
matters little to me. How can it matter to a man standing here
with the winters of eighty years upon his head, who has given
more than half that time to this country, and who still holds the
support of this country pre-eminently above the gentlemen sitting
on the government benches, as they will find out to their cost
when the next appeal to the country is made.
f
Mr. LEVIEN : What about payment of members ?
Sir HENRY PARKES : I do not recognise the hon. mem-
ber, for Quirindi so much as a lawyer—profound as he un-
doubtedly is—as a brilliant humorist, and I know he can even
embellish the dry question of payment of members with some
tropes and figures from his luxuriant mind. For me, payment of
members is in this form ; that, looking at all things at the present
moment, it seems to me that sufficient for the day is the payment
of members thereof, and when the time comes, and it is not come
now, I shall not hesitate to declare my own opinion as to payment
of members. In submitting this motion, Mr. Speaker, I can only


say that I am guided by one, two, three motives. The first is to
hasten the advent of a united Australia; the next is to punish a
government of trucksters who never can be trusted by serious
men ; and the third is to try to consolidate in this country a party
united for federation, who, when the real tariff struggle comes,
will fight on one side for free-trade and no surrender, but who
know that the time is not yet come, leaving others to fight on the
side of protection.
Question proposed.
[The Debate extended over three sittings; the last, Wed-
nesday, the 22nd, and Thursday, the 23rd, continuing for thirty-
three and a half hours. Mr. Reid, the Prime Minister, followed
the mover in a speech of over two hours. Nearly half the House
took part in the debate, the most notable feature being the
unmeasured condemnation pronounced against the Ministers by
members who either voted for, or paired in favour of, the
Government. The more remarkable of these “ candid friends”
were Mr. Knox, Mr. Morton, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Griffith, and Mr.
Wise, the latter gentleman delivering a powerful and brilliant
phillipic in condemnation, containing no single word in defence
or apology—one continuous crushing volume of censure from
beginning to end. Yet Mr. Wise paired in favour of the
Ministry, under some feeling, it is said, that while the fate of the
Land and Income Tax Bill in the Upper House remained
undecided, he must abstain from voting against them. Sir
Henry Parkes rose to reply a little before midnight, having been
sitting in the House about twenty-nine hours.]


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
THURSDAY, 23rd MAY, 1895.
REPLY.
Sir HENRY PARKES in reply: When I submitted this
motion I purposely laid upon myself great restraint, for one or
two reasons, which ought to have been apparent. Standing in
the position in which I stood, I thought it was my duty to say
nothing that could in any way provoke personalities or recrim-
ination, and from first to last I remained as undemonstrative as
it was in my nature to be. Obviously, the hon. gentleman who
has just sat down (Mr. Law) could not appreciate a course of
that kind ; but it seemed to me more consistent with the import-
ance of my subject, with the character of this House, and with
the dignity which I thought it proper to maintain in the respon-
sible position I occupy. Now, though 1 provoked no attack
whatever, though I said nothing to which any man could take
exception, the Prime Minister of this country, whose duty at all
times it ought to be to set an example to all others, turned upon
me as if my speech had been one tirade of abuse. From first to
last he did not scruple to fling upon me any epithets of abuse
that occurred to him, to the extent of gross misrepresentation of
facts. I felt that, when my turn came to reply, after this long
debate, that those restraints which I thought it my duty to im-
pose upon myself in opening the debate, might be justifiably
flung off; but I will not stoop to take that course. I think it
more consistent with my character in this House for as long a
time as many of you have been on the face of the earth—l think
it is more consistent with my character, and more calculated to
serve my cause —which is the cause of truth and justice—to
pursue the same unprovoking course with which I opened this
debate. Why should I have been attacked by the Prime Minis-
ter, who could not find candour or courage to defend his own
conduct, because I say unhesitatingly that there never was a
defence of a Government so completely given away as that was
given away by the hon. member? What were the main charges
which the hon. member for Balmain South cannot understand?
What were my main charges ? They were these. That by an


incompetent management of the affairs of this country the Prime
Minister had rendered the circumstances so perplexing that it
was impossible for him now to conduct affairs any longer. He
brought in bills, notably the Local Government Bill, in such a
crude and imperfect form, in such an impossible form, that if it
could have been passed into law in that condition it would have
been a curse to this country instead of a blessing, I accuse him
of tampering with the honour of the country in his treatment of
a great public servant. I have nothing at this stage to say
about the merits of the Chief Commissioner for Railways, or the
merits of the new agreement, but I have this to say: that if the
Prime Minister of our country, acting in the name of the people,
thinks it is his duty to entreat this gentleman to stay in our
service at an increased salary subject to the approval of Parlia-
ment, he is bound in honour to give all sections of this House
an opportunity of deciding upon what he has done. There is
no escape from that. To take that straightforward and manly
and constitutional course would be worthy of the country. Not
to take it covers the hon. and learned gentleman with shame.
I pointed out that this session of Parliament has now proceeded
longer than most sessions which are full of business, and that
the multitude of measures submitted to this House at the
eleventh hour could not by any possibility be carried into law,
even if the House continued to sit for two or three years. And
yet, if hon. gentlemen here, and the people behind us cannot see
through the chicanery and public dishonesty of conduct like that,
then God help the people of this country, who forfeit their title
to possess free institutions. Now, the hon. member, in the
abuse he heaped upon me, resorted to other persons ; he dwelt
upon the abuse—l will not use harder terms—that has been
heaped upon me at different times by hon. gentlemen, notably
the hon. member for West Macquarie. I would point out to
you, sir, what is the difference between my case and the case of
the Premier. He had to go back to years of the past history of
the country to find the abuse which members had heaped upon me,
or I will say the severe language they had applied to me, because
at this time of the day I do not want to call it abuse or vilifica-
tion ; I will say harsh, and, as I thought, unjust language they
had applied to me. Well, the Prime Minister has not to go back
a single hour. The difference between us is, that he has to
ransack the records of our country to find those cases of attack
upon me. He can find the attacks upon himself in the speeches
of the men who are going to vote for him to-night. That is the
difference. There is no occasion for him to go far. He can go
to the hon. member for Waratah, who treated him to such a
lesson, that the Premier, I am informed, fairly winced under it.


When a gentleman of his happy constitution winces, the exercise
of the flail must have been very severe. There are others here
also No less than ten or twelve hon. members advanced enough
to condemn any government in the world, but, nevertheless,
they are going to vote for the government. I do not wonder
that the Premier felt uncomfortable in that state of things.
Now, there are one or two things affecting my own position
to-day, and I should like to occupy two or three minutes in
making an explanation. I have been accused of deserting the
free-trade convictions of the last thirty or thirty-five years of my
life. I simply deny that altogether; but I ought to explain that
I never was a technical, or if you like to select a finer word, a
scientific free-trader. Hon. members on both sides must have
heard me frequently say that what I aimed at by free-trade
was, to remove the barriers from the free transactions of the
people; to prevent impediments to the transactions of com-
merce, and to leave the food and the necessities of the people
practically free. But I never pretended in all my life to reduce
these doctrines to a modern tariff of some six or seven articles,
which, beyond carrying out a sound principle to the ridiculous
extreme, could do no good to the nation or the people. Now
England, who is not only the teacher of our form of government,
but is the pioneer of the doctrine of freetrade, has a tariff at this
moment which could not be defended for a single hour on any
scientific basis. It is an extremely inconsistent tariff, judged of
by any rule of technical propriety, and it imposes a number of
duties on articles which might be complained of severely by any
mere scholastic or scientific free-trader. What are the conditions
of the mother country ? It is a densely populated, incalculably
rich country. Her people, as we have heard to-night, are often
in a state of great privation. Ido not hesitate to say that many
thousands of them are in such a state of pitiable adversity that
no man can view their condition without feelings of horror and
compassion being wrung from his very soul. I admit all that.
There the people have to be fed from foreign markets, not as in
our country. The people of England would die if the ports were
not thrown open to food for the people. In that country there
might well be a scientific tariff, but the great statesmen of
England have been wiser, and they have been content in carrying
out this high and pure principle to practically leave the commerce
of the people free, without going into experimental antics such
as have been foreshadowed for this unfortunate country. That
being so, I said the other night that I did not sympathise with
the free-traders, who were going to take the duty off the wheat in
order to admit the wheat of the farmers of the adjoining colonies
who imposed a high duty on the wheat of our farmers, I hat is


not my view of a system of free-trade. What I meant was, that
this action of ours was taken at an ill time ; that there was no
necessity for it ; that there was no demand to supply our people
with bread, and that it was a mere pretence to go into this
fantastic trick when by federation you could sweep away all
those barriers, and make Australia free to everybody within the
shores of Australia. That is what I meant, and that was a sound,
practical view of free-trade. The view of the Government is a
scholastic, impractical, nonsensical and misleading notion. In
this crusade, apparently against me, there is one portion of the
press which has in a most disgraceful manner joined with these
gentlemen. I say advisedly a disgraceful manner. For example,
they send their servants to me to obtain my opinion on some
topic, and then they doctor my words to make me express what
they want me to express in their own language. Not only so,
but they have stated things of me in direct contradiction of my
professions and they pay no attention when I seek to explain my
conduct. Now, I admit the right of a great newspaper to defend
its opinions and its advocacy. I admit that fully—l mean a great
daily paper. I have not forgotten the interesting anecdote when
Mr. Cobden said to the late Mr. Delane that the Times was
inconsistent, and Mr. Cobden quoted an article of some three
years earlier to show how inconsistent was the article of to-day.
Mr. Delane, who was a great journalist and a noble gentleman,
replied to Mr. Cobden, “ The Times has no pastand the very
noble name which Mr. Walter selected shows that that great
newspaper was to be the political history of to-day, and had
nothing to do with keeping up a consistency with what they may
have said years ago. I quite understand that, and Ido not
complain of anything that any journal says if it only sticks to
the truth. Ido not complain. I never in my life complained of
any attack made in the columns of a paper if they will only
represent a man’s conduct on the lines of truth and right. The
great London journals and the great Parisian journals are scru-
pulous to treat all public men with exact justness and patriotic
fairness. It is because this journal to which I have alluded has
not the capacity or the sense or the honour to be true and right,
to be commonly honest, that I say it is unworthy to be accredited
as a great public organ. However, I am going to show hon.
members what, on the authority of the Prime Minister, this
journal is. Whatever it has said of myself it has said much
worse of him :
Mr. George Reid is an uncompromising free-trader in theory, but an aggressive
and militant protectionist in practice.
I do not think that the Premier can chuckle much over what
this journal says of me when they have spoken of him in these


terms. I will read a little bit of a speech made by the Prime
Minister, which is reported as follows in the Daily Telegraph,
June 11, 1891: —
He did not generally complain of what the newspapers said about him ; but
that morning a paragraph appeared in the Daily Telegraph (groans) which he had
no hesitation in saying was so utterly unfair and untrue, that during the whole
course of his political career he could never have been treated worse. (Applause
and groans). On Monday last they had spoken of him as a largeminded and con-
sistent politician. To-day they said that he was going to slaughter all his free-
trade friends, and that he had formed an alliance with Mr. Dibbs,
You see that the thing that is said of me now was then said of
the hon., the innocent, the jubilant gentleman who is now at
the head of the Government.
and that he was going to bring a protectionist government into power. (Applause,
and a voice, “ I wish you would.”) Why, even his protectionist friends knew
that he was not to be bought. (Applause.) Yet here was a paper which had just
as bad an opinion of the Convention Bill as he had, which had denounced it right
and left, and which from the moment he had denounced the bill had never ceased
to denounce him. Why ? Because it spoke with two voices. (Applause.) While
it made a parade Of its independence it was in the pocket of Sir Henry Parkes.
(Applause and hoots.)
Just imagine my pitiable case, to have the Daily Telegraph in
one pocket, while the Premier himself, only the other night, said
that I had in my other pocket the hon. member for Flinders
Division. Should I not have a nice burden to carry about the
world —in one pocket the hon. member for Flinders Division, in
the other the Daily Telegraph ! This remark, that I had the
Daily Telegraph in my pocket, was received with applause and
hoots. The hon. and learned gentleman then went on to say:
No one who crossed his (Sir Henry’s) path seemed capable of getting decent
treatment from the Daily Telegraph (applause). They had put words into his
mouth which every man who knew him would say was either a printer s error, or
—a lie (applause, and a voice, “ It’s a lie ! ”). They had used these words, that
he was “an uncompromising free-trader in theory, but an aggressive and militant
protectionist in practice.” It was, no doubt, a printer’s error (laughter, and “No ;
it’s a lie I”). (Applause.)
I am very much tempted to point out to hon. members the course
taken by the Premier with regard to the Convention Bill, and
also with regard to the Local Government Bill of 1891, but I will
not read the extracts which I marked for the purpose in deference
to hon. members, and because I only wish to speak gently of the
Prime Minister. But in 1891 the government of which I was the
head convened Parliament on the 19th May. There is a resolu-
tion on the records of this house that Parliament ought not to be
convened later than the month of May. I fell back on that
resolution and convened Parliament on the 19th May. At that
time we had provision for the public service for the whole year,
and my object in convening Parliament was to pass the Local
Government Bill. I think even hon. gentlemen on the other side


will admit that the bill introduced by myself in 1891 was the most
perfect bill for carrying out local government which has appeared
in this country. The bill, I know, has received the approval of
the gentlemen sitting on the Government benches, because they
approved of it at the time they were members of my Government.
If that bill could have been passed into law it would have given
to the people living in the remote districts of this country a
system under which they could have managed their own affairs,
and there was no reason why it should not have become law in
1891. The person who is principally answerable for its not
passing into law is the present Prime Minister. He went to a
great public meeting, and, after a very abusive speech, he
announced that if, when parliament met, the Government did not
introduce a bill of this character, he, like Trelawney, would know
the reason why. We introduced it, and then in May the hon.
member set to work to render it impossible to pass it. In
the same manner, on the very day that Parliament met —19th
May—l gave notice of a resolution for taking into consideration
the Federation Bill. The hon. member met that by an amend-
ment, notwithstanding that the House had ample opportunity
to discuss it on the resolution which I placed on the paper
myself at the earliest hour possible. But he gave notice of a
motion which occupied two or three days, and which was
defeated by a large majority. Then the hon. member for
Tamworth, who was leader of the Opposition, gave notice of a
direct motion of want of confidence—l did not complain of that
then ; I have never complained of it since. It was strictly
within his right as disagreeing with my policy to take that
stand. But that resolution was carried by the free-trade vote of
the present Prime Minister, and the free-trade vote of the
present Attorney-General and one or two others. The voting
was equal, and Mr. Speaker gave his casting vote with the
Government, which, of course, did not remove the defeat, and
Parliament was dissolved. Well, the labour party made their
appearance, in the result of that election, much stronger in
numbers than the present labour party. Some of them are here
now, and they will know as well as I do the accuracy of what I
am going to state. They had a meeting to decide whether they
would support the motion of want of confidence, or support the
Government, and they decided to support the Government. I
had then, with the labour party, a decisive, even a large,
majority. I knew well enough that it was my duty to introduce
two measures especially interesting to this new section of the
House-—I mean the Electoral Bill, embodying one man one vote,
and a bill for establishing an institution to deal with industrial
strikes. I felt sure, and I do not deny that, that if I at that


moment had attempted to go on with federation, a thing which
lay outside the legislation of our own colony, I should give grave
dissatisfaction ; and in deference to this new element of my
support, without in any way forfeiting the independence of
government, we decided to give these two principal measures
precedence over the question of federation. I dare say the hon.
member for Redfern recollects the action to which I allude, and
I dare say the hon. member for Broken Hill does also. We went
on and passed through the Assembly the Electoral Bill and the
Industrial Strikes Bill, and the motion for taking into considera-
tion the question of federation stood first on the business-paper
for the following week. But in the meantime a course was
taken in the House on which we thought well to retire from
office.
Mr. Cann : The Conciliation Bill did not pass!
Sir HENRY PARKES: No; we had not time; but it was
well advanced, as the hon. member will recollect. I think the
Electoral Bill was ready to be sent up to the other Chamber.
Very well, the present Prime Minister, all through this crisis of
a free-trade Government, coalesced, intrigued, gave the whole
weight of his character to the protectionist and honest minority
in order to defeat us at every stage.
Mr. Reid : It is not true !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I speak amongst a multitude of
witnesses, and I am sure it will be admitted that what I say is
substantially true.
Mr. Reid : The hon. member went out on the Coal Mines
Bill, his own measure !
Sir HENRY PARKES; Of course I did. I have said
already that a course was taken on which we thought well to
retire from office. Now, it has been said of me —and I think the
hon. member for Monaro interjected the same the other day—
that when I had an opportunity to deal with the federation
question I failed to do so. 1 have explained how I failed. If I
had not taken the course which I did—and all my colleagues
consented to that course—the probability was, that I would not
have been allowed to deal with federation at all; because the
labour members would have deemed that I was neglecting the
business of the colony to go into a thing which in their judg-
ment had not the first pressing claim. 1 will not make any
further reference to the hon. member. I now come to my own
attitude in making this motion. I am agreeably satisfied with
what has been done. lam aware that the motion will be defeated;


but, notwithstanding that, it has led to the delivery of many able,
most interesting and instructive speeches, in which the question
has been more or less well ventilated. Independently of that,
it has led to what is of much more value —the discovery of who
the men in this House really are. The supporters of the Govern-
ment may claim to be free-traders; I do not dispute it; but
they cannot claim to be friends of federation. I will proceed to
prove that conclusively to this House and to the people of this
country. The hon. and learned member at the head of the
Government proposes a readjustment of the tariff, not such a
readjustment as former governments have carried through, but
something much superior; something worthy of his genius,
something worthy of the Secretary for Public Works. What is
this adjustment of the tariff? It is to remit duties at different
stages in a capricious and unjust manner —unjust to the country.
If they are to be repealed, they should be repealed much earlier ;
but the hon. member spreads the adjustment of this tariff over a
period of six or seven years ; then he tells the House that he is
not going to rest at that; but he is going to simplify, to rarify,
to fine down this tariff till it will be more scientific, more
thoroughly free-trade, than any tariff in the world. Well, that
will take another additional three years, I should think.
Mr. Reid : No, no !
Sir HENRY PARKES: The hon. member cannot do with-
out the element of time any more than I can do things without
the element of time. But giving him credit, and at this stage I
will give him credit, for the sake of argument, for having a
sincere desire to carry out this change which he dignifies with
the name of a great reform, he cannot build up a free-trade tariff
which will take six, seven, or eight years before it is completed
by this fanciful addition and at the same time advocate federation,
I should like to ask hon. gentlemen there, every free-trader, how
can the hon. gentleman be justified in unsettling the affairs of
the country, going to this enormous trouble, irritating the friends
of protection who sit opposite to renewed effort and fresh zeal;
I ask them whether the hon. gentleman is justified in doing all
that unless he intends to give this tariff a trial and see whether
it is right or wrong? Less than ten years would not afford a
reasonable and just to see whether this tariff suited the
people of the country and was calculated to promote the
country’s interests. Hence, then, there is some ten years to be
added to the six or seven of construction, and if the hon. member
tells you he wants no trial, that is a severe condemnation of the
course he now takes. It shows that he does not know what he is
doing, and that he is not sincere in proposing to do it. That would


lead us on for seventeen years, and during all that time the
question of federation would be in abeyance, because I defy any
man here whatever his reasoning powers may be, who is actuated
with the utmost desire to see the thing in its true light, to tell me
or any company of sensible men that it will be possible to
attempt to carry out the union of these colonies with time occu-
pied in fabricating a tariff such as he describes for a single state.
Now, in England, if Sir Robert Peel, and Mr. Gladstone, after
free-trade had been established, had afterwards endeavoured to
establish a free-trade tariff for Scotland, another for Wales, and
another for Lancashire, they would have done something very
much like what the hon. member is doing, because federation by
striking down the barriers between the colonies will make all
Australia one country. It would be just as rational, just as
patriotic, just as defensible, just as impossible for free-trade to
be carried out by several tariffs applied to different parts of the
United Kingdom as for this free-trade tariff to be carried out
against the other colonies of Australia. Any man who has a
clear conception of, and an honest desire to bring these colonies
together, knows this. I have discovered that gentlemen here
who prate about federation, but who in reality want to promote
and preserve and perpetuate the disunion of these colonies, are
the hon. members who seek to establish a tariff to carry out
their own nostrums of free-trade. Well, I denounce that for
two reasons. If they are sincere in taking up this time to pass
their model tariff, they cannot be sincere in trying to bring
about the union of the colonies. Now, with regard to this
motion, I should never have made it if 1 had not been urged to
that course by free-traders who deserted me when I made it.
I say that unhesitatingly, and I can easily substantiate the
assertion whenever they desire me to do so. That brings
me to another feature which I think I have a right to com-
plain of in submitting this motion. When I submitted the
motion I said nothing about my own honest convictions on
free-trade, and I never supposed that members of the Opposition
would promulgate in their demonstrative way, their adherence to
protection. I see clearly enough that the standard of federation
can only be reared successfully by a united people, and my
acceptance of the proffered assistance of those gentlemen was
entirely on the grounds that I am convinced in my inmost soul,
that this people can never federate with the other colonies unless
all fiscal sections, all sects, and people of all opinions, join
hand in hand in the one great work of the union cause. I think
I have made that apparent to hon. members now. I told the
protectionists in my first observations, that they must not expect
to receive aid from me in the protectionist cause. If they are


willing to lay down their contention, if they are willing to have
a truce till such time as is necessary to bring about federation, I
stretch out my hands to them, but I tell them at the same time,
that I give no assistance to the promulgation of their protec-
tionist doctrine.
Sir George Dibbs : And we cannot give assistance to the
promulgation of free-trade.
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am quite satisfied with the con-
duct of the hon. member for Tamworth in this matter. I
recognise that he has acted in a straightforward, honourable and
delicate way. I have no right to suspect him of other motives
than that now, whatever he may have thought in other times, he
is convinced that the best way is to bring the sister colonies
together in a bond or union, aud to leave this wretched strife for
a tariff for the time when alone it can be fought out, that is
in the election of the federal parliament. Now, lam not going
to let this matter rest. I shall travel wherever I can, and I shall
promulgate this doctrine of the Federal Party. I shall ask my fel-
low men in every part of the colony to join me in doing this great,
this grandest work of all, without which we can never be a
nation, and to put aside this tinkering with a local state tariff till
that time comes when we can act with effect whether for free-trade
or for protection. If I have not made my position clear no words
of mine can effect that object. I have concealed nothing, I have
suppressed nothing, but I say to this House, I say to this Govern-
ment, I will say to those late colleagues of mine who were so
unfaithful to me, that I have had to deal with many difficult things
in my life : I have met with far greater obloquy, far greater
obstruction at first, but at last I have succeeded in every case.
Mr. A. Chapman : And the hon. member will succeed
again !
Sir HENRY PARKES: I have no doubt I shall succeed,
because I know my motives are pure and honest. I know the
object before me is a grand and lofty one. I know that lam
seeking to bring about a national union, without which this
country may at any moment suffer irremediable evils. I know
that no provincial Parliament can do the things which are wait-
ing to be done. I know that only a federal government and a
federal legislature can deal with the many great pregnant ques-
tions which are overshadowing the destiny of this nation. I
think I know the heart of this people, and I believe that I never
took a course in all my life which will receive the plaudits and
support of the people of New South Wales more than the course


that lam taking now will receive them. I have no doubt what-
ever of that. I first took office as Colonial Secretary in the
Government of the late Sir James Martin, nearly thirty years
ago. Sir James Martin placed in my hands the question of
public education. There had been nine different governments,
extending over ten years, and several of those governments had
tried to deal with that question and failed. One of them had
lasted, I think, a little over three years —one of Mr. Cowper’s
governments. Up to that period the paltry sums voted for educa-
tion were placed in the hands of two boards —the National
School Board and the Denominational School Board, who dis-
tributed the money to the respective congregations on the one
hand, and to the National schools, to be spent as the clergy in
the first case thought well. You will, therefore, see that that was
no light task. The expenditure of public money for education,
for training the children of the country, had been largely lodged in
the hands of the churches, and without any disrespect to anybody,
and with no desire to revive bitternesses of that kind, I can
appeal to gentlemen on both sides as to whether clergymen are
not very unwilling to give up the education of children or the
money of the public which is necessary to that end. I introduced
a public school bill, and I encountered an opposition such as
never existed in this country on any other question. I suppose
there are gentlemen here who must recollect it. Even at its
later stages motions were made to oppose the message carrying
the bill to the other Chamber. On every device possible
motions were made to delay the passage of that bill. Well,
that bill, if any measure ever belonged to any man, belonged
to me. The very manuscript that went to the printing office
was in my handwriting, and the manuscript is with me now
to prove what I say. Well, it met with the approval of the
leading men in both Houses. It was passed in the Assembly
by a majority of 8 to 1 ; in the Council by a majority of 4 to 1.
and I conducted that bill through the most trying, the most
aggressive and determined opposition that ever existed in this
country, and it became law in about four months. Is it surpris-
ing that I—who went through that great trial with this great
question, and carried it to a successful issue in a little over four
months—am dissatisfied with the criminal dilatory conduct of
this Government in regard to the bills they flaunt before the
public of New South Wales? lam driven in spite of myself to
the conviction that they do not intend to pass the measures they
have submitted in so crude a form. They have told us different
stories at different times ; they told us they could not introduce
their taxation bills until the Local Government Bill was law;
they told us that the Land Tax and Income Tax Assessment Bill


must be passed before they could go on with their subsequent
taxing measures. The Local Government Bill has gone to the
winds. It is destroyed—partly by their own want of manage-
ment, and the Land and Income Tax Assessment Bill is pending
in the other chamber for the second reading next week, and
nobody knows what is to become of it. When I hear gentlemen
laying down this distinct course of conduct, when I see them
failing at every step to carry it out, when I know what other
governments have done, and see, with my eyes open, that
the session is drifting to a disastrous close, when there will
be no provision for the public service, and when, in all
probability, our indebtedness will be largely increased, can I
entertain any other conviction than that it is our duty to try
to bring this Government to an end in view of the public good?
The beginning is to-night. The end is not far off; and I say to
these gentlemen that they may sit there on the Government
benches with the business of the country delayed, with their
incapacity to conduct it made manifest, they may sit there and
ignominiously allow their bills to be torn to pieces ; but they will
never place on our statute-book any measures which will be
those of a government of patriotic men. As for me, I shall go
on with the federal cause, and I will make every elector in the
country say whether he is in favour of the union of the colonies,
or whether he is in favour of hoisting the Disunionist flag in the
Ministerialist camp and on the upper Storey of the member for
Randwick.


SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
A FEDERAL POLICY.
“ The North Sydney,” May 18.
Parliament is once more in the throes of a crucial struggle, and its only
justification is the certainty that out of it will come the settlement of
issues that are vital to our national life. These issues are too sacred for
the trifling of superficial critics who, on the one hand deny the Govern-
ment the large share of credit which is its due, or on the other hand allow
party feeling to blind them to the real stand taken by Sir Henry Parkes.
That Mr. Reid and his ministers have worked hard and strenuously to
give effect to their reading of the popular will is simply beyond dispute;
and that they have done it with purity of motive few will deny.
But, three years ago Sir Henry Parkes, forseeing the insufficiency
and danger of all forms of mere provincialism enunciated a federal
policy. Neither of the Parliamentary parties was ripe for it, so there was
nothing for it but to place it on record and wait till the growth of public
opinion and the failure of other policies should open the way. The
Dibbs panacea of provincial protection came in and failed. The Reid
remedy of provincial free-trade (so graduated as to discourage any
enthusiasm of support, as well as any strenuousness of opposition) is
good so far as it goes, but in its fullest measure would fall utterly short
of the larger benefits of national unity.
At this juncture Sir Henry unfolds the banner of a federated Aus-
tralia, with its motto of “ One people, one destiny.” The fact that the
Protectionist members of the Assembly have come up to the stand Sir
Henry has occupied for years past can hardly be construed into a ground
for charging Sir Henry with inconsistency. He has not changed.
He concedes nothing, compromises nothing. The change and con-
cession are all on the part of those who previously differed from him,
but have now come to his views.
The only point, therefore, for honest difference of opinion regarding
his present action, is as to whether Mr. Reid was not entitled to a fuller
opportunity of leadership. Naturally Ministers and their strong
supporters think he ought. But just as naturally Sir Henry claims the
right to fix his own time for attempting to accomplish what not only he,
but the vast majority of the people regard as the supreme object for the
whole of Australia.
For the moment he is assailed with the most egregious misrepresent-
ations bv nearly every organ of the city press. But it is not the first time


that the press has found itself lagging in the rear. Possibly he may at
the first essay fail to convince a majority of the Assembly that it is their
duty to vote according to their judgment on this great question, but it
can only be a matter of a very short time indeed, when whatever party
may be in power will be forced to give first place to federation.
“The Cumberland Times,” May 16.
The position of Sir Henry Parkes, in the Parliament of New South
Wales, is unique in the political history of Australia. It is like the old
warrior’s personality sui generis. He has won the proud distinction of
being, at the present moment, baited and bullied, misrepresented and
traduced by evefy newspaper rag in the country. We held that, at the
last general election, the mandate of the country was that Sir Henry
Parkes should take the helm of the ship of state, and guide her safely
into the haven of Federal Union. We said then, as we say now, that the
only national political question worth a moment’s consideration, is the
great question of the Federation of the Colonies. Compared to that, the
contest between the advocates of free-trade and the preachers of protec-
tion, is as the chatterings of kites and crows. Five years ago, when Sir
Henry Parkes first propounded his federation scheme, we said his speech
rang the death knell of the provincial fiscal creeds of freetrade and pro-
tection. It was the Aaron’s rod turned into the serpent, which swallowed
all meaner transfigurations. Sir Henry Parkes said virtually the same
thing to the Herald reporter who interviewed him on the subject on
Saturday last. The venerable and to-be-venerated statesman has been
the reviled of all revilers. He has been accused by Premier Reid, of
having been a life-long traitor to the cause of free-trade ; whereas he has
been, of all men that ever sat in the Parliament of the country, the most
consistent advocate of absolute freedom for the interchange of com-
modities. ,
“The Freeman’s Journal,” Saturday, May 18.
We need offer no excuse for borrowing Sir Henry Parkes’ phrase
for the Premier’s Budget speech, “The Reid Romance,” for of the many
that have been found for it there are none which express it so well.
Little as there might be supposed to be of the romantic about Mr.
George Reid in one sense, in another there is much. As a Premier he
might be said to be a romance in himself, as in one definition of the
word something quite out of the natural order of things, and his policy
as unfolded in this speech equally a romance in another, as something
wildly fictitious and extravagant. We have always doubted whether his
boasted mandate from the country was not itself largely founded on
fiction, and now that after nigh twelve months’ delay he is forced to a
serious attempt to carry it out, we fancy that never did “ castles in the
air ” vanish more expeditiously than will romantic Premier and policy
together. He himself has been tried and found wanting, for the
mandate he came into power nearly a year ago to enforce remains still


unfulfilled, and his policy now is not worth trying, for it is on the face of
it impossible. It is literally the policy of the political “ plunger,” in the
desperate hope to make up for some ten months of unmitigated failure
by a magnificent show of promises which both from their number and
nature it would take as many years to carry out. The show may have
dazzled with its broken glass brilliancy some of his party at the moment,
or may still, but the saner sort must have seen at once that the man who
could make such a parade of impossible performance must be one of
two things —either insincere, or if sincere, idiotic. Either he hoped to
to dupe the country, or he was himself the dupe of his own intoxicated
incapacity, and hence in the revolt from such disgraceful leadership
either way of the better sort of freetraders may be found possibly the
salvation of the country from a policy of which it is hardly too much to
say that even in the attempt to carry it out it would spell ruin in almost
every line of it.
“ The Armidale Express,” May
In striking out for federation, Sir Henry Parkes has adopted a line,
which should commend itself to a majority of the House, apart from any
other consideration; and as a federalist, he has done more to bring the
question home to the people of Australia than any other public man. If
we are to have federation, the present is the most opportune time to bring
it about. The whole of the colonies are in a state of political unrest, and
the chief aim of the respective Parliaments is to legislate in the direction
of gaining advantage over their neighbours. Border tolls are levied in
a retaliatory manner, railways are constructed and special rates charged
with a view to attracting each other’s trade, reciprocal treaties are made
between some colonies to the detriment of others, and a feeling of antag-
onism prevails, which ought not to exist amongst a community whose
interests are identical, and whose progress depends so much upon a close
relationship existing between them.
“ The Wagga Advertiser,” May 18.
Whether he (Sir Henry Parkes) succeeds or fails in the struggle he
has now entered on he will, in either case, have the conciousness that he
has been inspired by the highest sense of duty and patriotism. In his
case sinking the fiscal issue does not mean truckling to a party, but, on
the contrary, relegating to the whole Australian people the settlement of
an issue in which they are all equally concerned.
“The Western Advocate,” May 18.
Sir Henry’s speech will satisfy the country that his position is
perfectly consistent with his previous declarations on the hustings, on
the platform, as well as in print. He has insisted all along, both in
Parliament and outside, in his speeches and in his writings, that no
alteration in the tariff should be made until Federation takes place.


“The Gundagai Times,” May 21.
So far, the discussion on the vote of censure only shows how utterly
wanting the present Assembly is in legislative capacity. Sir Henry
Parkes’ speech was weak and ineffective. It reads like a speech
delivered with a belief that there was nothing noble to appeal to in the
House, no patriotism to arouse or no cord of noble passion to strike.
He was like a great musician performing on a bad instrument. Our
Parliament is not what it was fifteen or twenty years ago. Between the
different parties it is now a struggle of tactics rather than of intellect —
votes are carried and changes wrought more by the power of machinery
than the power of truth or eloquence. The strength of an orator lies in
the sympathy between him and his audience. Men nowadays do not
talk as Johnston did at the sale of Thrale’s brewery, and our Parliament-
arians do not understand the language of Wentworth or Dailey. , . .
In that speech there were, however, some brilliant passages
After quoting the passage on the true meaning of Federation, the
writer says;—
In that, we have the situation in a nutshell. Mr. Reid lamented
that Sir Henry Parkes was about to make federation a party question.
Every true hearted friend of the cause will be glad that he has done so.
The result of the division will be to tear the mask from false friends,
and to consolidate a strong federal party, with distinct objects in view,
in Parliament, a party that will be bound to put those objects before the
electors. We have had in the past too much lip service in regard to the
national movement, and, if it achieves nothing else, one great result of
the present debate will be to remove doubt, and to bring federation as a
question of first importance within the present narrow regions of practical
politics
The Premier’s reply was purely personal. The greater part of his
address was devoted to quotations from speeches delivered by Sir Henry
Parkes years ago. He went as far back as the 22nd September, 1859.
What we have to remember is that the circumstances of the country have
changed, and with every change in the country the statesman must
change his point of view. It was not very difficult for Sir George Dibbs
to use the same weapons against Mr. Reid. “ When I moved a resolu-
tion in 1891,” said the ex-Premier, “ that the Government then existing
no longer possessed the confidence of the House and the country, Mr.
Reid voted for the motion, the object of which was to destroy the free-
trade party then in power. The present Premier voted against a free-
trade Government, and voted to bring a protectionist Government into
power.” He also reminded Mr. Reid of the speeches delivered by him
in the Protestant Hall, when he denounced federation and poured
ridicule upon the members of the National Convention sitting at the
time in Sydney.


“The Tamworth News,” May 21.
Over and over again for the last ten months we have had it dinned
into o.ur ears that the mandate of the people to Mr. Reid at the last
election was, that the Dibbs tariff must be abolished. Over and over
again we have been told that the mandate would be obeyed. Mr. Reid
avoided giving effect to the mandate as long as possible, but it had to be
faced at last, and this is what he said in his budget speech: —
“ I stand here to-night as the head of an administration which is prepared for
the first time in the history of this country to stake its political existence upon
carrying out that policy (direct taxation) Every shred of the Dibbs
tariff, specific and ad valorem duties alike, will disappear in six weeks, the grain
duties on 30th September.”
These brave words looked very much as if Mr. Reid had plucked
up courage and fully intended to nail his freetrade colours to the mast,
and to stand or fall by his fiscal proposals. No such thing, however.
For on Saturday the following inspired announcement appeared in the
Freetrade organs :
“ As there appears to be some misconception in regard to how far the House
in Committee can amend the Tariff Bill without imperilling the position of the
Government, it may be well to explain the exact position. When the House, after
expressing general approval of the proposals of the Government, goes into Com-
mittee on the Tariff Bill, every item will receive consideration, and hon. members
will have full liberty to propose any amendment, provided it does not increase the
taxation of the country. If the committee passed an amendment increasing the
taxation, that would amount to taking the business out of the hands of the
Government, and the Government would have to resign ; but amendments may be
proposed and carried reducing items of taxation, or declaring for their retention at
the present rate, even though the Government may propose their abolition. The
Government will, of course, strenously oppose any such alterations; but if the
Committee in its wisdom insists on retaining certain duties —such as those on
grain or sugar—the position of the Government will not be vitally affected. That
can only happen by the passing of an amendment increasing duties or by the
House refusing to approve generally of the freetrade proposals of the Government.
The Premier made this pretty clear in his speech in reply to Sir Henry Parkes on
Thursday night, when he said : —‘ The policy of the Government must come before
the House in committee —it must come before the House for decision. Every item
of the tariff could only be removed by the deliberate consent of the committee. So
with the land tax ; it was a separate principle. So with the income tax ; so with
the grain duties, and with every proposal the same. Every hon. member would
have a chance of voting on them according to his conscience and according to his
fiscal belief.’ ”
The only inference to be drawn from this inspired statement is, that
honorable members will be permitted, nay, are invited, to tear Mr. Reid’s
tariff proposals to pieces, to rend his beautiful symmetrical budget to
shreds, to scatter it indeed to the four winds of heaven, provided they do
not give a vote that will turn Mr. Reid and his colleagues out of office.
If the Reid Ministry survive Sir Henry Parkes’ censure motion, and we
have little doubt, in the face of the crooked game they are playing, that
they will survive it, it will be interesting to watch their ulterior policy.
Item by item they will contentedly allow their budget proposals to be
voted away, and then Mr. Reid, still sticking to office, will, without a
blush, declare that he has done his part in carrying out the mandate of


the country, but that the Assembly refused to follow him. The oppor-
tunity which Mr, Reid gives to every member of the House “to vote
according to his conscience and fiscal belief/' will be largely availed of,
because it will relieve members from the awkward dilemma of jeopardis-
ing their £3OO a year.
“The North Sydney,” May 25.
That the Government should succeed in holding its majority
against the motion of censure was generally expected. The question now
of importance is, How far the debate has affected the political outlook ?
As far as criticism of the Government is concerned, by far the most
hostile speech was that of Mr. Wise. But the object of Sir Henry
Parkes was not so much to condemn the policy of the Government, as to
lead the public mind to larger issues. Most of the items of the Govern-
ment programme are in themselves highly desirable, but over against the
policy of the Government Sir Henry advocates a higher plane of action.
Just as earnestly as the present Government he would work for freetrade
and direct taxation, but on a basis compatible with the larger question of
national unity.
Coming to the practical working out of these alternative policies, we
have on the one hand an attempt to apply the freetrade principle on a
provincial scale. New South Wales is to disregard any interests that
have been developed under past legislation, and throw open her ports to
neighbours whose ports are still closed to her ; and as the Premier puts
it, she is thereby to challenge them to like flights of generosity, and thus
shame them into federal relationship. Now, passing by the claims of
vested interests to the consideration of practical statesmen, and viewing
this policy purely in its bearing upon the prospects of federation, how will
it work ? It is all very well for the Premier to reason that the lowering
of barriers by one colony ought to challenge like action by the rest. But,
unfortunately, such is not the outcome of the provincial spirit. Any one
who has studied our intercolonial relationships must know that, it Mr.
Reid succeeded, the response of Victoria would be, “Thank you for free
ports for our surpluses, and don’t hurry yourself about federation.”
On the other hand we have the great factors of progressive legisla-
tion arranged in natural sequence—the federal union of the colonies
wiping out all the barriers from Australian commerce ! All the colonies
are to-day ready for federation. Why should it be delayed by the mere
whim of attempting piece-meal reforms which it would accomplish in
one act ?
The Government will now, no doubt, set to work with all the
enthusiasm which so decisive a majority should give. But the
appearances of strength in its position will be found most delusive. A
policy which leaves out federation and local government may be other-
wise sound so far as it goes ; but the attempt to give it legislative effect
will prove most disappointing. Such a policy can hardly command the
confidence of the Legislative Council, and the probabilities are that,
before many months are over, ministers will be furnished with a
“popular” ground of appeal to the country.


“The Freeman’s Journal” of May 25 has the following
article :
THE “ MAN AT THE HELM.”
“ My greatest offence against Sir Henry Parkes is that my hand is
on the helm,” very superflously declared the Premier the other night,
and we are sure the polite Sir Henry would never think of contradicting
him. That just is his offence, and not against Sir Henry Parkes only
but against the country, for it means rash, reckless incompetence at the
helm, and the imminent result shipwreck. There could be for him no
greater offence politically than to have his hand where, as in another
sense in his neighbour’s pocket, so decidedly it ought not to be. There
are men whose very presence in Parliament is an offence, but that need
not be said of Mr, Reid, if he would be content with the comparatively
humble and harmless place there for which plainly he was only meant.
He might make a decent sort of midshipmite or (if he would obey orders,
which he never would), as Mr. Copeland once called Mr. Carruthers,
powder-monkey, but as the man at the helm of the ship of State he is
clearly as much out of place as he would be on the driving-box of a
fiery four-in-hand, where indeed we should very much like to see him.
And it cannot be said that he has not had a fair trial. He has had nine
months of it, with perhaps fairer seas and smoother sailing than for so
long a time ever Government had before. For many months it almost
seemed as if the stormy winds of politics had ceased for ever to blow,
A halcyon calm prevailed; the opposition seemed asleep, and never a
ripple stirred the surface save when the labour party splashed or some
hapless Government measure was tumbled from the Upper House into
the deep. And now what is the net result ? Why, that this highly-
favoured Government, which ought fairly to have done more in the time
than any of its predecessors and boasted that it would, is now found to
have done less. Practically of its own motion it has done nothing, for
the Land Bill was the whole Parliament’s work, and most of its other
measures have either perished miserably or been transformed unrecog-
nizably by the way, while the great work which it came into power
specially to do, tariff and taxation reform, remains still undone, or is
only now for the first time attempted. And with what chance of success,
supposing that were desirable? None at all. The work which could
not be so much as set about during nine months it is now proposed to
complete in about half the number of weeks, notwithstanding that it
involves the passing of as many great measures of reform, each and all
necessary for the new financial scheme and any one of which might well
take up the whole time.
Well, the steering which has resulted in landing the ship of State in
such a situation as this would seem indeed to demand a prompt change
in the “hand on the helm,” but there is something more. The new
financial scheme itself, if it could be carried out in the time, is not
required or desirable in the interests of the country, and further, is now
apparently only meant to serve as an excuse for keeping this do-nothing
Government in office. What the country wants just now is not fiscal


change but political rest and relief from harassing uncertainty; what the
Government wants, an excuse for its continued existence. It finds this
in the cry falsely called the country’s cry, for absolute freetrade and
direct taxation, but the country would really be very well satisfied to let its
present system of taxation, at any rate for the present, severely alone, and
now that Sir Henry Parkes has voiced that cry, possibly to some purpose,
the Premier seems not unwilling to change his own note for something
much less absolute. At all events it is no longer “straight freetrade and
straight land and income tax” that he talks about, but both as “crooked”
as the House likes to make them. What else was his meaning when in
his speech the other night he told the House that his budget was
practically in their hands to cut and shape precisely as they pleased ?
And to make the matter clearer there were inspired paragraphs in the
morning papers pointing out how far the House in committee could
amend the Tariff Bill without imperilling the position of the Government,
and specially how “if the committee in its wisdom insists on retaining certain
duties —such as the grain and sugar duties —the position of the Govern-
ment will not be vitally affected.” The committee in its wisdom after this
plain hint probably will so insist, but it would be much better if, to avoid all
this shuffling and virtual bribery and corruption, the House in its wisdom
would insist upon shifting without further to-do the “ man at the helm,”
whose incompetence or worse has brought about the whole trouble.
Overboard must go this political Jonah, if the vessel of the State is not
to drift further and further to inevitable disaster. He has himself set a
strong example of the necessity sometimes of jettisoning dangerous
cargo, and no cargo so dangerous, foul weather or fair, as the wrong
man at the helm.


THE FEDERATION SOMERSAULTS OF THE
“DAILY TELEGRAPH."
The North Sydney , a paper conducted by one of the most
sincere and logical free-traders in the colony, Mr. J. F. Cullen,
late M.P. for St. Leonards, has published the following ex-
amples of the gross inconsistency of the Daily Telegraph
newspaper.
Daily Telegraph , June 24, 1893.
“ Federation is the one big Question which, belonging to no party,
concerns all colonists alike.”
“ It is greater than freetrade or protection —greater than the two
parties combined.”
“ The two parties in the State can therefore associate themselves
with equal ardor in its promotion without sacrifice of consistency or
danger of compromising their loyalty to their respective party shib-
boleths.”
u j£ protectionists are willing to work heartily with the freetrade
party, why should freetraders refuse to accept the assistance they
proffer ?”
Daily Telegraph , June 30, 1893.
“We have never ceased to regard federation as a greater question
that either freetrade or protection, and we cannot regard without regret
any attempt on the part of the freetrade party to discount their federation
enthusiasm of two or three years ago in favour of snatching a free-
trade victory.”
“ Freetraders have always been willing to submit their principles to
the test of the commonwealth vote, believing that the voice of United
Australia would be for the freedom of trade.”
“If there should be any attempt on the part of freetraders to
‘ side-track ’ federation by shunting freetrade in front of it they may
delay the consummation of Australian federation.”


TURNER AND HENDERSON, PRINTERS, HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.


