

i i • I;;,i c * •
. i j{ .o. . > I--' X : • .jJ"
/T L § 'jit * >
■; ■■Sh t % ; ? 7 1 :■ I '. v
The “Blaxland Galleries
eighth and ninth floors, new building’
Farmer $ Company, limited
Officially Opened
16 September, 19^9
by His Excellency the State Governor,
Admiral Sir Dudley de,Chair; jccb.,m.v;o.
Sydney,
N.S.W.


; > .' ■ : a ,
i
*
' |? i * • ft; , * - - . % ' , f ' ' ; " I
«. • :> * ■ | (






FARMER (S COMPANY, LIMITED
PITT, MARKET 8 GEORGE STREETS
SYDNEY, N.SAV.
Established 1840


The March of Progress
ROBABLY no phase in the romantic history of Farmer
& Company, Limited, has culminated in such a signi-
ficant achievement as that marked by the completion
of the imposing new premises on the corner of Market
and George Streets. Few businesses, in their develop-
ment, have so vividly epitomised the March of
Progress.
The present firm of Parmer & Company, Limited, originated
with Mr. Joseph Parmer in 1840. Mr. Farmer with his wife
had arrived from England shortly before, and opened a business
in George Street, Parramatta, then the seat of the Government.
In 1845 he acquired a lease of premises at 221 Pitt Street, a site
now included in the present Pitt Street frontage. From this tiny
leasehold has grown the valuable freehold block of Farmer &
Company, Limited, covering li acres and fronting Pitt, Market
and George Streets.
MANY PARTNERSHIPS
Mr. Joseph Farmer carried on the business until 1849, and was
able to acquire the freehold of two of the three blocks —no small
matter in those days. In 1849 he leased the premises to Messrs.
Price, Favenc, and Gwyn, and brought his nephew, Mr. William
Farmer —afterwards Sir William Parmer—from England to watch
his interests. The new firm only remained in business five years,
a period during which gold was discovered in Australia. When
their lease expired in 1854, Mr. William Farmer assumed con-
trol, with Messrs. Williams and Giles as partners.
In 1856, when there were 17 employees, the late Mr. John Pope
was engaged. His partnership continued until 1860, when Messrs.
Williams and Giles retired, and another partner, Mr. Painter, was
introduced. Mr. John Pope was admitted to the firm in 1865, and
four years later Mr. Painter retired to England.
A new partnership for 10 years, commencing September Ist, 1869,
was now entered into by the remaining partners, Messrs. Joseph
Parmer, William Farmer, and John Pope.
Eighteen Forty-nine
TWO


Eighteen Fifty-four
The admission of two junior partners, Messrs. G. P. Fitzgerald
and William Seaward on 31st January, 1874, resulted in a new
partnership of 10 years. It was during this partnership that
the founder of the original business, Mr. Joseph Farmer, defin-
itely retired.
FLOTATION OF A COMPANY
The next partnership, Messrs. William Parmer, John Pope, and
William Seaward continued until 31st December, 1894, when Mr.
Seaward retired. A new partnership which was then arranged,
was brought to a conclusion on sth February, 1897, by the
flotation of the business into a limited liability company, under
the name of Parmer & Company, Limited. The first annual
report of the Company gives the following as Directors:—Sir
William Farmer (Chairman), Mr. John Pope (Managing Director),
Messrs. E. S. Perry, S. Taylor, J. Vallentine, Park W. Pope,
John Charles.
In 1854, when the 24 feet frontage had been increased to 46 feet,
a novelty in the form of a shipment of plate-glass was imported,
and a new window-front erected to Pitt Street, with two main
entrances.
From 1854 to 1860 a lease of the adjoining premises on the
southern side with a frontage of 52 feet to Pitt Street, was secured
from William Moffitt. These premises were leased continuously
by the business until 1906, when the freehold was acquired by
Farmer & Company, Limited, prior to the erection of the present
main building in Pitt Street. In 1860 at the conclusion of the
Farmer, Williams, and Giles partnership, extensive alterations
to the buildings were instituted over the full 98 feet frontage,
and in November of that year the premises were re-opened with
a special display of £ 80,000 worth of merchandise. This was
chiefly purchased by the late Mr. Pope, who had been specially
sent to London in 1859 to represent the firm there for three
years. Premises were also leased at 291 and 293 George Street,
which, being opened for business by the firm, thus provided the
public, for the first time, with a means of reaching George
Street from Pitt Street.
THREE


“Victoria House,** 1913
"Victoria House”
Additional premises were leased in 1867 on the southern side
of the existing Pitt Street building. After a few years the whole
of the premises in Pitt Street were demolished, and a modern
warehouse erected on the site with a frontage to Pitt Street
of 138 ft and a depth of 140 ft. The foundation-stone was laid by
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, of Darling Point, on 20th September,
1873. The new “Victoria House” opened for business in 1874. It
was beautifully designed, and many people still living remember
the imposing facade of the red brick which fronted Pitt Street.
The display windows were placed at some little distance from
the footpath, and were protected by a colonnade of arches sup-
ported by polished granite pillars, while a white marble bust of
Queen Victoria, in whose honour the building was named, ap-
peared in a niche over the principal entrance.
In 1874, Sir William Parmer returned to England to live, revisiting
Australia in 1894, and as late as 1907.
The New Premises
In 1910 the whole building was demolished once more, and the
present six-storey structure erected in its place. In 1913 the
Company purchased from the Burdekin Estate a large block of
adjoining land, with frontages to George Street and Market
Street, and in 1916 the freehold of Roberts Hotel, at the corner
of Market and George Streets was acquired. Finally the freehold
of the present George Street premises was secured in 1920, so
that the Company now owns the freehold of the whole of the
property, with frontages of 173 feet to Pitt Street, 322 feet to
Market Street, and 168 feet to George Street, giving an area of
upwards of 54,000 square feet, equivalent to U acres.
A disastrous fire which broke out of 20th December, 1918, resulted
in the total demolition of the buildings, including Roberts’ Hotel.
As the Company was not ready to commence building operations
on this land, permission was obtained from the City Council
for the erection of temporary display windows, which remained
until April, 1925, when a contract was signed by Howie, Moffat
and Co., Ltd., contractors, to complete the first portion of the new
premises, from designs prepared by Messrs. Robertson and Marks,
Architects.
The “Blaxland” Galleries are situated on the Bth and 9th Floors
of this building.


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
"OREVO R D
Y some alchemy, the spirit of the City selects and blends
memories of the past with experiences of the present
and hopes for the future.”
These words—which are taken from a work called “ The
Making of the Future”—came into my mind when the
Directors of Farmer £s? Company, Limited, invited me to write
a foreword to this brochure. In naming the new galleries
“ Blaxland ” and associating them with the lives of the two
pioneers, John and Gregory, they have “ blended memories of
the past with experiences of the present,” and, when one looks
’round on the spacious galleries devoted to the enrichment of
our artistic life, one can add, they have “hopes for the future.”
The material prosperity of our city is a thing we all hope for;
on it is based our comfort and well-being, but if we lose sight
in our progress of “whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report” we are pursuing a shadow.
We should welcome, therefore, the “Blaxland” Galleries as
an expression of faith by the Directors of Farmer & Company,
Limited. A faith that in opening these galleries they are
contributing something to the cultural life of our city.
In choosing the name of “Blaxland” the Directors have
married a successful past to a successful present. May the
child of this union be a successful future.
CHARLES H. BERTIE, E.R.H.S
10th September 1929.


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
‘Blaxland Galleries
The choice of “Blaxland” as the name for the spacious floors
that constitute the Galleries, the Directors of Farmer &
Company, Limited feel, will be applauded by those who, inher-
ently appreciate the need of fostering a sound Australian senti-
ment. They believe, also, that greater still will be the acclaim of
generations to come, when, through such practical monuments
to the pioneers of Australia’s nationhood, a genuine and wider
patriotism is aroused.
The “Blaxland” Galleries are not merely the upper stories of
a great commercial institution put to use, but the consum-
mation of an idea, which, it is hoped, will exert far-reaching
effects on the arts and industry of this city.
The selection of the name “Blax-
land” —to the elimination of those
usually accepted titles for such
halls, was the outcome of many
hours’ research and the studious
thought of those best fitted to
the task. And, in the ultimate
choice, the Directors feel that,
while dignity has been added to
the House of Parmer’s, equally
has honour been done to an illus-
trious family whose bravery and
perseverance in the early days
of the colony accomplished so
much towards founding the
happiness and prosperity enjoyed
in this great community to-day.
The magnificent lamps of
chaste bronze and opal glass
were imported at no little
cost to do justice to their
setting


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
The spaciousness of the new floors will be appreciated when
the actual measurements of the areas embraced in the
Galleries are considered;
Length, George Street Frontage—lo 7 feet.
Length, Market Street Frontage—l 79 feet.
Area (less light-well in S.E. Corner) —18,253 sq. feet.
When the new building, in course of erection on the site of the
Company’s present old George Street premises, is completed, an
additional area of 62 feet x 179 feet will have been added.
Thus, the ultimate total area of the great eighth floor will
be 29,351 square feet.
From the eight to ninth floor the columns rise 14 feet; and
from the parquetry of the eighth to the glass ceiling of the
Galleries, the majestic height of over 25 feet is reached.
Above this again is the main light-well, a further 15 feet in
height and scientifically constructed to admit the maximum of
sunlight to both floors.
Eastern Gallery, ninth floor.
On the ninth floor, the east and west galleries are 60 feet x 84 feet
and 30 feet x 84 feet, respectively; and, when the additions now
under construction are completed, they will measure 60 feet x 114
feet and 30 feet x 114 feet.
The areas of the upper galleries at present are
Eastern Gallery—s,o4o square feet.
Western Gallery—2,s2o square feet.
When the new structure is complete:
Eastern Gallery—6,B4o square feet.
Western Gallery—3,42o square feet.
The total approximate area of the two floors of the “Blaxland”
Galleries at present is 36,911 square feet, and, ultimately, will
be 39,611 square feet.
The whole is substantially constructed of steel and concrete,
with a rich exterior facing of Hawkestaury sandstone. The floors
of oak parquetry are set on concrete, and, with the building,
will outlast this and many future generations.


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
John Blaxland, Pioneer of the
Cattle Industry in Australia,
Gregory Blaxland, Discoverer of
the Blue Mountains Pass.
THE FAMILY HISTORY
Blaxland estates in Kent and the Isle of Thanet dated back
to the dawn of Christianity in Britain. The family had
always been fairly important and it was a John Blaxland who,
in 597 A.D., had welcomed St. Augustine. A “gifts,” or grant
of land, exchanged hands, and on Blaxland property the first
English Abbey was built. Six centuries later, we read of a
certain Knight Templar, a Gregory de Blaxland, who accom-
panied Richard, Coeur de Lion, on the Third Crusade. And
finally, on 4th January, 1769, the curtain rises on the most
important phase of all the family history, with the birth of
John Blaxland, Australian Pioneer.
Back to
St. Augustine.
John Blaxland
trains for the
Army.
The brothers
decide to
emigrate.
EARLY DAYS IN ENGLAND
When Captain Cook cast anchor in Botany Bay, John Blaxland
was sixteen months old. As a boy, he attended King’s
School, Canterbury, and later on, as the fashion was, trained
for the army. Here, he rose to the rank of Captain in the
Duke of York’s Cavalry, but resigned on the death of his
father and, being the eldest son, succeeded to the family
Estates. Meanwhile, on 4th June, 1778, a brother Gregory
had been born.
SIR JOSEPH BANKS
Sir Joseph Banks
In 1805, John, aged 36, Gregory aged 27,
for some inexplicable reason, decided to
emigrate to Australia. We can imagine
that the enthusiasm of Sir Joseph Banks,
upon whose advice they acted, had much
to do with the decision. A certain spirit
of adventure must have prompted them,
too.


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
FEW FREE SETTLERS
But, even so, in New South Wales, at the time, unexplored,
undeveloped as it was—an eighteen-year-old colony, made
up of Government officials, soldiers, and a medley of the worst
types of convicts England happened to be burdened with at
the moment, there was little, indeed, to attract such pros-
perous and well-to-do English gentlemen as John and Gregory.
Free settlers were few and far between. The British Govern-
ment welcomed the Blaxlands with open arms. Here were
ardent agriculturists proposing to emigrate and invest £ 8,000.
These were the men to be encouraged.
The Convict
Colony
GREGORY SAILS
Free passage in
convict ship
Gregory accepted the Government’s
“free passage” and was first to em-
bark on the 12,000-mile voyage. He
sailed on the “William Pitt,” a
female convict ship carrying 400
souls. Even for those days the voyage
was a fearful experience—-scores died
from small-pox. It is difficult to
understand how Gregory and his
wife, accustomed to the more luxur-
ious amenities of life from earliest
childhood, managed to survive the
appalling conditions.
The “William Pitt”
Amazing
inventory of
pioneer.
Gregory quarrels
with
Governor King.
Position of
free settlers.
ARRIVAL IN N.S.W
They landed in Sydney on 11th April, 1806. They were enter-
prising pioneers and with them came two English sheep-dogs
(among the first brought to Australia), seven Spanish sheep,
four bulls, cases of plants, hops growing in boxes, a swarm of
bees and such essentials as glass, lead, cutlery, flint, nails,
ploughs, and three steel corn-mills.
GREGORY—OPPORTUNIST
As Gregory found difficulty in storing his
goods, King allowed him to use the
Government Stores. This went on till
the Governor discovered, that, taking a
broad-minded view of the privilege, the
new settler was using the store as a
trading depot. Permission to select 40
cows from the Government herds was
successful in directing Gregory’s atten-
tion from petty-trading to cattle-raising,
Governor King
FRICTION WITH GOVERNORS
The Blaxlands were never at any time popular with the
Governors, though they imagined —and rightly enough, too
- —that they were a boon to the colony. The Governors, on
the other hand, naval captains for the most part, had little
sympathy for their type of free settler, to whom a severe code
of military discipline could not be applied.


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
Sydney Cove, 1803
JOHN BLAXLAND SETTLES IN SYDNEY
In the meantime, John had finalised affairs in England. The
sale of estates brought just on £ 30,000. £ 8,000 of this was to
go to New South Wales. He was to be allowed 8,000 acres of
land, the use of 80 convicts (one for every hundred acres) for
eighteen months at Government expense, and as usual, was
offered “free passage” and freight for his family and goods,
Gregory’s “free passage” was enough to make John decide to
sail in a private vessel.
Sale of
family estates.
The Brothers’
In "The Brothers,” Blax
land was a joint share-
holder with the firm of
Hulletts Brothers, Lon-
don. She sailed \7th
October, 1806, and ar-
rived ird April, 1807.
He took a half-share in a whaler called “The Brothers.” His
wife and four daughters braved the six-months voyage,
together with a governess, two female servants, a bailiff, a car-
penter, a man for agricultural purposes, and a boy. In paying
his own passage, John had relinquished the advantage of
rations, and other “privileges.” He felt himself justified, there-
fore, in applying for further concessions on arrival. These
Bligh was instructed to afford, much against his will.
John sails in
private vessel.
IN BLIGH’S BLACK BOOKS
It was not long before Blaxland was in
Bligh’s black books. In dispatches Bligh
waxes indignant. “John Blaxland,” he
T rouble
Bligh..
writes, “cares for nothing but making
money. He buys cheap and sells dear —he
deals in milk and fat cattle instead of
farming—instead of using 80 convicts for
eighteen months, he proposes to use
twenty for six years.”
Governor Bligh


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
A HOME IN HIGH STREET
T , jjj j j Notwithstanding the hostility of a biassed administration,
j°on ax an however, John Blaxland soon proved himself a “model of tausi-
makes a home ne ss acumen and honourable dealing.” As his brother had done
in George St. the previous year, John took up residence in George Street
(then High Street). The exact location is not known. In 1807,
however, by a series of letters it appears that John Blaxland
had on lease from a certain Sergeant John Fleming two blocks
of land abutting upon Market Street, which at the time only
extended as far as High Street. (See Appendix).
Plan of Sydney, 1807. Blaxland’s leases marked in
black. See Appendix, Note 2.
A STRANGE COINCIDENCE
On present site Consulting Meehan’s plan of the city (1807), one of the blocks
of Farmer 6- of land is seen to occupy the present position of Parmer’s New
’ ‘ \ T ,i Building. Letters show that on this block stood the house,
Company, Lta. and garden of John Blaxland. The block on the opposite
side of George Street, then “High” Street, was used as a stock-
yard. “Queen Victoria” Buildings now occupy the site.
UNDER THE FOOTPATH
n A fascinating discovery was made
, 7 j during the excavations for Par-
uneartbea. mer’s present New Building in
1925, when an old oven was un-
earthed beneath the footpath. The
bricks were obviously older than
any others previously found in
Sydney, and everything points to
this having been part of the
original Blaxland homestead.
AN AUSTRALIAN ANTIQUITY
Seven feet This remarkable oven, an Australian “antiquity,” was left
a f . intact, and to-day, lies beneath the footpath about twenty-five
un er 5 ’ feet from the southern wall of Parmer’s “Gift Shop.” Thousands
pass over it unbeknowing, each day, as they enter beneath
the arch of the George Street entrance into Parmer’s New
Building. The roof is about three feet under the level of the
footpath, while the floor is about four feet lower still. The
oven extends seven feet under the street.
ELEVEN


NO MERE BUTCHER
The Pioneer
of cattle
industry
He was no mere butcher, though. His position in pastoral
development is unique. The Australian Encyclopaedia sums
it up: “John Blaxland was .... one of the few early settlers
to dissociate himself as far as possible from local politics. His
object in life was to develop his properties and businesses;
at Luddenham near the Nepean and near Broke on the Wol-
lombi, he bred and fattened cattle which were slaughtered
and salted down at Newington, his headquarters on the
Parramatta River HE WAS AS TRULY A PIONEER IN
THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
Cottage and dairy of John Blaxland —a reconstruction
BLAXLAND PIONEERS CATTLE INDUSTRY
On the above mentioned site, stood John Blaxland’s home
Blaxland milks and Sydney’s first large dairy. Milk was supplied at moderate
29 cows. rates and a butter and cheese factory was established. John
Blaxland writes: “We milk 29 cows and sell the milk to the
inhabitants which is very eagerly sought after, particularly by
the poorer classes; and to secure the whole of the return
from our stock we have opened a butcher’s shop and sell meat
3d. per pound lower than any other person.” Blaxland knew
his business.
CATTLE-RAISING AS MACARTHUR WAS IN SHEEP
CALAMITY
"Broken
Illustrative of the minor trials
and tribulations of Mrs. Blax-
land’s early Sydney existence, a
pathetic story is told of a con-
signment of beautiful cut-glass
and china. It was packed in
casks, and as there were no carts
available, these were rolled home
from the wharf. Every article was
smashed to atoms.
THE GRANT OF “NEWINGTON”
The grant of The “Sydney Gazette,” the Colony’s only newspaper—a
"Newington” semi-Government publication—reports on June 12th, 1807:
F , “Whereas his Excellency the Governor (Bligh) has granted to
John Blaxland a certain tract of land known as Newington
Farm, bounded by the road to Parramatta, Duck River, Hack-
ing’s Creek, and the River, all persons are required not to
trespass.”
TWELVE


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
f V u■ i -V ;w r-
V v
‘Newington” House, Newington, Sydney
A social
centre.
The first
successful Salt
Works.
B one-crushing
Mill.
Lime Works.
Corned Meat
Factory,
John Blaxland founded the Col-
ony’s first successful Salt Works.
Before this, supplies of imported
salt were not only uncertain, taut
almost prohibitively priced. And
it is certain the establishment of
a local salt-works had much to do
with preserving a healthy con-
dition among the early settlers.
Eight tons of clear white powdery
salt were sent down to Sydney
from Newington each week.
“NEWINGTON” FARM
John Blaxland here built the celebrated “Newington” House —
now a Government hospital and asylum. This became a
veritable social centre in the Colony, to which flocked all the
“best people,” including Governors, Bishops, Naval and Military
men. Many an historic ball and dinner was given by the House
in the heyday of its fame.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SALT WORKS
He also built a bone-crushing mill, a lime-works, and a large
salting-down factory which provided corned meat for shipping.
Extensive abbatoirs and cattle-yards were part of his business.
He was successful, too, in sowing hemp and flax, though he
dabbled little in the cultivation of cereals. Cattle occupied
most of the brothers’ attention, and Bligh refers to the
partnership as follows: —
Typical Lime Kilns.
BLIGH’S REFERENCE
“The Blaxlands seemed to turn
their minds principally to grazing,
and selling the milk of their
cows, and butchers’ meat, which
is attended to by Mr. John Blax-
land in a house in Sydney, where
he now resides, while his brother
remains in the country purchas-
ing live stock. . . Gregory also
appears to have attended to the
Blaxland herds.
THIRTEEN


THE
'BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
George Street, 1833—looking up George Street from King
Street. Arrow marks crossing of Market Street
BLAXLAND VERSUS BLIGH
Bligh A very interesting side-light is thrown on the strained relat-
denonnces ionship existing between Bligh and Blaxland by these extracts
Blaxland. from two letters, the first from Bligh to the Right Honour-
able W. Windham: “The Blaxlands, who lately came out,
became so speculative as to care for nothing taut making
money. They endeavoured to monopolise under the principle
of buying as cheap as they can and selling dear. . . . John
Blaxland is very discontented with what the Government has
granted him, although it is in itself a fortune.
RECIPROCATION
Blaxland The attitude is typical and exaggerated. So, in a lesser degree
denounces is Blaxland ’ s denouncement of Bligh. . . . “The Government is
behaving so very arbitrary that I do not even consider my
personal property safe even a single hour; indeed, I think it
will not be long before I am sent to gaol . . . (The Governor)
selected fifteen of the best men from the Government settle-
ment . . . for his own farm, after having ransacked all the
hospitals to make up my number of twenty-one which is all
the men I have been able to obtain out of eighty allowed by
the Government. Some of these are invalids, and the others
the most atrocious characters.” This was in 1807.
THE VOYAGE HOME
In 1808 John Blaxland sailing for England to air his grievances
John Blaxland, and p ro t e st against the begrudging treatment of the Gover-
S p 5 , nor, was unfortunate enough to 1 be arrested at Cape Town
as one of the mutineers connected with the Bligh rebellion.
For three years he was forced to remain in the Home Country,
but at last succeeded in convincing the authorities that he'
had been dealt with unfairly. He returned with an order for
Macquarie to carry out in full the original agreement. This
the Governor did, but not without a great deal of grumbling.
FOURTEEN


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
J. BLAXLAND, M.L.C.
/. Blaxland, Governor Darling, in 1829, nominated John Blaxland to the
M.L.C. Legislative Council. He sat from January 30th, 1829, till its
dissolution on January sth, 1843.
THE DEATH OF JOHN BLAXLAND
Death of On Au § us t sth, 1845, a gloom was cast on the community of
/. Blaxland. Sydney and Parramatta. It was announced that Hon. John
Blaxland had passed away. He was 78 years of age. The news-
papers of the day expressed public esteem. “By his family and
friends, he was universally beloved; by the public he was
highly respected and admired for his uniform good sense,
consistency and the firmness which marked his political
career.”
APPRECIATION
One of the Thus, it is seen that John Blaxland, one of “the first county-
, ’ men who emigrated to Australia in the pure spirit of enter-
Pioneers prise,” played one of the most important roles in the early
pastoral development of the country. Pounder of Australia’s
Cattle Industry, successful administrator of the first large
dairy, slaughter-house and salted-meat factory, builder of the
first salt-pans, sower and hemp and flax, he was perhaps the
most enterprising of all the early settlers.
But his work was not the type to gain popular acclaim. His
splendid class of pioneering effort rarely is. Gregory remains
the hero.
A MEMORIAL TABLET
rr ln On the wall of St. John’s Church of England, Parramatta, is
Memoriam.” a marble tablet erected to the memory of John Blaxland and
his descendants. The main portion of the memorial is seen
below forming the centre-piece of an ornament. For the in-
scription borne by the tablet, see Appendix, Note 5.
FIFTEEN


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
GREGORY BLAXLAND
His Epic Exploration
A superb The single but epoch-making achievement of Gregory Blaxland
achievement. will continue to grip the public imagination more and more
as the years throw early Australian History into truer per-
spective.
A GIGANTIC TASK
Even to-day, there are relatively few who realise the tremen-
dous task it was to find a pass, or, really, the only pass,
across the Blue Mountains and the truly gigantic effect that
the discovery had on the future development of the continent.
The path that Blaxland pioneered in 1813 is the only one in
hundreds of miles. To-day, road and rail follow his route
almost exactly. No other pass seems to exist.
FRANK WALKER WRITES
rr A veritable “That country (the Blue Mountain region), containing some
Godsend.” of the m ost rugged and forbidding elements in the world,
will be associated with him for countless generations to come.
His work was carried out with marvellous courage and per-
severance ... he eventually opened up thousands of acres of
arable land, which only awaited his discovery to be occupied
by settlers to whom the success of the expedition was a veri-
table Godsend. Blaxland’s wonderful achievement changed the
hitherto restricted area of settlement into a vast continent
teeming with riches, and giving promise of even greater riches
in the years to come.”
SIXTEEN


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
Typical
Blue Mountain
Scenery
Gregory’s
theory.
Little help
from
Macquarie.
He mentioned the idea to His Excel-
lency, Governor Macquarie, who
“thought it reasonable and wished me
to attempt it, and requested two other
gentlemen to accompany me ... it
was proposed by one of them that I
should apply to His Excellency to lend
us a false horizon for which I did apply
but it was refused. I also called on him
a few days before we were ready to set
out. I could not see him in the morn-
ing, taut was asked to dinner.
LUKE-WARM ENCOURAGEMENT
The expedition itself, and the strangely hostile attitude of
Macquarie towards Blaxland, is better understood by reading
these extracts from a letter Gregory wrote to Sir Joseph
Banks. After preliminary expeditions with several Euro-
pean servants and natives, Blaxland “formed the idea
that if he could get on the high land on the right-hand side
of the north bank of the Western river ... he must inevi-
tably be carried into the interior of the country.”
GOVERNOR MACQUARIE
Governor Macquarie
“RESERVEDNESS OF MANNER”
Macquarie
jealous?
T did not mention the subject to him nor did he mention it
iiimself, which I expected he would have done. When I took leave
in the evening I informed him we intended setting out imme-
diately. He wished us success, but there was a reservedness in
tils manner which I could not account for.
SEVENTEEN


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
Showing River Systems, present road and railway, and
Blaxland’s original route shown in solid black.
Three weeks to
penetrate. 5 8
miles.
GREGORY’S ACCOUNT
“In a few days after my dining with His Excellency we set
out on our expedition with four European servants, four
horses and some dogs. In about three weeks we penetrated
nearly 8 miles beyond the mountains. By keeping the runs of
water which emptied themselves into the Western river on our
left hand, and the runs of water which emptied them-
selves into the River Grose on our right hand, until we came
to the top of the mountains, when we were forced to go about
25 miles along their western side along a steep precipice round
the foot of Mount Banks to the northward before we could find
a passage between the rocks to get our horses through on to
the earth that laid against the side of the mountain.
Macqtiarie’s
conduct
inexplicable.
Gregory’s
further
offer.
LACK OF RECOGNITION
“When I returned I called on the Governor and informed him
of our success. He did not doubt my statement, but appeared
dissatisfied, since I have had reason to suppose he neither ex-
pected nor wished us to succeed. That must remain in doubt.
His conduct to me ever since has been perfectly inexplicable. He
has endeavoured to give to others as much of the merit due
to us as possible. He has named the pass down the mountains
with another person’s name who only followed our steps, and
also a river at the foot of the mountains we discovered, with
the same person’s name, which may leave it in doubt to
posterity who were the real discoverers.
GREGORY APPEALS
“I have memorialed Lord Bathurst on
the subject and offered to explore the
interior of the country further, in any
direction possible that might be re-
quired, but I have heard nothing further
respecting it, nor have I received an
answer, j remain, etc.”
. . . Letter to J. Banks from G. 8.,
'Brush Farm, November 10, 1816.
See Appendix. Note 4
Lieutenant Lawson
EIGHTEEN


' had just been killed by an eagle.
A small patch of grass supplied
the horses for the night.
Precipitous
cliffs.
.
. . . Every ridge which they explored, proved to termin-
ate
al a deep rocky precipice; and they had no alternative
but
to return to the thick brush-wood, which appeared to
be
the main ridge, with the determination to cut a way
through for the horses on the next day. This day, some of
the horses, while standing fell several times under their loads.
T edious
“ .
. . . They began to make their track by cutting the bark
FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
Title Page of Gregory’s Journal,
published in 1823
THE JOURNAL OF
GREGORY i BLAXLAND
These extracts from Blaxland’s
Journal, published in 1823, bring
very vividly to mind the difficul-
ties which at every turn must
have beset the explorers. The
Journal, though in the third per-
son, was written by Gregory
Blaxland.
T remendous
difficulties.
“ In the evening they en-
camped at the head of a deep
gulley, which they had to descend
for water; they found taut just
enough for the night, contained
in a hole in the rock, near which
they met with a kangaroo, who
had just been killed by an eagle.
A small patch of grass supplied
the horses for the night.
No ivater.
' of the trees on two sides. Having cut their way for about
progress. fi ve mileS; tlie y returned in the evening to the spot on which
they had encamped the night before. The fifth day was spent
in prosecuting the same tedious operation.
“ . . . they found a pyrama-
dical heap of stones . . . .
This pile they concluded to
be the one erected by Mr.
Bass* to mark the end of his
journey . . . but having got
thus far, he gave up the
undertaking as impractic-
able; reporting on his re-
turn, that it was impossible
to find a passage even for a
person on foot.
Impassable
barrier.
M 1 NV 6 Malang
{ 0 “ ... . But their progress
in both the latter directions
was stopped by an impass-
able barrier of rock, which
appeared to divide the in-
terior from the coast, as
with a stone wall, rising
perpendicularly out of the
side of the mountain.
"Impossible
find a
passage”
OrtueH* ,
* <5
Distances and Route of explorers
reconstructed by Mr. F. Walker.
! See Appendix. Note 5*
NINETEEN


View of Mount “Blaxland
EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL
“ .... In the evening, they contrived to get their horses down
the mountain, by cutting a small trench with a hoe, which
kept them from slipping, where they again tasted fresh grass
for the first time since they left the forest land on the other
side of the mountain.”
Dotvn
Mountains.
Grassland for the And finall y- •■ • “They descried all around, forest or grass land,
stock of the sufficient in extent, in their opinion, to support the stock of the
Colony for the Colony for the next thirty years. This was the extreme point
"next thirty of their journey. The distance they had travelled, they corn-
years.” puted, at about fifty-eight miles nearly north-west; that is,
fifty miles through the mountain (the greater part of which
they had walked over three times), and eight miles through
the forest land beyond it, reckoning the descent of the moun-
tain to be half-a-mile to the foot.”
LATER LIFE OF
GREGORY
A reward
Government recognition of the
feat went to the extent of offering-
each of the party, Blaxland, Went-
worth and Lawson, a grant of
1,000 acres of land. Gregory sold
his rights to John Connell for 5/-
per acre.
Explorers’ Tree , Katoomba. Only
the stump now remains
twenty
5
GALLERIE
"BLAXLAND ”
THE


FARMER & COMPANY, LIMITED
Statue of
Gregory Blaxland,
S.W. corner Depart
ment of Lands,
Sydney
SETTLES AT “BRUSH FARM”
Settles at
He then settled at “Brush Farm,” on the Parramatta River,
on land which he had acquired some years previously from
one William Cox. This man, a military officer, later construc-
ted the first road over the Blue Mountains, closely following
Gregory’s original route.
"Brush Farm.
Makes fiirst
xvinel
At “Brush Farm” Gregory planted a vineyard—importing
vines from the Cape —and made the first Australian wine.
For this he was awarded a gold and silver medal by the
Royal Society of Arts in England, at present in Mitchell Library.
Cattle
fodder!
He experimented with cattle and sheep fodder and was first to
cultivate oats for hay, and buffalo-grass. He established salt-
pans at Newcastle.
In January, 1827, the “Third Grand Colonial Assembly of
Australia’’ chose Gregory Blaxland to take to England and
present to the House of Commons a petition demanding Trial
by Jury and Representative Government.
Represents
Australia!
DEATH OF GREGORY BLAXLAND
Death of
Gregory.
Gregory finally settled on the ridge above Ryde, near Parra-
matta, where he died at “The Hermitage,” on January Ist, 1853.
The Vineyards at “Brush Farm’"
TWENTY-ONE


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Directors are desirous of expressing thanks to the fol-
lowing gentlemen whose corroboration in the assembling of
historical fact and reference so materially facilitated the com-
pilation of this brochure. In particular, acknowledgment is due
to Mr. Guy Blaxland and other members of the Blaxland family
resident in the State.
. To Mr. G. H. Bertie, P.R.H.S., of the Municipal Librarv,
upon whose knowledge of historical facts was based the final de-
cision to call the Galleries by the name of “Blaxland” . . . who
not only lent books from the Municipal Library, but also made
available private notes and many references from his own personal
collection of Australiana. To Mr. Bertie’s advice is also due the
general authenticity of illustration in this booklet.
. . . . To Mr. F. Walker, ex-President of the Australian His-
torical Society, for permission to reproduce photographs and
maps reconstructing Gregory Blaxland’s route over the mountains.
. . . . To Mr. Hugh Wright of the Mitchell Library, for ren-
dering available newspaper cuttings and a pencil sketch of
Gregory Blaxland.
. . . . To the Reverend S. M. Johnstone, rector of St. John’s
Church, Parramatta for permission to photograph the Blaxland
Memorial Tablet.
SOURCES CONSULTED
Australian Encyclopaedia, Vol. 1.
Bladen’s Historical Records of N.S.W., Vol. 6.
Newspaper Cuttings.
Diary of Gregory Blaxland.
Notes on Diary by Mr. F. Walker.
Original Notes by Mr. Bertie, F.R.H.S.
Memorial Tablet, St. John’s Church, Parramatta.


An Exhibition
PICTURES AND PRINTS
EARLY SYDNEY
AND
NEW SOUTH WALES
Further to stimulate the growing interest of the present
generation in the pioneer days of the State, the Opening of
the "Blaxland” Galleries was deemed the opportune moment
to hang an authoritative group of early prints and pictures.
Surely no more graphic evidence of the remarkably rapid
growth of this city and its hinterland could be forthcoming,
than is disclosed in this collection.
Therefore, visitors to the Galleries to-day, and over the
ensuing fortnight, are specially directed to this exhibition.
Endeavour has been made to hang the exhibits in chrono-
logical order, from 1790 to 185 5, without regard to media.
Therefore, while the Exhibition is rich in artistic merit, it,
primarily, is one of historical intent.
The Directors of Farmer & Company, Limited express their
thanks to those many private collectors and others who so
enthusiastically loaned the exhibits or assisted in establishing
their authenticity.
Twenty-three;


THE "BLAXLAND” GALLERIES
APPENDIX
NOTE 1, MEMORIAL TABLET
IN AFFECTIONATE MEMORY OF
THE HON. JOHN BLAXLAND, M.L.C.
of NEWINGTON, LUDDENHAM & PORDWICH, for twenty years a mem-
ber of the GOVERNOR’S COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA. As a man he was
valued and beloved; as a legislator honoured and revered. BORN at
PORDWICH, in KENT, JANUARY 4th 1769, DIED AUGUST sth 1845 at
NEWINGTON. He was the first county man who emigrated to AUS-
TRALIA in the pure spirit of enterprise, and thousands have been blest
in his much enduring achievement. In 1806 he entered upon the
gigantic work of colonization, and chartered a ship for his family and
dependents and came to Sydney in the same spirit of piety with which
his ancestor JOHN BLAXLAND, of BLAXLAND TOWERS, ISLE OP
THANET, went forth to present ST. AUGUSTINE with a “GIFTS” (a
grant of land) for the future ABBEY OP ST. AUGUSTINE to emplant
more firmly our glorious faith in his Fatherland; and REGINALD DE
BLAXLAND with RICHARD THE FIRST, to fight for the HOLY SEP-
ULCHRE, to these their descendant, built a church for the worship of
ALMIGHTY GOD in this then heathen land (ST. AUGUSTINE, NEW-
INGTON). And to the beloved memory of HARRIET his wife (nee DE
MARQUET), BORN in CALCUTTA, MAY 31st, 1777, DIED in SYDNEY,
JANUARY 7th, 1852. They may be regarded as of those leading the van
of the Anglo-Saxon race in the onward march of civilization, Christian-
ity and all the blessings that follow in their train. This tablet is raised
by their beloved child LOUISA AUSTRALIA BLAXLAND. Also in dear
remembrance of ELIZA MARIA, their fifth daughter, wife of GEN. H. W.
BRETON, BORN in SYDNEY, DECEMBER 28th 1808, DIED APRIL 15th,
1884. Also in memory of DE MARQUET BLAXLAND, their eldest son,
BORN JANUARY 3rd 1800, DIED MAY 31st 1840, in SYDNEY.
LOUISA AUSTRALIA BLAXLAND, DIED AUGUST 2nd 1888
ANNA ELIZABETH, second daughter of the above, widow of
THOMAS WALKER, D.A.C.G., DIED DECEMBER 20th, 1889.
TN TRUE AND HUMBLE FAITH IN GOD’S MERCY, THROUGH JESUS
CHRIST OUR LORD, THEY REST TILL THE DAY BREAK, AND THE
SHADOWS PASS AWAY.”
NOTE 2, PLAN OF SYDNEY
The two blocks marked in black on the plan on page 11 were those sub-
leased by John Blaxland from John Fleming in 1807. The street which
runs from Soldiers Middle Row to High Street is now known as Market
Street. High Street is the present George Street and Camden Street
becomes Castlereagh Street. Sydney Cove is Circular Quay, while Cockle
Bay has since attained to the more euphonious title of Darling Harbour.
Market Street, which in 1807, stopped at High Street, was later extended
to Pitt Street through Blaxland’s property, thus forming Parmer’s
George Street corner, the present site of the “Blaxland” Galleries.
NOTE 3, ORNAMENT
The centre-piece of the ornament at the foot of page 4, is drawn from a
mural plaque which was originally set up in “Victoria House” in 1873.
In 1912 it was placed in its present position on the wall of Parmer’s
Tea Rooms, Sixth Floor, Pitt Street.
NOTE 4, WENTWORTH, LAWSON
Gregory Blaxland, aged 35, was the leader of a party including William
Charles Wentworth, then a lad of 19 years, and Lieutenant Lawson.
NOTE 5, MR. BASS AND THE CAIRN
The inference is wrong, for Mr, Bass was never in this part of the
mountains
TWFNTY-FOUR




