

THE
PARRAMATTA
OBSERVER.
APRIL— 1885—MAY.


Copies of Photos taken on board s.s. “ Parramatta’"
nay be obtained from
W. M. WEBSTER & Co.,
135, Malpas Road, Brockley, S.E.
A few copies of the Parramatta Observer BtiU remain, ca “ * e °
application to \ G COURTHOPE, ° felted, 10s. each, post
House, Wickham Road, Brockley, S.E. 1 lam copies, os
free. „ , * -ii ven to the “ Dreadnought ” Merchant
Any profits resulting from the sale will be g v
Seamen’s Hospital. ..


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
NUJVQUAM DORMIO.”
APRIL <Sz MAY, 1885.
LONDON:
PEiNTED BY M°COBQUODALE & CO. LIMITED, “THE ABMOUEY,” SOUTH WABK. S . E .
1885


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
NUNQUAM DORMIO.”
APRIL <&; MAY, 1885.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY M«CORQUODALE & CO. LIMITED, “THE ARMOURY,” SOUTHWARK, S’E.
1885






PASSENGERS PER R.M.S. “PARRAMATTA.”
Sydney to Melbourne.
Mr. Frank Lee
Miss Kite
Mr. and Mrs. Thos. Wilson
Mr. H. Tatham
Miss B. Cruickshank
Mr. G. A. Cruickshank
Mr. W. Wardell
Mr. G. W. Newton
Mr. J. Wilson
Mr. P. I evey
Mr. E. P. 0. Capper
Mrs. Magor
Miss Molony
Mr. E. M. Paul
Rev. J. Murphy
Mr. A. J. Richards
Mr. E. A. E. Woodrow
Mr. and Mrs. A. T. Rees
Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Edwards
Sydney to Glenelg.
Masters Flemming (two)
Sydney to Colombo.
Mr. James Bird
Miss Powell
Sydney to Brindisi or Venice.
Mr. E. P. Capper
Mr. and Mrs. V. J. Owen
Miss Rolfe
Sydney to Gibraltar.
Mrs. Panl, son, and three
daughters
Sydney to London.
Mrs. Cruickshank and three
daughters
Miss Dobbin
Miss R. Dobbin
Mrs. Montague Levey, son,
two daughters, and maid
Mr. R. J. and Miss Alliband
Mrs. R. C. Franks and two
children
Madame Perret
Mr. William Webster
Mr. T. P. Porter
Mr. R. T. Shields
Mr. W. E. Sawbridge
Mrs. M. E. and Miss Armstrong
Mr. Wm. Stanley
Mr. E. J. Sievers
Mr. John Booth
Mr. J. V. Johnson
Mr. H. R. W.
Mr. Wm. Taylor
Mr. John Wright
Mr. F. G. Courthope
Mr. J. L. Nash
Mrs. and Miss Phillips
Miss Busbridge
Mr. and Mrs. David Marks,
seven children, and two
servants
Mr. and Mrs. W. Summers
Sydney to London— continued.
Miss Wilkie
Miss Eva J. T. Pym
Misses Thomas (two)
Mr. Jas. Alexander
Mr. and Mrs. H. Brandon,
Master C. Brandon, Miss
Brandon, seven children,
Miss Sharp, and two
maid servants
Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Flem-
ming and infant
Mr. J. B. Hill
Mr. G. B. Mackenzie
Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Moore-
White, seven children,
and two servants
Capt. W. H. Moseley
Mr. E. G. B. Maxse and ser-
vant
Mr. T. E. S. Gardner
Mr. E. C. Hordern
Miss Hordern
Hon. Chas. Nelson
Melbourne to Glenelg.
Mr. D. Blair
Melbourne to Venice.
Mr. W. E Barratt
Mr. H. C. Bagot
Melbourne to London.
Mr. John and Miss Scott
Mr. S. Nathan


Melbourne to London —continued
Mr. and Mrs. Whitehead
Mr. W. and Miss Welshman
Mr. and Mrs. J. Sharp, daughter,
and two sons
Mrs. Greig and two daughters
Mr. G. F. Belcher
Misses Jebb (two)
Mr. and Mrs. G. Chapman
Mr. H. Markwald
Mr. F. J. Bryant
Mr. C. H. Rendall
Mr. D. Cameron
Mr. J. Wolstenholme
Melbourne to London— continued
Mr. and Mrs. Gavin Gibson,
Mr. Gibson, Jun., three
Misses Gibson, and two
children
Mr. J. C. Manifold
Mrs. Wm. Inglis
Mr. J. Pickles
Mr. and Mrs. D. Mackinnon,
son, and two daughters
Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Toosey
Mrs. Hordern
Miss and Mr. W. Hordern
Mr. Geo. Bargate
Melbourne to London —continued
Miss Smith
Mr. T. E. Smith
Mr. and Mrs. Gunn
Miss Wilson
Albany to London.
Mr. E. C. Shenton
Batavia to London,
Mr. C. G. de Betham
Mr. F. A. L. Popham
S.S. "Panamatta” Amusements Committee.
Capt. W. D. ANDERSON, President.
Capt. W. H. MOSELEY, Chairman.
Mr. H. R. W. WATSON, Hon. Sec.
Rev. Dr. MOORE WHITE
Mr. G. BARGATE
„ J. BOOTH
„ G. CHAPMAN
„ T. E. P. GARDNER
„ D.V. JOHNSON
Mr. D. MARKS
„ T. P. PORTER
„ 0. H. REND ALL
„ W. STANLEY
„ W. SUMMERS
„ W. TAYLOR
Dr. j. Mclennan
Cbrtors xif “ §aramatfa dtorfor-”
Capt. W. H. MOSELEY.
Mr. J. BOOTH.
Mr. F. G. COURTHOPE,


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
“Nunquam Dormio.”
No. 1.
SATURDAY, 11th APRIL, 1885.
In sending forth to our readers the first number of the Parramatta Observer , it
appears desirable to address to them a few words in explanation of the programme of
this Journal. We may state generally that we enter on our task with no high flown
aspirations, and that our aim will be rather to amuse than to instruct. At the same
time, we hope to furnish an occasional article calculated to give useful information to
our readers, of which one in the present issue on “ Ceylon and how to see it,” may serve
as an example.
We trust that those responsible for the amusements on board will supply to our
columns accounts of the various entertainments; and communications on any subjects of
general interest will be welcomed by the Editors.
Arrangements have been made for putting our readers in possession of the latest
news from London, Sydney, Melbourne, and the principal cities of. the world by
special wire, so that they may rely on arriving at their respective destinations thoroughly
conversant with the topics of the day.
In order to provide that piquancy, so essential to the success of marine journalism,
a column headed “ Tittle Tattle from the Tea Table,” will, in future, have a prominent
place, several ladies of literary ability having undertaken to become contributors to this
department of our paper.
Another column, entitled “ Echoes from the Club,” may be expected to furnish a
resume of those discussions on science and morality which are believed to form the
staple of conversation in the smoking saloon.
Besides the foregoing, a “ Varieties ” column claims the attention of our readers, to
the furnishing of which the Poet, the Riddler, and the Acrostic producer are requested
to contribute. Chess and Whist problems will also be gladly received by the Editors,
as well as any contribution calculated to relieve the tedium of a long sea voyage.
A photographic artist of established reputation has undertaken to furnish illustra-
tions for our paper (the first of which will be found in the present number), and sketches
will be cordially welcomed, as such cannot fail to add largely to the attractiveness of a
journal of this character.
With this explanatory preface we make our bow to our readers, asking them, in
conclusion, to do what in them lies to promote the success of the Parramatta Observer.
The Editors desire to draw the attention of readers of this paper to the illustrated
cover which has been prepared for it. This is the work of Mr. G. D. Saunder, one of the
officers of the “ Parramatta,” and it will be universally admitted that it is admirable, alike
in design and execution.


OH ! SCISSORS !
While deploring the scarcity of literary pabulum this week (due, no doubt, to the
very short notice of the first issue of the Parramatta Observer ), the Editors have to thank
those contributors who have furnished them with materials for bringing the journal
before the public, and they hope that for the future the Editors’ box may be kept well
supplied by ladies and gentlemen of literary and artistic ability, of whom there are
believed to be many on board. The Editors’ minds have been considerably exercised
by the discovery in their box of a pair of scissors, which are understood to have been
placed there by Miss K. G—bs—n, and it has been a subject of discussion what was
working in that charming lady’s brain when she made the box the receptacle of this
implement of feminine industry. Had the scissors been accompanied by a paste brush,
she might have wished to convey an imputation of a probable want of originality in the
composition of this journal, which imputation we might have had the opportunity of
rejecting with indignant scorn. But there were only scissors—nothing more. It may,
again, have occurred to our fair young friend to supply us with her idea of sharpness
but this conjecture can hardly be a correct one, inasmuch as when the implement was
tried upon the editorial beards it failed to.make any impression whatever.
We have, therefore, been driven to the conclusion that the intention of the young
lady was to contribute something cutting , and if we are correct in this surmise, we may
be allowed to point out to her what a splendid opportunity is offered to her of exercising
her talents by becoming a regular correspondent with this journal, under the column
of “ Tittle Tattle from the Tea Table.” Should our young friend accept this suggestion,
and furnish us with a succession of keen contributions, it is possible that the life of the
Editors may become not quite “ a happy one,” but the attractiveness of this journal to
the general public will be largely increased, and the publication of future numbers of
the Parramatta Observer will be anxiously awaited.
OUR HOME.
As some account of our present home may not be uninteresting to our fellow
lodgers, the following details have been ascertained. The S.S. “ Parramatta ” was built at
Greenock, by Messrs. Caird and Cos., and launched in November, 1882. Her length is
420 feet, her breadth 43 feet, and her depth 34 feet. The gross tonnage is 4,737,
and the nett registered tonnage is 2,684. She is built of steel, and brig rigged. Her
engines are of the usual compound kind, of 4,000 horse-power. Her cylinders are, one
of 56 inches, the other 100 inches in diameter, both having a stroke of 66 inches. On
her trial trip, with her engines going at 61 revolutions per minute, a speed of knots
per hour was attained. Her daily consumption of coal is about 55 tons. She is
constructed with eight bulk-heads, which are all thoroughly water-tight, so that, any
compartment being filled with water, the vessel would still retain sufficient buoyancy to
float with perfect safety. Her crew numbers 186 all told, divided as follows, viz :66 in
the Engineer’s, 62 in the deck, and 58 in the Purser’s departments, respectively. The
officers are :
W. D. ANDERSON, Commander.
C. GAHH, Chief Officer.
E. A. H. BINGHAM, Second Officer.
C. DOUGLAS SAUNDER, Third Officer.
P. LYNCH STAUNTON, Fourth do.
HUGH 13EVAN, Fifth Officer.
J. KING, Sixth Officer.
A. H. HARVEY, Purser.
J. M. CARROLL, Assistant.
J. J. GRAHAM, Chief Engineer.
J. N. E. MACLENNAN, Surgeon.


PURSER.
3RD OFFICER. CHIEF OFFICR. COMMANDER THIF ENGINEER. 2ND OFFICER.
5TH OFFICER. DOCTOR. 4TH OFFICER.
6TH OFFICER.


CEYLON, COLOMBO, AND KANDY.
What to See, to Do, and to Avoid.
After the long dreary stretch of ocean which separates the Australian coasts from
the next land, travellers look eagerly for the first glimpse of Ceylon, which, with its fore-
ground of dense tropical vegetation rising from the margin of the sparkling blue water,
behind which the rugged mountain chain, culminating in Adam’s Peak, rises high into
the deep azure firmament, presents a landscape unsurpassed by any scenery in the world.
Point de Galle, at the extreme southern point of the island, was formerly the place in
which the P. and'O. system centered. Here when, as not unfrequently, the steamers from
China, India, Australia and Europe met, such a scene of confusion took place as could be
witnessed nowhere else in the world. Here friends, outward bound, encountered others
on the homeward trip ; here many a vow of eternal affection has been registered, as the
tender intimacies which had sprung up during the voyage must be ruthlessly severed
for those whose paths of life here separated, probably never again to unite. No longer,
however, shall its shady lanes, or the cool alcoves of the Grand Hotel re-echo to the
hearty greetings of old friends, or hearken to the fond adieux of despondent lovers; for
now the scene is shifted to Colombo, some 70 miles to the north, which, as the commer-
cial capital and seat of government, presents much greater advantages for shipping.
Since the completion of the fine sea wall, what was formerly an open roadstead, exposed
to the swell of the southern ocean, has been converted into a safe and commodious
harbour. The town is situated upon a promontory, and thus lies open to the ocean upon
two sides; behind it is a lagoon of considerable size. It is traversed by wide roads
bordered with trees; upon either hand rise lofty buildings occupied as stores or
government offices : from the business quarter run wide level roads well shaded by the
glossy green foliage of bread fruit, Jack fruit, cocoa nut, and other trees;
at a. short distance back from them the bungalows, with heavy thatched roofs, nestle
amid a blaze of crotons, coleus, poinsettia, and other high foliaged shrubs. To the
northward of the town, and along the beach, lies the native town and bazaar, which,
from its dirt and variety of evil odours, is rather to be avoided, as it presents no points of
interest. There are two hotels, the Grand Oriental, and the Galle Face, at both of
which good accommodation is provided.
Upon landing, passengers are at once beset by a crowd»of natives offering for sale
a most miscellaneous collection of goods, among which articles in tortoiseshell, walking
sticks and elephants carved in ebony and ivory are most noticeable. Sapphires, rubies,
and cat’s eyes of surprising lustre, which are found in the mines near to Adam’s Peak,
with pearls of great price, are forced upon one’s notice by the native dealers. These,
however, the natural products of the country, are largely supplemented by others from
the vicinity of Birmingham (where the geological formation is not supposed to produce
other minerals than coal or iron), which, among the inexperienced, may easily pass
muster as genuine; and many an unwary passenger has found out that the excellent
bargain on which he has congratulated himself is not worth as many pence - as it has
cost him pounds. All the best stones are exported to London, and those offered by the
regular dealers are slightly deficient in colour, or contain some trifling flaw which
renders them unfit for the jewel market: but for those who understand precious stones,
specimens well worth the price paid can be obtained. The confidence in the integrity of
passengers, especially Australians, on the part of many of the native dealers is surprising,
as they will often allow Btones to be taken on credit, to be paid for upon arrival in


England. A great part of the dealing takes place in the verandah of the hotel. Here
may be seen various groups busily chaffering with tradesmen who have the entree there,
and display their goods for the benefit of the passengers, while outside a crowd of smaller
dealers keep up a continual chatter, each vaunting the excellence of his own wares, and
eagerly soliciting custom. The Cingalese wear their hair long, turned up into a coil at
the back of the head, where it is confined by a large tortoiseshell comb : and being clad
in long petticoat-like garments, coming down to the feet, present a very effeminate
appearance. But they are glib of tongue, and very sharp at a bargain. It is hardly
necessary to warn passengers that all Orientals invariably ask a much higher price than
they are willing to accept, and that unless they have some idea of the proper price of the
articles offered, they are pretty sure to pay more than their real value.' Conveyances
ply for hire at a reasonable rate, and usually take the one drive round the lake, past the
cinnamon gardens, and home by the sea face, which occupies about an hour. The
museum contains a small collection, and is worth a visit en passant.
Should time allow for a trip to be made by rail to Kandy, the lovely scenery
traversed en route will well repay the latigue of the journey. The distance is about
75 miles, and the time occupied about four hours. For the first half of the way a district
mostly under cultivation, but somewhat flat and uninteresting is traversed, but for the
latter portion the line rapidly ascends the mountain range, each turn revealing mountains
clothed in the luxuriant foliage of the tropics, picturesque crags, or waterfalls like silver
threads, in rapid succession, until the eye is almost bewildered with the beauty of the
panorama thus displayed by Nature. Kandy stands at the extremity of the little lake,
embosomed in pretty hills, well wooded, around which the carriage drive winds. Here is
a shrine and temple of Bhudda, the more sacred inasmuch as it rejoices in the possession
of a tooth of the great lawgiver. This, however, is most jealously guarded from the
profane gaze, being exhibited only at very special festivals, or to some highly distinguished
visitor. It was displayed on the occasion of the visit of the Prince of Wales; but to
those who saw it at that time, it bore a greater resemblance to the tooth of a pig than of
a human being—but its possession brings in a considerable revenue to the custodians of the
relic. The great charm of Kandy lies in the botanical gardens at Pereadenya, about two
miles out of the town, where is the finest collection of palms and other tropical and inter-
tropical shrubs in the world. Foremost among these is the giant Talipot palm, with its
huge leaves, and fine pyramid of creamy-hued flowers rising high from out of the heart of
its crown. The gardens are of considerable extent, and tastefully laid out. The Queen’s
Hotel is clean and comfortable, but its sleeping accommodation is somewhat limited.
The climate of Kandy, however, is very charming, and the discomforts of camping for one
night would not possess much terror for an Australian. It is contemplated to apply for
a special train for the accommodation of passengers. But should the duration of the
stoppage at Colombo permit, the ordinary trains which leave at about 7 a.m. and 2 p.m.
daily, would be equally convenient, as persons leaving by the afternoon train could
reach Kandy by dinner time, and after spending the night there, return by the second
train on the following day, which would bring them back to. Colombo in good time, and
allow of their seeing the sights of Kandy. Another trip by rail can be made to Mount
Lavinia, where there is pleasant scenery and a good hotel, and a lower temperature than
that of Colombo. Passengers may in either way spend a very pleasant time in Ceylon,
and carry with them many pleasing mementos of their visit.
There are some excellent stores at Colombo, kept by Europeans, where every
description of article of costume or otherwise can be procured, and simple materials,
suitable for working up into fancy dresses, can be purchased at a trifling cost.


ATHLETIC SPORTS.
The quarter-deck of the “ Parramatta ” has on many previous occasions presented a
brilliant scene, but it may safely be averred that there has seldom or never been seen
upon it such a perfect galaxy of beauty and fashion as graced with their presence the
Athletic Sports held thereon on Thursday, the 9th of April. Among those present
were observed many persons of note, both from the old country and the
Australasian colonies. The rising generation were also well represented. The light
dresses of the ladies and the white suits of the gentlemen gave a delightfully cool
appearance to the scene, though the faces of both competitors and spectators proved the
truth of the old adage as to the deceitfulness of appearances.
Through the courtesy of a lady friend, we are able to inform our fair readers that
figured muslins are much in vogue, many striking and pleasing varieties being observed.
One especially, with a cream ground and coloured flowers, attracted admiration, setting
off to perfection the charms of its lovely wearer.
The programme of the Sports was carried through with the most perfect success,
the Rev. Dr. White showing himself au excellent judge, while Mr. Marks fulfilled with
signal efficiency the duty of starter. The stewards of the sports were untiring in
their endeavours to provide for the comfort'of the spectators; and we should be
guilty of a dereliction of duty were we to omit to pay a tribute of praise to Mr. Bird
for the admirable manner in which he rang the bell when it was necessary to clear the
course. It was an artistic performance, and we have the authority of the head steward
to state that if Mr. Bird is open to an engagement, he can have permanent employment
on board the “ Parramatta,” to summon passengers to the festive board by the judiciously
handled bell. We give below a detailed account of the various events, and it may
be mentioned as shewing the severe nature of the contests that, in almost every instance,
competitors reached the goal in a dead heat .
FIRST DAY.
OBSTACLE RACE.—In the first heat, Messrs. Porter and Sawbridge were the only two com-
petitors, and the latter failing to negotiate the wind-sail business, Mr. Porter was left to go over the
course at his leisure.
In the second heat, three started, but one of the competitors was manifestly short of condition,
and seemingly discouraged by the Manifold obstacles before him, he retired at the second fence. A
good race ensued between Messrs. Brandon and Shenton, resulting in a clever win by the
first-named.
In the final heat between the winners of the foregoing heats, Mr. Porter had it all his own way
and came in an easy winner.
TWO HUNDRED YARDS FLAT RACE.—Messrs. Sievers, Sawbridge, and Johnson
started for the first heat, and the first-named won, “ hands down.”
In the second heat, Messrs. Shenton, Brandon, and Manifold were the competitors, and after a
good race, Mr. Shenton won cleverly ; Mr. Manifold being a good second. The final heat produced
a capital race between the winners of the preceding heats, Mr. Shenton just winning on the post.
PICKING UP SHILLING.—This competition furnished much amusement. There were five
entries, but Mr. Gardner was disqualified at the first attempt for moving his foot, and shortly after
Mr. Johnson met a similar fate. Mr. Porter made a gallant fight with the remaining competitors,
but he had eventually to withdraw. It then became a question whether the length of Dr.
McLennan’s tongue or the power of Mr. Watson’s jaw would land their respective possessors in the
proud position of winner. The latter at length was successful, and continued plaudits hailed
the victory of Mr. Watson.


LADIES’ EGG AND SPOON RACE.—This event was full of interest, almost every
heat being well contested; the winners being Mrs. Brandon, Miss Armstrong, Misses Paul and
McKinnon (dead heat), Miss Gibson, and Miss Dobbin.
In the second round, Misses Armstrong and Dobbin w ere successful; and in the final competition
Miss Armstrong came in an easy winner.
COCK FIGHTING.—This competition attracted much interest, the contest being of an
international character ; and the competitors having been victors in many a well-fouglit main.
Some disappointment was felt at the failure of more than one Australian bird to put in an
appearance against the British Champions, but the one who entered the lists made a truly gallant
fight. The honour of representing Australia belonged to Mr. Johnson, better known among
Sportsmen as the “ Sydney Gamecock.” The British competitors were Mr. Gardner, well known
as the “Metropolitan Spurrer ” ; Mr. Watson, the “Newcastle Chicken”; and Mr. Porter, the
“ Cheltenham Pecker.” The Chicken and the Pecker were first put into the pit, and for some time
the fighting was of a cautious character. A change in tactics was then insisted on by the backers
of the “ Chicken,” and the contest became a most exciting one; the Pecker, though he fought with
the most determined courage, being unable to bear up against the superior weight of his opponent
Great excitement was manifest when the “Metropolitan Spurrer” and the “Sydney
Gamecock” were pitted against one another. They fought a most plucky battle, but the
“ Spurrer ” was unfortunate in getting a severe fall, and it was feared that he had received an injury
to his well-tended comb. We are glad to report such was not the case; but, in consequence of a
slight injury to one of the wings of the interesting biped, it was decided to withdraw him from the
contest, the Gamecock being hailed as winner.
This left the final contest between the Gamecock and the Chicken—the excitement being intense
as each bird seemed to be gaining an advantage.
At length, after a most determined struggle, victory rested with the representative of England;
the noble bird seeming to be carried away with exultation, and filling the air with triumphant
crows.
BUCKET RACE.—This was another interesting competition, tlxo object being to carry a
bucket of water on the head for fifty yards in the shortest time, and with the least waste of water.
Three heats were run, the winners of which were Messrs. Shenton, Watson, and McLennan. The
deciding heat was postponed until the second day of the sports.
THE JUVENILE RACES were well contested, and called forth genuine enthusiasm. Some
fractiousness was observed at the starting post in consequence of the anxiety of the young ones to get
well away, but in all cases the flag was eventually lowered to a good start. The one hundred yards
(under fourteen) race was won by S. Marks, who defeated Sharp and Gibson rather easily. In the
final, for the hundred yards (under ten) there was a fine competition between S. White and H.
Brandon, the former coming in first, with V. White for a moderately good third.
IN THE POTATO RACE (under fourteen) S. Marks was again victorious, and, in the same
competition, for those under ten, G. Marks was successful; a special prize being awarded to
J. Brandon for his admirable performance. The future career of this juvenile prodigy, will be
attentively watched by the athletic world.
TUG OF WAR. —Perhaps the most exciting incident of the day was the Tug of War, in
which ten followers of the British Lion contended against an equal number of the supporters of the
Australian Kangaroo. In the first tug the superior weight of the Australian team soon drew the
leader of the English party over the line of demarcation, but in the second struggle, amid a scene
of almost frantic excitement among the small number of the partisans of the mother country, the
Englishmen succeeded in equalising matters. The deciding pull was a long and severe struggle,
but, eventually, amid the deafening plaudits of the Australian contingent (to which it is said the
wallaby from his cage in the bows, joined his discordant cries), the victory rested with the
representatives of the land of the Kangaroo.


GAMES TOURNAMENT.
At the first meeting of the Committee of Amusements it was arranged that a
General Tournament should be held under their auspices, in which all of the passengers
might contend for the Championship in each of the following games, viz.:—Whist,
Cribbage, Chess, Backgammon, Draughts, Dominoes, Bull and Quoits.
A fair number of entries having been obtained, at half-a-crown for each event, the
Chairman, assisted by members of the Committee, proceeded on Monday last to draw the
names of the combatants and their opponents for the First Round. The names as drawn
out of the hat arranged themselves as follows, and the games up to date have been
played with the following results:—
WHIST — First Round.
Messrs. Brandon and Bryant beat Messrs. Scott and Porter.
Miss Scott and Mr. Shields beat Messrs. Sievers and McKinnon.
Messrs. Webster and-Hordern beat Miss Pym and Captain Moseley.
Mrs. Levy and Mr. Capper beat Messrs. Kendall and Booth.
Names were drawn for another match in this Round in which Messrs. Markwell and
Westenholme were to play Messrs. Marks and Taylor, but upon Mr. Markwell refusing for private
reasons, to take part in the Tournament, this match went to Messrs. Marks and Taylor, who
accordingly stood in to play in the Second Round.
Second Round.
Messrs. Brandon and Bryant beat Messrs. Webster and Hordern.
Messrs. Marks and Taylor beat Miss Scott and Mr. Shields.
Mrs. Levey and Mr. Capper —bye.
For the Third Round, which has yet to be played, the drawing has taken place with the
following result: —
Third Round.
Messrs. Brandon and Bryant have to play Messrs. Marks and Taylor,
Mrs. Levy and Mr. Capper having again drawn a bye.
In this Tournament several interesting and well-contested matches have taken place. It was
decided by the Committee that each match should go to the winners of two out of three Rubbers,
and it is noteworthy that all the four matches of the First Round were brought to the third Rubber
for decision, and in one case the match was decided by the odd trick in the last game of the third
Rubber.
A Second Whist Tournament is now being arranged in which each lady is to select her partner,
and retain him throughout the contest.
Of the remaining games, the following have been played out to the end of the First Round,
and the names drawn for the Second Round: —
BACKGAMMON — First Round.
Captain Moseley beat Mr. Shields.
Miss Pym beat Dr. White.
Mr. Bargate beat Mr. Graham.
Mr. Rendall beat Mr. Porter.
Second Rocnd.
Mr. Bargate has to play Miss Pym.
Mr. Rendall has to play Capt. Moseley.
DRAUGHTS— First Round.
Miss Pym beat Mr. Sawbridge.
Mr. Porter beat Mr. Sievers.
Mr. Summers beat Mr. Sbenton.
Mr. Graham beat Mr. Manifold.
Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Gardner.
Mr. Booth beat Mr Marks.
Mr. Nathan beat Mr. Levy.
Mr. Bargate beat Miss Gibson.


DRAUGHTS— Second Round.
Mr. Summers has to play Mr. Booth.
Mr. Bargate has to play Mr. Porter.
Mr. Nathan has to play Mr. Hordern.
Mr. Graham has to play Miss Pym.
CRIBBAGE— First Round.
Mrs. Gunn beat Mr. Porter.
Mrs. Inglis beat Mr. Gunn.
Miss Wilson beat Mr. Marks.
Mr. Booth beat Mr. Capper.
Mr. Brandon beat Mrs. Brandon.
Second Round.
Mrs. Inglis has to play Mr. Booth. | Mrs. Gunn has to play Mr. Brandon.
Miss Wilson, bye.
QUOITS — First Round.
Mr. Porter Mr w Whitehead.
Mr. Cameron beat Mr. Owen.
Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Shenton.
Mr. Chapman beat Mr. Brandon.
Mr. Webster beat Mr. Capper.
Mr. Courthope, scratched for this event, and his opponent, Mr. Bagot, accordingly stands in for
the Second Round.
Second Round.
Mr. Porter has to play Mr. Bagot. | Mr. Hordern has to play Mr. Webster.
Mr. Chapman has to play Mr. Cameron.
BULL.
Very few entries were booked for this event, probably owing to the fact that a Bull board was
not in existence at the time the matches were got up, and the nature and attractions of the game
did not appear to be very generally understood.
In the First Round Mr. Webster beat Mr. Courthope.
First Round.
Mr. Shields beat Mr. Capper, and Mr. Porter beat Mr. Shenton.
In the Second Round Mr. Webster has to play Mr. Shields. Mr. Porter having drawn a bye,
“ stands by ” to play the winner for the final tie.
In the Chess and Dominoes all the games of the First Round have not yet been played out.
The following is the state of these contests up to date, 10th April, 1885
CHESS— First Round.
Mr. Barratt beat Mr. Sievers. | Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Gardner has yet to play Miss Armstrong, and Mr. Rendall has yet to play Mr. Marks.
DOMINOES — First Round.
Mrs. Paul beat Mr. Summers. | Mr. Porter beat Mr. Nathan.
The following have yet to play in the First Round :
Mr. Sievers has to play Mr. Levy. | Dr. White has to play Mr, Rendall.
Mr. Marks has to play Mr. Taylor.
It is to be hoped that those whose games in the First Round remain yet unplayed, will lose no
time in bringing them to a conclusion, in order that all matches may be brought to the same
standpoint, and the Tournament go off smoothly without hanging fire.
“ OLD SPORT.”


LATEST TELEGRAPHIC NEWS.
London, April 10.—In the House of Commons last night Mr. Gladstone, in reply to
an inquiry from Mr. Ashmead-Bartlett as to the position of affairs in Afghanistan, stated
that instructions had been forwarded to Sir Peter Lumsden to ascertain from the
Commander of the Russian Expeditionary Force whether he objected to the British
occupation of Herat 1 In the event of his doing so, Sir Peter is directed to apologise
for having taken any steps not in consonance with the wishes of the Czar; he is to retire
from the city without delay; and to see that everything is left in such order there as to
ensure the comfort of the Russian forces when they take possession. The reply of the
Prime Minister was not received in the House with general favour.
New York, April 10. —A marriage is arranged and will shortly take place between
Mr. Jeremiah O’Donovan Rossa and Mrs. Lucille Dudley. The announcement has been
received with some surprise, as the attempted assassination of Mr*, Rossa by the lady
shortly to become his bride is an event of such recent occurrence.
Sydney, April 11.—Great excitement has prevailed in this city for several days
past on account of its transpiring that several individuals connected with the Russian
Consulate here had left the neighbourhood. It is believed that they are bound for Saint
Petersburg, and are furnished with plans of our harbour to lay before the Marine
Department of the Russian Ministry. On making inquiries at the Peninsular and Oriental
Company’s Office here, it was ascertained that a party of five persons started by the
S.s. “ Parramatta ” on the 20th March, four being ladies (whose influence on Russian
politics is so well-known) and the fifth a male disguised as a British sailor. The latter
is said to be a desperate character, and is strongly suspected of having been concerned
in more than one dynamite outrage. They appear to have booked passages to Gibraltar,
but it is considered certain that this is a ruse llusse , and that they will leave the steamer
at some other port of debarkation, making the best of their way to the City of the
Czar, in the manner already arranged at headquarters. Reports of the movements of
passengers of the “ Parramatta ” will be anxiously awaited here. Meanwhile, the New
South Wales Government have put themselves in communication with Captain Acland,
their newly appointed Naval Adviser, with a view of perfecting the marine defences.
He has devised a system of torpedoes for use at the entrance of the harbour, which it is
felt will render this city actually impregnable to an attack by sea.
SOCIAL NOTES.
It is contemplated to have a FANCY DRESS BALL upon arrival in somewhat
cooler latitudes; probably upon arrival in the Gulf of Suez. Our fashionable Editor,
being specially marked by his modiste demeanour, will be happy to advise either ladies
or gentlemen in the selection of a character suitable to them. A fair professor of
palmistry has also been specially retained, who will, by showing what is to be, point out
to those desirous of knowing how best to bring it about.
A SPELLING BEE will also be held at an early date. An entrance fee of 6d.
must be paid by all competitors. Words to be submitted on the occasion will be gladly
received by the Editors. We understand this is to take place on the day after leaving
Colombo. Dictionaries can be procured there.


A RUMOUR having reached our ears that a hostile encounter with small swords
was to take place in the vicinity of the cowshed at an early hour this morning, our
special reporter took up a convenient position from which to observe the contest. One
of the parties was noticed in company with a friend, smoking a cigar, near to the
scene of action, but the other one did not appear upon the ground. We have not
yet heard who “she ” is.
Our column of “Hatches,” “Matches,” and “Despatches” is as yet not in a
sufficiently advanced stage for publication.
ADVERTISEMENTS will be received for insertion up to within 24 hours of each
issue. The charge for these will, as is customary, be at per space occupied. It is
contemplated holding a competitive examination among the juveniles on board, to
ascertain which wrßes the finest round hand, with the view of offering him an appoint-
ment upon our stam Although a somewhat increased space may thus be required, we
feel sure that the increased legibility will more than compensate for the extra expense.
We have already received the following, which we hope may be soon followed
by others:—
Lost, a Heart. N.B. —The loser will be satisfied with an exchange.
VARIETIES.
A facetious young masher, who danced at our recent ball, remarked that although
he liked rings on his fingers he couldn’t stand belles on his toes.
A lady poet asks, “How can I tell him that I love him no more'?” There are divers
ways. If he lives out of town, and economy is an object, she might send him a post-
card, or wait till a telephone line is started; but if she wishes him to receive the news
as if by magic, she should divulge the state of her feelings to a couple of friends at
afternoon tea in the saloon.
“ The man who does not play whist is preparing for himself a miserable old age."
“ You want to teach me cards,”
A fair young maid was wont
To murmur, and to sigh ;
“You want to teach me ? —Don’t.
I hate your gambling games,
Your whist, your nap, and 100 ;
I hate besique, and more,
I won't be taught, by you.”
Then answered Time, and said,
“ My fair young maid, be wise ;
I driyo my plough o’er all,
I dim the brightest eyes ;
And when your eyes are dim,
And wrinkles line your face,
You still can see the cards,
And throttle king with ace.
Tall knights of other days,
Who beauty loved and kissed,
Will grumble if you don’t
Return their lead at whist.
Then bo wise while you may,
Take lesson by the ant,
Secure your future now,
And don’t say, ‘ Learn —I sha’n’t.’
And then, in time to come,
Rejoicing, you will say,
‘ My beauty’s lost and gone,
My hair is turning grey;
Mine eyes are waxing dim,
My lovers all have flown ;
Bnt whist remains—a gift,
Rue to the gods alone.’ ” —C. H. R.


THE LAY OF THE BOOTS.
Up and down the smooth poop deck,
Many a theme we jest on ;
This the way that hearts are lost,
Pop goes the question.
There is a man who walks that deck,
His name- ISb ; I won’t tell.
But if he’d only, change his boots,
I think it would be well.
The squeaking of those dreadful boots
Would almost wake the dead,
I wish that he were overboard,
Instead of overhead. — Susie.
RIDDLES.
1. Why is an oyster the greatest anomaly in nature ?
2. Why is a tallow-chandler the most unfortunate of men P
3. What is the definition of a muff ? v
4. Why was Noah the greatest financier the world has ever seen ?
5. What is the difference between Tom Thumb and Henry VIII ?
6. How can you show from history that Charles I. consented to be beheaded ?
Answers will appear in our next issue.
ACROSTIC.
Sure to her goal o’er ocean’s trackless waste
My First my Second guides; without its aid
Her useless length she stretches on the flood,
The sport of wind and tide.
1. Such are the tides when Luna least compels,
2. Of my bright beams the Arctic voyager tells ;
3. He bows obsequious as we pace the aisle.
4. Such games, when days are wet, the hours beguile.
5. ’Mid stately homes o’er placid waters glide.
6. Take me, and hit the mark, or stand aside.
7. I graced Rome’s wisdom in her early days.
8. His vacant stare the wandering mind betrays.
9. Come not within, but stay where now you stand.
10. Find me ’mid snow and ice of distant land.”— Tip.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Angelina, — Your case it may be feared is no uncommon one. A residence of any duration in the Bush
is apt to disincline for feminine society , and to produce that diffidence of which you so justly complain. A
well-known couplet says: —“ Patience" and Perseverance will make a Bishop of your Reverence ,” and
if such advice might fitly be addressed to a British Divine , ive think you ivill not take it ill , if we
recommend to yourself a practice of the same virtues. We feel sure they ivill succeed eventually in bringing
the gentleman to your feet, especially if your charms are of the manifold nature you state. Should you find
it necessary to bring matters to a climax , a judicious reference to Leap Year, and the prerogatives of the
fair sex in that happy year has , in numberless instances , served to draw a declaration of his passion from an
enamoured though diffident swam , and we cordially recommend your trying its effect. Asa happy result
of a word spoken in season , we may mention the experience of a now happy matron. She informed us that
it was a quotation of the well-known proverb about “ wilful waste ,” which led her bashful lover to clasp her
round her own. We sincerely wish you success , and shall watch with interest the marriage column of the
“ Argus." — [Editors, Parramatta Observer.']


Benjamin B. — We gladly ansivcr your inquiries on the subject of Etiquette of the Table. In the best
society it is not considered cornet to use the knife as a vehicle for conveying food to the mouth except in the
following instances:—Peas and Beans (both of the French and English varieties) may be dealt with in this
manner , and it is often found to be the most convenient process to avoid the waste of either gravy or salad
dressing. II va sans dire, that no gentleman ever eats cheese except from the point of his knife. With
regard to the most gracefxd manner of disposing of cherry stones , this is a subject xvhich has proved a
stumbling block in the path of the directors of etiquette from the days of Beau Brummel down to the present
time. We are in a position to inform you , however, that the custom at Marlborough House , and the
mansions of the British aristocracy , is for the consumers of cherries to throw the stones over their left
shoulders, in the same manner as is described in every Text Book of Etiquette as the correct way of dealing
with salt , ivhen any happens unfortunately to be spilt between any two guests at the festive board.
[Editors, Parramatta Observer.']


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
“Nunquam Dormio.”
No. 2.
SATURDAY, 18th APRIL, 1885.
THE TRUTH ABOUT “TRUTH."
In a great republic of letters, the mantle of secrecy, in which the Satirist is enabled to
enshroud himself, while investing him with considerable power, at the same time
serves to protect him from many attacks, both personal and critical, which he would
otherwise be called upon to encounter. But in the small world in which we are now
living, “cabined, cribbed, confined," within the narrow limits of a ship; where it is well
known that the author cannot be out of earshot, those who may be smarting under his
strictures are emboldened, under the cloud of obscurity which overshadows him, to
express their opinions in no measured terms in his presence, while he is compelled to bear
with the most stoical fortitude their deeply insulting and possibly very unjust remarks,
lest by a single quiver of a muscle he reveals his identity. We certainly do not envy the
position of the person who so eagerly hastened to proclaim in print to the world the
truth, as it appeared to him, concerning some of his fellow passengers and the officers
of this ship. It must have been deeply galling to one who evidently plumed himself
upon his literary and classical attainments, after having taken so much trouble in
producing, and expense in publishing his ideas, to hear them stigmatised as “ the crapulous
chattering of a churlish cad.” Far better for him had it been, that his “brochure " should
have fallen flat, but, unfortunately, the arrows of his wit had been dipped in so virulent a
poison, as to draw forth one unanimous cry of execration; if not from those at whom the
shafts were aimed, yet from all who condemned the employment of such weapons as
unworthy of the usages of legitimate literary polemics. While loath to accuse him of
wilfully saying the thing that is not, we do not envy him the possession of an imagination
so distorted as to be able to view matters only through a medium so obviously false.
To stab one’s neighbour in the dark, it was felt, was bad enough, but to tip the weapon
with a venom which could not fail to cause the wound to fester, was worthy only of a
mean coward. Such was the verdict universally passed by public opinion, and openly
expressed, so soon as the pestilent puerilities of the “ Truthful Jeames "had been perused.
To this Verdict, we may safely leave both him and his work, -without wasting upon it
further time or space, which could only have the effect of giving to it a notoriety of which
it is utterly unworthy.
ALBANY, KING GEORGE’S SOUND.
This little town —a photograph of which we are able to place before our readers,
and which some of them took the opportunity of visiting when the “Parramatta"
anchored in its harbour on the Ist instant—stands on the rising ground on the north
c


shore of Princess Royal Harbour. At the present time it does not possess much
importance, except as a port of call for the Peninsular and Oriental Company’s steamers,
but as the Colony of Western Australia increases, and railway communication is improved,
it is probable that the capabilities of Albany will assert themselves. Possessing as it
does a magnificent harbour, and being the westernmost port of the Australian continent,
it can hardly be doubted that at no very distant date Albany will be recognised as
worthy of development. It is believed that its importance has been appreciated by the
Imperial Government, and that, in the arrangements now being made for the defence of
the Australian coast, a considerable sum of money will be spent in fortifying the
approach to the harbour at King George’s Sound. There is as yet no railway at
Albany, the communication with Perth, the chief town of Western Australia, being by a
main road, over which the Government run a conveyance once a fortnight each way, for
carrying the mails to and from the steamers of the Peninsular and Oriental Company.
The present population is about 1,600, and the trade of the town is unimportant;
sandal wood being almost the only export worthy of note. From Mount Clarence—the
hill on the slopes of which the town is situated—a splendid panoramic view of the
harbour, wide expanse of bush land in the interior, and the open sea, may be obtained,
and though the climb is rather a severe one, the visitor feels well recompensed for his
exertions when the summit of the hill is reached.
The town itself does not present any special feature of interest, but the ivy-clad
Church tower conjures up memories of the mother country which the internal
arrangements of the church do not altogether dispel, though it must be confessed that in
the latter respect some improvements might easily be suggested.
It is at Albany that on his outward voyage the English traveller obtains his first
view of the Australian aborigines, and anything more degraded in the scale of humanity
it would be hardly possible to picture than the black people who are encountered during
a walk through the town. These savages, however, display a truly marvellous skill in
the use of the spear and boomerang, and it is in watching their feats with these weapons,
and subsequently bargaining for the purchase of the same, that passengers are accustomed
to spend the three or four hours of their detention at Albany. Few leave the place with
regret, but fewer perhaps without a conviction that a great future lies before this now
quiet town, and it is inevitable that Albany must play an important part in the progress
of Western Australia.
OUR VOYAGE.
On Friday, March 20th, at noon, with the punctuality that invariably marks the despatch
of the Company’s steamers, the “ Parramatta ” left the Circular Quay at Sydney amidst the
cheers and waving handkerchiefs of the hosts of friends who had assembled to bid adieu
to the voyagers. On her course down the harbour she was closely attended by the
steamer “Admiral,” which was filled with the employes of Messrs. Hoffrung & Co. The
hearty cheers which resounded from her decks, and the flags which fluttered from her
mast-head, emblazoned with mottos expressive of good wishes for the welfare of Mr. and
Mrs. Marks and family, bore testimony to the respect entertained for that gentleman by
all who have served under him. A large circle of private friends waved their adieux from
the deck of the steam-launch “ Nea,” which also accompanied us to the Heads. Outside,
a. strong southerly breeze, with a heavy head swell, was met, over which the good ship
rode with as tender a regard for the comfort of those on board as circumstances would


ALBANY, W.A.


allow. With careful forethought for the stomachic susceptibilities of the passengers, and
possibly with the liope of deluding them into the idea that the ship was perfectly steady,
the table was laid for luncheon without those omens of rough, weather, the “fiddles,”
at no small risk to the crockery, which was happily unattended with any loss, for although
the tables were well filled, a large number of the chairs were empty. After a dirty,
drizzling night, the morning of the 21st broke clear and bright, while Father Neptune
was good enough to make our first introduction to life at sea as smooth as could be
expected. By breakfast-time on Sunday we were through the Rip and up to the Heads,
and made fast to the wharf at Williamstown about 2 p.m., abreast of the The
attraction of three such fine vessels as H.M.S. “Nelson,” (which was lying in the dock close
to the wharf,) and the “ Orient ” and “ Parramatta,” which were alongside, drew large
crowds of sightseers from Melbourne and the neighbourhood ; during the whole afternoon
a continuous stream of visitors was passing and repassing along the decks, admiring the
decoration and arrangements of the vessel. On Thursday, March 26th, at 1 p.m., the
vans laden with huge sacks of mails having been discharged, we resumed our voyage,
and soon the vast concourse of friends who had come down to speed us on our way
melted away into the dim distance as we slipped down the bay. At 5.30 p.m. the Heads
were passed, and having discharged the pilot, we continued the even tenour of our way
until the anchor was dropped at 8 a.m. off Glenelg on the morning of March 28th. Most
of the passengers here took the opportunity of a day ashore and a visit to Adelaide,
returning laden with magnificent grapes and other fruit. A piano was purchased here by
subscription among the passengers, for use on deck during the voyage. By dinner time
we were again under weigh, and soon found our good ship rolling along with a slow
majestic motion to the heavy swell abeam.
On Sunday, March 29th, Divine Service was held in the saloon, the Rev. Dr. White
officiating. On Tuesday, 31st, at a general meeting of the passengers, a committee was
appointed to arrange for the amusements, musical and otherwise, during the voyage. A
varied programme was prepared, and various sub-committees deputed to carry out the
different entertainments proposed to be given. Early in the morning of April Ist, King
George’s Sound was reached, where, after having been detained (as it appeared to us) by
the health officer for a very unnecessary length of time, the yellow flag was hauled down,
and the passengers free to land. Taking advantage of the steam-launch which kept plying
between the ship and the wharf, Albany was soon invaded by a crowd of people, who split
up into various parties as their fancy dictated. The township, however, does not present
any objects of overwhelming interest, and the short time allowed was found ample for the
full exploration of its lions. Here the latest telegrams were eagerly looked for, as war with
Russia seemed to be imminent when we left Adelaide, and there were sundry sinister rumours
afloat as to Russian ships being in the neighbourhood. Great interest also was felt in
the movements of the New South Wales contingent to the army in the Soudan. News
of the safe arrival of the “ Iberia ”at Aden was here obtained. Those who remained on
board amused themselves chiefly by fishing, but the results were not upon a scale to call
for remark. By 1 p.m. we were passing down the pretty bay, and settled down for
regular sea life, and the long stretch of blue water that must be traversed ere we should
make the next land. The dreaded Leu win was rounded early in the morning of April
2nd, and in smooth water, and with all sail set we sped along before a strong fair wind
upon our course to the north-west. On the 3rd, it being Good Friday, Divine Service
was celebrated in the saloon by Dr. White, a large congregation being present. On
Saturday the first of the regular series of entertainments was held under the auspices of


the committee. The programme of vocal and instrumental music was a good one, and
excellently carried out, and but for the rule which forbade “ encores,” would have been
prolonged to such an extent as to have interfered with the dance, with which the evening
was most successfully wound up. On Sunday, April sth, the full Choral Service for
Easter Day was performed by the choir; Dr. White officiated, and also performed evening
service on the Quarter Deck at 7.30 p.m. On Monday the Tournaments which had been
arranged for Whist, Draughts, Chess, Backgammon, Cribbage, Dominoes, Quoits, and Bull
were commenced; in many instances the competition was watched with very keen interest,
and the results as announced on the notice board were eagerly scanned. Reports of the
winners of the various events will be duly furnished. At night the constellation of the
Great Bear was well above the northern horizon, we being at the time in about 20 deg.
south latitude. The weather has now become very warm, and the brisk following breeze
travelling at about the same rate of speed as the vessel, prevents any current of air from
being felt, which would otherwise temper the heat of the atmosphere. A dance was held
on deck in the evening, which, notwithstanding the heat, was kept up until time for
“ lights out.” During the remainder of the week the weather was intensely hot,
notwithstanding which the various competitions were vigorously carried on. On
Thursday, April 9th, the Athletic Sports produced a degree of activity which could not
have been surpassed in the Arctic regions. A full description of the events decided on
the first day is furnished by our Sporting Editor. The programme originally fixed for
the following day was postponed on account of the threatening appearance of the
weather; it was eventually decided not to carry it out until the climate should be
somewhat more suitable for the severe exertion necessary in such contests. Between
the 7th and Bth April we passed near to the Cocos or Keeling Islands, which lie between
the 11th and 12th parallel of south latitude, and very nearly in the direct course from
Australia to Colombo. They consist of a cluster of low coral islands, very little raised
above the level of the water. They are well planted with cocoa nuts, and are inhabited.
There is a safe harbour at Port Refuge or Albion, where good water and fresh provisions
may be procured. It lies in the direct track of vessels bound from the Cape to the
eastern parts of the Bay of Bengal. It was near these islands that the “ Khedive” fell in
with the hurricane on the outward voyage, in which she sustained some damage, the
particulars of which we learned at King George’s Sound. On Saturday, April 11th, the
Line was crossed during luncheon time ; in the forenoon a young marine monster, purporting
to have been sent by Father Neptune, was observed perambulating the deck, but
probably owing to his youthful appearance, there was not the same amount of respect
paid to him as the presence of Old Father Neptune himself had used to command. Had
the old Sea God appeared in propria persona, there were several interesting young
persons, who were for the first time in their lives crossing the mystic barrier of the ocean,
who would have been presented to him with all the customary formalities. We only
heard of one scientific observer who looked out for the line, and have not been able to
discover if his researches were rewarded with success. On this day too the Parramatta
Observer first saw the light, which must henceforth be always marked with a white
stone in the annals of journalism. Its infancy has most undeniably displayed an amount
of literary and artistic talent which augurs well for the achievments of its maturer grQwth.
A most successful entertainment, comprising vocal and instrumental music, "with recitations,
brought the week to a close. At the forenoon service, in the saloon, on Sunday morning,
a collection was made for the Seamen’s Orphan Asylum, which realised the handsome
sum of £l2 10s. lOd. to the funds of that most excellent Institution. A very full


congregation attended the service, conducted on the quarter-deck in the evening by
Dr. White. About midnight the light at Galle was made, and daylight on Monday
found many of the passengers on deck refreshing their eyes with a sight of land, after so
many days of nothing but sea and sky. The dark green foliage of Ceylon was clearly
visible in the rays of the morning sun ; mountain and forest stretching away into the dim
distance, while high over all towered the triangular cone of Adam’s Peak. Breakfast
was advanced by half an hour, by the end of which the vessel was safely moored inside
the grand sea wall, which protects the harbour from the swell of the ocean. Here we
found the “ Chusan ” and “ Mirzapore,” from China and Calcutta, besides a large Dutch
steamer and one of the Austrian Lloyds, with one or two more steamers and a large
number of native craft. No sooner were we made fast than the ship was invaded by a
swarm of traders, and her decks at once converted into a bazaar rivalling Babel in its
confusion and clamour. An Australian steamer is looked upon with the utmost favour
by these keen traders, as colonials have invariably money to spend, and being utterly
unacquainted with the value of the articles presented for their inspection, and having no
standard by which to estimate the demands made for them, they are quite satisfied if
they procure what they want for half the price originally asked, a fact fully taken into
account by the dealers in fixing the price demanded. Tortoiseshell goods, elephants
(black and white) of various sizes, lace, boxes in ebony and sandalwood, many of them
prettily inlaid and carved, and hats of portentous dimensions, were being offered on all
sides, while gentlemen in curiously woven skull caps produced from their pockets jewels
of bright lustre and inestimable value, which they, under slight pressure, would dispose of
for as many shillings as they originally asked pounds. The migration to the shore of a
great portion of the passengers caused the departure of a large number of the traders
likewise, who persistently stuck to their prey, and left the decks in comparative quiet,
broken, however, by the various chaunts of the gangs of men employed in watering,
coaling, or shifting cargo. The constant rattle of steam winches resounded on every
side; huge fighters, propelled by the spoonlike oars of the boatmen, glided along the
glassy surface, while the catamaran of the native waterman competed not unsuccessfully
with the steam launch; all spoke of a large trade and a busy centre of commerce. Nor
did the night bring any cessation of work or the clank of machinery, for not only had over
250 tons of cargo to be discharged, but over 1,000 tons, besides about 500 tons of coals
had to be taken on board before Tuesday evening. As no doubt the impressions of
Kandy and Colombo are still fresh in the minds of those who have visited these places so
recently, we will not inflict upon them any further description of the sights and scenes
they have witnessed themselves.
HOW WE INTERVIEWED ARABI PASHA.
Having done the sights of Colombo, raced up to Kandy, and back, and spent all our
money in the shops, we thought that a visit to Arabi would be a good finale to our stay.
Accordingly we called a Gharri and drove to the Bungalow, some three miles out, where
he has his residence. Upon arrival we were beset by a swarm of bright-eyed little
urchins, whose vociferous importunity may well remind the exile of the country of his
birth. Upon handing in our cards, we were received upon the verandah by Arabi
himself, attended by his son. Having shaken hands with us, he seated himself and
requested us to take the chairs which were placed for us. He is a fine, but somewhat
heavily built man, of marked Arabic style of feature, with a massive head, and a


countenance indicative of resolution and determination, but not displaying any marked
signs of intelligence. Having ascertained that we could not speak Arabic, as he could
not understand English, the conversation was carried on through the medium of his son,
whose knowledge of our language was not very extensive. Their notions on geography,
too, were rather vague. Australia they had heard of, but of New Zealand or Fiji they
were utterly ignorant. As any allusion to politics or even the condition of affairs in
Europe, and the probability of war with Russia was “ tabooed,” it was difficult to keep
up the conversation ; and Arabi certainly looked terribly bored. However, upon rising
to take our leave, he most courteously shook hands with us, and thanked us for having
called to visit him.
BLIGHTED AFFECTION.
Her eyes were of a pensive grey,
Her hair was of the richest brown ;
I looked —methought I caught her eye,
As we left Sydney’s busy town.
I watched her mount the vessel’s side,
Koted the foot and ankle trim ;
I looked amid the throng to see
If there might be some other “ him.”
I watched the group of sorrowing friends
With tender partings round her hover ;
With secret pleasure I observed
There was not one looked like a lover.
For but one glance of those sweet eyes,
I’d brave the perils of the sea;
E’en banishment itself were sweet,
Could it be shared with such as thee.
And as our vessel sped along,
Still westward o'er the rolling seas,
I strove her fancy to attract,
Tried every artifice to please.
Did she but smile, my heart beat high
With cheering visions of success ;
Did but a shadow cross her brow,
I sank to depths of wretchedness.
Constant devotion such as mine,
Surely in her must waken love,
Yet still in doubt I lingered on,
And longed, but feared my fate to prove.
At last I screwed my courage up,
And sought her : Oh ! that I could curse her !
For sitting in my own arm chair
I found her, flirting with the Purser !
I choked my jealous rage, and said
With feigned mirth, “ Sure never worse a
Taste than that she, whom I had loved,
Should throw me over for the Purser.”
COLOMBO.
Oh ! a wonderful place is Colombo,
With its beggars, bazaars, dust, and noise, —
Don’t go dealing in jewels, as some do,
Buy nothing but trinkets and toys.
For to cheat new Colonials their trade is ;
In all dealings or bargains, beware
Of these Cingalese men, so like ladies,
With their petticoats, combs, and long hair.
So bewitchingly soft are their manners,
Their tact, too, is charming to see,
And they’ll always accept a few annas,
For what they’ve just asked a rupee.
They have Jumbo of all sorts and sizes,
Carved cases and boxes inlaid,
With bangles and bracelets for prizes,
And tortoiseshell knick-knacks displayed.
They have jewels and gems rare and handsome
If a buyer, you’re sure to be sold;
Though to look at they’re worth a king’s ransom,
All that glitters, you know, is not gold.
Oh ! they follow you close as your shadow,
And stick to your skirt like a burr,
So back to the vessel I’ll glad go,
And get out of the Babel and stir.
Cornstalk.


Dear Mr. Observer,
I am very pleased to do as you ask, and send you a few lines about “ Life on
the Ocean Wave,” from a feminine point of view. Of course it is rather monotonous;
but not altogether unpleasant by way of a change. Meals become somewhat too
important epochs in our day, and in the present hot weather even they become a burden
almost beyond endurance. It may be feared that a discussion of our neighbour’s foibles
occupies too large a portion of our conversation ; but when we are cooped up for weeks
within the limits of a ship—even if she be a fine one like the “ Parramatta”—this is only
what might be expected. I cannot agree with what you said last week about the high
order of the conversation in the smoking saloon, for George says the men there have
much less regard for our reputations than we show for theirs , when we talk them over on
the quarter deck.
But all this is a digression; for you want to know what I think of the ladies on
board. Well, Ido not grumble about them. All of them have been amiable, many of
them may be described as “nice.” I have not been able to discover any remarkable
beauty on board, nor have I noticed anything particularly striking in the way of dress, a
subject which you know I study with interest. To one point I must draw attention, viz.,
that wearing my own hair in that neat style which you have frequently commended, it
is with a secret sense of triumph that I remark the fatal effects of a day at sea on those
fringes on the forehead which look so bewitching when they make their first appearance
at breakfast, or tiffin. But I must write to you again about the fashions on board
the “ Parramatta,” for I want now to tell you how annoyed all the ladies have been with
what they have heard about a publication called the Parramatta World (or some similar
name), intended evidently to set all the passengers by the ears. We like what Mary
calls your “ dear old twaddlebut we give our worst wishes to the editors of your so-
called contemporary. I have not seen the production in question, as George declared that
it was such “ low form ” that it would not do for us to be seen reading it. The Pater,
who loves to roll forth epigrams, treated us to the following at dinner yesterday:—“ The
authors, my dears, are evidently under the impression that personality means wit, and
that scurrility is identical with humour;” a sentiment which I have been enunciating as
an original one of my own ever since.
It is very natural that my curiosity should have been aroused by all I have learnt
about this paper, and I have heard so much about it in my various walks and talks that 1
seem to be fairly well posted up in its contents. The question of authorship is the one
most mooted among us, and some innocent people have been charged with having had a
finger in the nasty pie. All are, however, agreed that summary justice should
be meted out to the authors, if discovered, so, for their sakes, it may be hoped
their names will not transpire. The worst portion of their offence seems to me the very
cowardly meanness shewn in propagating scandals under transparent initials, respecting
a lady on board, and when it is borne in mind that the lady in question is travelling
without the protection of any male relation, the offence appears doubly heinous. There
has been some talk of horsewhips, and if these are brought into use on the right person,
“ may Ibe there to see ! ” Then, again, the obloquy cast on the ship’s officers is
abominable. Nothing could exceed the kindness and attention we receive from the
Captain and some of the officers, and although we may think that others hold themselves
aloof from the passengers to rather too great an extent, yet we do not doubt they do so


with the best of reasons. I may say, moreover, that whenever we are brought into
communication with the more reserved of the officers, the treatment we receive is
invariably courteous and pleasant.
You must excuse, dear Mr. Observer, the length of my remarks on the unsavoury
subject of this newspaper. Hoping on another occasion to address you on more
congenial topics.
I am your friend and well-wisher,
JEMIMA.
Dear Observer, London, 2nd April , 1885.
In accordance with your suggestion, I send you a few scraps of London
gossip, and preface my remarks by saying that I do not propose to furnish you with
other than those items of intelligence on personal matters which form the attractive
features of Society journalism.
Your friends on board the “ Parramatta ” will, I am sure, hear with concern that
Her Majesty has been seriously indisposed. The cause of this unfortunate illness was a
dish of humble pie forwarded from St. Petersburg for the consumption of the Queen,
and, which having been dealt with in the usual manner in the Downing Street Kitchen,
was duly despatched to Windsor, with the lamentable result indicated. Much
exasperation is felt against the Chef responsible for furnishing the dish, and it was thought
at one time that a complete change would have to be made in the personnel of the
kitchen. On the Managers of this department, however, promising to exercise care for
the future, Her Majesty was graciously pleased to overlook their offence, and it is hoped
that no further disaster of the kind may occur.
A severe epidemic of trepidatio vrsi has prevailed for some time in Whitehall, Lords
Granville and Derby being the chief sufferers. It is reported that the worst phase of
this malignant disease has been reached, but it has left the noble patients in a state of
weakness closely bordering on decrepitude.
It is with the greatest regret that I inform you that a coldness, which it is feared
may lead to a total estrangement, has arisen between the Prime Minister and the Duke
of Westminster, caused by a playful joke of the former, of which His Grace was unable
to see the point. It appears that during a visit at Eaton Hall Mr. Gladstone rose one
morning with the dawn, and with his trusty axe felled the noble oak under which it is
the Duke’s practice to smoke his morning cigar. On being asked why he had perpetrated
this breach of good manners, he said he only acted in the exuberance of his spirits, and
to show that there was “ life in the old dog yet.” The explanation was not altogether
satisfactory to His Grace.
It is believed that the Land Bill, which is backed by Mr. Chamberlain and Mr. Jesse
Collings, is now in process of drafting. Its chief provision is said to be, to secure the
enjoyment of the land by the tenant in perpetuity at a peppercorn rent, all outgoings of
every description being discharged by the Landlord. The publication of the Bill is
anticipated with interest both by Landlords and Tenants. A report is current (for the
truth of which I cannot vouch) that, with a view to shewing his desire to improve the
condition of the lower orders by example, as well as precept, Mr. Chamberlain intends
for the future to supply indigent carpenters and builders with screws, free of charge, from
the well-known works of Messrs. Nettlefold & Co., at Birmingham, of which the Right
Honourable Gentleman is the chief proprietor. Report also says that his long expected
book “ Every Man his own Screw-driv§r,” will be in the hands of the public next month.


Your Australian friends will learn with interest that the dinner given by Lord
Rosebery to the Agents-General of the Australian Colonies, passed off with success,
though there appeared a danger at one time of a hitch occurring, in consequence of a
dispute among the guests on the question of precedency. His Lordship, with that
delicate tact for which he is distinguished, had provided a bill of fare comprising only
such delicacies as can be produced in the colonies, and which had been brought to
England, regardless of expense. Space forbids my laying before you the entire menu,
but when I mention that a haunch of “ old man,” Kangaroo formed a veritable 'piece de
resistance (his tail having furnished the excellent soup which ushered in the dinner) ;
that boiled emu was an admirable rdlevd; and that Possum ala gum tree, and fricassed
cockatoo were only two of numerous colonial entries, some idea of the recherchS character
of the repast may be obtained. A Tarantula Curry was greatly admired, and was
declared by the guests to be vastly superior to the same dish prepared with prawns.
Nothing but Colonial Wines were provided, and it is not known whether to this fact may
be attributed the brisk demand for Lemonade and other Temperance drinks. The
Countess of Rosebery was present until the curry was brought in, and the infant Lord
Dalmeny was the object of much interest, one enthusiastic guest declaring that he could,
with the eye of faith, see him as Viceroy wielding the sceptre of a United Australia.
Hoping that before you reach our shores I may be able to furnish you with the
latest Metropolitan gossip for the benefit of your numerous readers,
I am, yours faithfully,
VIGILANS.
CONCERT.
A most successful concert took place on the quarter deck on Saturday evening last,
the 11th April, when a very numerous company were delighted with a selection of music,
both vocal and instrumental.
The programme opened with the overture to “ Der Freischutz,” admirably performed
by Mr. Stanley, after which, Miss Thomas gave an artistic rendering of‘‘Come unto me,”
a song which was received with great favour. Mr. Bargate then sang the ever welcome
“ Midshipmite,” in his well-known style, the audience joining in the chorus with
admirable effect. The next item on the programme was the glee, “ Building of the Ship,”
sung by Mr. and Mrs. Gibson, Miss Phillips, and Mr, Stanley, and which gave general
satisfaction, after which, Miss Phillips sang Braga’s “ Serenade.” This was undoubtedly
one of the leading features of the evening’s performance, the song being rendered in
excellent style and being one well suited to the voice of Miss Phillips. The Misses Smith
next shewed to great advantages in a pianoforte duet, and were followed by Mr. Watson,
who sang the well-known comic song, “He always came home to tea,” in a manner which
recalled memories of Mr. J. L. Toole in his palmiest days. The glee, “ Beam of Light,”
sung by Mr. and Mrs. Gibson, Miss Wilson, and Mr. Rendall, was next on the programme.
This was an admirable performance, and was succeeded by the favourite and appropriate
melody, “ The Tar’s Farewell,” sung by Mr. Johnson. Mr. Rendall next favoured the
audience with a short recitation, an extract from “Alice through the Looking Glass,”
which elicited much applause, Mr. Gibson then sang, “ Old Friend John,” in a style
which was much appreciated, and the concluding song was “ Wait till the clouds roll by,”
the audience joining with much spirit in the chorus. “ God save the Queen,” brought
to a termination a most satisfactory performance. It should be mentioned that


Mrs. Gibson, Miss Wilkie, Miss Armstrong, and Mr. Stanley lent valuable assistance in
accompanying the vocalists on the piano, and Mr. Rendall accompanied one song with the
violoncello. The following is a summary of the performance :
1. OVERTURE. . . . “ Der Freischuiz.” . . . Mr. STANLEY.
2. SONG .... “ Come unto Me.” . . . Miss THOMAS.
3. SONG AND CHORUS . “Midshipmite." . . . Mr. BARGATE.
T kt? t Q-i • „ f Mr. & Mrs. GIBSON, Miss
4. GLEE .... Building of the Ship. j PHILLIPS & Mr. STANLEY.
5. SONG .... “ Braga’s ‘ Serenade.’ ” . . . Miss PHILLIPS.
6. PIANOFORTE . . . “Tancredi.” . . . Misses SMITH.
7. SONG . . . “He always came Home to Tea.” . . Mr. WATSON.
q r*T tt’u’ « .p t ■ ii” C Mr. & Mrs. GIBSON, IVliss
8. GLEE .... Beam of Light. | WILSON A Mr. RENDALL.
9. SONG .... “ The Tar’s Farewell.” . . . Mr. JOHNSON.
10. RECITATION ... ... Mr. RENDALL.
11. SONG “ Old Friend John.” . . . Mr. GIBSON.
12. SONG AND CHORUS . “ Wait till the Clouds roll by.” .
SPELLING BEE.
A Spelling “ Bee ” was held on the Quarter Deck on Thursday evening, a detailed
account of which we hope to furnish in our next issue. The acoustic capabilities of the
place of entertainment were of the worst possible nature, and the accommodation provided
for members of the Fourth Estate most inadequate. We hope, however, to glean full
particulars in the course of the next few days, and will now only add that, after a keen
competition, Mr. Hordern was declared the Champion Speller of the “ Parramatta.”
GAMES TOURNAMENT.
In spite of the interruption consequent upon our arrival and short stay at Colombo,
we have made fair progress with the above Tournament during the past week, no less
than four of the contests having been brought to a conclusion; to wit, Backgammon,
Cribbage, Bull, and Quoits, and two, Chess and Draughts, to the issue of the final struggle.
The Whist Tournament, we regret to have to report, remains in statu quo at the time
of our last publication, that is to say :
Messrs. Brandon and Bryan have yet to try conclusions with Messrs. Marks and Taylor in the
Third Round, and the victorious pair to dispute the prize with Mrs. Levey and Mr. Capper.
Besides the Whist, the
DOMINOES
Tournament is still in arrears. In spite of the hope expressed in our last report that this contest
might be brought to the same standpoint as the rest, the First Round remains yet unfinished. The
winners, so far, in the First Round are Mrs. Paul, Messrs. Marks, Porter, and Sievers, whilst the
game that yet remains to be played before the drawing for the Second Round can take place, is
that between Dr. White and Mr. Rendall.
Chess and Draughts, in each of which one game only remains to be played, will probably be
brought to a conclusion to-day, though not early enough, it is feared, for their results to appear in
our present report. In
CHESS
Messrs. Barratt, Gardner, Hordern, and Rendall won their respective games in the First Round. In
the Second Round
Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Gardner. | Mr. Rendall beat Mr. Barratt.
. Thus leaving Messrs. Hordern and Rendall to play off the Final Tie.


DRAUGHTS— Second Round.
Mr. Bargate beat Mr. Porter. I Mr. Grabam beat Miss Pym.
Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Nathan. j Mr. Summers beat Mr. Booth.
In the last game Mr. Booth scratched, press of business, owing to the untiring way in which
he has been devoting his energies to the amusement of the public, not leaving him time for his own
private pleasures.
Third Round.
Mr. Graham beat Mr. Summers. | Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Bargate.
Messrs. Graham and Hordern, it is believed, will try conclusions during the day.
There remains now only to tell of those contests in which the palm has been already oarried
away, and (to their praise be it spoken), the palm-bearers are, in two cases, of the gentler sex. In
BACKGAMMON — Second Round,
Mr. Rendall beat Captain Moseley. | Miss Pym beat Mr. Bargate.
And in the Final Tie between Miss Pym and Mr. Rendall, Miss Pym was victorious.
CRIBBAGE — Second Round.
Mrs. Inglis beat Mr. Booth. | Mrs. Gunn beat Mr. Brandon.
Miss Wilson, Bye.
Third Round.
Mrs. Gunn beat Miss Wilson. | Mrs. Inglis, Bye.
In the Final Match Mrs. Gunn beat Mrs. Inglis, thus winning the Tournament and the last of four
well-fought and well-won battles.
QUOITS — Second Round.
Mr. Porter beat Mr. Bagot. | Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Webster.
Mr. Cameron beat Mr. Chapman.
Third Round.
Mr. Horden beat Mr. Porter. | Mr. Cameron having drawn a Bye.
And in the Final Tie , Mr. Hordern beat Mr. Cameron.
BULL— Third Round.
Mr. Shields beat Mr. Webster. | Mr. Porter, Bye.
And in the Final Round, though the Bull-dog was his hound, and his name was Porter, he battered
himself in vain against the Shield(s). —“ Old Sport.”
THE DRAWINGS IN THE FIRST ROUND OF THE LADIES’ WHIST TOURNAMENT
Have taken place with the following results, though none of the games have been played off
up to date :
Mr. Hordern and Miss Wilson to play Mr. Rendall and Miss MacKinnon.
Mr Capper and Mrs. Levey „ Mr. Booth and Mrs. Summers.
Mr. and Mrs. Owen ~ Mr. Marks and Miss Greig.
Capt. Moseley and Miss Pym „ Mr. and Mrs. Brandon.
Mr. and Mrs. MacKinnon „ Miss MacKinnon and Mr. Manifold.
“0. S.”


VARIETIES.
A SONNET OF COUPLETS, BEING ALL A HUM, ORA BUZZ ON THE “ SPELLING
BEE,” BY A DRONE.
Tenent passengeres deckium,
Circlum formantes magicum.
In centro lampum flickerum,
Et judex omnium blunderum.
Competitores cranium
S cratchant, —timentes pessimum.
Judex cullat congissimum
Yerbum, et horribillimum.
Quum stumpasset virum primnm
Growlabat victima “By gum !”
Jndicem damnabat plurimum,
Qui exturnebat scowlingum.
“ Rot est infernallissimum
Ron admitto librum tuum !”
Fetchabat dictionarinm,
Et contestabat id verbum.
Sed nil availens squabbleum,
Descendens, topat whiskeium.
(Stewardi find ant in floorum
Salooni miserum virum).
Alter mullit post alterum,
Contractat circlum magicum.
Jam remanent duo solum
Hushatur buzzus voicium.
Quam judex strivat botherum !
Vivat genus Joemincum!
Sed Di protectant strongerum,
Et vir deportat proemium !
Florbat Etoha.
WAIL OF THE VANQUISHED.
That spelling B, that spelling B,
Why thus yclept t’is hard to see !
It had been more correct to say
“ We’re going to hold a spelling A.”
That spelling Bee, that spelling Bee !
Say what you please ’twas hard to see ;
Behold the judge’s brow contract
O’er dimmest lamp, w'hose glass was
cracked.
Thou spelling Bee, tliou spelling Bee !
Although so harsh this time to me,
I’ll join the fun another night,
And trust to be the lucky wight.
Good spelling Bee, good spelling Bee !
(I’ll keep it dark) reveal to me
The talisman I must obtain
That I next time the prize may gain.
“ Owl.”
One of our passengers—name and sex, married or single, being a secret confided to
our editorial bosom—writes:
I have consulted the Professor of Palmistry referred to in your last issue, being
desirous of looking into futurity as regards myself. The reply to my queries was so
vague that I did not feel as though I had added to my knowledge by one single iota—in
fact I was forcibly reminded of the explanation afforded to the monarch renowned in
song under the title of ‘ Old King Cole,’ by his secretary, which was as follows :
“ Old King Cole upon his face had a mole,
So he sent for his secretaree,
And bade him to look in the necromancer’s book
To see what a mole might be.
Now the secretary said, when the books he had read,
And cast his Tiativitee,
‘ That a mole upon the face meant that something would take place,
But not what that something would be.’ ”
Memo. —lt is the peculiar characteristic of all oracles to deliver somewhat mysterious
utterances. They can only furnish information in the same manner as it is revealed to
them. They cannot provide the brains requisite for elucidating the hidden truth.


A lady correspondent writes:—There are none too many dancing men on board
at present; it is a great sliame of the Captain sending away the males on board the
Mirzapore.” Upon enquiry, the Captain has kindly informed ns that it is a regular part
of the service to tranship the ‘ Mails ’ at Colombo into the vessel carrying the Calcutta
mail. It shows the danger of ladies making complaints upon hearsay evidence only.
HATCHES. Several lively u Canards.” We are informed that these are
perfect prodigies, as they fly freely as soon as they are hatched; and though
from their name we understand that the authors of their existence look upon them as
perfect “ Ducks,” they are eagerly swalloxved by Geese.
MATCHES. Up to the present date we cannot announce the completion of any,
although from present indications we have every reason to expect highly satisfactory
results. It is commonly reported that matches are forbidden on board of the Company’s
vessels under a heavy penalty, but from the number of gay young sparks that are to bo
seen at all hours the rule seems to have fallen into abeyance.
DESPATCHES. We have to lament the departure of one of the oldest residents
in the ll Parramatta,” who disappeared somewhat mysteriously at sea, on the evening of
the 14th inst. He filled with considerable eclat the office of Bellman. He has left his
bell behind. We have every reason to believe that he has gone to the Celestial land.
Sundry arm chairs, in a more or less advanced stage of decomposition.
A number of letters from Colombo—more to follow.
ANSWER TO ACROSTIC IN OUR
LAST NUMBER.
N a yi gation. Parramatta.
N ea P
A auror A
V erge R
I ndoor R •
G ondol A
A i M
T og A
1 dio T
O u T
N ebrask A
ANSWERS TO RIDDLES.
1. Because it has a heard without a chin, and
is pulled out of hed to be “tucked in.”
2. Because all his ways are wicked, and all
his wicked ways are brought to light.
3. A “thing” that holds a lady's hand without
squeezing it.
4. Because he succeeded in floating a large
company, when all the rest of the world were in
liquidation.
5. Because one was a wonder and the other
was a Tudor (Twoder).
b. Because ho was “axed ” whether lie would
or no.
RIDDLES.
1. Why does a sculptor die a most painful death P
2. Why ought all rooks to be beheaded ?
3. What is the difference between a cow and a ricketty chair ?
4. Why must a chemist always be a woman ?
5. What is the worth of a woman ?
6. What is the key-note to good manners ?
7. When daylight broke what became of the pieces ?
8. What animals took the least baggage into the ark ?
9. What did the spider do when he came out of the ark ?
10. Why does a duck go under water P
11. Why does it come out again ? —Tip.


DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
1 We shall all be loath to quit her,
Though we leave her far behind;
2 These should ne’er be impecunious
They can always “ raise the wind.”
1 It gives the best restorative to weary pilgrim faint
With desert heat, we hail thee, the true blue ribbon saint.
2 She breathing this, her heartfelt prayer
Consigns her dear ones to their Father’s care.
3 How much it will carry, and what its daily length
Fair field for speculation is, none care to know its strength.
4 We run this daily as we go by tram, by coach, or line,
Without it none can make a voyage, what t’is you’ll all divine.
5 Alone ’midst hostile fleets, her rebel flag displayed,
She swept the ocean, and destroyed their trade.
6 This moist and warm, at best a homely feast
Will oft refresh the over-ridden beast.
7 Real hearts of oak, sons of the sea,
In this a jolly tar you’ll see —
8 An apple once sowed discord, as we’re told,
In this the true Love’s apple you’ll behold.
9 As stuck up folks we see so high and mighty,
A fitting sequel this you say to higlity.
10 Between two choice morsels bewildered,
The beast in the fable might say,
How happy could I be with either
Were the other sweet charmer away.
CONUNDRUMS.
There is a word of plural number
A foe to peace and quiet slumber.
Now any word you like to take
By adding “ S ” you plural make ;
But if you add an “ S ” to this,
Strange is the metamorphosis;
Plural will plural be no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
Cut off my head and singular I act,
Cut off my tail and plural I appear,
Cut off my head and tail and wondrous fact,
Although my middle’s left, there’s nothing there !
What is my head cut off ? —a sounding C ;
What is my tail cut off ?—a flowing river ;
And in unfathomed depths I fearless play,
Parent of sweetest sounds though mute for ever.
CHILDREN’S CORNER.
Where there’s a w 7 ill there’s a lawyer.
Procrastination is the soul of business.
The "want of money is the root of all evil.
What can’t be cured had better be eaten fresh.
Never do to-day what you can put off till to-morrow.
Never do yourself what someone else can begot to do for you.


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
“Nunquam Dormio.”
No. 3.
SATURDAY, 25tii APRIL, 1885.
April 25th, 1885.
While Australian passengers homeward bound must be impressed by the vast extent
of the British Empire, yet the carelessness hitherto displayed by its rulers towards
securing their dominion cannot fail to strike the most casual observer. For more than
two-thirds of the journey every link in the long chain of communication is British. All
visible authority is clothed in that uniform, over head floats the Union Jack, while the
number of vessels flying foreign flags which make use of their ports, proves their
importance as depots for coal and other necessary supplies, and bears testimony to the
almost prophetic instinct of our forefathers, who possessed themselves of these places ere
yet their extreme importance, as necessary centres, in the days when steam should have
altered the conditions of naval warfare, could have been fully recognised. Albany with
its splendid natural harbour and important coaling depot; Colombo with its grand
artificial basin, its vast coal stores, the busy commercial centre of the island; Aden, the
key to the Red Sea, a no less important coaling station, whence also the whole of the
Colonial lines of communication radiate; all under the direct authority of the Imperial
Government, appear to be very inadequately protected (the two former especially so),
while their coal stores would seem to lie handy to be either appropriated or destroyed
by a comparatively small force. The absolute security of all these links in the chain
which unites England to her Colonies, whether as stations for coaling or refitting, or as
mere harbours of refuge, has become of vastly increased importance since the introduction
of steam. Duiing the wars at the beginning of this century, when naval operations
were last carried on upon an extended scale, a frigate could keep at sea for a period
defined only by her stock of water and provisions, both of which could be replenished
without any great difficulty. Dependent upon the winds alone, she could cruise in any
part of the world; unheralded by telegrams she could capture an enemy’s vessel or
bombard a fort in the Eastern hemisphere; herself the bearer of the intelligence of
similar feats recently achieved in the Western one. Nowadays a war vessel is limited in
her sphere of operations ; once her stock of coal is exhausted she is practically useless;
and as the places upon the world’s seaboard, where fresh supplies can be obtained are
few and far between, the offensive powers of a hostile cruiser will extend to the number
of days only by which she can venture to separate herself from them. These being
efficiently blockaded, her capture is only a question of time. As coal is now contraband
of war, so much only can be furnished by any neutral Power as will suffice to carry the
vessel safely to the nearest port, while all ships carrying it are liable to seizure. It
becomes the more incumbent, therefore, upon that nation, which, by owning both the
sources whence the chief supplies are drawn, and the depots where they are stored,


possesses vastly increased powers both for attack and defence, to ensure the absolute
security of both stores and store-houses. That England has been very remiss in this
respect is sufficiently notorious, and it is to be hoped that the present war scare will
compel her administrators to cany out in its entirety the scheme of defence submitted to
the House of Commons in the Autumn of 1884.
THE GLADSTONE CABINET PUDDING.
Of Gladstone jam and Harcouvt sauce one ounce;
A spoonful add of Dilke’s unrivalled bounce;
One dozen of Trevelyan’s finest gushes ;
One pound of Bismarck’s scorn and England’s blushes ;
Of affidavits false a bundle take ;
Upon them quickly twenty pledges break;
Of indecision half a hogshead pour;
Of indiscretion take the same, or more ;
Of milk and water, weak, take firkins six ;
With half a quart of brag and bluster mix.
Then let cook Granville take the whole and stir it,
Shunning, like poison, the least drop of spirit.
A daintier dish has never yet been seen
‘ To set before the people, and the Queen.
FROM SYDNEY TO COLOMBO AND KANDY.
The passengers by the S.S. “ Parramatta ” have every reason to congratulate them-
selves upon their good fortune in having had such a thoroughly pleasant time since their
departure from Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide. The voyage, so far, cannot be
regarded otherwise than as a pleasure trip, and, indeed, it could not be the reverse, con-
sidering the very favorable circumstances under which it has been pursued.
The weather, for the most part, has been all that could reasonably be expected or
desired; everything has been done on board ship to supply the wants of the passengers,
and to ensure their comfort. In addition to this the passengers themselves, with,
perhaps, one or two exceptions, have evinced a most decided wish to be on friendly
terms with each other, and to engage in that social intercourse and amusement which
are essential in making a voyage an event to be recalled with feelings of pleasure. Nor
must we forget to mention that this happy state of affairs is attributable in no small degree
to the courtesy and kindness of our Commander and his officers, and to their ready
acquiescence and assistance in all arrangements having for their object the recreation and
enjoyment of the passengers. The tedium, which is the usual characteristic of a long sea
voyage, has been broken, in the present instance, by the calls which have been made at
various places, and undoubtedly the most interesting of those yet visited is Colombo. Here
is a town which fills the stranger in tropical climates with wonder and astonishment;
for it presents to him human life in a form entirely different to that to which he has been
accustomed, or of which, perhaps, he can form any conception. He is at once struck
(not unfrequently with the Sun!) with the wonderful prolificness, luxuriance and beauty of
tropical vegetation, which forms such a contrast to that of colder countries. The natives,
too, and their manners and rather scanty costumes, cannot fail to form subjects of much


amusement, curiosity, and, it might also be added, annoyance. Long before you have
had an opportunity of landing they visit the ship in scores, and commence opera-
tions by harassing you with uninterrupted importunity to purchase of them articles of
such varied description that it would become tedious to particularise. They have,
undoubtedly a keen eye to business, if such it may be termed, and it would be well for
the stranger to exercise much caution in any monetary transactions with them. In most
cases one would have a very fair chance of being taken in if about 1,000 per cent, reduc-
tion upon the original offer were accepted for the articles presented for sale; and instances
are by no means rare where lower reductions even than that have not been refused. What-
ever good qualities the natives may possess, modesty in their business pursuits most
assuredly cannot be claimed.
The part of the town known as the native quarter baffles description, and must be
personally inspected before any accurate idea of the place can be formed. The houses,
or rather huts, are principally made of mud, and roofed with tiles, and, for some reason or
other, are huddled together as closely as possible. The village, which has a decidedly
unpleasant odour, and, in the afternoon, is the scene of much activity, abounds with such
a number of children, all apparently sturdy and in good health, that the idea is at once
negatived that the population of Ceylon is likely soon to decrease. These children notice a
stranger immediately, and follow him for a long way begging for money, and protesting in
the most piteous accents —altogether feigned—that their fathers and mothers are either
both dead, or very sick. It is useless to attempt to drive them away as they, like flies,
only dodge you from one side to the other ; so grin and bear it you must. A stock-whip
of the very largest dimensions would be an invaluable weapon in Colombo for a
stranger to carry—he would find frequent opportunity for its use.
Some of the passengers of the “ Parramatta,” including the writer of these lines,
availed themselves of the opportunity of visiting Kandy, a town about 60 or 70 miles
from Colombo, reached by railway. For the first 20 or 30 miles the country passed
through is entirely flat, not very interesting, and is covered chiefly with jungle. Here
and there were seen some rather seedy-looking bungalows, and occasionally some paddy
fields, which appeared to be in rather a neglected condition. As we proceeded, the
scenery became more hilly and attractive, and eventually quite mountainous. In some
places, the railroad passes along the side of high bluff mountains, thousands of feet high.
The views here are very grand and extensive, and are sufficient to repay one for the
journey. It makes one shudder to think of what the consequences might be should the
train happen to run off the line at some of these dangerous places. Great care,
however, is evidently taken by the engine-driver and the guard in passing those spots.
It might be mentioned that in one of the valleys we passed, a mountain arose, on the
summit of which is a rock, which from a distance looks very much like Stirling Castle.
We duly arrived at Kandy about dusk, without having seen any of the ferocious
animals which inhabit Ceylon, and drove straight to the Queen's Hotel, to.secure accom-
modation for the night. We found, however, such an influx of visitors that for many of
us bedrooms were altogether out of the question, so we had to be contented with the
promise of “ shake-downs ”on the floor of the drawing-room. Before we dined we took
the opportunity of a few spare minutes of visiting the Buddhist Temple, where one of the
sacred teeth of the gentleman, after whom the edifice is named, is said to be deposited
under a huge gold bell. We passed through a number of mysterious-looking passages,
lined by darkies of all ages and description—all begging—and finally came to a place
which looked very much like a cell. Here we saw the bell, placed behind some strong
D


iron bars, on either side of which stood two very swarthy-looking gentlemen, dressed in
white, each holding a plate to receive any contributions we might be pleased to offer.
We were not permitted to see the tooth, as we were not armed with the necessary
written authority from some respected old codger, who alone could grant the privilege.
Most of us, however, were truly glad to reach the open air again, for the fiendish noise
going on inside, by the yelling and hooting of the natives, and the almost sickening
odour of the place, made it nearly insufferable. Some musicians were also performing
on instruments, which produced sounds even more distracting and awful than the
bagpipes. It is not astonishing that, under these circumstances, we were not anxious to
prolong our stay. One gentleman of our party not thoroughly understanding what
precious treasure was hidden under the bell mentioned, innocently inquired of one of
the attendants, of which there was no scarcity, whether it was an elephant’s tooth.
Some very fierce looks were the reply to this question, and he may thank his lucky stars
that he was not annihilated on the spot.
About 11 o’clock, the few of us who remained up so late retired to the “ Drawing-
room ” to inspect the “ shake-downs ” prepared for us. To our intense disgust we found
all of them occupied, and, as the manager of the Hotel had retired to rest, there was
nothing else to be done but to lie down on any available spot we could find. Hard
as the “ arms of Murphy ” were under these circumstances, we were on the point of
sinking peacefully and resignedly into them, when we heard an altercation in the corridor
outside, and voices protesting that some “ rascally Australians ” had taken possession of
bedrooms to which they were not entitled. Knowing the Australian character so
well, we were prone to believe the charges made against them, and, in view of our own
positions, deeply sympathised with the unfortunates who had been unjustly deprived of
their beds. These gentlemen proved to be some members of the legal profession on a
visit to Kandy, on business connected with the Court. They eventually came to seek rest
in our apartment, where already there were about twelve packed as tight as sardines.
The prospects now of obtaining any sleep became rather remote, as the new arrivals
proved to be gentlemen of undoubted festive characteristics, and capable of making the
best of a bad position. They commenced smoking, and chaffing each other in such a
manner as to discourage any attempt to sleep, and it was not long before nearly all the
occupants of the room were on the most friendly and affable terms. The arrival then of
a few more luckless individuals, likewise roaming about in search of beds, completed a
very lively and animated party. Matters, however, did not reach their climax until,
during a slight interval of quietness, two of our friends took hold of one of the sofas, one
at each end, and calmly bundled the occupant on to the floor on top of some other
unoffending individual. This proceeding was of course the signal for active and
immediate hostilities. We all rose as one man, and armed ourselves with whatever
weapons came handiest; even two elderly gentlemen who were with us are not free from
the suspicion of having taken a somewhat prominent part in the affray. Pillows, beds,
boots, hats, and all kinds of articles were hurled about the room with utter recklessness,
and might indeed have ended in some damage to the contents of the room if not to
ourselves, had not the footsteps of the manager been heard approaching. Strange to
relate, when he made his appearance nearly all were snoring ; being, however, a man of
more than ordinary cuteness, he was not to be deceived and begged that, as ladies were
in an adjoining chamber, less noise might be made. One gentleman adroitly defended
himself against the charge of want of consideration, by pleading that as he had simply
a sponge for a pillow and no clothes, it was monstrous to expect him to sleep


and be quiet. The manager was much affected at hearing of this state of affairs,
and went away, returning almost immediately with a pillow which, he informed us, his
wife had given up on condition that there should be no more noise. Compliance with
these terms was faithfully promised, and peace reigned for some time until someone,
whether under provocation or not could not be ascertained, suddenly seized his neigh-
bour by the heels and hauled him, without further ceremony, into the corridor. Our truce
having been thus openly violated, another general attack ensued, but, perhaps, not of
such a desperate character as the previous one. In the midst of the turmoil someone had
the good sense to suggest a cessation of hostilities for the purpose of obtaining some
refreshment. This idea was unanimously approved of, and all fell in accordingly and
retired. In due course we returned to the “ Drawing-room,” and beguiled a few hours by
sundry personal reminiscences, more or less edifying. About 3 a.m. one of the elderly
gentlemen previously referred to arrived at the conclusion that he had had about enough
of it—insatiable monster —and suggested that we might now with propriety “try a little
sleep.” This proposal was carried by acclamation, and in a very short time we were
all enjoying that repose reserved only for the just. We were rather pleased to find next
morning, on settling our hotel bill, that nothing extra had been charged for our enter-
tainment of the previous night, which, no doubt, we enjoyed the more on account of its
thoroughly impromptu character.
After a somewhat hurried breakfast, we drove round the lake at Kandy, and visited
the Botanic Gardens, which, apart from the general and natural loveliness of the district,
is the only thing to be seen. On our way back to Colombo we had better opportunities,
the morning being delightfully cool and clear, of appreciating the grandeur of the scenery
through which we passed, One lesson may be learned from the foregoing account, and
that is, not to take a journey to Kandy without securing by telegram proper accommo-
dation for the night.
23 rd April , 1885.
NOTES ON THE ROUTE HOME THROUGH ITALY.
The following notes may be of service to those passengers who have not travelled
across the continent, and who, having but a limited time at their disposal, are bewildered
by the amount that may be seen even in a few days. Now our readers will kindly
recollect when reading the brief itinerary, that our experience of Italian Hotels is more
than a year old, and that, therefore, our recommendation of any special Hotel should, if
possible, receive confirmation from other travellers, who are met with at every town.
Hotels, as all know, improve and deteriorate in the most rapid manner under different
proprietors, but one important point never alters, and that is the position. It is a matter
of no little moment to be situated in a healthy position, removed from the various
fragrances (if we may so call them) which, alas, seem inseparable from a large number
of the most interesting towns in the world.
We will suppose that Brindisi has been reached. It is an ancient town (the
Brundusium of the Romans), but there is nothing of particular interest about it, at all
events, to the traveller who is unskilled in Roman remains; yet' it should be remarked
that it is one of the old walled towns.
Unless altered during the present year, the last train leaves Brindisi for Naples at
3.0 p.m., arriving at the latter place at 7.30 the next morning. Without doubt, the
best Hotel in Naples, especially as regards position, is the Grand Hotel Nobile.


The city of Naples itself will probably disgust,the English mind, but the Bay, with
the view of Mount Yesuvius especially, and all the environs are lovely. The ascent of
this volcano is made without any fatigue, first by driving, and then by the wire rope
railway. A crowd of troublesome fellows will meet you at the upper station, who will do
their best to haul you up the crater, all of whom treat with contempt. The whole
excursion will not take more than 6or 7 hours. Luncheon is provided at the top.
Pompeii is 15 miles from Naples by train, and can be seen in a morning.
A drive should be taken to the grotto of Posilipo, Virgil's tomb, and Pozzuoli.
The Museo Nationale contains many interesting relics of Pompeii and Herculaneum.
Three days in Naples will enable you to get a very fair idea of its charms, and we
strongly advise the hurried traveller to spend his time as we have suggested, out of doors,
and not in the churches or galleries there. The cabmen are given to many tricks by
which they hope to get more than they are entitled to. Two of the dodges are, to
pretend that the horse is tired and cannot go quite home with you; and that the axle-box
has heated, so that the carriage cannot proceed. In any case do not pay except at your
hotel, which will save you much extortion and abuse.
From Naples to Rome, takes about hours by train, Hotel Quirinale is one of the
best, and especially well situated in one of the chief streets, next the Opera House.
Four days will enable you to see a great deal. The chief buildings of interest of
Ancient Rome lie in a small area. The lions of all the lions that exist in Rome,
are; the Colosseum, Forum, Arches of Constantine and Titus, Palace of the Csesars
on the Palatine Hill, the Pantheon, Trajan’s Column, the Cloaca Maxima, Aqueducts,
and the Tombs of the Scipios; the last named, and the Baths of Caracalla being a
short distance outside the city. A day will suffice, at the rate we are moving, to see
S. Peter’s, the Vatican, and the Castle of S. Angelo. One of the series of Catacombs
should be visited. The finest churches are S. John Lateran, S. Maria Mazziore, S. Croce
in Gerusalemme, and S. Paolo estra Muros. S. Clement’s is a curious building, three
churches having been built over one another.
From Rome to Florence by night express takes 7 hours. None of the hotels are
really good, but the Grand Hotel Continental, and the Grand Hotel of New York are the
best. Both of these overlook the River Arno. There is more to see in Florence in
the way of Paintings and Sculpture than any where else in Italy, if not in the world, and
we should advise you to walk through the various Galleries to get an idea of the riches
of Italy in works of art. It would take months to get any knowledge of the galleries,
therefore, stroll through them, and hope for a longer time in the future The Campanile
.or Belfry by the side of the Cathedral is extremely beautiful, as is also the octagonal
Baptistry.
The Cascine Gardens (about 2 miles drive) are pretty; besides, one can get there a
view of the Apennines, which should not be missed. By ascending the Campanile, a
splendid view is obtained of all the country round. The Churches are not remarkable
on the whole, but just look into any you pass; they are always open.
From Florence direct to Milan takes 10 hours, but by making a small detour you
can see Pisa, where two hours will suffice to see its four great sights (all of which lie
close together) : the Leaning Tower, the Baptistry, the Marble Cathedral, and the
Campo Santo, built towards the end of the 13th century, to hold earth brought
from the Holy Land. On your way to Milan you pass through Bologna, Modena,
and Parma, if you go direct, but if you go to Pisa you pass along the Western Coast,
by Spezzia, Genoa, and Pavia. We cannot afford time to stay at any of these, however.


At Milan there are many very fair hotels. Hotel Cavour is one of the best, though,
perhaps, rather more expensive than others. The Grand Hotel, Milan, is also very
comfortable. The Cathedral is built entirely of white marble from the Simplon, and
besides many beautiful mosaics, bronzes, etc., contains the tomb of S. Carlo Borromeo, in
the crypt.
There about 2,500 statues in and about the building. Be sure to ascend the tower,
and note with what care every piece of marble is placed, and how beautifully finished off.
All the work is most thorough, whether it is likely to be seen, or in some out of the way
corner. The celebrated picture by Leonardi da Vinci of the Last Supper is in the Church
of Santa Maria delle Grazie, and should certainly be seen. It is painted on the wall,
and is peeling off terribly. It is not improbable that it will be almost gone in a few
years. S. Ambrose is a very ancient church. S. Carlo Borromeo, a round one ; S. Lorenzo,
octagonal. The environs are very pretty. The theatre, called La Scala, will hold some
4,000 people. There is a large Palace of Science and Art, called the Brera, well worth
visiting.
There are many routes from Milan to Paris, all of which have their attractions. We
recommend the route by Lake Maggiorc. The train from Milan to Arona takes about two
hours. At Arona, on Lake Maggiore, you take steamer to Locarno, at the Northern end
of the lake; five hours. The Grand Hotel, Locarno, is the best, but it is only open for part of
the year. Hotel de la Couronne is a very fair one. You should ascend to the Church of
Madonna del Sasso, very curious and full of votive tablets. From Locarno you can go
by train to Lucerne, but you will miss some of the finest scenery in the world if you do.
Go by train to Bellinzona, and take the diligence over the St. Gothard Pass to Fluelen,
whence you go by steamer along Lake Lucerne; hours to Lucerne. The scenery is
magnificent, some of the very finest in Switzerland, passing Tell’s Chapel, and the
lower station of the liigi Mountain Railway.
The best Hotels at Lucerne are the Schweitzerhof, and Grand Hotel National. See
the wounded Lion, carved in the rock, in memory of the Swiss Guards. There is nothing
of special interest in Lucerne. Spend any time you have out of doors, and gaze at the
lake and snow clad mountains.
We imagine now that our time is at an end. There are two routes from Lucerne
to Paris. If you cannot stay any longer by the way, take the one by Berne and Neuchatel,
skirting Lake Neuchatel. The other one is by Bale.
And thus we must conclude our rush through many lovely scenes, hoping that
these hints may be of service to some time-pressed traveller. We have omitted one
thing: do not forget when at Milan that you get an astounding view of the huge mass
of Monte Rosa from the top of the Cathedral.
OUR VOYAGE.
By dinner time on Tuesday, April 14th, most of the passengers had returned on
board, only a few who had gone up to Kandy by the morning train not having
yet got back. All seemed much pleased with what they had seen, and the first glimpse
of Eastern life, which to many of them possessed the charm of absolute novelty. It
was a relief after the heat and bustle, and constant chatter by which we had been
surrounded on shore, to return to the comparative quiet of our vessel. The last of the
cargo being on board, we got away to sea about 9.45 p.m.; shortly after getting


outside, the stoppage of the engines surprised us. on enquiry it appeared that a little
Bird who was bound eastward, found so much difficulty in severing sundry pleasant
associations with the vessel, that he missed the pilot whom he was to have accompanied.
Fortunately for him the captain hove to, while he was put ashore in a boat from the
ship. The following morning found us again in blue Avater and grumbling at the
heat. The appearance of a small pamphlet calling itself the Parramatta Truth, Avhich
had been printed during our stay in Colombo, and was extensively circulated on board,
caused a small flutter of excitement, though upon the whole harmless. It struck pointedly
at a certain portion of the Company and Avas generally received Avith disapproAval. The
authors not being flattered by the comments did not think fit to proclaim themselves, and
much speculation Avas caused thereby, but so far the secret has been Avell kept and nothing
has arisen that could A r erify the suspicions entertained as to authorship. In conse-
quence of the heat of the Aveatlier it Avas decided, at a general meeting of the Amusement
Committee, to postpone the second day’s athletic sports until the Aveather should have
become more favourable for such active exercises.
Thursday, April 16th, broke fresh and cool, with a crisp N.W. breeze meeting us,
and reviving everyone by the agreeable change of temperature. At about 11 a.m. the
island of Minikoi Avas passed. This is a narrow strip of coral reef about seven miles long
by tAvo broad. Like all these curious coral formations, the leAml of the ground is in no
part more than six feet aboA’e high Avater mark; but, notwithstanding, it is densely coA-ered
Avith vegetation, above Avhich towers the cocoa palm, Avhich flourishes in great profusion.
It is inhabited by a numerous population. It lies midway between the Maldivli and
Lakadivh groups, being about 68 miles to the northward of the former group, to Avhich it
is usually allotted. It belongs to Great Britain, by Avliom a liglit-house has been recently
erected and lighted for the first time on January Ist, 1885. This has been required for a
long time, as this land, lying right in the track of steamers bound for Colombo, Avas a source
of considerable anxiety to their commanders; for in consequence of its lying so low it Avas
not A T isible until Avithin a A r ery short distance of it. It Avas here that the P. and 0. Steamer
£< Colombo ” stranded in a fog in 1862. SeAmral of the steAvards having been knocked
up by the heat, a movement Avas started to relieA r e them, if possible, of some of the heaA r y
Avork of the dinner, by curtailing the daily menu. It must Inwe been \ r ery gratifying
to the gentlemen avlio undertook it, to find that Avith one consent the passengers signed
the memorial on the subject, Avhich AA r as presented to the captain; Avith the result that
the duration of dinner Avas reduced by a good half-hour, to the lightening of the Avork of
the sciwants, and comfort of a considerable number of the passengers, avlio Averc by no
means sorry to sit a somcAvhat shorter time in the heated atmosphere of the saloon.
A Spelling Bee on the quarter deck provoked a considerable amount of merriment, and
proA'cd satisfactorily that young Australia is quite able to hold her oavii in orthography,
as in cricket or boating. Nothing particular occurred during the tAvo folloAving days
to break the ordinary routine of sea life. Eating, drinking and sleeping, Avith games,
and small talk—in Avhich remarks as to the temperature find a considerable place—fill up
the day. A nice cool breeze has made life on deck enjoyable and agreeably disappointed
many, avlio seem to haA r e fully made up their minds that the Aveather Avould groAv hotter
and hotter as Ave Avent Avestward, until it culminated in a positive Inferno in the Red Sea.
A concert, Avinding up Av r itli the usual dance, concluded our fourth AA r eok at sea.
On Sunday the 18th, Divine Sendee Avas hold on the quarter deck in the forenoon,
and in the saloon in the ewening, Dr. White officiating, Early this morning a fine
specimen of the by no means " rant aria” the “ Bipcs implumis albas'' Avas seen in the


main top. As this variety is very rarely found at such an altitude, great anxiety for its
capture was manifested on the part of the ship’s company, who, cautiously ascending
the rigging, were able to “pop ’em” selves upon the unsuspecting creature and to
secure him. It is now to be seen tame about the deck, and, apparently, by no means
dissatisfied with its quarters. It has every appearance of being a bird of passage.
At daylight on the morning of Monday, April 20th, the jagged peaks of Socotra
were seen ahead, rising high into the clear sky. As the sun rose the tops of the
mountains glistened with a dazzling white glare, having every appearance of being
covered with snow. The whole of the forenoon we were passing along its northern
shores, its barren mountain side, storm, riven, and over-topped by lofty crags splintered
into a thousand fantastic shapes, constantly presenting fresh picturesque features to out-
vie w.
This island, extending E. and W. for 70 miles, its greatest breadth being 22 miles,
is generally composed of high maftatamous granite peaks, rising to a height of upwards
of 4,000 feet. At their base lie fertile well-watered valleys covered with luxuriant
vegetation, which afford good pasturage for large numbers of cattle, sheep, and goats,
which, with the fruit of the date palm, furnish the inhabitants with their chief means of
support. These, numbering about 4,000, live in an exceedingly primitive style. Among
them there does not appear to be any visible constituted authority, nor any distinction of
rank; all are respectable in proportion to their property in stock and date trees. In
dealing among themselves money is rarely used, Ghee being the chief medium of
exchange. Any silver that they may become possessed of is made into ornaments for
their women. Travellers in the 15th century write of them as being Nestorian Christians,
and in the 17th century they still retained a profession of this religion, but, with a strange
jumble of rites, sacrificing to the moon, practising the rite of circumcision, abstaining
from wine and pork; these latter practices were doubtless introduced by the followers
of Mahomet, whose religion is now universally professed by the people. The chief
products of the island are: aloes, which grow spontaneously upon the sides of the lime-
stone mountains up to a height of 3,000 feet above the sea; and the gum, which exudes
from the dragon’s blood tree, which also grows wild on the hill sides. There is not much
cultivation, the only grain grown being a kind of millet. On the following day the
breeze blew round astern, causing a return of hot weather, growing cooler, however,
towards evening, when another Spelling Bee was held on deck. As it had been
announced that Mr. Ilordern intended to present the winner with an Indian T
set in silver, very great interest was excited, and much speculation indulged in as
to the value of the Tea Service. After a very spirited competition, which at one
time bid fair to exhaust the resources at the command of the Examiners, the prize was
awarded to Miss Gibson. Upon opening the box, after removing the numerous wrappers
in which so valuable an article was enveloped, a very neatly wrought letter T made
from a Rupee, and set in a shilling, was disclosed to view, and handed to the fair winner:
an appropriate reward for success in spelling. The joke, which was happily conceived
and the secret of which had been well kept, provoked no small amusement on board
On going on deck at sunrise on the morning of Wednesday, April 22nd, the high peaks
that overhang the bay of Aden, were well in view, rising grim and barren from
the water’s edge. By 7.30 we were at anchor, and surrounded by a swarm of ladg
yelling “ I dive, I dive,” and displaying very extraordinary proficiency in the art; divins,
like otters, and fetching up the very smallest coin, and fighting for its possession under
water, which, having secured, they at once deposited fin- safe keeping in their mouth.


For a small consideration they are ready to go right under the bottom of the vessel.
No sooner had we anchored than the ship was invaded by a horde of Arab dealers in
ostrich feathers. As is usual, to the Australian passengers prices were advanced fully
fifty per cent. A great variety of other objects, beads, mats, pieces of Olive
Wood from Jerusalem, and baskets with a number of trinkets, too numerous to
mention, were also displayed. Most of the passengers went ashore, and had the
good fortune to find a fresh cool breeze blowing from the sea. As there had
been heavy rains within the past month, the arid wastes of the settlement were
looking at their best, and the huge tanks, which form the chief feature of interest
in the place, were filled with water. Here we found the “ Mirzapore ” which had
preceded us from Colombo by a few hours; she went to sea again about 10 a.m. on her
voyage to Suez. Much disappointment was felt by the passengers, who naturally,
at the present crisis of affairs, felt the very greatest interest in being informed of what
had taken place during the interval that had elapsed since our departure from Colombo,
at the neglect of the agent of the P. and 0. Company, to send on board the book con-
taining the telegrams, which we understand it is the custom to do. The omission was
the more to be regretted on this occasion, as all the N. S. Wales passengers were most
anxious for tidings of the contingent in the Soudan. However, thanks to the receipt of
papers from London, bearing date April 10th, we are enabled to furnish an account of
their doings up to that date, which shows that they haA r e borne themselves both in camp
and on the march in a manner such as to call forth the highest commendation from the
general in command, and prove themselves “ worthy comrades in arms ” of the British
troops. This cannot fail to be most gratifying to all Australians, and we deeply regret
that the necessary transport was not available in the other colonies, that fact alone
preventing their contingent from being despatched to the seat of Avar in Africa, and
forming an Australian Brigade. Having taken in about 100 tons of coal and a supply of
Avater, Ave again put to sea soon after 2 p.m., carrying Avith us some tAvo or three natives,
among Avliom Avas one of the Water Police in uniform, Avho, in consequence of the neglect
on the part of the authorities to relieve him, remained at his post at the port gangway
until the vessel was under Aveigh. To the scantily clad natives, to jump into the sea
Avas a matter of no consequence, but to the officer of the laAv, clad in tunic, belt, and
trousers, it was a much moro serious business, and it was universally felt on board, Avlien
he, too, Avas compelled to divest himself of his uniform and plunge into the sea, that such
treatment Avas scarcely fair toAvards a man Avho had been placed in that position, simply
by discharging his duty faithfully, and sticking to his post until properly reliev'ed; and
that, moreover, such a summary expulsion from the vessel could not fail to seriously
detract from the dignity to Avhich, as a representative of authority, ho Avas entitled, and
Avhicli should be, by all means, upheld. A general feeling of relief Avas experienced by
all Avho Avitnessed the occurrence Avlien he Avas safely drawn on board of a boat.
Rounding the headland of Jebel Hasan, Avith its lofty double-peaked hill, knoAvn as the
Ape’s Ears, avo again bore aAvay on our course northward, and, under a bright clear moon,
entered the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. The light Avas sufficient to enable us to distinguish
clearly the Island of Perim, rising to an elevation of 200 feet above the sea. This rocky
island is really the key to the lied Sea, as it effectually commands both the passages
Avhich pass on either side of it. According to the usually accepted story, the officer
commanding at Aden forestalled the French in their occupation of the post by only a few
hours, the captain of the French A r essel charged Avith the duty having incautiously
betrayed the object of his mission while staying at Aden. The importance of it to G reat


Britain since the opening of the Suez Canal can scarcely be estimated. During the night
the wind freshened considerably from the S.E., bringing up with it a heavy sea, which most
disagreeably surprised a number of those occupying cabins on the port side, by popping
in through their ports. Nor did those upon the starboard side altogether escape, as a
heavy sea, entering by the port forward gangway rolled across to the other side of the
vessel, setting the cabins afloat. Several accessions to the circle of early morning pro-
menaders were made, and a number of new faces were observed on deck soon after
sunrise, whose presence at so early an hour—as was evident from the rueful expression of
their countenance —was due to some untoward circumstance, and far from voluntary on
their part. The strong wind, however, had the effect of most thoroughly tempering the
heat of the sun, until towards noon it gradually died away, soon, however, to give place
to a fresh, crisp breeze from the N.W., which most agreeably disappointed us in our
anticipations as to the Red Sea climate. A large number of steamers were met with
during the day travelling up and down the sea. About 2 p.m. Jebel Teer, with its lofty
peaks of volcanic origin, was passed; its rugged barren shores being clearly distinguishable
as we slipped past, at a distance of only about two miles from it. During the Abyssinian
campaign of 1868, the steamers of this company used to call here for the mails to and
from Ansley Bay, which was the base of operations for our troops.
Much interest was excited by the opening game of the match at draughts, in which
a certain gentleman from Melbourne had backed himself to beat a young lady five
games out of six; which, after a good fight, was won by the lady, thus materially ad-
vancing the odds in her favour. On the 24th nothing occurred calling for special remark ;
the strong N.W. breeze brought down a good lump of a sea, to which the ship rose with
a steady heave that was hardly perceptible, although the waves were quite large enough to
render the closing of the ports over two-thirds of the starboard side a matter of necessity,
numerous parties are being projected to make a flying visit to Cairo and the pyramids,
during the period that will elapse between our arrival at Suez and departure from Port
Said. In consequence of the probable absence of so many of our party, it has been
decided by the Committee to postpone both the Second Day’s Sports Programme and the
Fancy Dress Ball until after the departure of the vessel from Port Said.
We learn with some pleasure that the fair lady has proved victorious in the Draught
Match referred to above, whereby the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum will be
benefited to the extent of five pounds.
We have also much pleasure in announcing that Mr. Marks, the winner of the
Domino Tournament, has handed over the amount of the prize, 255., to the same most
excellent institution.
Dear Mr. Observer,
You gave such a kind reception to my last letter that I am emboldened to
address you again, as I hinted that I might do. The subject of the fashions of the
“ Parramatta” does not promise a very fertile theme, for, of course, we hack out our old
dresses on board ship, reserving our smart “frocks” for the season in London. But there
have appeared a few pretty dresses, and I send you a description of two signally
successful ones. An artistic costume, worn by a brunette, is one of green cambric made
in the “housemaid” style, the only trimming being some lace on the body. Another
dress belonging to the same wearer is a crushed strawberry gingham, with a vest and
cuff’s of ruby velvet. A simple and most appropriate costume for the kind of life we are
now living is one worn by a pretty girl. It is made of navy blue print with white spots,


and the tunic is trimmed round the edge with embroidery. The hat is a sailor one lined
inside with black velvet, and a band of the same round the crown. Other dresses might
be described, but I think .the above mentioned are those chiefly deserving of comment,
and the inappropriate costumes, which, in the spitefulness of my nature, I should dearly
like to tell you about, I will pass over without remark.
Our amusements on board have not thus far been of a very exciting nature. One
night at least in each week we have a dance, with a programme arranged beforehand,
and on most other evenings a small band of energetic people indulge in an impromptu
hop; for I think the exercise then partaken of cannot be described by a more dignified
name. In a few days it is proposed to have a “ Fancy Dress Ball,” which you may like
me to send you some account of, and I may then take the opportunity of making a few
remarks on the “ Parramatta ” dances. On Saturday evenings we have concerts on the
quarter deck, which are always well attended. Practising goes on “ from morn till dewy
eve” throughout the week on both pianos, so we know pretty well what our
entertainment on Saturday will, consist of, especially as regards glees and part
songs, of which [ think we have rather a surfeit. We have on board a lady of
much more than ordinary ability as a vocalist, and we should all like to hear her
sing oftener. She epjoys singing, moreover, and would, I am sure, be pleased if
a larger share in the performance were allotted her. There are, besides her, three or
four ladies who sing nicely, and are always willing to help in an entertainment of the
kind. Then we have a gentleman who sings songs of a bravura type; and if they do
not always go quite right, yet a good swinging tune, especially if followed by a rattling
chorus, covers a multitude of sins. Now could you, dear Mr. Observer, use your influence
with the Music Committee, so as to ensure our getting fewer glees and part songs
for the future ? We all allow that the performance of these songs on the evening of
entertainment is admirable; but the same cannot be said of the rehearsals, some of which
are positively painful; especially those which take place in the early part of the week.
That naughty fellow, George, says that on these occasions he is always reminded of the
verse we hear in one of the Psalms in Church, “ The singers go before, the minstrels
follow after,” and I must-say the idea is not altogether a bad one. There is one other
subject which I wish to bring before your notice, dear Mr. Observer, and it is one which
I approach not without fear, as I know it is your sincere wish to keep out of the
columns of your paper any matter calculated to give offence. Ever since we started on
our voyage I have noticed a certain slovenliness among the younger members of the
male community on board the “ Parramatta.” There is a terrible “ slipshoddiness ” about
them, and this implies a good deal more than the shuffling about all day in slippers, a
practice so common, and, I venture to think, so reprehensible. The acme was, however,
reached on Thursday morning, when a young gentleman made his appearance on the
quarter-deck (which was tenanted by a large company of ladies) without either shoes or
socks on, and not only walked about in an ostentatious manner, but made the deficiencies
of his, toilet doubly conspicuous by lolling at full length on an Oriental chair. It was,
perhaps, well for this young gentleman that the Captain of the ship did not pass by while
he was lounging about in this state of deshabille, and that he was spared the receipt of a
lesson from that officer on the sanctity of the quarter-deck. It may be hoped, however, that
the offence may not be repeated, and if the foregoing remark should have any effect in
producing among our “ Parramatta ” youths a greater regard for appearances, it will be the
cause of much satisfaction to the ladies on board, and not least to your sincere well wisher,
S.S. “Parramatta,” 2 ith April." JEMIMA.


G. CHAPMAN, G.EARGATE. F. G. COURTHOPE. W. SUMMERS. W. TALOR T. P. PORTER
D. MARKS. REV. J. WHITE. H. R. W. WATSON. W.L MOSELEY. W. SASLEY. C. H. RENDALL.
I. E. P. GARUNER. J. V. JOGNSON,
AMUSEMENTSCOMMITTEE.


CONCERT.
ANOTHER of the successful series of Saturday Popular Concerts on board the “ Parra-
matta ” was held on the 18th April, and was numerously and fashionably attended.
• Mr. Stanley again opened the performance, and his rendering of “ Clemenza di Tita ”
was greatly admired and vigorously applauded. Mrs. Franks then sang “Golden Love'”
in such excellent style that the audience gave her an enthusiastic encore, in responding
to which she sang the favourite ballad of the “ Miller and the Maid,” which also gave
general satisfaction. Mr. Gibson was very successful in his song, “ Ever Thine,” and
Mrs. Paul, who followed, sang “Come Dorothy” in a manner which was most gratifying
to her audience. Mr. Watson, by way of introducing variety into the entertainment,
then gave a short reading of the Blue Jay story in Mark Twain’s “ Tramp Abroad,” and
which is usually considered one of the most humorous of that author’s productions. Mr.
Bargate was next on the programme, with the favourite nautical song, “ Sailing,” the
audience joining in the chorus, and the performance gave such pleasure that the last,
verse was repeated in accordance with the loudly expressed wishes of the company,
Mr. and Mrs. Gibson and Mr. Stanley then sang the “ May Queen,” which was a most
meritorious performance ; after which Mrs. Marks made a highly successful first appearance
at the Saturday Populars, in “ Looking Back,” a song which met with unanimous
approval. Mr. Bargate was again to the fore with “ Silver Rhine,” and achieved a
marked success, and the same may be said of Mr. and Mrs. Gibson’s duet, “Friendship.”
Mr. Rendall’s performance of “ Early one Morning ” was one of the chief features in the
evening’s entertainment, and he had to repeat the last verse before his audience would
be satisfied. The glee “ Softly falls the shade,” sung by Mr. and Mrs. Gibson, Miss M.
McKinnon, Miss Wilson, and Mr. Rendall, brought a pleasant musical performance to a
conclusion, though the audience did not separate without shewing their loyalty by
joining heartily in “ God save the Queen.”
The following was the programme :
1. OVERTURE ... “ Clemenza di Tita.’’ . . . Mr. STANLEY.
‘2. SONG .... “Gold en Love.” Irs. FRANKS.
3. SONG .... “Ever Thine.” . . . Mb. GIBSON.
4. SONG .... “ Come Dorothy.” . . . Mrs. PAUL.
5. READING.... ... Mm WATSON.
6. SONG .... “Sailing.” . . . Mr. BARGATE.
SONG ,•• • • “ Looking Bavk.” . . . Mrs. MARKS.
9. SONG .. . . “Silver 111 line ” ... Me. BARGATE.
• “ Friendship.” . . Mr. A Mrs. GIBSON.
11. SONG .... “ Early one morning.” . . . Mr. RENDALL.
lft (Mr A Mrs. GIBSON, Miss
12. GLEE • “ Softly fall the shades.” . < M. McKINNON, Miss
( WILSON A Mr. RENDALL.
It should be added that the accompaniments were in almost all cases played by
Mr. Stanley, Miss Pym and Miss Wilkie also giving kind assistance on the piano.
Apropos of amusements, it is generally believed that, encouraged by the success
which has attended the various tournaments, one of “ Go-bang” vull be started by Mr. and
Mis. Gunn. Mr. F. A. L. Popluim will probably give his assistance.


GAMES TOURNAMENT.
We have much pleasure in reporting that this Tournament has at length been
brought to a successful termination; those games in which the final contest was not
recorded in our last having been played off during the week; and that the stakes will be
paid over at once to the respective winners of each event by the Hon. Sec. to the Com-
mittee of Amusements (Mr. Watson).
It is to be hoped that another Tournament will bo set on foot as soon as we take
our departure from Port Said, as, with the increased interest in the different games which
the late contests have inspired, and the increased skill which their opportunities for
practice have effected, we may confidently expect a much larger number of competitors,
and a more general, lively, and vigorous interest in its proceedings.
In our last week’s issue, the following winners were announced: —
Backgammon, Miss Pym.
Cribbage, Mrs. Gunn.
Quoits, Mr. Hordern
Bull, Mr. Shields.
The final results of the contests concluded this week, are as under:—
Chess, Mr. Rendall.
Draughts, Mr. Graham.
Dominoes, Mr. Marks.
Wbist, Mrs. Levey and Mr. Capper.
It is noticeable that the names of three ladies appear amongst the winners; also that
no single person has been successful in more than one game throughout tho Tournament
though Mr. Hordern made a good fight of it with the winner in both draughts and chess.
LADIES’ WHIST TOURNAMENT.
The following are the results of the games in the First Hound of the Ladies’ Whist
Tournament:
Mr. Hordern and Miss Wilson beat Mr. liendall and Miss McKinnon.
Mrs. Summers and Mr. Booth „ Mrs. Levey and Mr. Capper.
Miss Greig anti Mr. Marks „ Mr. Owen and Mrs. Owen.
Mrs. Brandon and Mr. Brandon ~ Miss Pym and Capt. Moseley.
Mrs. McKinnon & Mr. McKinnon „ Miss McKinnon and Mr. Manifold.
For the Second Hound the drawing has given the following Games :
Mr. Hordern and Miss Wilson to play Mr. Marks and Miss Greig.
Mr. and Mrs. Brandon ~ Mr. and Mrs. McKinnon.
Mrs. Summers and Mr. Booth, bye.
HINTS TO BENEDICTS.— By a Bachelor.
A wife, domestic, good, and pure,
Like snail, should keep within her door;
But not like snail in silver track,
Bear all her wealth upon her back.
A wife should be like echo time.
And speak but when she’s spoken to ;
But not like echo, still be heard
Contending for the final word.
Like the town clock a wife should be,
Keep time and regularity;
But not like clock speak out so clear,
That all the town her voice may hear.
Young man if these allusions strike,
She, whom ns bride you’d bail,
Should be just like and yet unlike
An echo, clock, or snail.


REJOINDER.— By an Aspiring Spinster
Nonsense I say, what man I wish to know,
Would choose a wife cold as a snail or slow ?
No, like a bee a proper wife should prove,
Active, and all her work, labour of love.
I own to see the world I like to fly ;
If men may take their pleasure, may not I ?
But not as bees, who for their labour skilled,
Have greater chance the sooner to be killed.
Like the town clock forsooth! What man
could trace
A charm in such a flat, round, changeless face ?
No, rather like the seasons I would be,
Varied, though bound by regularity.
Fresh as the spring, or bright as summer glow,
Or bringing fruitfulness like autumn’s show.
Or, if like winter’s frost she seem severe,
Frost mellows earth, though hard it may
appear.
Not like the seasons, for alas, in truth,
We cannot every year renew our youth.
But sweet good temper, sense and spirits may
Brighten life’s pathway to its latest day.
Be like an echo ! Sure the thing’s absurd,
A woman’s privilege is the last word ;
But men take heed, this maxim bear in mind,
Soft words from you will make our last words
kind.
Loving, not angry, words best rule a wife,
It’s mutual love that sweetens married life;
And know that when from spinsterhood you
take us,
To wedded life, we’re what the husbands make
us.
Now ladies to your verdict I submit,
Had not the Spinster much the best of it ?
Honoria Heartsease.
ADEN.—A CONTINUATION BY CORNSTALK.
My mate and I landed at Aden,
’Tis the driest place ever I stayed in,
The whole of the land
Is just nothing but sand;
It is nowhere worth putting a spade in.
The moment the anchor holds ground,
The shore boats the vessel surround,
With keen Arabs, whose trade is,
To wheedle the ladies,
And change into shillings your pound.
They show baskets and trinkets galore,
Bright beads and a lot of things more,
And instead of a pack,
They’ve a bag at their back,
Where a stock of fine feathers they store.
There’s young darkeys in troops all alive
Who appear in the water to thrive,
If you offer a shilling,
They are all of them willing,
Right under the vessel to dive.
A boat you must take to the shore,
’Tis a row of a mile, perhaps more,
But on reaching the land,
You’ll find nothing but sand,
Some niggers and dogs and a store.
Then a gharry you’ll take to the camp,
It will save j on four miles of a tramp,
Amidst camels and asses,
And black grinning lasses,
Of the genuine African stamp.
The great tanks were all full to the brim,
So inviting they looked for a swim,
But we sat on the brink,
And took only a drink,
For hard by were police black and grim.
’Tis a scorching hot place, and quite true is,
That the liquor is bad, and my view is,
That to get out to sea,
Is the best thing for me,
And continue my journey to Suez.
SOCIAL SLIPS.
The Social Barometer during the past week has been in a somewhat disturbed
condition, the atmosphere having been heavily charged with frictional electricity; a
considerable depression accompanied by heavy gloom was observed early in the week
upon a fair face: it has now passed away and from the soft airs observed proceeding
lately from that quarter, a return to its usual genial condition is anticipated.
In another quarter heavy clouds arose early in the week and a serious disturbance
seemed brewing. The storm, however, exhausted itself in a tea cup, where, not being


aggravated by the presence of a spoon, it happily subsided, and summer weather has
returned. A certain party on board has made to us an accusation against another of
having stolen a “spoon.” Upon enquiry, however, finding the article in dispute not
to be genuine metal, we have advised the loser that there are plenty more to be picked
up, and of a better quality.
We regret to hear that the “horizontal parallax” has lately been much disturbed,
and assumed an uneven, not to say a somewhat elevated position. The cause of this
not having been ascertained, makes a correct diagnosis impossible, but wo hope that
a return to the true normal equilibrium is in progress.
VARIETIES.
“ Plain food is quite enough for me;
Three courses are as good as ten :
If nature can subsist on tlireo,
Thank heaven for three. Amen !
I always thought cold victual nice :
My choice would be Vanilla-Ice.”
Where does that come from? Wherever it comes from, it struck me as being
eminently apropos , and expressive of the opinion of the majority on the vexed dinner
question.
ANSWER TO LAST WEEK’S
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
Parramatta. Punkah-Boys.
P urn P
A die U
R u N
R is K
A labam A
M as H
A B
T omat 0
T ight Y
A s S
ANSWERS TO RIDDLES IN OUR LAST.
Conundrums.— l. Cares, Caress.
2. Cod.
Riddles.
1. Because he makes faces and “ busts.”
2. Because they cause (caws) high treason (trees on).
3. One gives milk and the other gives way (whey).
4. Because he must be either an analyzer (Ann Eliza) or a
charlatan (Charlotte Ann).
5. W O MAN (Double you 0 man).
6. B fcj (Be natural).
7. They made light of it, and went into mo(u)ming.
8. The fox and cock —They took only a brush and comb
between them.
9. The spider took a fly and went home.
10. To liquidate his Bill.
11. To have a run on the Bank.
RIDDLES.
1. Why is Blindman’s Buff like sympathy ?
2. What best improves yet most impedes the Christian’s course ?
3. Wby is Gladstone like a very expensive piano ?
4. Why cannot a deaf-and-dumb man tickle nine persons ?
5. What is the difference between a bird with one wing and a bird
with two wings P
6. What was the measure of the late Emperor Napoleon’s moustaches ?
7. How can we account for high temperature of our atmosphere ?
8. Why is rough weather the best adapted for dancing at sea P
9. What is woi’sc than raining cats and dogs ?
10. Why should a greedy man always wear plaid trousers ?


CHARADES.
My first is what Gladstone loves,
My second is what Gladstone hates,
My whole, pi’onounccd one way, is what Gladstone would like to do;
pronounced another way, is where Gladstone ought to he.
’T was not in Alpine snow and ice,
But on plain English ground ;
“ Excelsior” their high device,
But lowly fate they found.
MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM CONTRIBUTED BY
MRS. LEYEY.
Three-fourths of a cross and a circle complete,
Two semi-circles perpendicular to meet,
Then add a triangle that stands on two feet;
Two semi-circles and a circle complete.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
1 Waft, comfort to the parched band,
Thy zephyr, soft as love,
2 Moved by the dark mysterious hand
Unheeded from above.
1 What eating and drinking, what flirting and play
’Neath the cool forest glade, on a bright summer’s day.
2 Haste not, fond youth, thy heedless course to run,
For this thou canst not. once the deed is done.
3 In fact most positive, though not in name,
I wield a stern dominion ;
Double me, and at once I cease
To represent opinion.
4 The backbone of these noble fleets,
Britannia’s prido, who rules the waves
That bear her sons from climo to clime,
To every coast wide ocean laves.
5 I’m often called for the defence
Of brazen guilt, or conscious innocence.
6 Urge not the captain, be assured indeed
That this increased doth not insure more speed.




THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
“Nunquam Dormio.”
No 4.
WEDNESDAY, 6tii MAY, 1885.
May tith, 1885.
To Englishmen revisiting their country after an absence of many years in the Colonies,
the position occupied by England in her foreign relations must be far from satisfactory.
One’s traditional idea of John Bull, was that of a man of few words, but who stuck to
what he said. But now on every side, the party responsible for the honour of Great
Britain is to be seen protesting with big words, but ready to scuttle ignominiously in the
face of the slightest show of opposition; the retreat being the more disgraceful in
proportion to the violation of promise which it involves. The telegrams which have met
us at every port on bur journey homeward have painfully displayed the vacillating policy
of the Cabinet with regard to Russia. Acting upon the advice of British Officers invested
with a direct Commission from their Government, the Afghans gallantly resisted the
invasion of their territory by the Russians; overwhelmed by numbers they were compelled
to retreat with heavy loss. Upon the gross premeditated outrage thus perpetrated upon
our allies having been clearly proved, our government sent an ultimatum to Russia. A
penultimatum it should have been called, for although all the evidence proceeding from the
most unimpeachable source only proved the unprovoked nature of the attack the more
clearly, yet, with the vacillation that seems to be inherent in the Cabinet, we hear of
negotiations, and finally of arbitration; and that the Arbitrator selected is a Potentate
who cannot fail to be overshadowed by the grim colossus so close to his borders, and one,
moreover, who can hardly have forgotten the base manner in which England, after
inciting him to resist Germany upon the Schleswig-Holstein affair, left him in the lurch to
the mercy of the overwhelming forces of Prussia and Austria. For robbery and murder,
arbitration would hardly seem to be the proper remedy. But as vindicating the cause
of the allies, whom we are solemnly pledged to assist in this emergency, might involve a
fight with Russia, the humiliating spectacle is presented to the world of a great nation
endeavouring to avoid the fulfilment of her engagements, and preparing to sacrifice her
allies. Big words will no more keep back the Russians, than the sugary promises of her
Statesman will bind her Generals, and yet the Government of Great Britain appear to be
hungering for the soft words that shall enable them to affect a satisfaction that they can
hardly feel, and afford them a decent pretext for accepting existing facts. Such a policy,
however, can only have the effect of bringing about an alliance between Afghanistan
and Russia. The comparative ease with which we overcame the Afghans in our last
campaign, proves that to Russia the enterprise Avould offer even less difficulty, as the
positions occupied by her on the Northern frontiers are far more formidable for attack
than those from which the British troops advanced. At present the Ameer is our firm
ally, and will put forth the whole of the forces at his command, while those Afghan
E


tribes over whom'bis sway is not established, will at the present time be more disposed
to oppose the Russians than ourselves. But once allow them to fall into the arms of
Russia, and a most formidable host of invaders will be ready at her signal to precipitate
themselves upon the rich plains of India.
The unfortunate incident of the suppression and rehabilitation of the Bosphore
Egyptien , has given us a somewhat unpleasant greeting upon arrival at the confines of
Europe. For months has this popgun organ of the French been firing its scurrilous
articles, at any time during which it might have been suppressed with advantage, but
at the present most inopportune moment for giving to French disappointment an
opportunity of administering an effective pinch to Egypt, an order is sent from Downing
Street to stop its publication. Upon France seizing the chance of adopting a bullying
tone towards Egypt, and through her, at England, the instigator of the act at once
hastens to disavow any complicity, and leaves to his Agent, the Egyptian Prime Minister,
no alternative but to humiliate and stultify himself. With what feelings must he
henceforth view the English alliance. The way to stop a bully is not by weakly
yielding to his bluster, and the fact of France thus hastening to turn an administrative
molehill into a diplomatic mountain, only proves her determination to try to fasten a
quarrel upon us under the very flimsiest pretext. But if this be her intention, such
political pusillanimity will only lead to further provocation from which no retreat is
possible, and weak concessions now serve only to precipitate that condition of events,
which a more determined policy would have arrested at the very onset. Thus only can
“ Peace with honour ” be effectually maintained.
OUR COMMISSARIAT DEPARTMENT.
But few of our passengers probably have any idea of the enormous quantity and
variety of stores required to supply the numerous wants of people in this age of luxury.
To our lady friends it may be interesting to know that the linen closet contains upwards
of 30,000 pieces, of which about 900 are tablecloths, 8,000 table napkins, 3,000 sheets,
and 12,000 towels. This represents about one and a-half miles of tablecloths, and about
half an acre of napkins, while the sheets, if laid out, would cover some two and a-half
acres of ground. To keep up the necessary supply of clean linen, large steam laundries
are established at various ports of call, where fresh supplies of clean are exchanged for
soiled articles. In London the Company’s contract is for a number never to be . less than
10,000 pieces weekly, though frequently largely in excess of that amount. In the china
cupboard are 5,600 pieces of earthemvare, besides glasses of sorts to the number of 2,500.
This vast supply is necessary to replace possible losses, as when Old Father Neptune does
get lively, his destructive powers completely eclipse those of the proverbial “ bull in a
china shop.” Now it would be but small satisfaction to travellers possessing the usual
sea appetites, to sit down to a board, however well appointed in the matter of linen and
other accessories of table decoration, unless it were equally well provided with the
' supplies necessary for satisfying the cravings of nature. In the event of any shortcoming
in this respect, we should inevitably fall foul of the Purser, who would stand a very good
chance of being entirely demolished ; and as the Company have not prepared a “ Purser’s
Expense Account,” neither do they keep on hand a reserve of these highly useful articles,
it has been found more economical to provide such a profusion of meats as will suffice to
appease the most insatiable appetite. With how liberal a hand this has been done, we
at this stage of the voyage are quite able to testify, and if there be any matters in which


improvements might be suggested, it is' certainly not in the direction of quantity.
Indeed our fellow voyagers, instead of like “ Oliver asking for more,” politely requested
to have a little less dinner; and even upon the so-called reduced diet, we fancy that if
brought to the test of scales, our company would be found to have increased considerably
in weight since leaving the Colonies. One of our friends upon resuming the waistcoat
discarded some days before crossing the Line, is under a decided impression that some
one must have been taking it in during the interval. To supply the staff of life for so
large a company requires a barrel of flour daily, which emerges from the bake-house in
the shape of three loaves, each of about a fathom long, 40 ordinary loaves, 130 smaller
ones, an equal number of French rolls, besides buns, and a cake or two on the sly; all
these, with the pastry, are made of the choicest Hungarian flour from Trieste. At Suez a
sufficient supply to last the vessel until her return to that port is taken on board. Dinner
as being, in most people’s opinion, the chief meal of the day, requires the most varied
and extensive preparation. Passing by the soup as only an airy trifle, unworthy of
serious attention, we arrive at the joint, the veritable “piece de resistance” behind
which the provider, who should hope to withstand the fierce onslaught with success, must
entrench himself. To furnish an obstacle sufficient to bear the brunt of the voracious
attack, a daily supply of upwards of 200 lbs. of beef, with an equal supply of mutton is
required. Nor is this barrier, formidable as it may seem, in proportion to the weapons
brought to bear on it, by any means enough : it must needs be supplemented by a vast
pile of potatoes and other vegetables, so big that no account is specially kept of them.
As these cannot be always procured fresh, a reserved line of 700 tins of preserved
vegetables is ready to fall victims during the attack. In the expectation that the first
fury of the assault may have been somewhat expended, at a slight interval a second line
is prepared to meet the daily demand. In this are arrayed an army of 1,600 fowls,
commanded by an important staff of 150 turkeys. Upon either flank are deployed a
corps of ducks, each 175 strong, while a reserve of 100 geese bring up the rear. Around
them hover a cloud of 500 pigeons as skirmishers, a detached corps of hares and rabbits
acting as vedettes. These rest upon a strong outwork of rice several cubic feet in
measurement, well supplied with powder (curry) and Nabobs. Our provider, however,
not feeling quite secure even behind so substantial a barrier, and as a special protection
against the ladies, has prepared a still inner line of defence. This is composed of some
250 glass vessels of a cylindrical shape, absolutely crammed with globular objects of a
size varying from plums down to grape shot, strengthened by an intermixture of 500
tins fully charged with fruits. Experience has proved that this system, upon which
many elaborate treatises have already been written, may be relied upon, and the enemy
will retire, at least for the night. For let not the purser sleep. The retreat is but a
ruse. “ Reculer pour mieux sauter ”is their motto, and by the early dawn the foe will be
ready to renew the assault with unimpaired vigour. To meet this we find a huge
rampart of some 30,000 eggs; on either hand is an entrenchment of 600 lbs. of solid
bacon, with a breast work of 1,400 lbs. of butter; hard by is a sturdy body of hams,
80 strong, ready to give support as required. A serried line of milk tins, in double
rank, showing a front fully 500 strong, stand, waiting but the water supply to assist the
body of tea to thoroughly flood the works. The solid shape of 100 boxes of this force
recruited chiefly in China, each weighing 40 lbs., flanked by an equally compact array
of Coffee raised in Ceylon, of a similar weight, rests upon a compact mass of sugar,
chiefly from Queensland, and weighing about 3,200 lbs. Behind these are ready an
auxilliary force of tins of jam, mustering nearly 1,000, amid which are to be observed


some irregulars mostly in pepper and salt, though at intervals the blazon of Coleman,
Lea and Perrins, and others are to be noticed. Such a series of defensive lines may well
be calculated to stay the appetite of the “ Robbin a Bobbin ” of the Nursery Rhymes,
and that in practice such is the case, may well be inferred from the calm demeanour with
which those who are specially responsible for their efficiency, may daily be seen exposing
themselves to the invaders. Facts speak for themselves, and when the somewhat
exigeant demands of persons, not satisfied with the profusion amid which we live, are
invariably met with the utmost consideration and courtesy, few there are who can fail to
applaud the arrangements which have been made for our comfort. It has been said, that
if bread was the staff of life, drink was life itself, and though this opinion is obviously
not held by the present company, whose consumption of liquor has been most unusually
small, yet as it fills at any rate an important place in our daily dietary, a few remarks
may not be out of place. This is not provided by the Company, but is supplied to each
passenger upon a requisition duly signed by him for which payment has to be made
weekly. To attend to the. business a barman is employed, who has to keep a book
showing all liquor received out of store and issued, and to account for all moneys received
in payment for the wine bills weekly to the Purser. Among the wines that are chiefly in
demand is Medoc, of which about six dozen are consumed weekly—the other varieties
being but little asked for. Ale and stout are the most in request of alcoholic liquors, but
of these the chief, indeed it may be said the only, demand is for small bottles—for while
about 4GO pints are opened during the course of a week, no more than 30 quarts appear
in the columns of the barman’s book, as issued during the same time. As may be
supposed, the account for aerated waters shows the largest total, especially daring the
hot weather, as not only are they most refreshing when taken alone, but they also furnish
a convenient vehicle for the administration of other and more potent beverages. Under
the head of aerated waters appears a weekly issue of close upon 600 bottles. In
spirituous liquors the consumption is practically confined to whisky; one week’s supply
of this exceeds that of all the other varieties of spirits put together for the whole voyage.
To administer all the various articles enumerated, to prepare them for the use of the
passengers, and to distribute them requires a large and well organised staff. In the
kitchen are four cooks, and two cooks’ mates, in addition to the butcher and two bakers ;
while to arrange the tables and attend to the wants of passengers and meal times, a body
of 50 men attend upon the orders of the Chief Steward. From the foregoing statistics,
it would appear that while there is no lack in the supply, the agency for an efficient
distribution has been equally well attended to, and, indeed, what with the regular meals,
and the afternoon tea, further supplemented by the social sandwich and the final glass
before retiring for the night, there can be very little excuse for the absence of
contentment.
HINTS ON GIBRALTAR.
The Bay of Gibraltar is nearly eight miles long and above five miles broad. The
anchorage is not good, owing to the south-west winds; while the east winds blow in
terrible gusts across its waters. The principal places surrounding the Bay are: —THE
QUEEN OF SPAIN’S CHAIR, a hill some 970 feet high. The distance from the Rock
gun is 6,866 yards. VILLAGE OF CAMPAMENTO : There is a large common here
where Polo is played, and the Steeple Chase Meetings take place. SAN ROGUE, an


ancient Hermitage, is situated here, which has always been an object of great veneration
to the inhabitants of Gibraltar. THE CORK WOODS are many miles in extent, and
they are the favourite resort of picnic parties from the Rock. ALGECIRAS, a Spanish
town across the Bay, west of Gibraltar; population, 12,000. CASTELLAR, an old
Moorish town and fortress, situated on a bare rugged mountain. T ARIF A: The most
Moorish town in Andalusia; population, 13,000. The Rock was taken by the English,
under Sir George Rooke, on the 24th July, 1704. Several attempts have since been
made to recover it, but it has ever since remained in their possession ; it is a bold ridge,
running due north and south, three miles in length; greatest breadth three-quarters of a
mile; and about seven miles in circumference. The north, south and east sides are very
steep, but on the western side, where the town is built, it slopes down to the bay; on
the north it is joined to the main land by a low sandy isthmus, 1,500 yards long, 950 to
1,800 yards broad, called the Neutral Ground. The mountain, at the northern side,
rises to a height of some 1,400 feet in a perpendicular cliff; the chief eminences are the
Rock Gun or Wolf’s Crag, 1.250 feet at the north; the Upper Signal Station, 1,294 feet in
the centre. Sugar Loaf Hill, or O'Hara’s Tower, 1,361 feet at the south. The greatest
height is attained between the Signal Station and O’Hara’s Tower. On the African side is
Ape’s Hill, 2,808 feet high. The town is divided into two parts, known as the North and
South Town ; the North is the commercial part, and consists mainly of two streets,
Waterport Street and Irish Town. The slopes at the back of the town are thickly covered
with houses, built tier upon tier to a height of 250 feet above the sea : at the northern end
stands the Moorish Castle. The South Town is divided from the North by the Alameda
Parade and Public Gardens, and stands on the slope of the hill below O’Hara’s Tower.
The only houses on the east side of the Rock are those of the village of Catalan Bay,
chiefly inhabited by fishermen. Places of interest: Europa Lighthouse, in the Europa
Flats, opened in 1841; the light is 150 feet above sea level, visible twenty miles. The
Alameda Gardens, a public promenade, and favourite resort of the inhabitants; it is
planted in terraces with trees and shrubs and splendid flowers. The Signal Station is
situated on the.central eminence of the Rock, 1,294 feet above sea level; from it the
Straits are watched, and on a calm day vessels can be sighted forty miles from the Rock.
Cape Spartel, Tangier, and the mountains on the African coast are also distinctly visible.
THE CAVES.
The largest of these is St. Michael's Cave. The entrance to it is 1,100 feet above
sea level. Within, is a lofty hall 220 feet long by 90 feet wide, and 70 feet high,
supported by stalactite pillars, some 30, 40, and 50 feet high. The Monkeys that used to
be seen about the Rock are now few in number. Horses can be obtained for the Signal
Station. The Caves are passed on the way up. The Galleries and Fortifications are
the great sight of Gibraltar. They are divided into two ranges —the upper and lower
(Windsor and Union Galleries). A permit can be obtained from the Military Secretary’s
Office to see the upper range, but the lower can only be visited by a permit from His
Excellency the Governor himself.
• The other places of interest are, THE MOORISH CASTLE, one of the oldest
Moorish buildings in Spain. THE NORTH FRONT is part of the Sandy Isthmus which
separates the Rock from the mainland, and forms the advanced posts.


PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
The Convent, Southport Street, is the official residence of the Governor. The
Exchange, Commercial Square: Travellers are admitted to the Library and Reading
Rooms. The Garrison Library, contains nearly 40,000 volumes. The Market: —The
foundation stone was laid by the Prince of Wales in 1876 on his return from his Indian
tour. _ All produce is imported; Fruit, etc., is cheap. The Dockyard is situated in the
South-west portion of the Rock.
GIBRALTAR MONEY.
(Spanish Currency.')
20 Centimos, equal to - -
1 Real (wn) ~ - 2|d.
1 Peseta „ - lOd.
1 Escudo „ - 2s. Id.
1 Dollar „ - - 4s. 2d.
24 Pesetas „ £1 os. Od.
OUR VOYAGE.
A NICE crisp head wind made Saturday, April 25th, a thoroughly enjoyable day, the
chief amusement being the spying out and speculating upon the character and destination
of the many steamers which we passed at various distances all day. Three of them were
vessels belonging to this Company, viz., the “ Sutlej,” “Ballarat,” and ‘‘Deccan.” After the
usual musical entertainment and the dance, the cool night air and the bright moonlight made
one loth to go below, and many stayed on deck until the brilliant light on the “ Dcedalus
Reef,” gliding past us (as it seemed) on the port hand, and melting away into the bright
silver-tipped waves astern, told of another danger of the sea having been safely passed.
At about 8 a.m. on Sunday the two small coral islands known as the “ Brothers ” were
passed, rising sheer from the sea; and at 3 p.m. the barren, rocky island of Shadwan,
along which we coasted at a very short distance away, marked our departure from the
Red Sea, and entrance into the Gulf of Suez. We, for our part, can certainly not in justice
speak of the weather experienced in that much dreaded sea otherwise than favourably.
Divine Service was as usual celebrated in the forenoon and evening in the saloon by
Dr. White. Many of our passengers were carefully examining the railway time tables,
and speculating upon the time of the vessel’s detention before she could again get to sea
from Port Said, with a view to making a flying trip to Cairo and the Pyramids in the
interval, and rejoining the ship at the northern end of the Canal. Near to Shadwan is
the small reef, Aboo Nahas, upon which the P. and O. steamer “ Carnatic ” was lost a few
years ago. High land was visible to the westward more or less all day, and to the
eastward the bold outlines of the Sinaitic Range rose high into the hot dusty haze that
somewhat obscured its picturesque summits. Many a longing gaze was directed towards
those grim mountains, seeking to discover that spot whence emanated the wondrous Law
which has survived in unbroken observance for so many thousand years, and many an
one read again the history of the portentous events that heralded its promulgation. But
alas 1 a sight of the “ Mount Sinai ” cannot be obtained from any part of the Gulf of Suez,


as it stands at the back of the range, which shuts it out from the sea. By 7.30 a.m. of
the morning of Monday, April 27th, we dropped anchor in Suez Roads, and speedily
obtaining “Pratique,” were boarded by the usual motley crowd of traders. A
considerable party of the passengers hastened away to catch the morning train to Cairo,
without waiting to ascertain positively what were to be our movements. The “ Mirzapore ”
was lying away some distance, flying the yellow flag; and as it was understood that the
“Nizam” from Bombay would have to undergo a similar detention, our ship was sent
away at 1 p.m. into the Canal, followed hard by the fine steamer “ Oceanien ” of the
Message lies Maritimes. Steaming at tlie usual rate, the Bitter lakes were reached, where
the Frenchman overhauled and passed us—our vessel being very dirty with grass all over
her bottom, besides being heavily laden—and ran into the first place for the morrow’s
start. After dinner many of our party went on board of her, and joined in the
dancing, while others strolled about on the shore under the brilliant light of the
moon. This Canal, which has so completely revolutionised the course of trade, was,
as most people know, constructed under the auspices of Baron F. de Lesseps, who,
in defiance of the disapprobation of the most eminent engineers, and the 'numerous
obstacles thrown in his way by politicians, succeeded in enlisting the support
of the Emperor Napoleon 111. and of Ismail, the Taclia, and subsequently Khedive of
Egypt. Backed up by these and the confidence of his countrymen, who took up the
shares in the company, the work of cutting through the Isthmus, and uniting the
Mediterranean with the Red Sea, was commenced in 1859. Ten years were occupied in
completing the excavations and embankments, and in 1809 it was opened amid a series
of most gorgeous festivities. Its total length is 88 geographical miles (nearly 100
English), 66 of these are actually canal, the passage of the three lakes, viz.,
the Groat and Small Bitter Lakes, and Lake Timseh, occuping the remaining
22. The width at the surface is 325 feet, at the bottom it is 72 feet, with a
depth of 26 feet. The level of the Mediterranean and Red Sea being nearly identical,
there is scarcely any current arising from that cause, but while the banks of the canal
north of Lake Timseh show that it is subject to a rise and fall of ene foot only, at the
Suez entrance spring tides produce a variation of over five feet. This, however, is not
felt for any great distance, and at the Great Bitter Lake no rise is perceptible. Quitting
our moorings, alongside of the bank where we had made fast for the night, with the first
daylight, Ismailia was reached at 7 a.m. Here the pilot for the southern end lands,
and that for the northern passage is taken on board. The settlement looks very pretty,
nestling amid trees and gardens at the western extremity of the lake. Here the line of
railway turns westward to Cairo and Alexandra. At this point also the Freshwater
Canal, which leaves the Nile at Cairo, enters the canal. This fine work, by which fresh-
water is supplied to Suez and also to Port Said, was excavated by the Pharaohs about
twenty-five centuries ago, and was restored in 1862. It is sixty miles in length, with a
depth of nine feet, and is forty feet in width, After an uninterrupted journey, without
any incident worthy of remark, Port Said was reached by 3 p.m., and we all hastened
ashore to avoid the discomforts of coaling. The “ Austral ” was lying here outward
bound, having arrived a short time before us. The town, which has sprung into existence
since the construction of the canal, stands upon a narrow strip of sand between Lake
Menzaleh and the sea. Beyond the few glimpses of native life that are to be obtained in
the narrow side streets, there is very little to interest one; the main streets are dusty and
devoid of side walks. The music at the Cafe is, however, good. A performance of the
“ Grande Duchesse” took place in the evening, the most remarkable thing about which was


the strong tendency to “ embonpoint” which characterised most of the characters, and
the marvellous fit of the nether garments of the General, who certainly looked, as we
heard it remarked, as if he had been melted and run into them. There is a fine light-
house 180 feet high, which, indeed, is the chief feature of the place. The Cairo party,
having come on from Ismailia by the steam launch carrying the mail, rejoined us here at
about midnight, and as the ship was waiting only for their arrival, she went to sea forth-
with. At Suez our party was reduced by Mr. and Mrs. Owen and Miss Rolfe, Mr. Capper,
Mr. E. C. and Miss Hordern, Messrs. Barratt, Markwald, Manifold, Nathan, Pickles, and
Wolstenholme. Their vacancies were supplied by Messrs. Sheen and Hall, Capt.
Stewart, R.N., of H.M.S. “ Carysfort,” and Lieut. D. B. Thomson, of the 28th Bombay
N.I. (the two latter invalided from Souakim), and Mr. and Mrs. Mieville, who came on
board at Port Said. Beautiful fresh cool weather, with smooth sea, greeted our entrance
into the Mediterranean, which continued until May day, when the breeze freshened,
making warm clothing very acceptable, and obliging all ports to be closed, as the sea rose
with the wind.
On Thursday, April 20th, the second day’s programme of the Athletic Sports was
concluded, in a temperature far more appropriate to violent exercise than prevailed at
the time originally fixed for it. The events were mostly well contested and created
considerable amusement. In the evening the prizes for the winners of the various events
were laid out for inspection on the Quarter Deck, where they were presented to the
successful competitors by Mrs. White; those for the gentlemen having been most liberally
contributed by some of the ladies ; while the gentlemen provided the objects for the ladies’
competition. A new series of Tournaments at various games was also commenced. On
Mayday the second-class passengers held their Athletic Meeting ; in the evening a highly-
successful little drama, called “ Matrimony, or all about a Bonnet,” was acted by Miss E.
and Master H. Gibson, both of whom acquitted themselves to the admiration of everyone.
Daylight in the morning of Saturday, May 2nd, revealed Malta, a dim outline upon the
western horizon, and by 9 a.m. we were slipping along under the frowning battlements
of its fortifications, whence the black muzzles of the guns looked down upon us in a
highly truculent manner. At 10 we duly anchored in the P. &0. harbour, and at once
hastened on shore to avoid the coaling. Here, amid the sights and shops, a very pleasant
day was passed. The Church of St. John, with its heavy gilding and gorgeous decoration,
the Armoury and tapestry-hung Council chamber, and the Monastery of the Capuchins,
with the niched mummies of its departed worthies, each being visited by our party. By
5 p.m. all were again on board, where bargaining for shawls and lace-trimmed kerchiefs
was in full swing for awhile, and several excellent bargains were supposed to have beeu
concluded at the last minute. As. however, the dealers somehow appear to thrive notwith-
standing, it would seem as though the excellence of the deal were not altogether upon the
side of the purchaser. At 8 p.m. the coal lighters were cast off, and we left the lights of
Malta rapidly astern as we headed again upon our course. The tone of the telegrams from
England were far less warlike, but a general feeling pervaded everyone, that peaee, if pur-
chased by the price of feeble concession, could not be permanent; and that it would be
only postponing the evil day, probably to a period when Russia would occupy a far more
formidable position as regards India, than at present. Sunday morning found us passing
the high island of Pantellaria (where is an Italian convict settlement), with all sail set to
a fair fresh wind. Divine Service was celebrated by Dr. White as usual in the forenoon
and evening ; at the former a collection was made for the Dreadnought Merchant Seamen’s
Hospital, which realised £8 Gs. OH’ the coast of Tunis the wind fell light, and sail was


taken in shortly after passing the island of Zareba. On Monday, the Fancy Dress Ball, so
long talked of was brought to a highly-successful issue; the Quarter Deck, tastefully
decorated with flags, made a charming Ball Room, amid which the many gay and tasteful
costumes served as an effective contrast to the more sombre habiliments of those whose
ingenuity did not suffice to provide them with a dress somewhat less prosaic than the
everyday black and white. An elegant supper was provided in the saloon, and dancing
was kept up until midnight with much spirit. A fresh head wind, with a rising sea, made
“ Ports down” the order of the day, but the contrast between the temperature of the
Mediterranean and that of the Red Sea is so great, as to cause their being screwed
down to be no more a thing to be dreaded.
CONTINUATION.— By Cornstalk.
WlienT last wrote, the vessel was leaving
That dreary spot, Aden, and cleaving
With her prow the blue seas,
While beneath the fresh breeze
The billows were gracefully heaving.
We passed Bab el Mandeb and Perim,
Where, indeed, he’d need plenty to cheer him —
Would that unlucky wight,
Who stays tending the light
To warn captains of ships how to clear ’em.
We entered the dreaded Red Sea,
Where red hot we expected to be,
But the sea was not red,
And the breeze right ahead
Made the passage quite pleasant to me.
But a short time at Suez we stayed ;
On the shore a short distance we strayed,
But found nothing but boys,
Dogs, donkeys, and noise,
When they hurried us off to Port Said.
Then of course, while the vessel was coaled,
Through its streets flat and dusty we strolled,
Where Egyptians unkempt
With more trashy wares tempt
The unwary to part with their gold.
When at Malta, to take us ashore,
Yelling boatmen, not less than a score,
Flower dealers and guides,
Touts and beggars besides,
All pestered us just as before.
For all travellers they count as a prize,
While they’re brigands themselves in disguise,
Though ’tis not with a knife
They demand “ gold or life,”
But they rob you with cheating and lies.
Now I’ve seen many peoples and cities,
And L’m certain of one thing, and this is,
Whene’er I get home
Never more will I roam,
But stick close to my trade and the missus.
Dear Mr. Editor,
I should like to tell you a few of the vicissitudes we suffered in our praise-
worthy endeavour to see the Pyramids.
Our arrival in Suez early on Monday morning beheld the Cairo party ready and
eager for the fray. Excitement supplied the place of breakfast, which was quite as well,
as we could’nt have had any if we wanted it. It was a lovely morning, and our spirits rose
as we steamed across to the shore, lined with Arabs in appropriate costumes.
Everyone had assured us we should have plenty of time to catch the steamer again at
Port Said, and all went merry as a marriage bell. We caught our train; were charmed with
our carriage ; charmed with our prospects; and even charmed with the Arabs, who cheated
us shamefully over palm leaf fans. The railway journey through the desert was some-
what uninteresting, except as being connected with the late war. We stopped at
Tel-el-Kebir and had a five minutes’ survey of the battle field. It was just an ordinary
little town in the desert; a few mud huts and stunted trees, a wretched little station
and “ quantities of sand,” but on seating ourselves again in the train we felt as if we
were straight from the seat of Avar, and gave ourselves airs accordingly. The place


of greatest interest—to me at any rate —on the journey was Zag-a-zig, where we got
a very good luncheon at a reasonable price. We arrived at Cairo at half-past four,
having been in the train seven and a-half hours (fare 235.) feeling very hot, very dusty,
rather excited, and somewhat like Cook’s tourists. We drove to Shepherd’s Hotel, hired
a guide, had a cup of tea, and proceeded to “do ” Cairo. A good deal of Cairo is in ruins,
(and inferior ones they are) besides being very dusty. We saw the Citadel. I only remem-
ber it didn’t impress me very much; and the famous Mosque built entirely of Alabaster,
before entering which we were provided with very large slippers. One of our party
executed a war dance in the aforesaid ornaments, and, on being remonstrated with,
remarked, “ How do they know it isn’t our usual way of entering a church ? ” We thought
this reasonable. From here we took a bird’s-eye view of the whole city and pitied the
people who were not where we were ; we then drove to the bazaar, through the narrowest,
dirtiest, most picturesque streets in the world, filled with Egyptians in picturesque attire:
it was like a scene in a pantomime. We then drove to the hotel and had dinner
o’clock), after which we adjourned to the gardens and heard the band play, our guide still
accompanying, although we hinted that as it was only a pleasure excursion and no
information required, we might, perhaps, dispense with his company. But he wasn’t
quick at taking hints, and as he was a very substantial individual with a ferocious
oriental gleam in his eye, we didn’t like to press the matter, so we meekly followed
him about, till he finally drove us gently home to bed. We were very, very tired, and very,
very sleepy, but going to bed at 11.30 p.m. is a ghastly farce when you have to get up again
at 3 a.m. to see the sun rise over the Pyramids, which our inexorable guide insisted upon.
At 3 a.m., therefore, in the cold moonlight we mournfully arose. It is a curious fact that
the Pyramids, the far-famed Sphinx, and even sunrise in the East look very, very small
at 3 o’clock in the morning. I tried to back out of going; on comparing notes, we
all had, and we assembled to a melancholy cup of coffee in the dining-room. Mark
Twain’s idea of a proxy struck me as being a particularly brilliant one. Behold us then
setting out in two carriages, our rotund guide on the box-seat of the first one, covered
with blankets. We were also covered with blankets, for it was awfully cold.
We took an hour and three-quarters driving to the Pyramids, and before we got
there the sun began to rise. It was a beautiful sunrise, I suppose, but I didn’t look at it.
I was fixed up too comfortably facing the other way; but, between ourselves, I didn’t
think it balanced the 3 a.m. All this while the far-famed Pyramids were looming in the
distance, looking like enormous triangles built of bricks; and after a lengthened survey,
we all agreed it was a pity the ancients hadn’t had something better to do. On arriving
close up, we found that a party of five of our fellow passengers had already made the
ascent and descent, and met us looking very hot and triumphant. We hired an Arab to
do the climbing business for us; he ran up, shouted hurrah three times at the top,
and was down again in ten minutes. This gave us great satisfaction, as we each felt we
had made the ascent, and at the same time given the man a help in life. We then
gazed at the huge head of the Sphinx, and agreed she was a very ugly old lady, and not
very well preserved for her age. We saw also here a Roman temple, sunk in the sand.
The Arabs’ attentions were very pressing. Two of them insisted on convoying me
about, much to my horror, and then demanded payment, which I refused to give; so
when we were driving off, they called out ironically, “ You very generous lady; we hope
you come again.” However, I survived their scorn, and the guide proceeded to take
us to see one of the Khedive’s palaces, which was not much of a place, after all, and
furnished in bad French stylo. We then thankfully went to breakfast; it was 10 o’clock.


We had breakfast, were just doing a little shopping comfortably before catching our
train, when arrived a telegram—
“We sail to-night. Must take special train and boat. Wire your movements.”
We were horrified, but could do nothing. No special train was to be had, so we drove
sorrowftilly to the station, settled ourselves as before, had luncheon at Zag-a-zig, got out
at Ismalia, learned there that the “Parramatta” would not wait after 11 p.m., and we
were not due till 12. We made a melancholy group on the tiniest steamer imaginable;
watched the sun go down and the moon rise up; counted the mile-posts along the banks
of the canal; fortified each other with dismal forebodings, and mentally said “ Good-bye”
to* friends and luggage. We wiled away the time until weary, hungry, cold, and ugly,
we arrived at Port Said and found the “Parramatta” had not gone, but had been waiting
for our miserable selves ever since five that afternoon. We slunk guiltily on board, as
we heard that the kindest Captain in the world was in an awful rage. However, we
eventually made our peace with him, and all is smooth once more; but I don’t think it
will become a general thing for P. & 0. passengers to run up to Cairo from Suez, and
catch the steamer again at Port Said. — Madge.
ATHLETIC SPORTS.— 2nd DAY.
This long deferred meeting was held on Thursday, the 30th April, and the various
events were decided in the presence of a numerous company of spectators. Most of the
races were well contested, and in particular those competed for by ladies, excited much
interest and enthusiasm. A good deal of amusement was caused by tho Ladies’ Walking
Race, many of the fair athletes evidently being under the impression that they had
entered in a “ Go-as-you-please ” distance match, and had not the Referee been a
gentleman of extraordinary leniency, it is certain that two-tliirds of the number would have
been disqualified for running. It is satisfactory to state that the winner of the final heat,
Miss Rhoda Dobbin, walked with scrupulous fairness, and regret was felt that two other
ladies, who won their heats by fair toe and heel walking were put out of the contest by a
most palpable runner.
The final heat of the Gentlemen’s Walking Race was productive of much mirth
among the spectators, as tho competitors, Messrs. Popham and de Betham twice fouled,
and rolled over together on the course. The former gentleman eventually proved the
winner of this exciting race. The Wheelbarrow Race was another exciting contest, the
first heat being very cleverly won by Messrs. Gardner (barrow) and Summers (wheeler),
beating Messrs. Porter and MacKinnon, filling the same respective posts. Tho second heat
was won rather easily by Messrs. Popham and de Betham. The final was a desperate
struggle between the winners of the foregoing heats, but at the finish, Messrs. Popham
and de Betham were adjudged victors by a wheel. The Juvenile Races were very
successful, great applause greeting the first appearance of Master G. White (probably the
smallest athlete who has ever made an appearance on any course), and who obtained the
second prize in the Juvenile Handicap. The High Jump was won in pretty style by
Mr. Porter; Mr. Popham being a good second. The Lascars’ Race was run in heats, and
on running these off, Said Allec Cadir and Mahomed Abdul Cadir were left in; the former
winning rather easily. The Punkah Boys’ Race also proved interesting, Abdul Cadir
winning the deciding heat, with Alnnod Hussein a fair second, the third competitor, who


was evidently short of condition, being beaten off. Chalking the Pig’s eye was the next
competition, and it produced a very large number of entries, the ladies displaying much
better judgment than the gentlemen, many of the latter going very wide of the mark.
Miss Scott, Miss R. Dobbin, and Miss Marks, hit the pig’s eye with almost equal precision,
but the verdict was finally in favour of Miss Marks, whose victory was hailed with great
enthusiasm.
The Ladies’ Tug of War caused much excitement, Mrs. Franks and Mrs. Brandon
commanding teams representing Great Britain and Australia, respectively. It was obvious
that the former were the stronger side, and though the representatives of Australia made
a plucky bid for victory, they were twice pulled over the line.
In the evening the Prizes were distributed on the Quarter Deck; Mrs. White
handing to the successful gentlemen the rewards of their strength and skill, and which
were, in all cases, articles manufactured by ladies on board the “ Parramatta; ” while
Capt. Moseley presented to the lady winners the prizes which had been purchased at
Colombo. The proceedings closed with cheers for Mrs. White, Capt. Moseley, the
Secretary, the Stewards of the Meeting, &c.
The following are the results of the various contests :
Ladies’ Walking Race - 1 Miss R. Dobbin - 2 Miss Smith
Gentlemen’s do. - 1 Mr. F. A. L. Pophain - 2 Mr. G. C. De Betham
Girls’ Race (under 14) - 1 Miss Paul - 2 Miss E. Gibson
Wheelbarrow Race - 1 Mr. FA. L. Popham - 2 Mr. E. Gardner and
and G. C. de Betham Mr. W. Summers
Boys’ Race (under 7) - IH. Brandon
Juvenile Handicap - IS. Marks - 2 G. White
High Jump - 1 Mr. Porter - 2 Mr. F. A. L. Popham
Chalking Pig’s Eye - 1 Miss Marks - 2 Miss Scott
Lascars’ Race ' - 1 Said Allec Cadir - 2 Mahomed Abdul Cadir
Punkah Wallah’s Race - 1 Abdul Cadir - 2 Ahmed Hussein.
THE FANCY DRESS BALL.
The Fancy Dress Ball, which has for a long time past formed a fruitful theme of
conversation, and preparations for which have been proceeding from the time the
“Parramatta ” left Colombo, was successfully brought off on the evening of Monday, the
4th of May. Much anxiety was felt lest the weather should prove unpropitious, and render
it impossible for the ball to be held on deck; but fortunately there was not more than a
light breeze blowing, though even this was of a cold and searching nature, which made
cloaks and sealskin mantles very desirable garments.
The quarter-deck had been most artistically decorated under the auspices of the
officers of the “ Parramatta,” trophies of flags forming important features of the arrange-
ments; the capstan being also covered with different coloured bunting, and the awning
prettily draped in the same manner. The piano was fixed on the top of the aft hatch,
aim additional room was thus afforded for the dancers, which was generally held to be a
very great improvement on all the previously held dances on board. The lighting was
very effectively managed, and one of the prettiest features of the evening was the manner


in which the lighting of the gangway leading to the ball room was effected, lamps being
held by the Lascars, dressed in their p ; cturesque costumes. By kind permission of the
Captain dancing was able to be kept up till a late hour, and an excellent supper was pro-
vided at 9.30 o’clock, to which ample justice was done, and at which the health of the
Captain and Officers of the ship was proposed by the Rev. Dr. Moore-White, and drunk
with enthusiasm.
The following is the programme of the dances :
1. Polonaise and Polka.
2. Valse.
3. Lancers.
4. Schottische.
5. Polka.
6. Valse.
7. Lancers.
8. Valse.
9. Mazurka.
10. Polka.
11. Valse.
12. Lancers.
13. Highland Scottische.
14. Polka.
15. Valse.
16. Valse.
17. Sir Roger rle Coverley.
It is much to be regretted that the request of the Editors of this journal, that
descriptions of the dresses worn on this occasion should be furnished to them by the
wearers, should not have been more generally complied with; and we are consequently
unable to give more than the vaguest information on this most interesting subject. It
may, however, be stated that the dresses worn were of a most varied kind, and when the
dancing was proceeding the scene presented was one which entirely baffles description.
It may, indeed, be asserted, without fear of contradiction, that a more animated picture
was never seen on board an ocean-going steamer than that seen on board the “ Parra-
matta ” on this festive occasion.
The following are the only dresses, descriptions of which we are able to supply to
our readers:
Among the ladies’ costumes that worn by Miss Greig was most deservedly admired,
consisting of an orange skirt, draped with lace, black beaded bodice, black lace mantilla
veil, caught up with poppies; amber ornaments. This was one of the most artistic
dresses worn.
Miss Levey appeared as a bride, and it may incidentally be remarked that her
entrance on the scene was heralded by the “ Wedding March,” performed on the piano,
which was looked upon as a delicate compliment to the young lady. Her dress was of
the finest muslin, trimmed with white satin ribbon. Her veil was of tulle, caught up with
diamond arrows, and was surmounted by a wreath of jessamine. A handsome diamond
necklace gave an appropriate finish to this elegant costume,
MiSS Lucie Thomas appeared as a Colston Charity (Bristol) School Girl, her
picturesque dress consisting of a scarlet gown, with white cap, handkerchief, and apron.
The fair wearer informed our reporter that this dress was the handiwork of a young lady
who, to the regret of all the passengers, quitted the ‘‘ Parramatta ” at Malta, and we
may add our regret that she was, in consequence of her absence, prevented from seeing
how admirably the dress in question suited the lady to whom she kindly presented it.
MiSS Welshman represented “ Forget me not,” wearing pale blue silk trimmedAvitli
Spanish lace and forget-me nots.
Migs Smith was Little Red Riding Hood, with blue dress, white apron, scarlet hood
and cloak, and basket of fruit and cakes.


Miss F. E. Smith appeared as a Swiss Peasant Girl, and wore a short flounced skirt,
with white Swiss bodice, scarlet sash and apron, with silk stockings to match.
Miss Sharp represented a German Peasant Girl, with a short striped skirt, scarlet
bands, Indian muslin bodice, trimmed with insertion and lace, navy blue pointed belt, laced
with scarlet, stockings to match, hair in two plaits.
Miss Jebb’s dress was styled “ Coming through the Rye,” and was composed of
cream nun’s veiling and broche with bunches of cornflowers and poppies.
MISS H. Jebb represented a Spanish Girl, and wore a black lace dress, scarves of
crimson brocaded ribbon, lace mantilla fastened with poppies, and a fancy comb ; coral
ornaments.
Miss Mary MacKinnon as Marguerite (Faust), wore a pretty cream muslin dress, with
blue apron and Marguerite daisies, her hair being worn loose, tied with blue ribbons.
MISS Hordern as “ Whist ” wore a white embroidered dress, two “ hands ” on the skirt,
one on the body of the dress, and one on the fan. Black and red ribbons completed a
novel costume.
Miss Gibson as a Spanish Peasant Girl, wore Moorish scarves tastefully draped over
short striped skirt, short grey body filled in with white puffing, and red silk stockings.
Head dress of Moorish silk.
MISS K. Gibson as a Housemaid, wore a dark dress, white apron, and lace cap, and
carried a feather brush as a symbol of her profession.
MISS Scott in a like character, wore a nearly similar costume, and bore a dust-pan
as her emblem of office.
MISS Armstrong as a Red Cross Nurse, was attired in the pretty and distinctive
costume peculiar to that Order.
The Misses Paul were tastefully dressed, and represented a French Flower Girl,
and “ La Fille de Madame Angot.”
MISS Brandon wore a Spanish Gipsy costume, and carried a tambourine gaily
decorated with ribbons.
Many of the dresses worn by the gentlemen were admirable for their beauty or gro-
tesqueness. Among the handsomest may be mentioned the one worn by Mr. De Betham,
who represented a Malay, with his white jacket and picturesque Sulu (turban) and
Savong (skirt), made out of rich material.
Mr. Maxse appeared in the garb of a Texan Cowboy, with sombrero hat, flannel
shirt, corduroy breeches, and butcher’s boots with long spurs. His blanket was carried
in a roll over his shoulder and across his chest, and a lasso, pistol in pouch, and cartridge
case, completed a unique and effective costume.
Mr. Popham wore a Soudanese costume, which possessed a special interest from
having been formerly the property of one of the warriors of the Madhi, and having been
taken from the battle field of Abou Klea. It included cap and long loose robe, and the
wearer carried a two-edged sword and spear, and a Soudanese tom-tom.
Mr. Montague Levey appeared in a Nigger costume, and described himself as
“ Black Johnnie Stout.” He wore black coat and waistcoat, each with brass
buttons, red and white continuations, and yellow shoes. He was further disguised in a
black beard and blue spectacles.
Mr. Shenton as the Heathen Chinee, wore a dress covered with Mongolian figures
and a skull cap. His grotesque costume was completed by a long drooping moustache,
and a pigtail, the latter appendage being useful as a means of support to his partner,
when being whirled round in the mazy valse.


Mr. Nelson was attired in correct style as a French Cook in white jacket, trousers,
apron, and cap.
Mr. Gardner as a Nigger Jockey (or as he was described by the funny man of the
‘‘Parramatta,” the ‘‘Jocular Nigger”) appeared in red and blue parti-coloured jacket,
buckskin breeches and red cap.
Mr. Summers wore an Egpytian dress (procured from Cairo, during his recent visit
to that city) surmounted by red fez.
Mr. Sievers appeared in correct costume as a Masher of the Period, with knee
breeches and gold garters, walking stick and hat of the most killing shape.
Mr. Pulley and Mr. Hordern appeared in Masonic costumes, the former being
described as Sovereign Prince Rose Croix; and Mr. Flemming was attired as the “ Sydney
Mail.”
The foregoing description of the dresses conveys but a feeble idea of the various
costumes, the effect of which was of the most successful character.
We have been requested by Mr. Belcher to put it on record that he appeared as usual
and this character was rather a favourite one. It only remains for us to state that there
was a rather large proportion of passengers present without any character at all, and this
is a statement which we make with regret, seeing the apparent respectability of the
passengers travelling by s.s. “ Parramatta.”
Dear Mr. Observer,
I am surprised to find no lady has yet sent you an account of feminine ad-
venture at the various ports at which we have touched, so I am now proposing to remedy
this omission, though George says that part of what I have to tell is, by this time, quite
ancient history. Our party, as you know, consists of the Pater, Mary, myself, and George.
We landed at Colombo on the 13th April, and drove to the Oriental Hotel, where we
were fortunate enough to get good rooms. Before I forget it, I should like to warn
people stopping at this hotel, that the walls of the bed-rooms do not go quite up to the
ceiling, a fact of which Mary and I were made aware by hearing our next door neigh-
bours on the left discussing the particular attributes of ourselves. We knew, from their
voices, who our friends were, and it was most edifying to hear such a subject thoroughly
discussed, though the opinions respecting us were far from complimentary. Well, we
spent the morning and part of the afternoon in walking through the bazaars, and quite
wished shopping could be done in the same way at home. How nice it would bo to
stroll through Regent Street and Bond Street, turning over the stock at, say, Howell and
James’, or London and Ryder’s, and then, failing our buying any article at a quarter of the
price asked for it, to go on to Farmer and Rogers’or Hancock’s, and repeat the perform-
ance there! Mary and I did not make many purchases, as we find we require all our
quarter’s allowance to repair the ravages in our wardrobes wrought by the sea air and
Australasian washerwomen. About 4 o’clock we drove through the native quarter, where
we were delighted with the appearance of the people—the babies in their full dress of a
bangle being positively fascinating, and then on to call on Arabi. A visit to this per-
sonage has been already described in your paper, so I will only mention that our’s had to
be brought to an abrupt conclusion, owing to an unfortunate remark of Mary’s. She has
a knack of saying the wrong thing at the right time, and, on this occasion, thinking, I
suppose, she ought to bear some part in the conversation, she asked Arabi’s son, who acts


as interpreter, whether his father expected soon to have the Malidi to keep him company ?
He was dreadfully offended, and we thought it best to beat a hasty retreat. Poor
Arabi! I believe he loathes the P. and 0. passengers, and well he may, if he often comes
across indiscreet ones like our dear Mary. On our way to the Cinnamon Gardens and
Museum we met a wedding procession, which interested us very much. The bridegroom
marched first, and, as he carried a sword, the Pater said he must be of superior station to
the bride, who was evidently not a distinguished person. She was clearly not in the
first bloom of youth, and her dusky complexion was not improved by a profuse sprinkling
of white powder. She wore the correct European costume of white silk, lace veil, and
orange wreath, and was accompanied by two bridesmaids, also attired in European garb,
the prevailing colours of which were green and mauve. The thing which tickled us most
f was, that these young women were duly provided with dress improvers (which I may
mention are articles intended to improve the contour of a dress), but they wore them in
front instead of in their usual position. This is, I assure you, a positive fact, and to see
these ladies walking up the steep steps leading to the Roman Catholic Church, where the
wedding ceremony was to take place, was something to live in the memory for ever! I
believe we were fortunate in meeting this party before the wedding ceremony rather
than after it, as in the latter case, we should have been expected to shake hands with
them all round—it being considered by the natives good luck to be greeted by Europeans
on such an occasion. I see I must pass over our visit to the Museum, with its ludicrously
ill-stuffed beasts and fishes (one devil fish I can never forget!) and to the Garden Club,
when we were enabled, through the kindness of a member, to inspect the capital lawn
tennis grounds, or I shall weary you and your readers. We had a first-rate dance in the
evening at the “Oriental,” the floor being delightful, and the band a capital one. Next
day we went to Kandy, but a visit to that district has been so well described by another of
your correspondents, that I shall pass over our adventures there without comment. It
was a tiring day, and we were not sorry to get back to the “Parramatta” about 6.30.
Aden was our next stopping place on the 22nd April, and time only allowed of our
landing and driving to see the Tanks, which are really most wonderful. A history and
description of them will, I hope, find a place in your paper. We had something like an
adventure on the way back, for George slily threw overboard a shilling, unobserved indeed
by us, but not so by our boatmen. Instantly the whole crew were in the sea, leaving us
in the boat at the mercy of the waves. Mary and I Avere quite frightened, and the
scrambling on board of our dripping boatmen (one of Avhom had rescued the shilling) was
not at all a pleasant performance to our way of thinking, as the boat threatened to upset
in an alarming manner. We were pleased to find ourselves safely on board the “ Parra-
matta,” where Ave had time to buy a few ostrich feathers before getting once more under
Aveigli.
We did not land at Suez, the ship only remaining there three hours, after Avhich Ave
Avent on through the Canal, just in front of the French mail steamer, “ Oceanien,” which,
hoAvever, raced past us on the Bitter Lake, and took precedence of us in the second part
of the Canal. We reached Port Said on the 28th, at 3 o’clock, passing the “Austral”
(Orient line) about to enter the Canal on her outward voyage. We Avent ashore and
looked round the toAvn, but avoided visiting more than the outskirts of the Arab quarter,
the smell of which did not attract us. The chief thing to do at Port Said is to stake
one’s money at the roulette tables, and it may be Avell to warn the speculative that, in the
highly improbable event of their playing successfully, it Avill be Avise for them to provide
themselves with an escort back to the ship, or they are unlikely to carry their Avinnings


further than the shore. We did not play deeply, but none of us left El Dorado (for that
is the name of the gaming establishment), with as much silver as when we entered its
portals. After dinner on board the “ Parramatta,” we returned to El Dorado to see a
performance of “ La Grande Duchesse,” but it was not a brilliant affair by any means, and
we left early, being back on board by 10 o’clock. Saturday, the 2nd May, found us at
Malta, where we were detained for several hours, and enabled to get through a great deal
of sight seeing. We took a carriage, and went off to Civita Vecchia, the old capital of
the island (now called Notabile), where we went through part of the Catacombs, which
are not particularly impressive ; and as all our family hate the smell of tallow candles, we
were not sorry to find ourselves again in the outer air. Saint Paul’s Church is a good
specimen of its kind, and there is an unusually fine organ there. What pleased us most
in the church was a statue of Saint Paul, cut out of an exquisitely white piece of marble,
a really artistic work. On our way back to Yaletta, we visited the gardens of the
Governor’s Palace at San Antonio (his summer residence), which are well worth seeing.
After luncheon we “ did” the local lions of Yaletta, beginning with the Cathedral Church
of Saint John. With parts of this building we were much struck, the 400 marble slabs of
the floor, each commemorative of a Knight of Malta, and the lapis lazuli high altar being
very fine. From Saint John’s we went, pursued by beggars (who display a greater
pertinacity in Malta than in any place I ever visited), to the Winter Palace of the Governor,
where is a most interesting armoury, and the walls of the Council Chamber are extremely
beautiful, being covered with tapestry from the Gobelin looms, 200 years old, but in a
perfect state of preservation. From the Palace we went to the Capuchin Monastery,
where the chief objects of interest are the “ Baked Monks,” the bodies of many of the
•deceased brethren having been preserved in this manner, and a very gruesome spectacle
they present. The last monk whose body was dealt with in this way died in 1874, and,
in consequence of legislation on the subject, none will henceforward enjoy the distinction
of being baked. The face of one of the mummies (for that is what they rather resemble)
was protected by a wire netting to preserve his teeth from the thieving propensities of
visitors who had appropriated several of them as keepsakes before this safeguard was
adopted. From the Monastery we made our way to the Landing Stage, and reached the
“ Parramatta” very tired, but much pleased with our day’s outing. We hope to go ashore
at Gibraltar, but it will not be till the day your paper is issued. I know, moreover, you
will receive an account of the place from a friend of mine who has visited it, and told me
he was going to write about it in the Observer.
And now I am sorry to find, dear Mr. Observer, that the great length to which this
letter has extended will oblige me to forego the pleasure I promised myself in describing
the dances on board the “ Parramatta.” I should have liked to pay my little tribute of
praise to the Committee, who have been indefatigable in seeing the programme success-
fully carried through on each dancing night. And, oh 1 I should have loved to tell you
about the gentleman whom Mary and I call the “ Monarch of the Ball Room,” and, in
devising new names for whom George displays a fertility of imagination worthy of a
better cause. I should positively have revelled in my description of this gentleman
figuring in our “ Parramatta” ball room, clad in a garment redolent of a hundred cricket
matches, and which I presume he feared to entrust (as being of historical interest) to the
tender mercies of the washerwomen to whom I have referred. “ But this eternal blazon
must not be ” for your ears, dear Mr. Observer, and with many apologies to you and
your readers for inflicting on you this long, and I fear uninteresting, letter, believe me to
remain your sincere well wisher, JEMIMA.
F


VARIETIES.
LINES ON A SKELETON.
Behold this ruin ! ’twas a skull
Once of ethereal spirit full;
This narrow cell was life’s retreat,
This space was thought’s mysterious seat;
What beauteous visions filled this spot,
What dreams of pleasure long forgot;
Nor hope, nor love, nor joy, nor fear,
Have left one trace of record here.
Beneath this mouldering canopy
Once shone the bright and busy eye,
But start not at the dismal void,
If social love that eye employed ;
If with no lawless fire it gleamed,
But through the dews of kindness beamed,
That eye shall be for ever bright
When stars and suns have sunk to night.
Within this hollow cavern hung
The ready, swift, and tuneful tongue ;
If falsehood’s honey it disdained,
And where it could not praise was chained—
If bold in virtue’s cause it spoke,
Yet gentle concord never broke ;
This silent tongue shall plead for thee,
When time unveils eternity.
Say, did these fingers delve the mine,
Or with its envied rubies shine;
To hew the rock or wear the gem
Can little now avail to them ;
But if the page of truth they sought,
Or comfort to the mourner brought,
These hands a richer meed shall claim
Than all that wait on wealth or fame.
Avails it whether bare or shod
These feet the path of duty trod,
If from the bowers of ease they fled
To seek affliction’s humble shed;
If grandeur’s guilty bribe they spurned,
And home to virtue’s cot returned,
These feet with angel’s wings shall vie,
And tread the palace of the sky.
Anonymous.
A FRIEND IN NEED.— Affectionately Dedicated to an Old Pipe.
For ten long years in New South Wales
An exile had I been,
And since I’d left my childhood’s home
Strange faces had I seen;
Strange peoples known, strange lands survey’d;
Strange dialects had heard;
And strangely learnt how sad and true
The adage “ Hope deferred.”
But joy and peace now filled my heart;
No cause for tears to flow,
For now no longer had I need
“ Sickness at heart ” to know.
For now at last in very truth
My steps were homeward bound;
One thing I needed, —and it was
The one thing that I found.
I found a friend to whom I could
Pour out my brimful heart,
To whom I could all trustfully
My inmost thoughts impart.
S.S. “Parramatta,” May Day, 1885.
This friend was constant to the end,
She cheered me on the way,
She never wearied though my tale
Ne’er changed from day to day.
Each morn, each eve, to comfort me,
To soothe she did her best,
And when at night I laid me down,
’T was she that brought me rest.
Who was this friend who ne’er betrayed
The secrets of my heart,
To whom I could so trustfully
My inmost thoughts impart ?
Who proved so constant to the end ?
Who cheered me on my way ?
Who never wearied though my tale
Ne’er changed from day to day ?
That friend was but a meerschaum pipe,
She soothed but with a weed,
But faithful, constant, silent, true,
She proved —A Friend in Need.


THE LITTLE RIVER ACCIDENT, VICTORIA, 1881
The dreadful news that’s going round,
No doubt, my friends, you’ve heard;
’T is of a Railway Accident,
That lately has occurred.
’T was on the Little River Line
Two engines did collide;
It injured many passengers,
And caused three deaths beside.
A train got to the Weribee,
It had not long to stay ;
The station master’s daughter came,
And let the train away.
She then sent down a telegram,
No danger did she fear,
Instead of sending “ Line is blocked,”
She sent the words “Line clear.”
The train at Little River filled
With passengers, we know;
The Station Master heard “ Line clear,”
Of course he let it go.
He did not know of their mistake,
Until it was to late ;
For if he had, he could have saved
Poor Tim Creig* from his fate.
They got about a mile away,
Along the line they sped,
When out cries Tim, “ What’s this I see? ”
Look ! look! a light ahead:
Then turning to the fireman, he
Forthwith to him did say,
“ Put on the brake, shut off the steam ! ”
“ For God’s sake don’t delay.”
And now to speak of Kitchin ;
He saw what was to be,
He turned and put his brake hard down,
But not a word said he.
Then rushing to his whistle,
He made it give a shriek,
But when he thought of passengers ;
Poor fellow, could not speak.
The trains now met with awful crash ;
It was a fearful sight,
To see the wounded passengers
On such an awful night.
But hark ! a groan was heard to rise,
A groan of one in pain,
Against the fire-box scalded stood,
Brave Kitchin in the rain.
Aid came at last, and got him out,
He was too weak to stand,
They laid him on the bank close by,
The staff still in his hand.
Then feebly calling to the Guard,
These words to him he cried —
“ Oh ! take this staff, and hold it tight,”
He then fell back and died.
Poor Tim ! we never see him now,
They’ve laid him in his grave,
He sacrificed his life—he tried
His passengers to save.
Full well we know that he is gone,
Where all is peace and love,
And may we all meet once again,
In realms of bliss above.
J. Marsden (Steward on board the “ Parramatta.’’)
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
1. 'T is a common study in black and white,
Though keenly felt, ’t is never seen ;
Oftimes arrayed in mimic strife,
Crowned as a King without a Queen.
2. This, too, is a study in black and white,
A blind to inquisitive eyes ;
Though my character's clear, and ne’er hidden from sight.
I am often a perfect disguise.
1. A cat will scratch if roughly you should catch her ;
But most folks say, that I’m a harder scratcher.
2. This beauteous City of the West, men say
Alone can rival Sydney’s lovely bay. ,
3. ’T is war’s alarm, prepare each gallant band—
Repel the invader from the fatherland.
4. You and I oft for afternoon tea,
Keep of scandal a racy collection ;
You and I both in one thing agree—
We alone are the pink of perfection.
• The Driver of the Up Train-


5. To help his fellow men, his sole desire,
To do his duty faithfully his highest aim ;
His life and death shall noble thoughts inspire
In human hearts fit tribute to his fame.
6. Hark to the shout that rings so clear,
Hark to the joyous sound,
So dear to every sportsman's ear,
Proclaims bold Reynard found.
7. Though I’m money, few care for my loss, yet when lost,
I can ne’er be regained, as you’ll find to your oost.
8. This badge most highly prized of yore,
The doughty knight reveals,
Though like a slave ’t is mostly seen
Close following on his heels.
ACROSTIC.
From week to week, in this our floating home,
MjJirst, for meed of praise, and not for hire,
Seeks in my second to beguile the hours
With strain melodious, till to rest we fare.
1. A science that calculates.
2. A sentence that characterises.
3. A heathen Chinee.
4. A transparent mineral.
5. The close of day.
6. A royal sire.
7. An Australian pest.
ANSWER TO LAST WEEK’S DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
Punkah—Coolie .
1. PicniC
2. Und 0
3. N O
4. Kee L
5. Alib I
6. HastE
ANSWERS TO RIDDLES.
1. Because it is a fellow feeling for a fellow creature.
2. Bunyan (bunion).
3. Because he is neither square nor upright, but he is grand.
4. Because he can only gesticulate (just tickle eight).
5. Merely a difference of opinion (a pinion).
6 Two imperial pints.
7. Because we have too Summers on board.
8. Because the fiddles are then brought out.
9. Hailing cabs and omnibusses.
10. To-keep his stomach in check.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES.
1. Reformatory. | 2. Jack and Jill.
SOLUTION OF MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM.
Tobacco.


THE
PARRAMATTA OBSERVER,
“Nunquam Dormio.”
No. 5.
SATURDAY, 9th MAY, 1885.
May 9th, 1885.
Our voyage is nearly’over, and, with the shores of Old England almost in sight, it
becomes our duty to bid a cordial farewell to our readers. It only remains for us to
express a hope that the efforts we have made for the entertainment of the passengers of
the “ Parramatta” have not been altogether futile, and we are encouraged in this hope
by the very general response which has been made to the proposal that the several
numbers of this paper should be published in a collective form on the completion of our
journey. We trust that this publication may afford to our friends an agreeable reminis-
cence of a not unenjoyable period of their lives, and that the photographs with which
it will be illustrated may recall some pleasant friendship formed during the voyage.
When .we entered upon the task of producing the Parramatta Observer, it was with
the determination that it should contain nothing of an objectionably personal character,
and we resign it with the consciousness that nothing has appeared in its columns
calculated to inflict a serious wound on any member of our small community. Some
exception has indeed been taken to some remarks made by our fair correspondent,
“ Jemima.” We may say, however, from personal knowledge of the lady in question,
that she is deeply imbued with the idea that “the world is out of joint,” and that it is
her special mission in life “to set it right.” And we may also record our firm conviction
that, if she is accustomed to “ extenuate nothing,” at least she has “ set down naught
in malice.”
Let us, then, with all good will shake hands (metaphorically) all round with our
readers, and with the best of wishes for their health, wealth, and happiness. May such
as have come, under medical advice, from the uttermost parts of the world to visit the
shores of England, carry back to their antipodean homes health gathered from the
invigorating breezes which blow over these northern isles ! May those on business
intent discover that even in these hard times trade still prospers for them I May those
who are travelling for pleasure find the same in a festive London season, followed by
enjoyable tours among the smiling cornfields and varied woodlands of England, the
heather clad moors of Scotland, and the verdant meadows of the sister isle! To those,
too, who are returning to their native land—in many cases, it may be, after a lengthened
absence—we offer our best wishes for joyous greetings from friends from whom they
have been long parted, and a hearty welcome to their English homes. And to all let us
wish (though we fear it is a vain hope) that their future lives may be as free from care
or misfortune, as has been their voyage in the good ship “ Parramatta.”
We are glad to inform our readers that the illustrated cover of the Parramatta
Observer , which has excited so much admiration, was, in accordance with the wishes of


Mr. G. D. Saunder (3rd Officer), the artist, submitted for sale by auction for the benefit of
the “Dreadnought” Merchant Seamen’s Hospital, and, after a spirited competition between
Mr. E. G. B. Maxse and Mr. G. C. de Betham, was knocked down to the former gentleman
for £3 3s.
OUR VOYAGE.
On Tuesday, May sth, a strong, bitterly cold head-wind, with a high sea, brought
down our rate of speed considerably, the log at noon showing the smallest run made
during the voyage. Daylight the following morning showed the reason of the keen winds
which we have felt during the past few days, as the summits of the Nevadas, as well as the
range of mountains on the southern coast, were seen to be quite covered with a sheet of
dazzling snow. At noon the bold outline of the celebrated Rock was in sight, and by
4 p.m. we were at anchor under the frowning batteries of Europa Point, close to the
“ Superb,” which was lying at anchor. Our arrival interrupted the artillery firing, which
was resumed as soon as we were clear of the range, and we were able to observe some
pretty shell practice at the target out to sea. As we had but two hours and a half, we all
hastened on shore, and dispersed ourselves about the various places of interest which time
would allow of our visiting. Our party was further reduced by Mr. and Mrs. Summers
and Mrs. Paul, with her family, who remained on shore, to follow later on—whih several
fresh passengers were taken on board. At 6.30 we again put to sea, and sweeping past
Tarifa, entered the Atlantic Ocean. It was long after dark when we passed Cape
Trafalgar, the spot which will ever live in the memory of Englishmen as the scene of
Nelson’s great victory over the combined French and Spanish Fleets in 1805, in which
he met with his death wound. At noon next day we were abreast of Cape St. Vincent,
memorable for Lord Howe’s victory over the French Fleet. In the evening, the juvenile
performers, Miss E. and Master H. Gibson, gave a second representation of “ Matrimony,”
the entertainment concluding with the laughable farce of “ No. 1 Round the Corner.” At
8 o’clock next morning a thick cold fog blotted out everything within the distance of a
few yards, through which, at half speed, and to the dismal accompaniment of the fog
horn, the vessel slowly felt her way. This lifted, after an interval of a couple of hours,
with one short return of the fog during the forenoon. The sun shone brightly out for
the rest of the day. Trusting to a continuance of the good weather, which has attended
us on our way, notwithstanding that Cape Finisterre was well abeam by 7 p.m., and
the Bay of Biscay had actually been entered, it was determined to have a dance on deck.
Our confidence in the forbearance of Old Father Neptune was not misplaced, and a most
enjoyable evening was spent.
The morning of Saturday, May 9th, found us well into the bay of evil repute to mariners,
where instead of the hard gale and mountains high billows that were expected by many,
we found a flat calm, the water presenting that glassy, oily look, which is often seen on
the line, but very rarely seen in these northern latitudes. The air was still keen, and
a brisk dance in the evening was welcomed by all. At 6 a.m. on Sunday Ushant was
seen well abeam, and by the afternoon the coast line of England was visible above the
horizon; in the same fine cold weather the land began to show a vivid green tint of
spring instead of the misty blue of the distance, growing brighter as the woods of Mount
Edgecumbe grew more distinct in the sky line, and the fields around Plymouth could be
clearly distinguished. At 11 a.m. we picked up a pilot cruising far out on the look
out for a job, by whom we were brought safely outside of the breakwater. Here we
were met by a tug carrying several friends of passengers, and bringing letters and agents


for Messrs. King and Grindley, on the expectation of obtaining baggage to clear. After
about an hour’s detention all those who intended leaving here were on board the tug,
and with cheers and counter cheers we were again away upon our journey up channel.
At luncheon the captain was presented with an address signed by all the passengers,
expressing their sense of the kindness and courtesy which had been displayed by
him during the voyage. Divine service was as usual celebrated by Dr. White. Beachy
Head was abeam by breakfast on Monday, and a large fleet of sailing vessels of all sorts
and sizes,which evidently had been waiting in the Downs for a fair wind, were met with.
A very pretty sight it was to see them bowling along under all plain canvas before the
fresh N.W. breeze. Beyond coldness of the air the weather was all that could desired,
and Dover, Deal, and other places of interest shone out clearly beneath the bright
sunshine. About 1 p.m. the North Foreland was passed, and entering the great estuary
of the Thames, we steamed on steadily until the arrival of the pilot proclaimed the final
stage of our journey to have been entered upon. Passing slowly up through the shipping
the Albert Docks, our final goal, was reached in safety at 10. p.m. And thus ends the
voyage of the “ Parramatta,” which, as it has been the most favourable passage ever
made by her, will certainly never be surpassed. Without one single incident to
interrupt the harmony or disturb the comfort of our company, everything seems to
have concurred in making our passage from Australia to the shores of Old England
one continuous pleasure trip, and all who are now separating after living in such close
neighbourhood for seven weeks past, will re-echo the sentiments, that all our succeeding
voyages may be made under as auspicious circumstances.
CONCERT.
The final concert on board the “ Parramatta ” was held on Tuesday the sth May, in the
Music Saloon, and excited the usual interest. Great pressure on the Editorial Staff
prevents our giving the prominence it deserves to the performance, and obliges us to
curtail our report of this interesting entertainment. The songs were rendered in that
admirable style which has characterized all the “ Parramatta ” concerts; but the duet
“Sainted Mother,” performed by Mrs. Franks and Miss Phillips, was jierban? iic moeT
generally admired piece of the evening. “ Waiiirg; ” sung by Mrs. Franks; “ The
Vagabond,” by Mr. Boxvfch,- ana “ THE Village Blacksmith,” by Mr. Hall, all roused the
enthusiasm. The following is the complete programme
V ’V; -A. Beethoven's 2nd Sonata” (dedicated to Haydn) . Mb. STANLEY
“Pierrot.” Miss PHILLIPS,
“■’v.. . * “Sweethearts.” . Mr. SHEEN.
* A “ Will he come ? ” Miss SMITH.
1 K U “ Village Blacksmith.” Mb. HALL.
“Waiting.” . Mrs. FRANKS.
-A; .' u>. ; “ The Vagabond.” . . Mr. BOOTH.
<* . ' 4S Sainted Mother.” Mrs. FRANKS & Miss PiIILLI l A
’k. * Tit for Tat.” Miss GREIG.
- a Pirate bold.” Mr. BARGATE.
r V * 4 V. Messrs. GIBSON & STAN LET.
THE QUEEN.
1 *A ’ * : x Ml* Virgo et Go mini ' by C. S. Caivml y)
' ' - ‘ *-ntliiir-ia.--tic-ii 11 \* , ’ : ■■■


THEATRICALS.
The. dramatic performance which had been looked forward to with great interest, was
given in the dining saloon of the “ Parramatta ” on Thursday, the 7th May, part of which
had been, under the able superintendence of Mr. Staunton (4th officer) fitted up as a stage.
Three dramatic pieces were produced, the first being practically a duologue, entitled
“ Matrimony, or all about a Bonnet,” Miss E. Gibson and Master H. Gibson, playing the
parts of the husband (who is fond of the club and dislikes cold mutton and rice pudding)
and the wife (who loves dress and is somewhat jealous of Miss Jones) respectively, in a
manner which delighted the audience, who called them to the front at the conclusion of
the piece, and rewarded their exertion with rounds of applause.
The second piece announced on the programme was entitled “ Taffy,” or ‘‘The Child,
the Chouse, and the Cheese.” It completely mystified the spectators, for it would be a
misnomer to speak of an audience, inasmuch as not a single word was audible. The
performers, Messrs. Drawbridge, Takey & Standoff, were the only people who appreciated
the humour of the piece, which must have been very funny, seeing that all three were
convulsed with mirth during the whole time they occupied the stage. The spectators
were evidently relieved when this remarkable performance was concluded, making way
for the well known farce “No. 1 Round the corner,” Mr. de Betham and Mr. Sievers
taking the parts of the impecunious “Flipper,” and “Nobbier,” and Mr. Popham the less
important role of “ Jeames.” The various vicissitudes in connection with coat and boots,
in which the “ Uncle” of the two heroes at “ No. 1 round the corner” bore an important,
though unseen part, were amusingly shown, the actors being well up in their respective
roles, and conversant with the histrionic art. At the conclusion they were all called
before the curtain to receive the congratulations of the audience.
•
SECOND GAMES TOURNAMENT.
**
Soon after our departure from Tort oidA onx First Games Tournament was brought
to a close, and before our arrival at Malta the entries had been received,
taken place for a Second Tournament. On the day after we left
in connection with this Tournament commenced, and has since* beetiß , j 3
spirited manner, and with the following results : —-
WHlST— Fikst Round. jJi|
Mr. De Betham and Mr. Porter beat Miss MacKimß . . . „ „«B|
Mr. Rendall and Mr. Scott boat Miss Groig and iB ’ H
Mrs. Armstrong and Mr. Webster beat Mr. Mjß - ' « ' „ , :BB
Miss Scott and Mr. Booth, bye.
Second Rouß B
Mr. do Betham and Mr. Porter boat MB MA '■■■•; ■;>/■S' ; .yBTyMdAA: v g. ;‘.gu- A mU
Miss Scott and Mr. Booth beat /’M M
A'r Be Betham ami Mr. I’-mA •i-Mi *. m - dk-* . ’ *.u. I, ' •: ,fl|


