



■v-'-
,i»! i a ... >. -, -M
il■ ' *
nh-:
Silk ■
:,.v5 '
m ' . ■»


Zbc flboet Xongfetlovv.
By A. C. MACDONALD.
Melbourne, 1898.




The Poet Longfellow.
By A. C. MACDONALD.
g = =a=^(S =:s; =5>
XONGFELLOW is a poet who has many claims upon our affection, a singer who sang for
the whole world, and whose verse breathes only the tenderest, gentlest, and most
humanising thoughts and sentiments.
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was born in Portland, Maine, on Feb. 27, 1807. He was
educated at B iwdoin College, where he began his higher studies at the age of fourteen. At the
age of eighteen he graduated with honours, and entered his father’s office (the Hon. Stephen
Longfellow). The study of law had, however, little charm for him, and he soon relinquished it
for the delights of foreign travel.
Before starting on his first journey through Europe, he had been offered a professorship,
which he accepted on the condition that he would only assume his duties at the close of his
tour. The arrangement being mutually satisfactory, he left America, and spent three years and a
half in France, Spain, Holland, Germany, and Great Britain, returning home in 1829. He at
once entered upon his professorship at Bowdoin, and when George Ticknor, the eminent author
of the best history of Spanish literature known in the English tongue, resigned, in 1835, the chair
of modern languages, in old Harvard University, Longfellow was appointed to fill the vacancy.
To fit himself more fully for his enlarged sphere of action, he undertook a journey abroad, and
sought acquaintance with the language and letters of Northern Europe. He devoted twelve
months to study, observation, and travel in Scandinavia, Germany, and the Swiss cantons, and
returned to the United States in 1836, refreshed in mind and body, and ready for his work. He
remained at Harvard as professor until 1854, when he resigned, and was succeeded by his friend
and associate, James Russell Lowell —the distinguished poet and essayist—known, I suppose, to
most of you through his inimitable series of Biglow papers. (It may be of interest to note that
in the Australian Church collection of hymns, we have one by J. R. Lowell, one by the poet
Longfellow, and five by the Rev. S. Longfellow, the poet’s brother).
Whilst an under-graduate, Longfellow began writing poetry, and many of his best pieces
appeared in the u Literary Gazette,” a well-conducted periodical of its day, though once its editor,
with the usual sapience of editors who are popularly supposed to know and understand everything
except politics, advised him to give up poetry, and 41 buckle down to the law.” This was odd
advice to a man who had produced at the time such work as the “ Hymn of the Moravian Nuns,”
u The Spirit of Poetry,” Woods in Winter,” and “ Sunrise on the Hills,” the last verse of which
I will quote;—
*‘ If thou art worn and hard beset
With sorrows, that thou wouldst forget,
If thou could’st read a lesson that will keep
Thy heart from fainting, and thy soul from sleep,
Go to the woods and hills ! —No tears
Dim the sweet look that Nature wears.”
But the poet, who fortunately knew himself better than his critic did, and trusted his own powers,
kept on throwing from his muse those wonderful gems of song and poesy, which carry sympathy,


and delight, and joy to thousands of breasts in all lands beneath the sun. During his incumbency
at Bowdoin College, he wrote a good deal, in the way of criticism, for- the “ North American
Review.” He published “ Outre-mer ”in 1835, and “ Hyperion ”hi 1839, both prose works, and
singularly graceful in style and spirit. His first collection of poems also appeared in 1839, under
the title of “ Voices of the Night.” This little book contained, besides the “ Midnight Mass for
the Dying Year,” “ The Reaper and the Flowers,” and the “ Beleaguered City,” that famous hymn,
“A Psalm of Life,” which is, perhaps, better known than anything the poet ever wrote. Uj
seemed at once to take its place among the better poems of the world. It is full of
young and the old, full of echoes of the heart and soul, full of comfort for everybody. It has been
translated into nearly all the European languages, as well as into several Asiatic tongues, and its
teachings have spread all round the universe of God. How often have you heard or read these
lines?—
Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.”
After “Voices of the Night” came, in 1842, “ Ballads and Other Poems”—full of ringing
metres and rapidly flowing thoughts—and in the year following he sent out “ Poems on Slavery,”
exhibiting much of his stronger work ; and the “ Spanish Student,” a drama cast in the
Shakspearian mould, vigorous in conception and individuality, marvellous in execution, but incapable
of representation on the stage. Its humour is exquisite, and the action free and natural. In rapid
succession, Longfellow produced “ The Poets and Poetry of Europe,” “ The Belfry of Bruges,”
“ Evangeline,” and the prose story of “ Kavanah.”
After these came “ The Seaside and the Fireside,” “ The Golden Legend,” and the grand
“ Song of Hiawatha,” a poem which attracted a great amount of criticism in its day. and made a
very lasting impression on the reading world. “ The Courtship of Miles Standish,” illustrating in
every line the Puritanism in Longfellow’s nature, and his rare skill as a sympathetic artist,
appeared in 1858, and met with a flattering and kindly reception everywhere. To further
enumerate the poet’s writings would be mere cataloguing, and it would be wearying to extend the
list. I may say, however, that among his more prominent and permanent work may be placed
his admirable translation of Dante —a stupendous performance—his beautiful domestic poem of
the “ Hanging of the Crane,” which all youug brides should read, and learn to repeat by heart ;
the “ Masque of Pandora,” “ Keramos,” “ Ultima Thule,” and his last noble effort, “ Michael
Angelo.” These exhibit Longfellow at his best, and show his many-sidedness, his intimate
acquaintanceship with all phases of the hum in heart, and his love for doing good to his fellow-
men. He was a true poet of the affections, of Nature in all her moods, and of sentiment. In the
humblest homes his is the poetry which makes the lives of their occupants more gentle and pure.
In France, in Russia, in Spain and Germany, in Switzerland, in Scandinavia, and in our own
Australia, his verse has wound itself into the souls of the people, whether noble or peasant, and
in so loving and unobtrusive a way that even the native bards of those countries have allowed him
to share their popularity without a murmur.
There is hardly a country on the face of the globe to-day which does not know Longfellow.
He is quoted in palace and in hall, in the cottage and in the poorest hut, and in the back blocks of
Australia. The great statesmen of the time point their speeches with an apt figure from his


muse. The church, the bench, and the bar pay tribute to his genius, and embellish their utter-
ances with quotations from his works. The poet has become a household word in the mouths of
all. He sang for the world. Like Milton and Tennyson, he wrote for those of learned leisure ;
like Burns and Beranger, he sang for the poor and lowly, for those bowed down by grief, for
those who wanted words of comfort to ease the aching heart and the wearied brain, for those who
yearned for some joyous melody, some soul-entrancing strains from the music of the spheres.
He spoke words of solace to countless thousands, and filled the air with generous songs, and
Christianised the atmosphere of the doubting. God, Christ, and religion, and the fundamental
truths were taught by Longfellow, in his splendid way, and who shall not say that he wrought an
influence for good that no man can estimate, and few, now living in the realms of song and story,
can surpass ? To all hearts he has sung his tender songs, and who can ever forget the majesty of
the man. or rhe sweet earnestness of the poet ? No one could wish to blot out a si. gle word from
his works. His poetry is the outcome of a fresh, pure, and lofty soul, full of sympathy for those in
affliction, full of helpfulness and joy for mankind. His humanity is so broad, his sympathies are
so just and true, the spirit of his poetry is so penetrating and catholic, that it would be singular
indeed if he failed to exert an influence on the people of Australia as intense and real as it is in
his own native country (Canada).
But while Longfellow’s writing influences much of the thought which finds an outcome in the
hearts of all lovers of true poetry, it must be conceded that his power more keenly asserts itself in
the individual lives of the people themselves, the readers of good books, and the lovers of true
poetry.
On the people of the western part of Canada, Longfellow’s hold is very strong. They learn
morality from him, and high en'deavour, and nobility of purpose, and duty. His poetry has all the
effect of beautiful music on the senses. It is stimulating, and encouraging, and warm. Not a line
of it breathes impurity or a base thought. His very simplicity is his great source of strength.
He will always be regarded as a Christian poet, as an educator of the people, as a teacher of
the principles of freedom and liberty, and as a real humanising agency, full of good works and
truthfulness. Longfellow’s name is reverently treasured and respected and loved wherever
“ Evangeline" has found a foothold.
The historical accuracy of the poem (** Evangeline”) enhances its beauty. Haliburton, in his
“ History of Nova Scotia,” tells us that the story is founded on a painful occurrence which took
place in the early period of British colonisation in the northern part of Europe. In the year 1713,
Acadie, or, as it is now named, Nova Scotia, was ceded to Great Britain by the French. The
wishes of the inhabitants seem to have been little consulted in the change, and they with great
difficulty were induced to take the oath of allegiance to the British Government. Some forty
years after this (Sept, 1775), war having again broken out between the French and British in
Canada, the Acadians were accused of having assisted the French, from whom they were
descended, and connected by many ties of friendship, with provisions and ammunition, at the
siege of Beau Sejour. Whether the accusation was founded on fact or not has not been satisfac-
torily ascertained ; the result, however, was most disastrous to the primitive, simple-minded
Acadians. The British Government ordered them to be removed from their homes, and dispersed
throughout the other colonies, at a distance from their much-loved land. This resolution was not
communicated to the inhabitants till measures had been matured to carry it into immediate effect ;


when the Governor of the colony (Colonel Winslow), having issued a summons calling the whole
people to a meeting, informed them that their lands, tenements, and cattle of all kinds we'f# 1
forfeited to the British Crown, that he had orders to remove them in vessels to distant colonies,
and they must remain in custody till their embarkation.
In the disorder that prevailed during embarkation, wives were torn from husbands, and
mothers, too late, saw their children left on the land extending their arms with wildest entreaties,
and so into separate ships were Gabriel and Evangeline carried.
I ! .. 4
“ Far asunder on separate coasts the Acadians landed,
Scattered abroad were they like flakes of snow.” , )
For many a weary year they sought each other in vain—although the poet tells us that at one,
period they were only separated by a day’s march. Finally Evangeline, after having travelled,
over half America, found herself in that delightful land which is washed by the Delaware’s waters
Penmylvania—the home of the Quakers, where all men are equal, and all were brothers and.
sisters, and where for many years she lived a sister of mercy, frequenting lonely and wretched
roofs in the crowded lanes of the city, where distress and want concealed themselves from the
sunlight, where the walls seem to echo softly the words of the Lord, “ The poor ye always have
with you.” ,
Pestilence and famine fell upon the city. With light in her looks she entered the chambers
of sickness, moistened the feverish lips, and the aching brow, and in silence closed the sightless
eyes of their dead. Many a languid head upraised as Evangeline entered, turned on its pillow of
pain to gaze as she passed, for her presence fell on their hearts like a ray of the sun on the walls
of a prison.
' Among the sick and dying she at last recognises the form of Gabriel, “ old, motionless, sense-
less, dying he lay.” Although both were so changed by long years, the recognition was mutual.
Gabriel dies in the arms of Evangeline—and so the sad story ends.
It is pretty generally known, I think, that the author never saw the spot which he depicts
with such fidelity in this poem. He was sitting in his study once, when the siory was told to him
by Hawthorne, who had it from a friend who wished him to make a romance out of it. The
novelist had it from a gentleman named Conolly, who, in turn, had learned it from a French-
Canadian, whose name, unfortunately, has escaped the record. Hawthorne jotted down the tale
in his notebook as he heard it, and one day he related it to Longfellow, who was so taken and
impressed with it that he begged permission to use it as the ground-work of an idyl. He did this,
however, only when he found that his friend had abandoned all intention of employing the simple
and tearful legend as a romance. It was full of poetry in his eyes, and his heart went out at once
in sympathy for the exiles, and the sore trials they were compelled to sustain. What a poem he
has made out of the slender materials ! Evangeline has become a type of sweet and tender
maidenhood, as much of a reality as “ Imogen,” or “ Desdemona”; as gentle a study as “Ophelia.”
She develops herself in the idyl, and lives in the human breast, this angelic Evangeline, pride of
the village :
“ Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seventeen summers,
Black were her eyes as the berry that grows on the thorn by the wayside,
Black, yet how sottly they gleamed beneath the brown shade of her tresses I
Sweet was her breath as the breath of kine that feed in the meadows.
When in the harvest heat she bore to the reapers at noontide
Flagons of home-brewed ale, ah 1 fair in sooth was the maiden.
When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.”


Such is the picture of Evangeline which Longfellow has sketched out for us. The poem is
a profound study of the human emotions, subtle, intense, and real. It is elevating in its thought
and morality, and presents a picture of womanly devotion, womanly affection, and womanly
sympathy, which no one can examine without feeling deeply moved.
The critics are divided on the subiect of Longfellow’s masterpiece, the “Song of Hiawatha,”
contending eagerly for first place with the tale of “ Acadie.” The latter was the author’s own
favourite, but those who have studied the two poems well, and measured their relative strength as
pieces of artistic workmanship, accord the palm to the Indian legend, which presents in such a
marked degree a true story of the forest, of rugged nature, and of wild life, in all seasons of the
year, in the poet’s own country. Theme and treatment perfectly correspond, the former calling
forth all the poet’s peculiar talent ; the latter taxing, yet exquisitely illustrating, his literary skill.
The poem is full of touches of Nature. The character-drawing is admirable, and exhibits
remarkable familiarity with all aspects of savage life and custom. It treats of a tradition current
among the Ojibeway tribe of Indians, the scene being located on the southern shore of Lake
Superior, in the region between the Pictured Rocks and the Grand Sable. There are dramatic
fire, strong movement, vigorous description, humour and pathos, and all the elements of a great
epic in this tuneful story. The wooing, the wedding-feast, the lamentation, and the famine,
exhibit various aspects of the poet’s genius, and show in wonderful light his mastery over the
canons of imagery, and his skill in bringing out the essence of the great forces of Nature. While
at work, in this grand manner he describes the awful winter, and the famine which followed the
storm, the cruel blast, and the cold.
The poet then describes the long and dreary winter, the snow falling thicker and thicker,
burying the wigwam. The -hunter, unable to find bird or beast, saw no track of deer, no foot-
prints in the ghastly, dismal forests ; at length he falls from weakness and starvation, unable to
rise again, and perishes where he fell :
“ O the long and dreary winter !
O the cold and cruel winter !
Ever thicker, thicker, thicker
Froze the ice on lake and river,
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper
Fell the snow o’er all the landscape,
Fell the covering snow, and drifted
Through the forest, round the village.
Hardly from the buried wigwam
Could the hunter force a passage ;
With his mittens and his snow-shoes
Vainly walked he through the forest,
Sought for bird or beast, and found none.
O the famine and the fever !
O the long and dreary winter !
O the wailing of the children !
O the anguish of the women 1”
The poet then tells of the entrance into Hiawatha’s wigwam of famine (“ Buckadawin ”) and
of fever (“ Ahkosewin ”), and of the death and burial of lovely “ Minnehaha,” the bride of the
young brave Hiawatha :
“ In the snow a grave they made her,
Covered her with snow, like ermine ;
Thus they buried Minnehaha.”


Though “ Hiawatha" was violently attacked by the critics, it found great favour with the public>
and the printing press was taxed to its capacity to supply the demand. The publishers, however,
bitterly resented the newspaper and magazine opinions. One day, Mr. Fields, more exercised than
usual by the budget of attacks and parodies which he had received that morning, hurried off to
Longfellow’s house in a state of great excitement. “My dear Longfellow," he called out as soon as
he caught a glimpse of the poet, “ these atrocious libels must be stopped !’’ Longfellow glanced
over the papers, and without a word of comment, archly said, as he handed them back to the
publisher, *• By the way, Fields, how is ‘ Hiawatha ’ selling ?’’ “ Wonderfully, none of your books
have ever had such a sale.” “ Then," said Longfellow softly, and with a smile, “ I think we had
better let these people go on advertising it." In the short space of two years 50,000 copies were sold
in the United States alone.
Longfellow’s Puritanism is more strongly emphasised in the “ Courtship of Miles Standish," and
in the “ New England Tragedies," than in “ Hiawatha," which breathe out in every line the true
spirit of that faith. “Standish" is the greater poem, more dramatic even than the “ Tragedies,”
more spirited in movement, and the warm pulsating figures with which it is peopled lend a genuine
reality and verisimilitude to the performance. There is a certain grim and dry humour developed
by the poet in this quaint conceit. The gruff Puritan captain, too busy to do his own courting,
despatches his friend and companion at arms (comely John Alden) to the home of the modest
Priscilla, one of the charmingest maidens in poetry, and bids him woo her for him. In war and in
great affairs the captain’s maxim from a boy had been, “ If you wish a thing well done, you must do
it yourself, you must not leave it to others ;" but an affair of the heart was quite too trivial, and love,
he thought, could be developed just as well by proxy. Perhaps the old bear thought he could
command a maiden’s heart as he could command his army of twelve soldiers. Alden set out on his
task. On the way he plucked some May-flowers for Priscilla, whom he really loved himself, though
he dared not say so. His passion was returned, though so well concealed that the brave and lithe
young fellow scarcely knew his good fortune. When he saw her that day singing and spinning in
her quiet home, he might have had her for his bride for the asking ; but his friendship for Standish
stood in the way, and he began to ply the suit of his chief. He lost all his finesse, and bluntly
delivered his message like a schoolboy. Priscilla, annoyed and vexed, could not brook such a system
of business-like love-making. She spoke out, and we may be sure her cheeks tingled with roses :
“ If the great captain of Plymouth is so very eager to wed me,
Why does he not come himselt, and take the trouble to woo me ?
If I am not worth the wooing, I surely am not worth the winning 1
Then John Alden began explaining and smoothing the matter,
Making it worse as he went, by saying the captain was busy,—
Had no time for such things—such things ! the words grating harshly,
Fell on the ear of Priscilla ; and swift as a flash she made answer :
Has he no time for such things, as you call it, before is married,
Would he be likely to find it, or make it, after the wedding ?
That is the way with you men ; you don’t understand us, you cannot.
When you have made up your minds, after thinking of this one and that one,
Choosing, selecting, rejecting, comparing one with another,
Then you make known your desire, with abrupt and sudden avowal,
And are offended and hurt, and indignant, perhaps, that a woman
Does not respond at once to a love that she never suspected.”
In this strain the poem goes on. Alden tries to make matters better for his friend, but all in
vain. The more he tries the deeper involved he becomes. He gets warm and excited over his
praises of Standish, who could trace his pedigree back to the days of Thurston de Standish.


V But as he warded and glowed in his simple and eloquent language,
Quite forgetful of self, and full of the praise of his rival,
Archly the maiden smiled, and, with eyes over-running with laughter,
Said, in a tremulous voice, ‘ Why don’t you speak for yourself, John ?’ ”
And the sequel to all this delightful foolery was that John and Priscilla were married, and when the
grim captain got over his rage and mortification, he forgave them both, like the brave and hearty
soldier that he was. But as Longfellow somewhere else says :
“ No one is so accursed by fate,
;>nj. \’’tu ' No one *o utterly desolate,
But some heart, though unknown,
Responds unto his own.”
Miles Standish won a wife at last. One Barbara came out to the colony in the Fortune , and the
ciptain, having learned wisdom by sad experience, this time did his own courting.
Most of Longfellow’s better known poems have a history. The “ Psalm of Life,” the oft-quoted
burst of song which sprang from the poet’s inmost heart, was written by Longfellow when he was
only thirty-one years of age. He was sitting between two windows, at a small table in his chamber,
looking out on a bright summer morning in July, 1838, when the beautiful Psalm came into his mind,
and with scarcely an effort he penned the lines where he sat. His heart, as we can well imagine, was
very full, and he kept the poem by him for some months before he gave it to the world. It was a
voice from his very soul, and he could not send it out then, tor his own heart was bleeding over a
private grief. The poem of the “ Reaper and the Flowers ” also came without an effort, and the
lines—
“There is a reaper whose name is Death,
And with his sickle keen
He reaps the bearded grain at a breath,
And the flowers that grow between,”
crystallised immediately into his mind, and as he rapidly wrote down the stanzas, his eyes filled with
tears. “ The Light of Stars ” was composed on a serene and beautiful summer evening, exactly
suggestive of the poem. “The Wreck of the Hesperus” was written in 1839. storm had
occurred the night before, and as the poet sat musing and smoking his pipe, about midnight, by the
fire, the wrecked “ Hesperus ” came sailing into his mind. He jotted down some lines, then went to
bed, but not to sleep. He got up, and wrote the celebrated verses which gave him part of his fame.
The clock struck three when the minstrel’s last verse was done:—
“ Such was the wreck of the Hesperus,
In the midnight and the snow !
Christ save us all trom a death like this,
On the reef of Norman’s Woe ! ”
That other noble ballad, “ The Skeleton in Armour,” appeared in 1849. “The Old Clock on
the Stairs,” one of the most dramatic that the author has given us, was based on a remarkable sermon
which a great French divine, Pere Jacques Bridaine, preached on eternity in 1754 at the church of
St. S ilpice, in Paris. He compared eternity to the pendulum of a clock, which ceaselessly
murmured, Toujours ! Jamais ! Jamais ! Toujours ! Forever, never, never, forever ! This
sermon caused extraordinary excitement at the time in the French capital, and people were
driven, in soms instances, into insanity over the wild thought which grew from too much pondering
over the idea. As soon as Longfellow read the sermon, he was struck with its awful power and the
startling figure which it conveyed. For several days he could not get it out of his mind. Toujours !
Jamais ! Jamais ! Toujours ! his thoughts turned incessantly to the musical refrain. He, too, was


haunted as if by a nightmare, and only when he had completed his poem was himself again :
“ Never here, forever there,
Where all parting, pain, and care,
And death, and time shall disappear, —
Forever there, hut never here.
The horologe of eternity
Sayeth this incessantly—
Forever—never !
Never—forever I ”
Longfellow’s translation of Dante’s Divinia Commedia, with its 14,278 lines, is the only pure
English version of the Italian.
There was a sad tragedy in the poet’s life ; for a while it threatened to cloud his whole future,
but time, that sublime healer of all our woes and sorrows, intervened, and after some anxious years
had passed away, the golden sunshine streamed into Longfellow’s heart again, and glad songs from
his mute once more trilled upon the air. He had been twice married. His first wife was Mary
Storer Potter, daughter of the Hon. Barrett Potter, of Portland. His bride was a very lovely woman,
accomplished in several branches of science, languages, and literature, beautiful in person, and
amiable in disposition. The marriage took place in September, 1831, but the happy domestic life of
the poet was destined to be of short duration. In November, 1836, Mrs. Longfellow died at
Rotterdam, and her memory, her worth and gentleness were commemorated in the touching poem,
“ The Footsteps of Angels,” But it was in connection with his second marriage that one of the sorest
trials which ever came to man occurred to Longfellow. The reader of that delicate and pleasantly-
told story, “ Hyperion,” is, doubtless, familiar with the incident illustrating the meeting of “ Paul
Fleming ” and “ Mary Ashburton,” and what followed after those attractive young people had been
together some time. In real life, Longfellow met Frances Elizabeth Appleton in much the same
way. She was the brilliant daughter of Nathan Appleton, of Boston, and sister of Thomas Gold
Appleton. Underwood, who knew her intimately, describes her as “the possessor of every grace of
mind and person that could charm the soul of a poet.” He says “ her remarkable beauty was fitly
accompanied by a serene dignity of manner. As a matron she was even more beautiful than in her
fresh youth. With her children about her she looked a proud Cornelia.” Longfellow’s story
(“ Hyperion ”) was published in 1839- It will be remembered that the hero is rejected by Maiy
Ashburton. So it is said that Longfellow’s suit was not at first acceptable to Miss Appleton, but as
the years wore on a change came over her, and she claimed a woman’s privilege, and changed her
mind. When the romance was published, everybody seemed to know that Paul and Mary had living
prototypes in the poet and his sweetheart, and the arch song, beginning, “ I know a maiden fair to
see”, had a delicious significance.
This ballad occurs in “ Hyperion,” and, as a reminder, I may quote a verse or two
“ I know a maiden fair to see ;
Take care !
She can both false and friendly be,
Beware ! beware !
Trust her not,
She is fooling thee !”
The last verse —
“ She gives thee a garland woven fair;
Take care !
It is a fool’s cap for thee to wear,
Beware ! beware !
Trust her not,
She is fooling thee !”•
* This was a favourite song, nearly thirty years ago, of Madame Carandini’s daughters.


The lady yielded to her passionate lover of thirty-five, and in July, 1843, the two were wed. Of
this union, five children were born, two sons and three daughters: Ernest the artist, and Charles the
cavalry captain, Alice and Anna, and “ Edith with golden hair.”
A description of the poet s home, his study, piled with pamphlets and papers in orderly
confusion, the pictures upon his walls of crayon likenesses of Emerson, Hawthorne, and Sumner ;
in one of the bookcases, rarest treasures of all, the poet’s own works in their original manuscript ; the
family library, the quaint old house once occupied by Washington and Lady Washington, is worth
a pilgrimage to see. It is historic in two departments of human activity, war and peace. Once Miss
Longfellow asked a rosy-cheeked child at Sunday-school “ why Americans kept Washington’s birth-
day ?” The urchin answered, “ Because he lived in your house.”
Longfellow took his bride to his pleasant home, and they lived happily together until July 4,
1861, when the fearful tragedy occurred. Mrs. Longfellow was seated in a room with her husband
and children ; she was dressed in flowing muslin, and while engaged in some household duty, her
garments caught fire. In a moment she was all aflame. Mr. Longfellow seized a large rug, which
he attempted to roll about her to extinguish the fire, but his efforts were in vain. The injuries she
received proved mortal, and very soon she died. Her husband's hands and face were severely
burned, and his grief and horror at his terrible loss aged him in a night. The poet was never quite
himself again from that terrible moment. He kept his grief to himself, and nursed in his heart the
sweet and fragrant memory of the kindly woman he had loved so dearly.
Longfellow wns peculiarly the children’s poet. On the occasion of his seventy-second birthday,
Feb. 27, 1879, the children of Cambridge presented him with an arm-chair, made from the wood of
the village blacksmith’s chestnut tree. For this charming testimonial he returned some graceful
verses, the concluding lines being :
“ Only your love and your remembrance could
Give life to this dead, wood,
And make these branches, leafless now so long,
Blossom again into song.”
He was forever doing kindly and generous things, and his warm, loving heart went out to the
little ones always.
In person, Longfellow was a handsome man. His mien was thoughtful, his figure erect as an
arrow, and his eye was blue and liquid, and full of good humour, and his manner was as gentle as a
woman’s. The world to him was always very beautiful. He looked out upon it, and saw there only
the sweetness of life, bright realities, and the goodnes sof God, and he sought to make all those around
him happy, contented, and joyous. The world, too, was very good to him, and when he died he had
his share of years and honours. His record is a record of one who lived a blameless life. The world
was brighter because he was in it, and now that he has passed away, his name and work survive. Men
of the future will keep his memory green, and the story of his splendid manhood, and the undying
treasures of his verse, will never fade from people’s minds, nor perish in the gaunt march of centuries.




XKUbo IRules—fllban or Moman ?
By A. C. MACDONALD.
Melbourne, 1895.


" ■ ■
v : ', • '


Who Rales —Man or Woman?
By A. C. MACDONALD, F.R.G.S., F.R.C.1., &c.
“ The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world.”
“ Great Statesmen rule the Nation,
Kings mould the People’s tate,
But the unseen hand of velvet
The Giants regulate.
The Nation’s doom hangs on the babe
In that wee blanket curled,
And the hand thai rocks the crhdle
Is the hand that rules the world.”
CORRECTLY speaking, I suppose I shall be somewhat outside my text this evening, as I
intend to say a few words upon the general characteristics of Woman, and her qualifica-
tions to hold the position for which she is striving so capably and successfully.
I must therefore claim the indulgence of my audience for the deviation from fixed rules.
Nothing is more remarkable for its persistency than a popular delusion ; born of error and
bred by ignorance, it sneaks into life unnoticed, and takes centuries in the killing. One rarely
knows its parentage, or the date or place of its birth, yet the foundling refuses to die. Like all
falsehoods, it is hardy and tough, and possessed of extraordinary elasticity and vitality. It is well
nigh impossible to kill a popular delusion. Now and a weak delusion may perhaps be
scotched, but thoroughly annihilated never.
There is one, nevertheless' which I <eel should be attacked, though failure follow the endea-
vour. It has come down to us through the ages, from the mists of antiquity, venerated and
universally believed by savage and civilised, orthodox and heterodox, wise and simple. It is the
world-wide creed in regard to the sexes that it is MAN who rules ; that WOMAN is the inferior,
the subordinate, the one to obey ; that MAN is her lord and master, the one to whose behests
she must submit.
I should be sorry to provoke rebellion in any well-regulated household, or to stir the meekest
of wives to revolt; but from a habit of looking popular frauds in the face, and challenging them
to a stern inspection, I ask, Who rules ? Who sways the rod of Empire in the Court, the camp,
the home, and society ? Man or Woman ? To any who have bestowed even the slightest
attention on the subject, there can be but one answer.
I cheerfully admit that Man is a very noble animal. He is sagacious, generous, ambitious,
courageous, and when spurred is capable of great effort. As a rule, however, he is deficient in
sensibility, in tact, penetration, and patience, and is idle by 7iature. He does not know how to
wait, at any rate gracefully. He regards the surface of things chiefly. He is guided by appetite,
passion, self-interest, although an excellent reas oner. But long ages of more or less disguised
slavery have sharpened woman’s wits. She is subtle, quick, observant, a good dissembler , patient
and profoundly penetrative. She scents a motive as readily as a dog scents a hare. She is sensitive
to every mood and tense of thought and feeling in others. She is a born diplomatist, and she has
abundantly learned the two great lessons which qualify for heroism and command to endure
and to obey. There is no self-sacrifice of which she is not capable when urged by love, no


torture too powerful, no patience too great, for her passive and indomitable resistance. And when
beauty is added to ability and determination, she is perfectly irresistible.
“The weaker sex we call them, but a mortal couldn’t make,
In speaking of the women-folk, a more profound mistake.
These precious parcels, made of smiles, of ribbons, tears, and lace,
Have clearly proved themselves to be the ‘ Samsons ’ of the race.”
Thus men, by their own selfishness in the past, have unwittingly fashioned a creature to rule
over them. In subjecting Woman they taught her how to subject herself, but by subtler and more
delicate methods. By long process of selection for their gratification, they have rendered her
soft, graceful, and winning in charms of, form and manner. The greater their perception and
power of appreciation, the greater is her dominion over them, for this education of them has
enabled woman to become, without the knowledge, and certainly without the consent of man, his
ruler.
The noblest and most heroic amongst men are those who have been most notably subdued.
Who is there in the records of history and mythology who ever achieved distinction and was not
conquered by Her ? Adam and Samson, David and Solomon, Hercules and Achilles, Caesar and
Anthony, Alexander and Pericles, Napoleon and Nelson, and numberless other heroes and states-
men, with all the hosts of painters and poets, and men of mind. Even the gods, we are told,
humbled themselves before Hfer. There is not the shadow of a doubt that, whatever her power
is, if she once resolve to use it, she does so, and as she wishes.
Now, if those things were done in the green days of womanhood, what shall be done when she
will have attained the fulness of her power in the flush and summer glorv of her intellectual
development ? We are but at the be finning of a new era in her history, the era of mental and
social emancipation.
It is not long since woman was denied a liberal education, when learning was “opprobrious,”
and “science” withheld. The ignorance of thousands of women of good position almost equalled
that of their sisters in the harems, where they are still studiously debarred from all sources of
mental improvement. Women in the past made puddings while their husbands made politics, and
were not expected to raise their eyes beyond household cares and duties. When they read or
wrote by stealth they feared to display their greatePknowledge, for few men in those days could
tolerate this sort of superiority in a wife.
“ Charlotte Bronte” only succeeded in getting a publisher to accept.her first book (“Jane Eyre”)
because her woman’s identity was hidden under the name “ Currer Bell.” Caroline Herschell was
really the discoverer of many of the heavenly bodies which bear her brother’s name.. “ Madame
Kowalski”, a Russian lady, is professor ot mathematics at Stockholm ; and so strong was the
prejudice against her, that she was denied employment as a teacher in her native country. In
California, a woman has charge of the great engine in one of the lumber mills there, and repairs it
when out of order. Doctorship of Literature at the London University was tor the first time
obtained by Miss Elizabeth S. Dawes. Mrs. Wood was the first in the list in the examination at
the Polytechnic Institute, Brooklyn, under civil service rules, for the position of typographical
draughtsman. Miss Marion Parker recently graduated from the Engineering Department of the
Michigan University, and has entered the office of the resident engineers and architects of the
Astor Estate of New York ; and there are many other women who could be mentioned if time
and space permitted.


But now our girls walk jubilantly through the whole curriculum of studies. The strongest
fortresses of knowledge, deemed almost impregnable to men, fall before them. They have become
graduates of Universities, Doctors of Music, Law, and Medicine, Professors of Natural Science,
and even First Wranglers. In art and literature they have achieved noteworthy distinction, and
every day witnesses an increasing number in the ranks of the intellectual.
Within another decade the educational supremacy of men will be lost, if it is not already so,
for it is admitted by competent judges that our girls are |more conscientious students and better
workers than our boys, and it is remarkable to note the influence that higher education has on
woman.
The time will come when women will be called to the bar, notwithstanding the of a
cynical judge who, when asked “ why a woman could not be a successful lawyer ?” replied :
“ Because she is too fond of giving her opinion without pay.” In America there are several lady
barristers—over 1,000, according to the last census. A few years ago one was admitted to practice
at the Massachusetts bar ; she quickly secured a client, but she married him straight off. (It is
one thing to espouse a client’s interests, but it is quite another thing to espouse himself.)
Satire of the sex is, just at the present time, very fashionable, and certainly no one can accuse
their critics of being half-hearted in their expressed opinions ; indeed, I think it must be generally
admitted that what they lack in wit and truth is fully made up in spitefulness and injustice. Books,
papers, magazines are full of tirades against woman in her new departure. A writer in the
Melbourne Age a few years ago says : —“ The new woman may be defined as one who despises
man, and aspires to wear the breeches.” Unrefined and untruthful as the accusation may be, it
contains a note of warning to the New Woman, for her position is at present so delicate a one that
she should be most careful in what direction she moves. She need not come into competition with
man in any unwomanly way, and she will not, as long as she keeps her innate purity and unselfish-
ness intact.
In a late number of the Nineteenth Century Magazine , Mrs. J. E. H. Cordon supplies some
noteworthy slatistics as to the career of University-trained women :—704 students passed through
Newnham in 22 years ; of these 37 were foreigners, of whose future after leaving the college
nothing is known ; but of the remainder (664). 374 became teachers, and only one in six of the
whole have married. The Girton girls have specially refrained from taking upon themselves the
duties of matrimony, as only 46 out of the 335 have married. According to a report issued in
1905 by the Chicago University, out of 1,060 girlS<-who have graduated during 13 years only 171
are married ; a college training in a girl being considered a stumbling-block to marriage in the
United States of America.
From Girton and Newnham there have been 164 students who have obtained the certificate of
the Mathematical Tripos, and of these 11 only have found husbands. Of the 162 who passed the
Classical Tripos only 18 have married, and 17 of fhdse 131 who passed the Natural Science Tripos
alone have become wives. Only about one in ten of the women who take high places in honours
marries, while two in five of those who take an ordinary degree enter into matrimony.
(This was how matters stood 17 years ago, but I have not had time td'bringstatistics up to date.
For women have made such rapid strides during the past 20 years that I have found it next to
impossible to make a correct record of their intellectual progress.)
It would appear from these statistics that the girl who has spent 10 years in climbing up the


arid eminence of the Mathematical and Historical Tripos will certainly contemplate both man and
marriage very differently to her less educated sisters ; her judgment will be severer, not to say more
fastidious.
There are two ways of accounting for this. The higher educated may make even lovely woman
less attractive in the eyes of unthinking man ; or the woman, who for a few years has outstepped her
male rivals in competitive examinations, finds it difficult, perhaps, to meekly vow to love, honour, and
obey, fur the rest of her natural life, a being who is her intellectual inferior.
Women are as fully capable of filling many positions hitherto held only by men as men them-
selves are, and they are rapidly proving that when the power is given to them to act in such positions,
they can use their talents aright, and with as much (if not more) judgment as men.
We are all proud to acknowledge that we are the countrymen and countrywomen of the late Dr.
Constance Stone and her sister ; of Miss Hunt, who at the early age of 22 got her degree as Bachelor
of Science at the Sydney University. There are considerably more than 400 lady journalists in Paris.
In America their name is legion ; even in Melbourne they are not unknown.
At a time like the present, when public attention is drawn to a comparative view of the qualities
of both sexes, it may be profitable to point out the bravery of women. No one can doubt that their
moral courage is superior to their physical. This of course is due in a great measure to the system
which prevailed until of late years, of shutting out women from the exercise of the physical faculties.
Had they been allowed the privileges which were accorded only to their brothers, might they not also
have developed nearly equal physical powers ?
Notwithstanding her disadvantages in this respect, woman has left a name in the annals of bravery.
History affords numerous examples of great heroism, many of them in ages when her general position
was that of a slave. There are countless numbers of women of both lowly and noble birth who
endured tortures devised, one might almost say, by friends, and endured those tortures with calmness
and serenity.
From the earliest ages we read of the heroism of women who dared any and every thing for the
sakes of those dear to them. Leaena of Attica, who bore the severest torture without a word escaping
her ; Camilla, Queen of the Volschians, who was slain fighting at the head of her troops ; Boadicea,
who encountered the veterans of Rome ; Ann Askew, stretched on the rack in the Middle Ages ; the
heroic Maid of Orleans, who saved her country from the invading English, only to meet with an ignoble
and agonising death at the hands of her foes, and who in her dying agony thought so little of herself
that she remembered to warn the friar who accompanied her to the stake that he was in danger of the
flames scorching him. The beautiful Ann Boleyn, and Mary of Scotland both laid bare their fair necks
to the block with grace and calmness, and infinite tenderness and thought for others, excelling in their
queenly dignity even the half jocular though fearless carelessness of the peerless Raleigh.
Whether under Nero or the Bishops of the Inquisition, or the French Revolutionaries, it was
noted that women met death more bravely than men. Marie Antoinette, gay and unthinking because
uneducated, went to the guillotine with fearless step and unmoved countenance, and calmness unbroken
even by the jeers of the hideous crowd, who had collected to see her lovely head fall beneath the cruel
knife. With only one exception, that of Madame du Band, the women of France showed that, what-
ever had been their faults and failings in life, they knew how to die, as only true women can.
In our own day we have every cause to be proud of women. Grace Darling will never be forgotten
by those who have heard and read of her heroic conduct in 1838, when she went to the aid of the


steamer Forfarshire , which was wrecked near the Faroe Islands, off the coast of Northumberland, and
with her father’s help saved the lives of those who were rescued. And it was only on the 15th May,
1895, that one whose name will be a household word with British men and women as long as our
history endures, attained her 75th birthday—the noble and venerable Florence Nightingale, whose
name has been immortalised by one of America’s poets in the great poem of the “ Lady of the Lamp.’’
And his words have indeed proved true,
“ That through the annals of all time she shall stand
A noble type of good, heroic womanhood.”
And no one here to-night, who has read the account of the dreadful massacre, will forget that all hearts
thrilled in sympathy to the sufferings and privations which were endured and overcome by one who
was but a girl—l mean Mrs. Grimwood, the heroine of Manipur.
I have not time or space to enumerate the thousands of examples which crowd upon me of the
numerous brave women of whom the world has heard, but I doubt not there must be many of whom
we have had no record ; indeed, I feel sure that every day in this world there are martyrs unknown and
unheeded. We must all agree that
‘ There are examples pure and high,
Which, though a seraph from the sky
Should visit us, would scarce show dim,
To whom such melody is given,
That up to the sublime in Heaven
Their life ascendeth as a hymn.”
Altogether the outlook assures us of the sexual equality, and at no very distant date, when it
arrives, it will give universal impetus to progress, and mark a new and happier era for humanity. For
Right will overcome Might, and the worthiest will wear the Crown. The brave women of the past and
present will then be revered as the daring pioneers in the discovery of a “ new Heaven and a nea\
Earth.”
Many have the stupidity and hardihood to deny that Woman really rtilts. This is but another
tribute to her tact and capability. All sagacious women handle the reins so lightly that the husbands
never know they hold them at all. They resemble Queen Caroline, who ruled England and George the
Second for 10 years without the King being aware of it. There are cases, however, when the wife lets
her hand be felt; and never yet was there a marital mouth so hard but what some kind of bit could be
found to subdue it.
The absolute rule of men is nearly over, and if in the see-saw of human events they should in the
future be placed in a subordinate position, woman should accord them more generous treatment than
men have given her. She must not retaliate. It must be her endeavour to hold her »own gracefully,
and let “ equality” be her motto then as now. No true woman need fear that because she can master
he “ologies,” and take a keen interest in science, art, medicine, and politics, she will lose her womanly
attributes. She knows her power. She recognises her advantages, and if she only use them aright,
she will force man to acknowledge the benefit of her companionship, and proclaim her right to be
treated as a friend , helpmeet , and equal.
“ They say that man is mightv,
He governs 1 ind an I sea,
He wields a mighty sceptic
O’er lesser powers that be.
Hut a mightier power and stronger
Man Iro n his tin one has hurl’d,
And tlie hand that rocks the cradle
Is the hand that rules the world.”


"
• ,1.1


COMETS.
By A. C. MACDONALD.
Melbourne, iBgg.




COMETS
By A. C. MACDONALD, F.R.G.S.
hundred and seventy-three years before the commencement of the Christian Era, the
Greeks, according to Aristotle, were startled by the appearance of a brilliant comet. This,
so far as I have been able to discover, is the first authentic record of such a phenomenon,
and, but for the fact that Aristotle, who saw it when a boy, and has left a description of it, posterity
would have remained ignorant that the terrifying object was a comet. It was midwinter when it
blazed up in the west first after sunset, with a tail sixty degrees in length.
The wonderful characteristics which mark the flight of comets through space ; the suddenness
with which they blaze forth ; their exceeding velocity, and their terrific appearance ; their
eccentric motions, sweeping towards the sun from all regions and in all directions, have rendered
these bodies objects of terror and dread in all past ages of the world. Even now that we have
ceased to regard their movements as irregular, or as governed by other laws than those which
retain the planets in their orbits, their intricate nature, and the offices they perform in the
economy of our system, are as much unknown as ever. '
» ( , :>
The number of comets which have been astronomically observed, or of which notices have
been recorded in history, is very great, amounting to over 700. Some comets must escape
observation by reason of their paths traversing only that part of the heavens which is above the
horizon in the daytime. Comets so circumstanced can only become visible by the rare coincidence
of a total eclipse of the sun —a coincidence which happened, as related by Seneca , sixty years
before the Christian Era, when a large comet was actually observed very near the sun. Several,
• , f-j 3 ~'wf f
however, stand on record as having been bright enough to be seen in daylight, even at noon, and
in bright sunshine. Such were the comets of 1402, 1532, 1811, 1843, and. a few others.
Halley’s comet is one of the most remarkable, in calculating its elements from its perihelion
passage in 1682, when it appeared in great splendour, with a tail thirty degrees in length. Halley
identified it with the great comets of 1531 and 1607, the intervals of these successive returns
being seventy-five and seventy-six years. Halley predicted its re-appearance within one month,
either way of the middle of April, 1759. The comet actually appeared on March 12 of that year.
Its next return to perihelion was calculated by Baron Damoisean, and M. Pentecoulant, and
fixed by them, one On the 4th, the other on the 7th November, 1835, or within a month or six
weeks prior to those dates. The comet actually made its appearance on August 5, 1835. The
next return of this comet, somewhat accelerated by Jupiter’s influence, is looked for in the year
1910.
The return of Halley’s comet in 1835 excited, as we can readily imagine, a lively interest
throughout the world, from the fact that it would pass a little within the orbit of the earth, and
that it would collide with our planet, producing the most terrific consequences. In Paris especially
was serious danger apprehended ; Arago reported to the Academy of Sciences, by request of that
body, and with a view to allay alarm, that the comet would cross the Earth’s track at the time


predicted, October 29, 1835, but«at*the moment of crossing, the Earth would be some fifty-five
millions of miles distant from the point occupied by the comet. More than a quarter of a century
ago, Mr. R. A. Proctor predicted that in or about the year 1897, a certain comet, with its meteoric
appendages, would fall into the sun ; that consequently, the sun would suddenly break out into
an enormous intensity of heat and light, probably lesulting in the total destruction of animal and
vegetable life, not only of our planet, but of the entire solar system. We have the satisfaction of
knowing that Mr. Proctor was mistaken, and that is is safer to prophesy after the event.
So far, it has been calculated that the distance to which the comet of 1680 recedes in its
aphelion is times greater than the orbit of Neptune, and that the apparent diameter of the
sun, as seen from that enormous distance (886,000,000 miles, multiplied by the intensity of
its light and heat (that of the sun, I mean) would be 73,000 times less than that at the earth, while
the intensity of either of the comets of 1680 and 1843, at their nearest approach to the sun. would
be 26,000 times greater than any heat ever felt on our globe.
Whiston might legitimately have felt authorised to suppose that the great event of 1680 was
near the earth at the period of the Noahcian deluge (if such an event ever happened, which is
questionable), and that it had some parkin.that great phenomenon. Whiston also holds that, out-
earth was originally a comet ; be considered the nucleus of the earth as a hard, compact
substance, which was the ancient nucleus of the comet ; that the matters of various natures,
confusedly mixed, which composed the nebulosity, subsided more or Jess qnickly. according to
their specific gravities ; that then, the solid nucleus was at first surrounded by a dense and thick
fluid, that the earthy matters precipitated themselves afterwards, and formed,a covering over the
dense fluid, a kind of crust, which may be compared to the shell of an egg ; that the water , in its
turn , came to cover this solid crust ; that, in a considerable degree it became; filtered through the
fissures, and spread itself over the thick fluid ; that, in fine, the gaseous matters rem a waling
suspended, purified themselves gradually, and constituted our atmosphere.
Whiston’s theory attracted much consideradon at the time, due principally, I think, to the
consideration of the man whom Newton himself designed as his successor in the University of
Cambridge. To those who have the time and inclination to read more of Whiston’s (shall I say
exploded ?) theory, I refer you to Larduer’s Popular Astronomy.
The probability of the terrestrial equilibrium being injuriously deranged by the near approach
of a comet, which nevertheless does not come into actual contact with the earth, is reduced to nothing
by the established fact that the masses of these bodies generally are so utterly insignificant, that none
of them have ever yet produced, by its proximity,.the slightest sensible deviation from its customary
path in the smallest body of the solar system. j o
Science has as yet discovered no guarantee for any planet against the possible shock of .a comet,
of which there is scarcely one chance in millions can ever occur. But an examination of the
delicate adjustments ot our system, and those of Jupiter and Saturn, would seem to indicate to us
that in all past time no derangement has ever occurred from such a cause. Olbers, who studied.the
subject with great care, was disposed to think that in case the earth had passed directly through a
comet, no inconvenience would have occurred, and no change beyond a slight influence on the climate
would have been experienced. I think it was Stephenson who, when asked what would happen to


his locomotive if it came into contact with a cow, replied, “So much the'worse for the coo.” The
same might safely be said of a comet.
Newton found that, immediately .after the return of the comet of 1680 to perihelion, its tail
measured 60,000,000 miles, and shortly, after perihelion 123,000,000 miles, a length greatly exceeding
the whole distance between the sun and the earth.
The tail of the comet of 1769 measured 148,000,000 miles ,and that of 1811, 108,000,000 ; the
nucleus of this comet, according to Herscheil (Sir Wm.), measured 428 miles.
The comet of 1811. one of the most brilliant of modern times, in consequence of its remaining
visible for nearly ten months, gave ample opportunity for the investigation of the elements of its
orbit. Argelander fixed its period of revolution at 3,065 years ; Bessel, 3.483 years ; its greatest
distance from the sun at aphelion is reckoned at 163 thousand millions of miles. It is r not likely, I
think, that any readers of this paper will live long enough to witness its re-appearauce.
The entire diameter oi the head of this (1811) comet measured 1,250,000 miles, hence its bulk
was nearly three times that of the sun, and four million times that of the earth.
The great comet of 1843 passed perihelion towards the end of February in that year, and
remained visible until the middle of April. On the night of February 27, when it first became
visible, shortly after sunset, I had the good fortune to see it ; its nucleus was then a little below the
horizon. Like the comet of 1680, it is said to have approached nearer the sun than any other comet,
which accounts for its extraordinary brilliancy. It approached the sun within about 538,000 miles,
and as the semidiameter of the spn is 441,000 miles, it follows that the centre of the comet’s nucleus
from the surface of the sun at perihelion must have been only 97,000 miles, or only seven times the
diameter of the earth. So that if the semidiameter of the nebulous envelope exceeded this distance,
it must have actually grazed the sun.
The elements of this comet, from the calculations of Mr. Hubbard (thirty-seven years, other
observers say 600 to 700 years) are subject to considerable uncertainty, and must be accepted only
as approximations. The suddenness with which it made its appearance added not a little to the
interest it excited. The orbit of this comet is remarkable for its small perihelion distance, its
immense velocity, and extraordinary peculiarities. Between the 27th and 28th of February, it
described upon its orbit,an arc of 290 degrees. Supposing it to revolve in an ellipse, this would
leave only sixty-eight degrees to be described during the time which would elapse before its next
return to, perihelion. During the first three days in March, an observer in Chili stated that a lateral
tail issued from the original one at a distance of ten degrees from the head or nucleus, and extended
to a much greater length than the other. Nothing of the kind was observed in this hemisphere. I
have a distinct recollection of this comet of 1843. Its tail shot up towards the zenith like a streak
of aurora streaming from the region of the sun, below the constellation Orion ; its outline was so
distinct, and its light so conspicuous, as to immediately arrest my attention. Within a few days
after its first appearance, its tail was apparently between sixty and seventy degrees in length,
stretching more than one-third across the heavens ; it rushed past perihelion with a speed of 366
miles a second. Throughout its journey towards the sun it seems to have been unobserved.
Sir John Herscheil describes it “ as by far the most remarkable comet of the present century.”
3


All descriptions I have read agree in representing it as a stupendous spectacle ; neither the comets
of ion and 1058 were comparable to it in splendour.
It has been thought by some that the 1043 comet was identical with those of 1618 and 1702, but
so little is known for certainty about this comet that astronomers are not yet in a position to admit
or deny the identity of the three bodies. The comet of 1880 (February), which was visible here for a
very few nights, and which disappeared suddenly south of West, seemed to be its ghost.
The comet of 1853, discovered in the Northern Hemisphere June 10, became faintly visible to
the naked eye in Melbourne on August 7, and rapidly increased in brilliancy during the remainder of
that month ; on the 30th its nucleus was nearly as bright as Sirius,” and remained visible until
January 11, 1854.
On Monday, October 11, 1858, a comet, said to be “ DonatisJ’ of which I made three drawings,
taken on the sth, 10th, and nth of the month ; its position in the western sky on the 17th of the
month was about fifteen degrees above the horizon, and about five degrees from the planet Venus ; it
was first observed in the Northern Hemisphere on September 18 ; it tail trended north-westerly at an
angle of forty-five degrees. ; ' • - J * ■ ;
In January, 1865, a very beautiful comet, with a tail thirty degrees in length, almost perpendicular
to the horizon, made its appearance, and remained visible for about two months. On January 20, the
nucleus was on the western horizon about five minutes to g, two days later at 9 30 p.m.
On Sunday morning, July 26, 1874, just before sunrise,-a small but beautiful cornet* supposed to
be the one discovered by Coggia at Marseilles, appeared in the eastern sky. On the 30th, its position
at five minutes to 6 o’clock was 29 degrees above the eastern horizon, south of East, its tail trending
in the direction of the Southern Cross* - ! : ‘ ,J
Ths comet of 1880, which was visible for a very few nights —it was very large and faint, : —this
comet was supposed by some to be a re-appearance of the great comet of 1843. Mr. Hind calculated
the length of its tail at 6,000,000 miles. '• - »
The comet of 1882 will doubtless be remembered by many readers of this pamphlet;
In September, 1882, the largest and most brilliant comet since 1843 became visible for a few
evenings before sunset, and on clear days it could be seen in broad daylight. A photograph by Foster
and Martin was published in one of the Melbourne illustrated weeklies : it remained visible in the
evenings until the end of December, and finally disappeared in the Milky Way, attaining the zenith
on December 25, at midnight. This comet was in some respects the most remarkable of modern
times, as it remained conspicuously visible to the naked eye for nine months. It underwent changes
in the nature of disruption (burst up, so to speak) ; one observer stated that it disrupted into three
parts, and that there was also a breaking up of the nucleus.
The time will come when comets will be traced in their career, their periods revealed, and their
orbits ascertained, so we may confidently hope that at no very distant day, all the mysteries which
hang around these chaotic worlds will be fully revealed, and a knowledge of their physical condition
shall reward the long study and deep research of the human mind.




