



■%
%s
( -L)
tyrreli/s bookshop
22 Castleheagh St., Sydney,
And at 128 Gawler Place, Adelaide.
Ift






THE
PRISONERS OF AUSTRALIA.
A NARRATIVE.
THE
AUTHOR OP “MIRIAM,” “ INFLUENCE,” “ESSAY ON
BODY, SOUL, AND SPIRIT,’’ &C. &C.
LONDON:
J. HATCHARD AND SON, 187, PICCADILLY.
1841.


PRINTED BY O. J. PALMER, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.


f> , -r&tZG/P ->V
11 f I oln
\<L (
THE LONDON COMMITTEE
OF THE
“BRITISH LADIES’
PRISON VISITING ASSOCIATION,”
THIS LITTLE VOLUME
IS AFFECTIONATELY AND RESPECTFULLY
INSCRIBED
THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.
Requested by many friends to lay before
the public the substance of a journal, which,
during my residence in Australia, I had for-
warded to England, relative to the condition
of our unfortunate prisoners in that colony,
I do so with some hesitation, feeling how
incompetent I really am, to do justice to a
subject, not only of deepest interest, but one
of too much importance to be unskilfully
handled. Nevertheless, so far as this little
volume may be considered as an appeal to
the feelings of every woman in behalf of
woman, I fear not that 1 have trespassed
upon grounds, confined within the limits of
political jurisdiction; and, connected as our
efforts among the poor in England must be.


PREFACE.
with the transportation of our prisoners
abroad, I trust I shall be pardoned in having
combined the interest of both, in a work ex-
pected, perhaps, to be more exclusively a his-
tory of Australia. But this I have left to
its more recent travellers, and to those whose
local information is more extensive than my
own, and whose descriptive powers are better
calculated to render its details interesting. I
have, however, stated facts, and facts only;
interspersed with suggestions, which I feel,
indeed, may have been too boldly advanced:
nevertheless the motive which induced them
cannot, I think, offend or be mistaken. Called
forth by scenes which might have moved an
angel’s pity, I have, in all simplicity of pur-
pose, thus committed them to public consider-
ation. May God direct the result, and teach
us how we may best prevent future vice and
irreligion, and avert the recurrence of trans-
portation among our female poor ! a class too
long neglected, and yet one, beyond all others,
whose principles necessarily involve the wel-
fare of our society at large. Nor can it be
but earnestly desired that so long as a prison


PREFACE.
VII
stands within the realms of Great Britain and
her dependencies, we might see a greater ex-
tension of “ prison visiting associations ”
among the ladies of our country and colonies;
convinced that the exertions of those already
actively engaged have been, in many in-
stances, the providential means of leading
the “disobedient, to the wisdom of the just
and the ignorant, to the 66 knowledge of salva-
tion.”
As regards the “ Prisoners of Australia,”
they who knew them in 1836, the period to
which I have more especially referred, could
bear witness that so far from exaggerating it,
I have given but a faint outline of their moral
condition, and have rather thrown a veil over
the worst features of transportation, than
exposed the greatest evils of its system. I
have done so, under the hope that much has
been already done to remedy them, and that
soon they will altogether cease to exist. In
the mean time, let us not slumber in our duties
here. Upon us is the first claim, and our own
is the greatest responsibility. Let every
home, then, be the ground of earliest reform,


--r-«V ■
PREFACE.
VIII
and every matron the example of her house-
hold ; that, as pillars of one militant church,
our British mothers, and our British daugh-
ters, may be numbered with the “ Israel of
God;” and at the last day, when the Lord
shall open the “ Book of Life,” they may be
found recorded there , as “ blessed among
\
* I.
women,” —“ fellow labourers of prophets and


THE
PRISONERS OF AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
“ They are unprofitable amongst the works of God,
and become like a blot in the creation.” — King.
Whatever be the motive which induces an
abandonment of home and country, the feel-
ings are probably the same in every breast at
the moment of a last farewell! The most
buoyant spirit of enterprise then yields a tri-
bute to the mournful contemplations of
“ time’s changes.” Even in the ardour of
the most youthful or sanguine anticipations,
memory then awakens the retrospection of a
thousand scenes w ? hich we are now, perhaps,
leaving for ever; and of many a sweet and


sacred tie, which may not outlive the shortest
period of our exile. Who can look upon the
retreating shores of beautiful England, and
not linger for a while in thought among its
44 happy homes,” its 44 cottage homes \ ■
those gems of a 44 pleasant land which can
never be surpassed, and O how rarely
equalled in the far-off landscape of a foreign
clime ? It is then, tue fair scenes of our
childhood are remembered as scenes which
life can never see again, and the eye glances
with a painful uncertainty through the vista
of futurity, too well reminded by some mourn-
ful associations, that many a coming sorrow
may mar the brightest visions of an imagina-
tive spirit, before one hope which reared them
can be realised. It was with some such
thoughts as these, that I leaned languidly
over the bulwarks of the 44 Camden’’ as she
slowlv made sail through the English Chan-
%/
nel, leaving all that was most dear to me be-
hind her. 1 saw not, indeed, the bright
things which belong to less experienced years
than mine. The living and the dead alike
mingled with my saddened recollections; and


looking forward to my novel destination with
all its precarious results, it was but with a
pilgrim’s eye, which read this moral on every
passing wave, that for the soul earth has no
resting place—no sure “ abiding citybut
they who seek a home, where the heart cannot
ache, nor the eye weep, must “ press for-
ward,” through the waters of a world of woe,
to the “ prize of our high calling in Christ
Jesus,” in whom alone is no variableness nor
shadow of turning,” and in whose blessed
kingdom only, can be found the calm of an
untroubled sea, and the c< joy in which the
stranger intermeddleth not.”
A four months’ voyage is as the passing
away of a world. It has its seasons of summer
and winter, of calm and tempest; its conflicts
with human passions-—its making and mar-
ring of pleasant hours. A universe lives
within a ship, but its good and evil seldom
mingle with our after career, so soon are both
forgotten. On these then 1 dwell not; but I
remember well the bright and beautiful morn-
ing, on which we were early aroused to look
upon the splendid scenery which surrounded
b 2


us, as we passed through Bass’ Straits, and
opened before us as we entered the fair haven
of Sydney. It was early in June, the winter
of that southern clime, a season which, ,
might almost realize the poet’s fancy of an
elvsium spring* The sky was one cloudless
canopy of ethereal blue, and the lights and
shadows, falling in strong contrast over the
rocks which begirt the bay, gave a rich finish
to the magnificent harbour, into which we
were so gently gliding, before a breeze that
scarcely ruffled the waters upon whose bosom
we were borne.
Sydney could scarcely have been seen to
greater advantage than at that moment. The
o c
landscape was illumined by a thousand sun-
beams, and the town irregularly built upon a
sloping foreground, at once told of its pro-
gress in prosperity. More than one church
already towered above other buildings, and as
we caught sight of the more cultivated do-
mains, which here and there enrich the coast,
one would scarcely believe that sixteen thou-
sand miles divided us from our 44 father land.”
But soon such contemplations of outward


things gave place to the more undefined and
indescribable feelings which arise within the
stranger’s heart when first recalled to a sense
of its loneliness, in a country where is nothing
of its own. This feeling in myself was, per-
haps, peculiarly powerful, for I had left Eng-
land unaccompanied by a single tie, and now
a stranger indeed, I awaited the welcome of
no familiar voice, nor a countenance beaming
in glad recognition of mine; my destined
home lying yet far northward of the port.
This sense of utter desolateness must be felt
to be understood: but, selfish must that spirit
be, which can bear no partin the sympathies
of another; so mine soon mingled with these,
and gave many a responding tear to the joys
and sorrows of those around me, although in
either I bore no other part. It is scarcely
possible to describe a disembarkation after a
voyage like that from England to Australia.
The passengers of the “Camden” numbered
many; and few amongst them were not anxi-
ously expected by friend or relative, who no
sooner hailed the signal of an arrival, than
they hastened to welcome the object of their


individual solicitude; and before our an-
chor was cast, or our sails well furled, many
a boat pushed forward to be the first
beside us, and to hasten the meeting of
parent with child, brother with brother,
friend with friend ! It was a touching sight
to witness the varied emotions which these
meetings inspired. A father clasped to his
bosom the son now grown to manhood, whom
years before he had left a playful child; but
nature needed no aid from memory to tell
him who he was; with an impulse of mutual
recognition, look answered look, while with
one spontaneous voice, the words 44 Father !”
44 My son !” spoke more eloquently for both,
than the most elaborate language could have
done, from hearts less full than theirs ! And
friend met friend with the glad welcome of re-
O
stored intercourse; some with the buoyant
and unbroken hopes of youthful companion-
ship : and one there was who met more
sadly, but not less kindly, than the rest, for a
link had broken from the chain which bound
him as a brother to the friend who was now
the first to greet him, and to ask him for his
■?


bride; but who can trace the thousand
springs of agony which must have mingled in
that brief reply, u She is in heaven /” Such
scenes mark but the common tide of human
life. Our vessel anchored; her passengers
dispersed; and few who parted then, will
probably meet again on earth !
Letters of introduction opened for me a
most hospitable reception in the amiable
family of the colonial Secretary, whose urbane
and benevolent kindness to me throughout
my visit in Sydney, will ever be gratefully
remembered, as tending so materially to sof-
ten the trials inseparable from the peculiar
situation of one, standing “ alone in the
midst of many.”
Having been commissioned by Mrs. Fry
to investigate the state of the female prisoners
at Paramatta, I sought an interview with the
governor of the colony, anxious to take no
step of personal interference unauthorized by
his permission. I met with a most courteous
reception from his Excellency, who not only
gave me carte blanche to visit the factory
when, and as often as I pleased, but also kindly


assured me of his cordial co-operation and as-
sistance, in the formation of a ladies’ visiting
committee, similar to that of the 6( British
Ladies’ Society in England, for the reforma-
tion of female prisoners,” if a sufficient num-
ber could be found in Sydney and Para-
matta, willing to unite in such a cause. Ge-
neral report, however, gave me small encou-
ragement to hope for success in such a pro-
posal, or to go forth myself into scenes which
others had found fraught with insult and dis-
appointment ; and 1 was even told by some,
not friendly to my mission, that they were
scenes, such as no female of education or deli-
cacy could, with propriety, encounter.
But one, whose name will ever be recorded
as doing honour both to her country and to
her sex, has proved, in her own experience,
that where woman will plead with woman,
upon the broad ground of Christian charity,
and virtue go forth to the depraved, —not to
condemn, but to persuade; to soothe, and
not to irritate—the most iniquitous will
scarcely fail to respect such sympathy, even
should it win nothing beyond it. I therefore


resolved, if possible, notwithstanding all appa-
rent obstacles, to execute my commission;
not , as was in one instance uncourteously
said—to take upon myself an office which no
other lady there would venture to attempt,
but simply, being pledged to report a
faithful statement to those who bad re-
quested it, I felt bound by that promise, per-
sonally to investigate the object of Mrs. Fry’s
solicitude. My motive was at least a pure
one, for nothing offered in the undertaking
either of advantage or credit, and I was not
unconscious of my own insufficiency to effect
anything like a reform; it was only matter of
regret to me, that those who might have been
more influential, and far more competent,
shrank from the proposed measures to ac-
complish it.
Aware of my desire to visit the prisoners of
Paramatta, the hon. Secretary, whose gene»
rous heart seemed never to forget the wishes
of another, kindly introduced me to the vene-
rable Chaplain of the factory, who immedi-
ately, on hearing the purport of my mission,
proposed, with true Christian hospitality, my


passing a few days with his own family at
Paramatta; an invitation of which I gladly
availed myself, as offering an opportunity of
seeing many objects of peculiar interest, not
only connected with the prisoners, but also
with the admirable institution for the main-
tenance and education of orphans and desti-
tute children, first established, I believe, by
the lady of the late Governor King. On the
17th of June, therefore, accompanied by the
reverend Chaplain, and our mutual friend,
Mr. George Mackenzie, I left Sydney in the
afternoon by a steam-boat; and after a pleasant
voyage of four hours, during w ? hich 1 truly
enjoyed the picturesque scenery of the river,
heightened by the rich tints of a glowing sun-
set, we reached Paramatta, where we found
a carriage awaiting our arrival, in which we
proceeded about a mile and a half to the
minister’s dwelling, and were cordially wel-
comed by his two daughters, who appeared
too much accustomed to their father’s wonted
hospitality to be surprised by the arrival of a
stranger guest. The good old man now rests
from labour, we may humbly believe, “ re-


joicing with a joy unspeakable and full of
glory,” in that land of light, for which his life
on earth was one continual preparation. He
is gone !—but his memory will long—long be
honoured as the patriarch of his people, the
first who ventured upon the sacred, but ardu-
ous mission of converting, through the preach-
ing of the Gospel, the heathen savages of New
Zealand, and the founder of many good works
which now stand as monumental of his zea-
lous exertions in the colony of New South
Wales. For nearly fifty years, he had “fought
the good fight” of a Christian ministry, and
after a long series of inconceivable difficulties
and many dangers, he was, when I saw him,
resting in the bosom of an amiable family,
blessed with an ample and well-earned inde-
pendence. Forty years he laboured on fo-
reign shores, and had seen them reared from
a wilderness to a land of promise. He had
just witnessed what he had long yearned to
behold, the consecration of Australia’s first
bishop, at which he himself officiated, and on
a much more touching scene mine eyes had
never looked, than when the aged man, tears


streaming down his venerable cheek, poured
forth, amidst a crowded and yet silent assem-
blage, the benediction upon him , into whose
hands he had thus, as it were, to use his own
metaphor, “ yielded up the keys of a most pre-
cious charge —a charge, which had been his
own devoted care, throughout the storms and
the tempests of a long and difficult pilotage!
i
And now, like another Simeon, his work well
nigh accomplished—the Gospel spreading far
and wide over the colony and its dependen-
cies, and the prayer for his adopted people
answered, he could say 'without another wish,
“ Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salva-
tion.
A few months only had bereaved him of a
beloved wife, who had nobly shared with him
years of missionary toil and privation : he
bade me look upon her grave from his own
room window; but although he spoke of her
still with tears of natural regret, he acknow-
ledged that his loss was surely “ gain to her ,”
and felt how brief would be their separation.
The dwelling of this reverend missionary


stood pleasantly upon a hill commanding a
fine view of Paramatta, an extensive but
scattered and irregular village about sixteen
miles from Sydney. Everything about the
house was so consistent with Christian simpli-
city, that it reminded me of patriarchal times,
such as my imagination has sometimes pic-
tured them; and here I truly enjoyed the
quiet evening of my arrival, for I was soon
made to feel at home, in a family of so much
%s
unaffected kindness and hospitality.
On the following morning, immediately
after breakfast, Mr. Marsden, having recom-
/
mended an early visit to the prisoners, we
sallied forth to the Factory, again accompa-
nied by our valued friend. I found it a large
and airy building, admirably situated for its
purpose, but in all other respects ill-adapted,
v
I thought, to be either a refuge for the un-
assigned convicts, or a prison for the more
refractory. It was, however, capable of better
arrangements, and the extreme cleanliness of
every part of the establishment was worthy of
praise. The prisoners were divided into three
classes, the whole numbering at that time


nearly seven hundred ! My first introduction
was to the first class, in which there were but
few ; being composed only of such as had re-
turned to the Factory from service, either in ill
health, or for some slight aggression; and for
unassigned convicts, among whom were a few
recently arrived from England, and one or
two of these betrayed considerable emotion of
shame and sorrow. Having spoken to them
seriously, but I trust kindly, of their past
conduct and present opportunity to reform, I
distributed tracts, which they all received
willingly, and some with thanks. I then
visited the second class, comprising a larger
number of prisoners, all of whom were there
for punishment of deeper offences. In this
class also, were the mothers of illegitimate
children, or of infants too young to separate
«
from the parent. These I addressed in more
solemn exhortation, to which, nevertheless,
they listened most patiently. 1 appealed,
more especially, to the mothers of some of
the really sweet-looking children, whose play-
ful and unconscious innocence formed a touch-
ing contrast to the wretched beings who nursed


them; but, depraved as they were, many
among them appeared deeply affected by my
appeal to to their maternal feelings, when I
reminded them of the double guilt they must
incur, if these helpless infants were trained
as partners of their own sin and shame.
Many wept bitterly, and some answered me,
. t
that they would, indeed, rather see their
children die, than live to be what they them-
selves had been, and were ! These also re-
ceived the tracts I distributed among them
with apparent pleasure, and many of them
thanked me for what I said.
I had now to pass on to the third class;
and here, I confess, I experienced some feel-
ing of nervous timidity, from which I had be-
fore been remarkably free. Having been led to
expect, from the prisoners of this class, (all of
whom were women of the lowest description,)
if not personal insult, at least, such language
as delicacy might shrink from hearing, I felt
that Iwould rather meet it alone, than with the
gentlemen by my side; I therefore requested
my companions not to follow" me further, as I
feared nothing of personal violence. Attended


only by the under matron, I then entered alarge
inner court, where I found, alas! the far
greater proportion of prisoners assembled to-
gether, all looking fearfully depraved; and
had it not been for a sense of God’s sure pro-
tection and strength, I might have shrunk
appalled from such a scene, where nearly three
hundred women, of desperate and most de-
graded characters, gathered in groups of
sin and infamy! some lying on the ground,
apparently in a state of intoxication; some
sleeping, others quarrelling, swearing, and
singing ! Immediately upon my entering the
court, several of the women, as ii from curio-
sity, gathered round me ; some with an air of
defiance, as if expecting some unwelcome re-
proach : but this soon passed away, as I called
those especially to come forward who had been
in Newgate prison previously to their trans-
portation, as to such I was the bearer of a
message. I then explained to them that I
was a stranger just arrived from England, and
stood there as their friend, deeply concerned
to see so many fellow-creatures of my own
sex thus abandoned and punished. I spoke
I a


of Mrs. Fry; her unremitting zeal in behalf
of all prisoners; her anxious prayers—her
unwearied exertions to benefit and reform
them; and I appealed to them all, whether
she deserved to be so soon forgotten, or her
counsels so disregarded, as to have one of
those for whom she had laboured, in that class
of infamy and disgrace ! I heard nothing in
reply but some heart-drawn sighs, and I ga-
thered courage to speak more fully upon their
deep ingratitude to God, who had done so
much to reclaim and save them, and still bore
with them in so much tender mercy and long-
suffering ! Nothing could exceed the quiet-
ness, the attention, and apparent interest
with which they listened. They answered not
one word, either of insult or impatience; but
some of them, gathering closer round, en-
treated me to listen while they told of wrongs
which no one heeded, or seemed to care for:
That bad masters and cruel mistresses often
made them worse than they were; that in
service they were treated “ like dogs,” and
seldom spoken to without an oath, or i 6 as de-
vils,” more than human beings. I heard


these complaints without contradiction, as, of
course, I had no means of judging as to their
truth; but I endeavoured to soften their
feelings by reminding them, that whatever
their sufferings, they had brought it on them-
selves ; and although I was willing to believe
that in some instances their complaints might
be just, yet I called upon them patiently to
bear with the results, to examine their own
souls, and seek for pardon and repentance,
leaving it to God to visit others for injustice,
cruelty, and unkindness, rather than add to
their own guilt by revenge and irritation.
Such is the outline of my first interview
with these unhappy outcasts, and truly was I
both surprised and gratified in being received
amongst them, as I was, with so much pa-
tience and forbearance. Many, I may say the
greater proportion, were in tears, and when
about to leave them, many voices exclaimed,
6< Come and see us again,—do come and see
us againwhich I promised, if possible, to
do.
The next day, Sunday, the 19tb, Mr. Mars-
den most kindly proposed that I should ac-


coQipany him to the factory in the afternoon
for the usual service and lecture; granting me
permission also to pass an hour with the pri-
soners of the third class, to which I gladly
acceded, especially as I found that the Roman
Catholics, of whom there were many, were
not compelled to attend to the Protestant
service, and were consequently left without
any regular religious instruction, the chaplain
having no authority to interfere in their spi-
ritual concerns, although their own priest, re-
siding, I believe, at some distance, seldom
visited them himself! On our arrival at the
factory, the matron was desired to apprise the
prisoners of my intention; and immediately
after the service, leaving Mr. Marsden, I
followed the under matron as before, and
found the third class awaiting me, arranged
in a circle round the inner court. There was
a murmur of recognition as I entered, and to
my great surprise several of them curtsied, a
mark of respect which I found very rare in the
colony. I then told them, that in compli-
ance with the wish they had expressed of
seeing me again, I had come to devote an
c 2


hour to them, if they would listen while I
read a chapter in the Bible, at the same time
requesting that all might go quietly away
who did not like to hear me, as I did not ask
any to do so against their will, especially the
Roman Catholics ; as being myself a Proles-
)
tant, as a Protestant only could I venture to
exhort them. I paused a few moments, dur-
ing which not a sound was heard, nor did one
O
move away, but rather, drawing in a closer
circle round me, they manifested the most
perfect attention and good order. I then
opened the Bible, and, after a short prayer,
read that exquisite parable 64 the Prodigal
Son,” which I endeavoured to illustrate as
applicable to their own case, so far as the
son’s disobedience and desertion of his father’s
home and love were concerned; and that I
fervently hoped it might, through God’s grace
and blessing, be as applicable to them in that
son’s contrition and return. I reminded them
how miserably they were now living upon the
husks of their own guilt and folly, while God,
in his long-suffering patience, still spared them
for repentance, and called them by every
THE PRISONERS


means of grace and mercy to return unto
Him, and to take of their Father’s bread, even
the “ bread of life.” I implored them not to
trifle with so solemn an invitation, but at
once to “ arise, and go to their Father” with
broken hearts, confessing their sins, their
helplessness, their entire unworthiness; to go
in humble faith, believing —because the Lord
hath said it, —that, for the sake of his own
anointed, He would not turn one suppliant
soul away unpardoned ! The robe of righte-
ousness was ready to throw over them, even
the garment of Christ’s atonement; and the
gospel door was open, if they would but enter
in, and learn of Him who was gentle and easy
to be entreated, even of the vilest sinner that
*
trembled there before me; and He would
teach and guide, correct and comfort them,
«
and give unto them a peace which they never
yet had known or tasted. But, on the other
hand, time was rapidly hastening to a close
the day of grace , and that if, indeed, they
would not hear his blessed voice, and follow
him; —if they would not accept God’s offered
mercy now in “ the accepted time,” destruc-


tion and everlasting misery lay before them,
and, from a state of evil and wretchedness
here on earth, they must pass on to a state
of unspeakably greater anguish in the world
to come, where the “ worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched. , ’
As I thus expostulated, the prisoners had
«
gradually so surrounded me, that I was com-
pelled to entreat that they would fall back a
little to admit more air; but still they listen-
ed with anxious looks, and no sound was heard
but that of sobbing. Anxious to avail myself
of these awakened feelings, I here changed
the subject, recalling to them the days of their
early childhood ; their first step in sin, their
progressive sinfulness, leading them on from
crime to crime, until, hardened in repeated
guilt, they no longer cared for their souls’
salvation; and yet it was a fearful, awful
thought, that once born to being, in being we
must ever remain! We must die once, we
might die the second death, still should we
live —consciousand immortal beings— for ever,
and for ever I I reminded them of home, coun-
try, and of parents who had loved and reared
THE PRISONERS


them, many of whom had, perhaps, gone down
to the grave in sorrow because of their dis-
obedience, while some might still be living
to weep over the disgrace of their outcast
children ! I asked them to tell me, what
fruit they had found in those things, of which
they were now ashamed ? —Whether, any one
of those sins which had brought them to exile
and sorrow, had ever made them really happy,
even for one moment? I entreated them to
bear with me while I thus spoke plainly, and
to believe that I did so only as their ,
deeply anxious for their salvation; and not
for one moment, as one who stood there to
condemn upon the ground of a more righteous
spirit, since I could only acknowledge that it
was through the grace of God towards me I
had been preserved from a state as destitute,
perhaps, as their own: but knowing the sav-
ing and reconciling power of Jesus as my Re-
deemer, and the exceeding love of God’s
Holy Spirit as my Sanctifier, I longed to see
each one before me partake of that blessed-
ness, without which, we could neither be good
nor happy; but which could, even amidst the
MMK- *<«*»*» ' '****■ •*


trials and heaviest afflictions of this world,
yield to us all , a joy and peace, indeed, pass-
ing man’s understanding.
I reverted also to their situation in ser-
vice, entreating them to bear with meekness
the trials they might, in some cases, meet
with from their employers; never forgetting,
that having, by their past conduct, forfeited
the esteem and confidence, which only the up-
right and honest could claim, they must pa-
tiently bear the consequences, and strive by
future well-doing to regain not only their
own liberty, but the good-will of society. I
was now about to leave them ; when two of
the women, making way through the press,
begged to speak with me. They had com-
mitted murder on the person of a Captain
Waldron, to whose service they had been as-
signed. Report spoke of him as a highly
respectable officer and a kind master, but not
one who considered the religious instruction
of his convict-servants, as important or prac-
ticable. The prisoners were both young and
extremely pretty; one especially lovely, with
a countenance expressive only of mild melan-
THE PRISONERS


choly, although I afterwards learnt that they
were both among the most refractory and
violent. The elder first approached me with
a countenance flushed with passion, and was
about to speak, when one of the women be-
hind her pulled her back, saying somewhat
to her which I could not distinctly hear; but
again turning round, she replied aloud, 44 I
am not going to offend the lady; I wouldn’t
say a word to make her angry, but she shall
hear meand then addressing herself to me,
she complained that she and her companion
were always pointed out to every stranger
who visited the factory as murderers , and
they thought it hard that they could have no
peace, but were 44 hunted like wild beasts,”
for a crime they never committed. I was
afraid to irritate her by direct contradiction,
but I ventured to say, that so serious a charge
would hardly have been brought against them
without some grounds. She repeated her
denial of the deed, adding, 44 I am not a mur-
derer, for I never meant to kill the man : we
were in liquor when we beat him as we did,
but we couldn’t help it that he died, and
~~~ . ~


we were sorry for it, although he deserved it.”
I need not detail all that this wretched
woman said in the vindictive language of
anger and desperation. I took her apart
from the rest, and, to turn the current of her
thoughts, I asked her of her early life ; in re-
ply to which, she gave me a brief outline —
sad enough it was—of her first departure
from moral principle ; for she had been, as I
supposed from her language, better educated
than her degraded condition might lead one
to suspect. Again she alluded, with much
bitterness, to the charge for which she was
now in punishment for life. I replied, that I
could readily believe the act of murder to be
one of awful passion, and not of premeditated
crime. Here she interrupted me, looking up
with an expression of deep emotion, such as
I can never forget, and exclaiming, “ Then
you do believe that.” — 44 Yes,” I replied,
44 I could scarcely think otherwise of a
woman” Large tear-drops for the first time
stood on her eyelashes, her lips quivered, her
countenance betraying an internal struggle
of awakened feeling which had long since


been perverted, mingled with that of angry
passion subdued for a moment by a confidence
on my part towards her, which she had doubt-
less forfeited of all else; and, after a brie
pause, she said more mildly than she had yet
spoken, (i May God bless you for thatP
while, with the corner of her apron, she has-
tily wiped away the tears, which, the matron
afterwards told me, were the first she had ever
been seen to shed since being there. I
again assured her that I did, indeed, believe
her so far innocent; but whatever her motive ,
she had, in fact, in a moment of ungoverned
and most guilty passion, sent a fellow-crea-
ture without mercy to an awful tribunal,
unprepared, perhaps, for so sudden and terri-
ble a death; and therefore it was an especial
providence of goodness towards herself, that
her own life was spared for repentance and
pardon, if in sincerity of heart she would turn
unto God in prayer, with a resolution to lead
a better life; but for the rest, she must sub-
mit to the consequences of her sin, and pa-
tiently bear with earthly sorrow and reproach.
She made no further reply, but simply re-


marked, “ If I had always been kindly treat-
ed, I wouldn't be as I am.”
<ll
Again I entreated her to read her Bible,
and to pray for a better and a happier state of
mind; then, returning to the other prisoners,
I once more addressed myself to them all,
exhorting them to read the tracts I left with
them, assured them of my interest and
prayers, and that I should never visit Sydney
without seeing them, if possible, although I
cordially hoped to find few present in that
class again. I cannot describe the touching
scene which followed this farewell exhorta-
tion : some took hold of my cloak and kissed
it; many were sobbing bitterly; others had
fallen on their knees, and were rocking them-
selves as if in an agony of sorrow. I could
not but deeply pity them; and feeling that,
so far as their conduct on that evening was
concerned, they deserved encouragement, I
expresssed myself gratified and obliged by
the manner in which they had received and
listened to me. I once more urged them to
pray for repentance, and, turning away to
leave them, there was a general exclamation


of — cc God bless you ! God bless you !-
Come when you will, you will be welcome,”
I now rejoined Mr. Marsden, who had for
nearly two hours been patiently awaiting my
return. He then took me to see the cells, in
which those are confined who will not submit
to the prison discipline, or are otherwise vio-
lent, It is a miserable punishment; for although
the cells were clean and dry, they were very
dark and comfortless indeed, a deal board
*
their only bed! In one of them a woman
was confined, in whom there was much that
interested me, as giving evidence, I thought,
of a generosity which, under happier aus-
pices, might have given fair promise of a noble
character. Why first condemned to the cell, I
do not remember; but the sentence would
have been but for a short period, had she v not
unfortunately protracted it by endeavouring
to make her escape, under circumstances of
great temptation. Some person or persons
had, it appeared, forced away the padlock of
her cell, upon which the prisoner left it,
hoping to escape altogether by climbing over
the wall of the court in which these cells are


built. This she accordingly attempted,
and had attained the summit of the wall,
when her foot slipping, she fell back again
with considerable violence, by which she was
so severely bruised, that she found herself
incapable of moving. She was, of course,
soon discovered, and sentenced to her cell
again for a month, but was offered an earlier
release, if she would inform against those who
had dared to aid her escape. This, however,
she obstinately refused to do; but as it was
thought important to discover the offender,
she was threatened imprisonment until she
yielded to the condition of her comparative
freedom.
Mr. Marsden mentioned these circumstances
before her, adding, that it was her own fault
she was there so long. He turned away to
visit another cell, when I entreated her no
longer to contend against what now appeared
a duty to herself, and that, by denying what
she must know, she was adding falsehood to
her fault. She replied very quietly, “ Indeed
I do not know positively who it was that
opened my cell, although I might guess it;
THE PRISONERS


but never will I tell against them, as who-
ever it may be, it was a. friend, and one who
would have served me at the risk of their own
safety. No, Mr. Marsden may keep me here
till I die ; I will say no more than what I
have said.” To this I could really make no
reply. The resolution was worthy of a better
cause. She spoke calmly, and her counte-
nance* which was naturally pleasing and in-
telligent, betrayed nothing of anger or resent-
ment ; so far from it, she said she did not
blame the master for being angry because she
tried to get away; she knew well enough,
when she did it, that it would be worse for her
if she could not get through with it; but she
thought it hard to be kept there because she
would not get another into trouble, who had
only done a good deed for herself. I could
not but feel deeply sorry for her, acting as she
had done under the impulse of a strong temp-
tation, although it was doubtless necessaiy
for the discipline of the prison to make an
example where an exception could not be al-
lowed. I pleaded her case, however, with
Mr. Marsden, and, after some expostulation,


obtained the promise of her release, as a fa-
vour to myself, in consideration of the inte-
rest I had manifested towards the prisoners.
We now returned home, but my heart was
too full of sorrow for those whom I had just
left, immediately to regain cheerful feelings.
I went to bed, chastened by the scenes of
human misery which I had witnessed, and I
trust humbled under a deep sense of God’s
peculiar mercy towards myself, in all those
providences of grace and education, by which
He had led me on from infancy, through many
trials, many sins, and many blessings, to that
faith in Jesus my Redeemer, which, like the
rainbow of promise, throws light and hope
around the darkest and deepest of earthly
trials, preserving us from a state so fallen, as
to feel neither the love nor the fear of God !
From what I had heard of the factory, I
was surprised as well as thankful, in having
been so well received and so patiently heard ;
and am persuaded that if some of the ladies
in Paramatta would unite in a visiting com-
mittee, similar to that formed in London and
other towns of England, much good might be


done, if only in softening the irritated feelings
of those unfortunate females ; and we might
look for a yet further blessing in means used
for their welfare. The difficulties of such an
undertaking are, in Australia, however, doubt-
less great, and such as in England can be only
faintly imagined. Be that as it may, it is
evident that were the prisoners reproved and
warned with mildness and kind persuasion,
they would receive instruction, and patiently
bear with those who manifest an interest in
their melancholy situation. I can only speak
from my own experience, and my testimony
is not exaggerated, that although really
hemmed in by a crowd of nearly three hun-
dred women of the most abandoned charac-
ters, I heard not one word which could offend
the most refined or delicate mind; so far
from it, fallen as they were in sin and shame,
still many an ear was open to the voice of the
Gospel, and many a heart responded to the
sympathy of a Saviour’s love ! I stood alone
among them all, with no defence against in-
sult but that which the Bible afforded me;
yet, during an interview of two hours, the


only language which I heard was that of
blessing , the only sounds which fell as mur-
murs round me were those of bitter weeping,
although I said many things which human
nature, even in its best state, feels hard to
" > 'k
bear !
I grant that all this may have been called
forth merely by a temporary excitement,
which the very novelty of my visit, —fraught
too as it was with powerful associations of
home and happier days,—was calculated to
induce; but whatever the cause of those
awakened feelings, it proved them capable of
impression ; and who shall say that such im-
pression will in all cases die without fruit f
Who shall dare so limit the love of God as to
say, such sorrow must be vain ? And it may
be, that soon these better feelings passed
away, and the heart, which for a moment
gave hope and promise of future well-doing,
returned to the mire of its own wickedness
again: but would it be thus, if counsel and
exhortation were reiterated day by day; line
upon line, precept upon precept ? No, weak
must that faith be which can so far doubt the
THE PRISONERS


power of God unto salvation, or dare to act
upon a spirit of despair, where Christ himself
has declared, He would in “no wise cast
out” the trembling soul which should come
to him for “life and light and resurrection
for that the blood of Christ was shed for the
remission of all repented sin !—And who
would refuse to bear that hallowed message
to “ them that are in bonds,” because we see
not the hand which can alone lead “ captivity
captive.” Means only are ours, mercies are
the Lord’s; but they must be unworthy in-
w
deed who reject the one, because over the
other we have no control: and they who
think it a light thing to see another sin with-
out an effort to reclaim the sinner, may in his
own hour be also left of God
It has been said of the factory at Para-
matta, that its inmates are that
nothing can be done for them ! and the same
thing is often asserted of convicted prisoners
generally. That they are “so bad should
surely be the strongest appeal to every Chris-
tian mind to aid in immediate remedy, and
that, with all the force and energy which
d 2


human efforts can command. Let us pause,
then, before we venture to pronounce any
fellow-creature to be beyond the pale of re-
formation, since peradventure we might find
that they, whom we so condemn, are in the
sight of God less guilty in their ignorance
than we, with all our responsibilities of edu-
cation, of knowledge, and of grace. Let us
rather trace the causes of so much crime
among the beings of our own sex, and we shall
find them to originate, in far the greatei pro-
portion of offenders, from the neglect of those
who might and should have taught them how
to seek a safer and a happier destiny.


CHAPTER 11.
May we find acceptance, praying for their
conversion and return; and that their wound may
be healed.”— King.
God has declared that punishment is His
“ strange work, the necessary infliction upon
sin, as a law of justice, which the holiness of
Jehovah cannot repeal, but which His mercy
sanctifies to the restoration of the sinner,
to whom a full and free pardon is offered, in
and through the righteousness of that blessed
Mediator whose blood was shed for the sal-
vation of fallen man. The question, then,
forcibly suggests itself to every thinking
mind, that since punishment is thus a work
of equal justice and mer , for what end was
it instituted ? and every word of the Gospel
answers it was instituted—not for the -
~mmmrnmmm± % ...


dation , but for the reformation of the con-
victed sinner.
Man is the appointed instrument by which
God’s moral laws are exercised; the autho-
rity of such a commission is one of the high-
est trusts which can be delegated to man; and
to his Maker, man must stand responsible for
the sacred charge of judgment upon a fellow-
creature. But alas ! how is this trust admi-
nistered in the case of our exiled prisoners of
New South Wales? On receiving sentence
of transportation, they are imprisoned in
England until the time of their embarkation,
and during such an interval they are, gene-
rally, favoured with the instruction and reli-
pious admonition of visitors and others con-
o
nected with our gaols, whose benevolent
exertions have, in many instances, been sig-
nally blest; and that they are not more ex-
tensively so, is perhaps the fault of the sys-
tem which casts the poor prisoners from such
care to the combined evils of contaminating
examples and neglect of religious instruction.
I speak not of their voyage. It is, I believe,
generally intended that the surgeon, to whose


care the convicts are judiciously assigned,
should act also as their Christian teacher, and
some, we may hope, have done their utmost
to promote the spiritual as well as the phy-
sical health of their unhappy charge; and
many instances there are in which the con-
vict has entered upon her novel life of exile
with an humbled heart, and earnest desire of
amendment. But what was their reception
in that exile under the assignment system,
which was in operation at the time to which
I allude ? They were indiscriminately allot-
ted to the service of the settlers and other
members of the colony; —in some cases, in-
deed, to masters who conscientiously provide
for them every means of reformation ; but
such masters were comparatively few ; the
greater proportion, it was well ascertained,
made no provision whatever for the religious
instruction of their unfortunate servants, who
were, in such situations, exposed to every
temptation of evil, and so circumstanced
must soon altogether lose the feeble spark of
latent shame, which had promised better
things, because all around and about them


were levelled to the same dreadful condition
of living without God in the world !
Then, to what were those exposed who, on
their arrival at Sydney, were not immediately
assigned ? Their only refuge was the factory
of Parramatta, which is also the receptacle of
more aggravated offenders. It is true there
was a subdivision of its inmates, but the fac-
tory did not admit of such a separation of
classes as could prevent the fatal admixture
of the more venial with the most iniquitous;
so that, the bad soon became worse, and the
most depraved held sway over the trembling
novice in crime. Here I am tempted to
quote one instance (from many similar) in
proof of this assertion; that of a young
woman in the first class, one of the recently
arrived convicts not yet assigned. Her coun-
tenance and quiet demeanour peculiarly at-
tracted my attention, as manifesting a more
subdued and sorrowful spirit than was evi-
dent in the generality of her companions. In
reply to my expressions of regret to see one
so young, and apparently respectable, in such
a situation, she answered, tears filling her


eyes, tc Oh ! I did wish to do better, but it’s
no use here: and though I have seen a deal
of wickedness, I have never been where there
is so much badness as there is in this place,
* »
and nobody takes account of it.” She then
added, that when she left Newgate she sin-
cerely desired to lead a new life: she had
heard more of God, and of the dreadful con-
sequences of sin, than she had ever before
(
known; and she blessed Mrs. Fry and the
ladies who had led her to hope for mercy
through the Saviour; that when she entered
the factory, she thought of these things, and
resolved to read her Bible, and to pray as the
ladies had charged her to' do; but the blessed
book was torn from her hands, she was scorn-
. v
V
ed and insulted, and left in no peace at all,
until she 66 gave over being sorry.” Upon
inquiry, I found that she was by no means a
solitary instance of such treatment, nor could
I learn that any measures were taken to pre-
vent this cruel tyranny of the depraved over
the penitent.
Another prominent evil, and doubtless the
very source of many others, was the want of
. ■« i*‘i


occupation for the prisoners throughout the
factory, none whatever being provided be-
yond the mere household work of the insti-
tution, which could, of course, employ but a
small proportion of its inmates; and that, for
only a very brief part of each day. Here I
would ask, where is the mind, even among
the morally virtuous, which could stand against
the complicated evils of total idleness ? —and
that, too, hedged round by such examples of
blasphemy and vice, as must wholly eradicate
every feeling of shame and self-respect ? Ne-
vertheless, such a state rendered the factory,
9
of course, a place rather of 'preference than
punishment to the ill disposed, so much so,
that several in each class told me, in excuse
for being there, that it was their own choice;
—that they had committed offence in service
on purpose to be sent away, nor had they a
wish to leave the factory, if they must go
back to service again, where they were
“ treated like dogs and worked like horses.”
To what could such a system tend, but to
create dissatisfaction against employers, and
encourage a spirit of defiance and idleness?
- inwjwrua m


In the factory they were well fed, well clothed,
and comfortably lodged, with little or nothing
to do, leaving wickedness to prey upon itself!
and going forth from such a den of infamy,
with all the uncontrolled habits of a sinful life,
can we feel surprised at the complaints pre-
valent throughout the colony of the iniquity
of convict servants ? But to what can this be
traced, if not to the very system itself, which
provided so little for the reformation of these
convicts, who were indiscriminately thrown inr
to service, not only wholly unprepared to fulfil
its duties, but with every temptation to rebel
against them ! At the period to which I al-
lude, the chaplain of the factory was appointed
to officiate only once on the Sunday, no pro-
vision whatever being made either for a weekly
lecture, or for any further religious instruc-
tion : nor were the Roman Catholic convicts
compelled to attend even that one sabbath
service, although they themselves told me
that their own priests had seldom leisure to
visit them more than once in three or four
weeks; and to avoid the restraints of even
this one weekly attendance upon divine wor-
■ .


ship, the matron informed me that several
Protestants had become Roman Catholics.
To one of these I especially addressed myself,
anxious to learn the grounds of such con-
version. I questioned her on several points
of her newly-admitted faith; nothing could
exceed the ignorance of her answers. She
assigned no other cause for her conversion
than that it was a “ blessed thing for a poor
creature like her to belong to the true church,”
the only church whose ministers could forgive
sins, without her having the trouble to read
the Bible, (i a book she could never under-
stand and the priest had told her, that if
she would follow the doctrines of the Romish
church she should surely be saved, and he
j
would grant her absolution for what she had
done, as heresy had been the cause of all her
misfortunes. She freely acknowledged to me
that she understood nothing of what she pro-
fessed to believe; adding, with great apparent
indifference, that it was laid upon the priest
to do and to say what he pleased, and that it
was not for her to contradict him, nor to
4
heed what any one else might tell her, who
THE PRISONERS


was not of the true church I This appeared
to be the concentration of her new faith; that
what she called the “true church” (words of
magic spell to her mind) was religion, and
all out of that church was heresy,—“ why,
she was sure she did not know ! ” Of course,
I do not mean to insinuate by these state-
ments that such ignorance prevails univer-
sally among Roman Catholic converts, but
the substance of her creed is, doubtless, the
fatal error of all who embrace so fearful a
»
doctrine, as that of absolution through human
agency. These details, however, bear upon
the evidence I would fain prove, that when 1
visited the factory, nothing could be worse
than the system then in operation respecting
the transportation of our female convicts;
and it being now probable that the assignment
law, which a short time since was repealed,
will be again in force, it behoves every
Christian to inquire into its regulations, and
to plead for such arrangements as may in-
sure to every prisoner, not only ample means
of religious instruction, but such a trial of
conduct as might afford opportunity of per-


manent reform, and, with God’s grace and
blessing, give promise of a better and hap-
pier life than hitherto led, while treading
through the fatal haunts of temptation, guilt,
and disgrace. Upon the abstract question of
assignment we presume to offer no opinion.
To the colonist it is doubtless a very impor-
tant one, but it is yet more vitally so to the
objects whose higher interests it more espe-
cially involves. Those whose opportunities
of judging have been greater than mine were,
have rendered a fearful picture of the results
which have hitherto arisen from the trial;
nevertheless it might, perhaps, under better
restrictions, be made to work more favourably
and even beneficially to both parties. To
effect this, every female convict, previously
to her assignment to service, should pass
through the term of a year’s probation, during
which she should be allowed every possible
means of instruction, occupation, and encou-
ragement. The factory of Paramatta might
be rendered eligible for a house of correction
and hard labour; but surely, there should be
an asvlum apart from this, in or near Sydney,


in which to receive the better class of pri-
soners who manifest a desire of doing well,
which arrangement would avoid the dreadful
admixture of characters such as I witnessed
at Paramatta. This asylum might be esta-
blished as a penitentiary in connexion with
those in England,—a branch of the same noble
charity. It should be made strictly a house
of industry, in which all might be admitted
who received tickets or testimonials from the
prison authorities in England, recommending
them as objects worthy a probation. This
would be a great encouragement for them to
leave their country with hope and resolution
to reform. Let them be separated in wards
or classes, according to the nature of offence
for which they are exiled, their previous cha-
racter and circumstances. A laundry might
form a part of the establishment, which would
be a public benefit to the inhabitants of Syd-
ney and its neighbourhood, and each class
might, according to their ability, be employed
in various kinds of work, such as binding
shoes, plaiting straw, making bonnets, hats,
shirts, knitting, &c., all for public sale, which


we conceive would produce a considerable
profit, even if at the rate of English ,
in aid of the institution. The penitentiary
to be provided with a resident married chap-
lain, whose sole object should be the charge
and instruction of its inmates in the daily ex-
ercise of prayer, reading the Scripture and
catechisms, with at least one evening in the
week set apart for divine service, and an ap-
propriate lecture. The sabbaths to be em-
ployed as our adult Sunday schools in Eng-
land, giving tickets of reward,valuing from one
penny to sixpence, according to the degree of
merit to be rewarded, for steady conduct
during the week ; which money might be well
applied in clothing, when they enter service
after their appointed probation. Such an
asylum as this might be an incalculable be-
nefit, and with God’s blessing, which would
assuredly rest upon it in a greater or less
degree, many a wanderer might go forth from
such care and training, restored to the fold of
Him who, as their 44 good Shepherd,” would
reclaim, and guide, and bless them during the
residue of their earthly pilgrimage; and after


this life of mortal conflict would take them to
his Father’s kingdom, “ washed white in the
“blood of the Lamb,” —to that kingdom, where
neither sin nor sorrow should*' again have
power to tempt them from HisHblessed care !
Frorn a probation like the proposed, the
prisoners might be sent to service, really use-
ful members of society, and better meet to be
the associates of the more respectable emi-
grants, who have hitherto suffered, in many*
instances, from their companionship with con-
vict fellow-servants. But here, too, there
should be restrictions. No colonist should
be permitted to take a servant from the Peni-
tentiary without a pledge of their receiving
religious advantages in the daily exercise of
family worship, and such rest on the Sunday as
is compatible with the duties of that holy day.
Under some such preliminaries on both sides,
of which a mere outline has here been imper-
fectly sketched, we can believe that the as-
signment of prisoners to the service of respec-
table families might be made the means of
blessing to the one, and of essential benefit
to the other. The factory of Paramatta


might then become a valuable institution, as
one set apart for punishment but equally
provided with every means of religious in-
struction, blended with such discipline and
labour as the nature and extent of offences
merited. In this, also, should be a subdivi-
sion of classes; but here we would give no
other reward than that of rising to the high-
est class, and so passing on to the Peniten-
tiary for probation, whenever the pnsoneis
deserved the trial. Here, too, the silent
system might be found to work, advantage-
ously. We have seen its good effects in many
of our home prisons, and the necessity for it,
in those of Australia, may be yet more ur-
gent. The treadmill, in a climate like that
of Australia, would be out of the question, at
least for females ; but there are many othei
laborious employments which might be sub-
stituted with equal benefit. During the ad-
ministration of General now Sir Ralph Dar-
ling a loom was established in the Factory
&' i
for the manufacture of a coarse cloth for the
use of the soldiers, sailors, &c., which, I be-
lieve, was found to answer in giving suitable


and ample occupation to the prisoners. It
was removed by order of his successor, Sir
Richard Bourke, in consequence, as his ex-
cellency himself courteously informed me, of
the heavy additional expense it needlessly, he
thought, incurred upon our government;
cloth, for similar purposes, being imported
from Yorkshire and elsewhere at one-third
the cost for which it could be made at Para-
matta. Such appeared a reasonable ground
of objection against the loom : but it is equally
true, that at no period was the Factory so full
of prisoners as when I saw it; its very idle-
ness being, as 1 have before stated, a charm
to its inmates; consequently, we are not sure
whether, even upon mere pecuniary calcula-
tion, the expenditure in maintaining so lar^e
O CD w
a number of unemployed convicts would not
give a balance in favour of the loom. Be this
as it may, can it be a question to outweigh
the justice due to the higher interests of our
unfortunate exiles ? What will it be to our
nation, if they who hold the solemn respon-
sibility of punishment, suffer minor consider-
ations to interfere with the far more impor-
E 9


5‘2
THE PRISONERS
taut duty of reclaiming, at jprice, those
whom their delegated authority has been
compelled to judge and condemn ? Will not
God visit for these things? Will not the
souls of all who are exiled by such authority
be required of us who neglect them ? The
law is emphatically our “ schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ such is its end, whe-
ther morally or spiritually considered, and
such is the express commission invested with
the power given by God himself to every
magistrate and ruler and governor who holds
the serious and most sacred charge !
We can say nothing upon the ground of
national policy ; nor of the necessity which is
urged for political economy and retrench-
ment. Of this we can be no judge, nor
would we venture to assume an opinion, so
misplaced, as to where that retrenchment
might be best made. But every woman must
feel deeply interested in woman’s welfare
deeply interested in the reinstatement of
character, in which that of her whole sex is
implicated, and at stake ! and surely we do
no more than justice in believing, that not one


within the British realm would refuse to lend
/
aid in a work so weighty in its consequences
—not one who would refuse to give the ut-
most of their means in administering to the
reformation of convict prisoners. And re-
garding it in a mere individual light, of what
deep importance is the conversion of these
convicts, who in their restoration to free-
dom, if not before, go forth again to take
their places in the domestic circles of our
own emigrated kindred and people; exam-
ples, either of good or evil, to the rising ge-
neration of Australian homes!
That the expense of such institutions as
we have proposed would be very great, we are
quite aware ; but we also believe, that in this
instance, the well-known adage, ce que
le premier pas qui coute ,” would be literally
verified, and that once established, they might,
in a great measure, be supported by the pro-
fits arising from the labour of their inmates,
especially in a country where labour is so
highly rated. And might not a tax be rea-
sonably demanded of the colonists, say of a
guinea a year or upwards, according to the
r^pHaßT'
- .. .4 ■■ y\


class of servant required, for every one taken
into service from the Penitentiary until the
terra of their sentence be expired, when, of
course, they become again independent of
government, and free to claim the wages of
an emancipist ? Such a tax, we presume,
would go far towards the maintenance of the
I
probationists, and be but a very small charge
upon those who might thus be provided with
useful, and perhaps deserving servants. Sub-
scriptions from England and the colony would
do the rest, so that in fact this plan, once or-
ganized, would, in all probability, be one of
considerable saving rather than of increased
expenditure to the home government.
Another important consideration should be,
the selection of those appointed to hold
authority over the prisoners, and this through-
out every department, from the principals, to
the lowest menial. Hitherto, many and most
fearful evils have arisen from a want of cau-
tion in this respect. Assuredly, the governor
and matron of all such establishments, should
be, not only characters of known integrity and
strictly religious principles, but also of such
THE PRISONERS


education as would render them competent
to fulfil the higher duties of so arduous and
important a trust, and to command the re-
spect and obedience of all who are placed
under their control; nor can we doubt, that
many such persons might be found willing to
undertake the charge, among our valued and
devoted missionaries. The subordinates of
the establishment should also, without any
exception of office, be respectable emigrants
of unblemished character, and not ,
as was, and lam told, still is the case: nor
can we think it desirable that men should
hold any appointment in the interior manage-
ment of such institutions, as can possibly be
fulfilled by females. And here we are tempted
to refer to one appalling feature of the system
in operation at the time of which I speak—
the abhorrent privilege granted to convict
labourers, if, with consent of their employers,
to go the Factory —as if to a slave market —
for a wife ! —to choose from among the ab-
ject inmates of that prison of iniquity, the
most sacred of human ties ! Alas! how
fallen must that woman be, who could thus
MP i ■ ■■


bind herself for life to the destiny of a man,
whom before that hour she may probably
have never seen; and who, from his very
situation as a convict , must have forfeited all
claim to woman’s respect! What then must
be the result of a union so fearfully unprin-
cipled in its motive ? Is this a measure cal-
culated to reclaim the fallen mind, which
must sink irretrievably lower, by the very
consenting to a compact so insulting to every
virtuous feeling, so incompatible with the
principles of Christian reform ! To effect
such reformation, should we not rather stre-
nuously aim to restore the self-respect which
sin has blighted ? and with this in view, pu-
nishment should surely be devoid of all that
can even remotely degrade, or it will tend to
harden and confirm, those baser passions
which we would fain subdue and eradicate. Oh!
would that in our fellowship with each other,
we more closely followed the example of Him
upon whose authority we profess to act, in the
exercise of our moral laws ! How 7 did He win
back the lost sheep of his Father’s flock, and
lead them from the captivity of sin to the
- r '


freedom of adopted children ! Where justice
demanded the penalty of a retributive law,
did He institute one which did not directly
tend to raise the fallen mind to principles of
exalted virtue ?—even to the very principles
of his own unsullied righteousness ? Look at
what Christ did—at what Christ still does
with every transgressor, whom he corrects,
>•
for life and repentance ? Does He implicate
the offender in any forfeiture, which can taint
the offence with a deeper shade of shame ?
No; he subjects our bodies to pain, our pas-
sions to coercion, our liberty to restraint;
but in all this, he never compromises the dig-
nity of an immortal soul! He may see it
needful to inflict stripe upon stripe, sorrow
upon sorrow, that so he may bend the stub-
born will, and break the callous heart; but
he gives to every blow a sanctifying power,
holding out the assured promise of par-
don and everlasting life; He heals while he
wounds, and reclaims while he reproves. Nor
can his blessing rest on any human agency
that does not thus “ work together for good ,”
for the vital good of every soul, which sin has


alienated from the favour and the peace of
God! And when affliction has done its work
of grace, and the stricken spirit has replumed
her wounded wings for renewed ascent to the
kingdom of heaven, then is the trembling
sinner received back to the bosom of a gra-
cious Father; and, sealed with the great
atonement of a Saviour’s blood, is hailed by
A
the hallelujahs of cherubim and seraphim —
unheard indeed by mortal ears, but echoed
throughout the new Jerusalem by angels and
archangels rejoicing over the sinner that re-
penteth, while proclaiming to all in heaven
and in earth the glad tidings of peace here,
and of 44 goodwill towards man.”
On the other hand, what has hitherto been
the 'punishment of transportation ? Banish-
ment from home and country has, in the ma-
jority of cases, been no punishment at all; so
far from it, the assignment of prisoners to
immediate service has often been highly ad-
vantageous to the temporal interests of the
convict, although it has but opened another
door for the triumph of vice and irreligion.
How many instances are on record of soldiers


deserting to share the brighter destiny of a
convict! and of convicts giving such glowing
colours of their captivity abroad, as to induce
their far distant friends, and brothers and
sisters, to the commission of crime purposely
to be alike sentenced to an exile fraught with
such advantages ! One such case fell under
my own observation : that of a father, him-
self a prisoner, rejoicing in the transportation
of his child, declaring, when told of her de-
linquency, that he was Ci glad she had been
sent over any how she would “ settle better
in the colony than she could do at home,”
and would be no worse for what she had
done.” Surely something must be lamentably
at fault in a system, which can thus produce a
rejoicing in iniquity, and that too within a
parent’s heart!
Make transportation a mean of wholesome
discipline, of judicious correction, of mild but
uncompromising coercion, and it might then
become a blessing indeed, as an instrument in
God’s hand, of reclaiming thousands from
ignorance and depravity; as it is, every re-
flective and generous mind must weep over its


results, and tremble to see a fellow-creature
sent forth in sin, to where sin need hardly
blush to own its sinfulness and shame.
Enough has now, perhaps, been said in evi-
dence of the evils connected with the transpor-
tation of our female convicts ; and yet, those
who know the colony may bear me witness,
that I have given but a very faint outline of
those evils, and the fearful effects arising
from a system so inconsistent with its pro-
fessed designs. And in speaking thus exclu-
sively of convicts, we have followed the sub-
ject through a very limited range of conse-
quences. It bears more widely upon the
welfare of our poor emigrant population, than
can well be imagined by those unacquainted
with the colony; but to this we can only
partially refer in our present narrative, and if
the convict system should happily be reform-
ed in some of its most important measures,
the emigrants will soon experience its bene-
ficial effects. There has not hitherto been a
sufficient distinction made between the par-
ties ; so far the reverse, that it is now a well-
known fact, —for it has lately been especially
'V.' d * -
. - - - v ***


brought before the public notice, —that the
convict often enjoys advantages superior to
those of the emigrant; offices and emoluments
being given to the one, which should exclu-
sively belong to the other; and it is also well
known, how many instances there have been,
and are, in which convicts, even previously to
their emancipation, have acquired property
and influence wholly inconsistent with their
disgraceful banishment! The effects of this
obvious injustice upon the emigrant need
scarcely be detailed; but we would venture
to assume it probable, that if the system of
assignment were adopted under the restric-
tions which we have dared to suggest, many
evils would be remedied, which are now so
heavily complained of by all parties in New
South Wales.
Perhaps we have said more in favour of the
assignment of prisoners to private service
than many will deem warranted under .the
circumstances of its past failure; but having,
nevertheless, seen it work as a blessing in
more than one establishment, where the colo-
nists really study and provide for the higher


interests of their unfortunate convict depend-
ents, we are justified in expressing a per-
suasion, that it might be .made more generally
conducive to such interests, and consequently
to the interests also of the whole free popula-
tion of Australia.
The settlement of Port Stephens is one ot
the few which offer a striking evidence of this
remark. It is situated about sixty miles
north of Sydney, on the eastern coast of New
South Wales; and a more exquisite land-
scape can scarcely be found than surrounds
that little bay, w r hich, nearly enclosed by
rocks and wooded promontories, and studded
with islands, like “ gems in a silver sea,” ra-
ther resembles a lake, on whose bosom the
r
angry waters can never swell, than an inlet
of the ocean, such as it really is. The set-
tlement was, when I knew it, an extensive
one, if we include that of Booral, a few miles
further on the banks of the Keruah river ;
which, together with a vast tract of country,
belongs to the Australian Agricultural Com-
pany. Sir Edward Parry, who was appointed
the company’s commissioner, fixed his abode


at Port Stephens, which he found a wilder-
ness, but left it, indeed, a land of hope and
promise. Long will his name be remembered
with love and reverence for services which
can never be requited by earthly reward.
No, his reward must be from on high, in that
blessed recognition of a good and faithful
servant, who, while fulfilling the charge of
an earthly stewardship, remembered the yet
higher trust of a heavenly commission ; and
planting his Father’s vineyard with scions of
the 44 tree of life,” reared a church in the
barren deserts of a heathen land, which,
through ages yet to come, shall tell of the
power and mark the goodness of our Saviour
God! Sir Edward Parry, laboured as a
missionary among the convict servants of his
extensive establishment, contending with a
thousand difficulties ever incident to a spiri-
tual reformation. He, nevertheless, worked
steadily on with a persevering zeal, which no
opposition could daunt or dismay. He set
the first example of regular family worship ;
established a sabbath service according to the
form of our national church, in a carpenter’s


shop, which was fitted up as a temporary cha-
pel. There he preached the glad tidings of
salvation to the reckless beings who formed
the people of that isolated little colony. He
also erected a small but beautiful church on
the rich borders of the calm Keruah, where
a flock soon gladly assembled to join in the
sweet incense of prayer and praise, where
never prayer was heard before. His example
animated others to do the like ; and his deeply
lamented successor, the late Colonel Du-
maresq, followed up the good work through-
out the increasing township of Stroud, and
every other settlement of his ow T n dependents
whose general good conduct, order, and obedi-
ence, proved how much may be effected by kind-
ness and discipline, even with the most refrac-
tory, where the groundwork of that discipline
is laid upon a spiritual foundation, the only
foundation on which a man may work with an
assured blessing on himself and others. Ano-
ther church had just been completed at Stroud,
wholly, I believe, at the expense of the Agri-
cultural Company, whose liberality in ail ar-
rangements connected with the welfare of


their officers and servants, deserve the high-
est commendation. A chaplain had been
appointed to take spiritual charge of the
united, though scattered, settlements of Port
Stephens, Booral, and Stroud, who officiated
alternately at each of these stations, and, as-
/ *
sisted by a few lay friends, a service was ge-
nerally administered twice on every Sunday
to the convict population, while his own life
and character bore evidence of the blessed-
ness of a pure faith. Schools and other
Christian designs were contemplated, tending
to the future, as well as present welfare of the
prisoners and their helpless children; and
having myself sojourned for fifteen months in
this little oasis of the desert, I can speak
impartially of the effects of such privileges
upon the lowest grade of human character.
And to me it was often a touching sight to
witness the deep attention and earnest coun-
tenance of many an exiled outcast, as they
listened to the simple but effectual preaching
of their beloved pastor, while he taught them
where to find a Saviour who could do for
them—what they could not do for themselves


—redeem them from their fatal captivity, and
give them pardon, peace, and salvation. Con-
gregated in a carpenter’s shop, the prisoners
uniting in our hymns of simple melody :
some partaking with us, from time to time,
the blessed sacrament in remembrance of
Christ’s atoning death and resurrection !
the cloudless sky, bright with ethereal glory.
spreading its blue canopy over tne landscape,
which, rich in natural beauty, still seemed
blighted by its desolateness : the soft plash-
ing of the waters as the tide drew them to
our silent shores ; and, here and there, lying
around our lowly temple, scattered groups
of native savages, whose ears, fast bound by
heathen ignorance, could not, and would not
listen to the words of life, which called us to
vigilance and contrite prayer ; —all, all formed
a scene of such peculiar and unspeakable in-
terest, that no words of mine, no language of
human tongue, can define the impression
with which I so often went on ray homeward
way again, rejoicing in the omnipresence of
my risen Saviour, who there , as in the most
o-nro’eous temple of civilized Europe, looked
O O *
THE PRISONERS


OF AUSTRALIA,
from his throne of glory, and interceding with
the Father in our behalf, sent forth his mi-
nistering angels to consecrate our simple
worship, and to record within the 4< book of
life ” each name among us, which, to the eye
of an all-searching God, bore with it the
credentials of a living, practical faith, and of
that pure and lowly spirit which can alone
44 see God.”
It was at the close of one such sabbath day
as thus, that I once sallied forth for an even-
ing stroll, and wending my lonely way, al-
most without a motive, save for the re-
freshment of a cool sea-breeze, which at that
moment was springing up with the rising
tide, 1 unconsciously wandered to a convict’s
hut which stood on the borders of the coast.
Attracted by the sound of voices, as if of
children reading, I paused to listen; and al-
though still too far from the dwelling dis-
tinctly to hear the subject of such discourse, I
saw through the open doorway what was
passing within. The father of the family, a
convict, sat near the entrance, with a young
child on his knee; while three older ones
f i 2


0O THE PRISONERS
were grouped arouud him reading from the
Scriptures, which, from time to time, he ex-
plained to them, and appeared earnestly
exhorting his children to love and obey God,
even as they were required by the will of
God to do. Unwilling to intrude upon a
family thus engaged, I returned home unper-
ceived by those who had thus attracted and
interested me; but on the following day, 1
beard from the lips of his own wife, the cir-
cumstances of this convict’s transportation,
and of her own heroic resolution, from the
moment of his condemnation, never to leave
or to abandon him, whatever might be his
destiny. Providentially he had been assigned
to the service of the Agricultural Company,
and, under the Christian teaching of Sir Ed-
ward Parry, both he and his wife had,
humanly speaking, been led to see the folly ot
worldly wickedness, and the deep importance
of those better things which now formed
their highest privilege and consolation. Her
husband, she said, had long since become a
reformed character, and was now all that she
could wish as a Christian husband and father.


This account was afterwards confirmed to me
by others, who spoke of him as an honest,
industrious, and most deserving man ; and
1 also found that he gave many sweet evi-
U *i
dences of his sincerity as a professing Chris-
tian. He never entered upon his daily la-
bours, nor lay down to rest at night, without
reading a portion from the Bible, and gather-
ing his little family around him for prayer
and thanksgiving. He devoted all his leisure
hours to the instruction of his children in
reading, writing, and arithmetic; and many
there are who might add their testimony to
mine, that these children, who never failed in
their attendance on the church services, be-
haved with a quietness and reverential atten-
tion, during the time of such services, that
might prove them examples to many of our
own more civilized families at home, who are
educated with far higher advantages. These
blessings were among the many fruits of the
missionary exertions of Sir Edward Parry
and his now sainted lady, who both lived in
the grateful affections of many a chastened
heart, long after they had ceased to take a


personal share in the interests of that far
distant colony. And if this be a case rather
of exception than of general result, it is by
no means a singular instance of excellent
conduct, good order, and, at least, of moral
reformation among the convict families of
Port Stephens and other settlements con-
nected with it, under the admirable govern-
ment both of Sir Edward Parry and his
talented successor. I would also instance
the establishments of St. Heliers and St.
Aubyns, the adjoining possessions of that
successor and his excellent brother, situated
on the border of the Hunters’ River, about one
hundred and eighty miles north-west of Syd-
ney. The former has been already noticed
by Dr. Lang in his publication on Australia,
as the best organized farm in the colony. And
why ? Because the blessing of God was
made the paramount interest, and Christian
instruction the basis of its moral discipline;
while every encouragement has been given to
the efforts of industry and good conduct, and
vice been visited with firm and judicious
coercion. The scenery around St. Heliers is


mountainous, and, to the eye of a stranger,
is both wild and striking. The farm formed
an extensive establishment, about half a mile
from the private dwelling-house. Its super-
intendent and his family were Scotch emi-
grants ; the wife, a singularly pleasing woman,
possessing both piety and good sense, not
always blended in the same character. She
was surrounded by a large family of well-
trained children, and everything around and
about her, was so beautifully clean—in such
perfect keeping, to use a painter’s expression,
with the simplicity of her station, that I
could scarcely realize the many disadvantages
to which she was nevertheless necessarily
subjected. The superintendent’s house pro-
perly stood in the centre of the prisoners’
6 ‘ camp, v ’ as it is called, a neat range of small
wooden huts or cottages, each containing two
*
rooms with a small garden, and shaded by a
verandah which protected them from the
burning rays of an Australian sun. Many of
these were ornamented with a vine, which
gave to them an additional appearance of
beauty and comfort. Far removed from the


superintending care of any clergy, the beloved
proprietor of this extensive property had not
neglected to provide for the spiritual welfare
of his exiled dependents. Divine service, and
a sermon, was regularly read to them, toge-
ther with rest, and every means of instruc-
tion afforded them on the sabbath-day which
circumstances permitted. Rewards also were
occasionally distributed to the industrious
and well conducted, both among the men
and women. Regular hours were preserved,
and good order maintained, as far as possible,
where the master was himself necessarily re-
moved from the personal charge of his estate;
but never, I believe, were the returning visits
of an absent master hailed with more grate-
ful and cordial welcome, than those of him
who was beloved, respected, and honoured
by all, even by those who also feared him,
Alas ! he lives no more to meet such earthly
welcome from his own again; but many must
wish to see his like in others, and none who
knew him can ever forget that benevolence
and unwearied kindness which sought the
happiness of all around him : nor could there
THE PRISONERS
*'■ I


be a stronger evidence of a noble and gene-
rous mind than the anxious desire which he
ever manifested, to mature those works of
faith and charity throughout the settlements
of his public jurisdiction, which had been
founded under the pious auspices of his more
experienced predecessor.
The establishment of St. Aubyns was fa-
voured with yet higher advantages; for al-
though neither so extensive nor so advanced
O
in its exterior operations, it had the privilege
of a master’s immediate superintendence,
who was himself peculiarly fitted for the
duties of an arduous and most difficult stew-
ardship. Here, too, the whole structure was
raised upon the solid groundwork of religious
principles. Yes, and under circumstances
of discouragement such as few can imagine,
who know nothing of Australia—who have
never experienced the persevering opposition
which, perhaps, in every country, more or
less follows upon the tread of a Christian’s
influence; but above all, where such influ-
ence is isolated, unsupported, ridiculed, and
often slandered! Nevertheless, amidst all


this, the respected proprietor of St. Aubyns
steadily pursued a course of government
which has been singularly blessed to many, and
by united firmness in discipline, and uniform
kindness and consideration towards his con*
♦
vict labourers, few masters in the colony have
been so influential as himself, in promoting
the reformation and well-being of his depen-
dents. Morning and evening his family as-
sembled for religious worship, at which all his
household domestics were required to attend.
Every Sunday morning he met the convicts
of his farm establishment in a large barn
arranged for divine service, as well as the na-
ture of the building would admit, his own
family being also present; while the Roman
Catholics, whose attendance was not com-
pelled, were nevertheless required to appear
neatly dressed and ranged with the others,
as prepared for prayers, that none might ab-
sent himself from the camp on that hal-
lowed day, unnoticed by the master’s eye;
but such as declined uniting in the Protest-
ant prayers were expected to return quietly
to their respective huts during the hours of
I, ! I
tv I


divine service, that they might at least have
time and opportunity for private devotion, if
they chose to avail themselves of it according
to the dictates of their conscience. The re-
mainder of the day was equally marked a
sabbath , no work being permitted but that of
actual necessity; even the family dinner was
dressed on the preceding day, that the ex-
ample of the master might prove to the ser-
vants how sacredly important he considered
those duties to be, which were enforced upon
themselves; and to all this was added affec-
tionate exhortation and counsel, whenever
circumstances called forth interference, re-
proof, or advice. Another admirable feature
of judicious management was the permission
granted to the prisoners of St. Aubyns, of
working after their appointed hours of ser-
vice for pecuniary remuneration, according to
the rate of free labour. This was a most
beneficial and generous arrangement, al-
though one which I have heard greatly cen-
sured by the more selfish and illiberal, as
making the servants of other settlers dissatis-
fied with their own allotment: but this is


taking a very narrow view of philanthropy;
better had it been for such settlers, had they
too done the like, rather than condemn a
system which not only provided an honest
encouragement for voluntary labour, but thus
employing leisure hours for the interests of
the industrious, saved them from many a
temptation of drunkenness and vicious com-
panionship, so peculiarly enticing to minds
perverted by a long course of habitual sin and
idleness. Such devoted and disinterested
care could not fail of producing vital benefits;
nor do I hesitate to assert, that many who
came to their destined captivity, ignorant,
depraved, and profane, have become faithful
servants both of God and man; manifesting
their genuine repentance, and sincere desire
to depart from all iniquity, by a change of
heart and life, which soon springs up in fruits
of grace and reformation. Some such have
expressed to me with much feeling, that to
the pious influence of their invaluable master
and mistress, under God’s blessing, they trace
that change and happier state of mind ; and
have deplored that their earlier career had


not been blessed with such guidance and
guardianship !
The history of one young man, more espe-
cially, might interest the readers of this little
narrative, and prove a striking instance of
the power of Christian example ; but delicacy
towards his still surviving and highly respect-
able family compels me to throw a veil over
that history, as regards its saddest features,
which they must desire should rather be now
buried in oblivion, save in the bosom of him
whose life they have most deeply and fatally
affected! I will therefore merely say, that
the guardians of that fatherless young man,
who loved and trained him as a son, have ex-
pressed to me their grateful conviction that
to his master and mistress they—humanly
speaking —stand indebted for the reformation
of their unfortunate charge, who, now per-
fectly restored to the affection and forgive-
ness of his afflicted family, has long since ma-
nifested towards them such a sweet spirit of
contrite meekness and obedience, that they
must for ever supplicate blessings on those
whose influence has thus reclaimed their long-


lost treasure. But they have annexed one
striking condition to their continued recon-
ciliation and favour; that he should never—
through the temptation of any inducement,
however fair in promise, or lucrative in emo-
lument —willingly quit the service of his pre-
sent employer, until the expiration of his sen-
tence allows him to return once more to his
own home and family; although born to far
better prospects, he is now but a livery man-
servant t The venerable relative, who told
me this, added with tears, 44 Yes, 1 would
rather leave him as doorkeeper in a Christian
family like that, than know him receiving
thousands, as the wages of a less secure and
honourable servitude.” And many other
are the instances I might detail, in which the
convicts of St. Au by ns have said, that thev
never knew either the love or fear of God
f
until they learnt to know them there.
I state these facts, which in that secluded
colony have hitherto passed away, like the
silent flowings of a watercourse, that gliding
from its upland spring gives life and verdure
to the vale, although unnoticed and unknown
THE PRISONERS


amid the turmoil and the din of a troublous
world. I state them, not in panegyric of
human efforts, but to prove what has been
done, and may yet be done, by the greatness
of God’s power and love, where the instru-
ments of that power work faithfully according
to his divine will, in the stewardship of means
which is assigned to man, and for which man
is so seriously responsible. Such faithfulness
may be subject of raillery and contempt to
those who are blind to its importance; and
they may smile derision on the “ ultra Chris-
tianity ” of principles which must oppose
those of their own infidel indifference; but
such taunts alter nothing of God’s revealed
and irrevocable decrees, that they who “ make
a mock of God,” or of his righteousness,
“ shall perish and woe to that soul which
shall cause another to offend !
Oh! should these simple pages ever meet
the eye of some, who, through ignorance or
indifference, sanction the false and fatal so-
phistry, which, alas ! I have but too often
heard defended, that to evangelize the pri-
soners of Australia, in the yet infant state of the


country, would (e do more harm than good ”
that to “ institute a sabbath in the wilds of a
penal settlement would only tend to encourage
vice, where idleness, one day in seven, must
lead to worse profanation, or to a fanaticism yet
more fatal to the interests ot masters, who,
having neither time nor means to be them-
selves religious, might vainly impose religious
restraint on others under their control!” —
Oh ! let such sophists pause, ere they thus
stand as a “ breach in the wall ” betwixt God
and God’s appointments !-—pause, ere they
thus venture to defy, by so bold a reasoning,
the commands of Him who has left nothing
open to such daring dispute, but has, in the
eloquent simplicity of divine truth, bid us go
forth even to the “ uppermost parts of the
earth/’ and draw all men to Christ, that all
men may, by faith in Christ, be saved and
sanctified ! Such is the sacred charge com-
mitted to our care, and such the hallowed
mandate which no argument of human rea-
soning can disannul or change ! Alas ! that
there should be found one within the family
of God’s created children who could desire to


deface a Gospel so lovingly, so mercifully de-
vised !
On the other hand, how blessed is he, who,
with the disinterested zeal of a Christian dis-
ciple, labours to fulfil the heavenly mission
of grace and mercy; “ let him know that he
which converteth the sinner from the error of
his way, shall save a soul from death, and
hide a multitude of sins.”
The Christian, indeed, may, while working
the will of God in faith and patient well-
doing, have to work through a conflict of his
own infirmities; —to fight the good faith
through a warfare of outward trials and con-
tentions; and against the arrows of the
wicked, all which may irritate our fallen na-
ture, and oppress the spirit even in her up-
ward flight!—but, through it all, he finds an
abiding peace which “ passeth understand-
ing;”—a “hope which maketh not ashamed ;”
—“ a joy unspeakable and full of glory
for it is the joy of the soul’s union with its
risen Lord and Saviour! Yes ! there he
finds “strength in weakness,” comfort in
sorrow, light in darkness, life in death! And


though oft-times wounded in his earthly course
by dispensations) merciful in purpose, but still
hard to the frail and feeble temper of erring
man, yet he “ knows in whom he believes ”
knows that He on whose grace he alone de-
pends, can never, never leave him in his
hour of need —will never forsake him, though
heart and flesh may fail! For He, who bids
us take up u a cross ” and follow Him, has
borne our nature too; and although without
sin, yet was in all points tempted even as we
are; and touched with the feeling of our in-
firmities, that risen Saviur still liveth to
make intercession for every meek and faith-
ful servant whose trust is on Himself! Let
such, then, take courage, and go on their
way rejoicing. Time is quickly drawing to a
close, the painful pilgrimage of their earthly
probation. Then, at the great harvest of a
general resurrection, the Lord will recognize
His own for ever, and take them to the king-
dom of His Father, there to share with Him-
self the glories of His exalted heirship!
Yes! 44 washed white in the blood of the
Lamb,” they shall rise triumphant to join in
THE PRISONERS


the hallelujahs of angel and archangel! and
entering into the 44 joy of their Lord/’ sorrow
shall flee away, and sin have no more power
to afflict them !
But, in that tremendous hour of final se-
paration between good and evil, what must
be the hope of those wdio, having defied the
Lord of life, and set at naught alike His pre-
cepts and commands, must perish for ever as
the enemies of a crucified Redeemer? Of
those, that with infidel and unbridled pas-
sions have reviled the Gospel, and despised the
4C ultra Christian ” who discharged with meek
obedience its blessed mission ? Oh I what
would they not give, could they then exchange
for his happy immortality their own dread
sentence of an endless woe—to be then
among the redeemed of Christ, whom once
they vilified and hated.
May we all ponder these things with
prayer, and, while time is yet our own,
find grace to flee from the wrath to come,
and to lay hold of that 64 better part” which
shall never be taken away.
But to return once more to the subject of
g 2


our narrative, have we not said enough to
warrant a persuasion that much might be done
for the reformation of our convict prisoners,
consistently with the interests of the colo-
nists ? Let the system of transportation com-
bine instruction with restraint on the one
hand, and Christian discipline with generous
authority on the other, and both parties,
under such restrictions, may become a mu-
tual blessing to each other. At the same
time, we cannot think the immediate assign-
ment of prisoners to service is desirable.
Surely they should first pass through a term
of 'punishment and probation, before they are
admitted as members of a domestic house-
hold ? Justice, both to the colonist and the
convict, requires this; and perhaps it might
also be well to adopt a dress something in
design like that of our charity-schools, neat,
but not derogatory to mark the distinction
between an emigrant and a convict servant,
the want of which is olten most painfully
felt by the former.
In thus detailing the effects of transporta-
tion, I have limited myself exclusively to the
THE PRISONERS


system as connected with our female pri-
soners. To abler pens, and to the judgment
of more efficient minds, I leave the yet deeper
question of what is required for the no less
important interests of the convict-men. I can
only trust that God himself will graciously
direct that question, that with His blessing
on the result, some means may be appointed
to secure the accomplishment of a permanent
and complete reform !


CHAPTER 111.
“Are not our ways more evil than their ways?
and our sin, above the measure of their guilt ?”
King.
When contemplating the history of trans-
portation, the mind naturally turns to consider
whence arises the fatal influence, which, act-
ing on the moral principles of society, breaks
away so many links of its best and sweetest
bonds ? For, when we ask, what forms the
blessedness of a domestic , we limit not
the question to the rich man’s dwelling, nor
to the abodes of luxurious plenty; but, taking
the whole range of God’s family on earth,
from the palace of princes to the cottager’s
hut, we ask what constitutes its happiness?
where lies its treasure ? and every heart will
answer, that harmony forms the one, and in
virtue, lies the other. Christianity, indeed,
ivi t


will take a far higher standard, and reply, that
both these, without the basis of her own
religion, must pass away like the mist of a
summer’s morning: but the moralist will
cherish them still, as needful to his peace;
and without them, piety herself must find
earth but a vale of tears.
Oh! how devastating then must be the
poison, which, destroying the peace of so
many a poor man’s home, sends sorrow' and
remorse throughout a land which might over-
flow with “ milk and honeyso abundantly
is England blest with the rich and manifold
privileges of Protestant Christianity ; privileges
both of spiritual and moral advantages, which
have raised her to a state of pre-eminence,
universally acknowledged to be peculiar to
herself, in her long course of prosperity. And
if the sun of that prosperity be indeed over-
shadowed, who, or what has raised the cloud
which dims the brightness of her national
glory? It is surely they, who, abusing the
gifts of God, have converted them to a curse,
and who, despising his commands, have “ sown
to the wind, to reap the whirlwind.” But


as according to the measure of our means, so
must be the judgment of our stewardship, on
those lie the greater guilt, who, having received
much, give back but little, and holding the
sacred trust of another’s welfare,—the highest
trust which God can delegate to man—have
“ hedged it round with thorns,” and spread a
tenfold woe over the soul thus wrecked by
selfish indifference, or the yet more cruel
wrong of evil guidance. Else, why is it that
from year to year our prisons teem with con-
victs, and our ships go freighted still with
exiles, banished from blessings which might
have saved them, and from hearts, which if
broken by their shame, yet love them even
unto death ? Oh ! could we see into the
homes thus desolated, by blighted hopes and
joys for ever marred, who could look upon
the scene of woe and wailing with hearts un-
touched by mortal pity, or without a wish to
remedy the ill which so often brings ruin to
a poor man’s dwelling?
Gh! if there be a class of human beings more
deeply to be pitied than another, among the
people of our land, it is that of our female


servants; who, for the most part, go forth
from an honest parent’s care, to earn their
bread in the service of less humble life; but,
alas ! how often to reap the wages of iniquity,
which, but for that service, they had never
learnt or known. Cut off, like tender scions,
from the parent tree, ere yet matured to
strength, meet for the tempest and the storm ;
how many a young and guileless cottager
leaves the lowly but still virtuous home of her
childhood, full of life and hope, to stand
alone, where, exposed to every temptation
which can assail a virtuous mind, she is soon
influenced to believe, by the examples of those
around her, that her own will is her heritage;
and that to do what others do, to go where
others lead, is the prerogative of independence,
which none but the weak-hearted will sacri-
fice or dispute. The lessons of that home
are remembered no more, while those of pride
and insubordination destroy the feeble germs
of better principles, and finally ruin a mind
which might have been, as one of the ransomed
jewels of a heavenly diadem.
Where lies the sin of this ? Is it not on


those who, in hiring the services of a fellow
being, become the stewards of a soul which
God will surely require at their hands ? O
it is no light thing to be the master or the
matron of a family, and yet how T thoughtlessly
are its sacred duties generally embraced;
how wickedly are they too often neglected
and abused !
Now it pleased God, in His wise and won-
derful mastership of a populous world, that
the family of man should, in their interests,
be so bound together, as to form a chain,
which the removal of one link must break.
Dependence on each other, therefore, formed
one of the first and most momentous designs
of the Creator, in the divine arrangement of a
peopled universe. To this end, so eminently
calculated to promote all that we can conceive
of perfect harmony, order, and universal
benefit, it was necessary to ordain different
states or grades of human kind, each ap-
pointed to act a separate office in the general
society, but all equally essential for the well-
being of the whole. Thus, notwithstanding
all the vicissitudes of time, all the revolutions
THE PRISONERS


which have marked the progress of creation,
mankind has been divided into rich and poor,
however varying in the degree of wealth and
poverty; and one of the most remarkable
passages of scripture is, that “ the poor shall
never cease out of the landa striking
evidence of the necessity of moral distinctions
in the moral government of God’s rational
creatures. So, from the earliest period of
patriarchial jurisdiction down to the present
date of civilization, the same unerring decree
has been as an unalterable law, that masters
and servants, whether bond or free, from the
throne down to the peasant’s hut, should be
linked as a mutual tie, which neither the one
nor the other can break, without fatal injury
to the interests of both. But this implies no
inequality in the administration of God’s
blessings , nor of man’s responsibilities. “ The
rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the
maker of them all.” The same law which
binds the rich to God, binds the poor man
too. Life is the probation of both, and im-
mortality has no shades of blessedness for
either. Earth has her princes and her


peasants, but in the kingdom of heaven there
is 44 no respect of persons.” And, as if to en-
force this doctrine by practical evidence,
44 He, who thought it not robbery to be equal
with God, took upon Him the form of a
servant” and in that form, the King of kings
became 64 obedient unto deathand by the
unspeakable, the unimaginable sufferings of
an ignominious death and passion, purchased
salvation and eternal life, for every soul
within the family of God’s creation, who,
through faith in Himself, would meekly do the
will of the Father, 44 every man according to
the measure of his gifts.” If, then, we assume
equality as regards the blessings of God, and
yet acknowledge abundance on the one hand,
and pining want on the other, we still advance
no contradiction in principle. Every gift
comes balanced with an attendant care and
proportionable responsibility, whether it be
wealth, rank, power, beauty, or talent; and
these can produce nothing in the scale of
happiness , save in the measure in which they
promote the glory of God and the welfare of
mankind. No; happiness is an abstract
THE PRISONERS


principle, dependent upon no merely adven-
titious prosperity. “ Godliness with content-
ment is great gain but, “it is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter the kingdom of
heaven.” And why ? not because God is
partial in the administration of His gifts, but
because in God himself can alone centre the
principle of happiness, whether in heaven or
on earth: and though man may choose to live
“ without God in the world,” no man apart
from God can he happy. In this sense, we
presume, St. Paul spoke of “ being poor, yet
making many rich,” “having nothing, yet
possessing all things.” “ Sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing;” so that, we maintain and
scripturally assert, that if there be an advan-
tage on either side, it is rather on that of
the poor; since in poverty and privation
there is a humiliating tendency favourable
to the reception of divine truth; while in
affluence and prosperity there is a tendency
to pride and selfish ease, equally unfavourable
to the culture of heavenly things. Why, then,
should we dare suppose, as some are disposed


to argue, that because vice and irreligion are,
alas ! predominant among the lower orders of
our people, that God designed it should be
so ? No, history abounds with proofs of the
reverse; the whole economy of nature goes to
contradict so impious a surmise, and the Bible
is replete with the evidences of God’s peculiar
solicitude over those who need Him most.
But, if the beautiful structure of His provi-
dence has been marred, it is man and not God
who has disorganized the system, and to man
alone can be traced the distortions of a broken
compact; for man was made vicegerent of
His laws as well as of His rights; and when
God assigned to him the high trust of human
interests, it was, and is, to 44 feed His sheep
to “lead them into paths of righteousness ,
for His name’s sakeand 44 beside the still
waters” of peace and love; to drink of these
waters from the 44 well of life;” a mandate,
synonymous with 44 power from on high,” to
execute a master’s charge, over the poorer
and weaker brethren of God’s heritage:
that at the coming of the Lord in glory, He
may receive 44 His own again with usury;”


nurtured and trained by the servants of His
vineyard, like branches purified and pruned,
meet for their portion in the tree of life.’’
Such is the compact betwixt God and His
appointed stewards, whether the stewardship
involve one talent or ten: and if there be
failure in the administration of moral ordi-
nances, we repeat that the disorganization
■t
lies in man's • disobedience , and not in any
imperfections of God’s exquisite economy.
But to contend for the equalization of moral
rights , is tantamount to rebellion against the
just appointments of Him, whose righteous
sovereignty all are bound to acknowledge and
respect. Alas, that mortal pen should thus
be found wandering amid the heights and
depths of Almighty counsels! That the
finite should thus be called to defend the
infinite ! The very act seems one of such
bold presumption, that we feel constrained to
sa}f, may the Lord look favourably on the
motive, and forgive the daring venture which
thus intrudes into the secret things of the
Most High, while the very cherubim of


heaven veil their faces, ere they bow before
V
His throne, to worship and adore.
Having now proved it the obvious will of
God, that the dependents of man should by
man be protected from evil, and advanced
both to moral and spiritual good, we would
bring these remarks, more especially to bear
upon our subject, as regards the relative
duties of master and servant; between the
matron and the members of her domestic
household, whose influence and example form
the master-spring of family prosperity, and, in
the aggregate, of national prosperity too.
If it be a peculiar prerogative, which
surely it is, to hold place among the higher
appointments of God’s moral government,
such appointments are necessarily replete
with cares and responsibilities, which counter-
balance the advantages annexed to superior
or influential stations, beyond such, perhaps,
as belong to those of more implied inferiority.
But the mistress of a family, who, in that
honoured character, let her rank in life be
what it may, really fulfils her place, as a


Christian example to all who stand within
the pale of her authority, may emphatically
be styled the “blessed among women.”
Ages yet unknown shall bear the record of
her praise, and when time itself shall be no
more, the Lord will recognize her as “ His
own” for ever, in that day when Ae shall
“make up his jewels,” for the glory of His
Father’s kingdom. For who can limit the
influence of the righteous ? their works fol-
/•
low them, as good seed multiplied to a rich
harvest of heavenly fruit, which, from genera-
tion to generation, spring up, a countless
host of never-ending blessings. But, alas !
how small is the proportion of Christian
mothers, and Christian matrons, who are thus
* r
faithful to their charge! How many, who,
amiable and well principled according to this
world’s designation, engage in the deep
responsibilities of the matronly office, without
one serious thought of the sacredness of that
most solemn stewardship, which she thus
pledges herself to fulfil; involving not only
her own account with God, but the happiness,
ay, it may be, the very salvation of many,


who must fall under her jurisdiction ! And
vet, we cannot think it would he so, if it
«/
were known to what extent, evil and sorrow,
disgrace and shame, follow as the conse-
quences of her neglect or bad example. Oh !
to such, then, would I now appeal, whether as
wife, mother, or mistress, by the strong testi-
mony of living evidences, which cannot, will
not, surely be offered in vain. For I can
bear witness that, so far as their history is
known to me, few are the exceptions among
the many convicts, both at home and abroad,
wdiose first fall may not be traced to the
temptations and wicked examples, to which
they were exposed, during the first years of
their servitude, in families of well-connected
and respectable society.
To detail the individual historv of such,
IT '
w r ould fill many pages, perhaps volumes; but
as illustrations from real life may carry with
them more striking and interesting evidences
of the evils to which allusion has been made,
than the most elaborate moral of mere theory
could do, I will offer a few such examples
from the simple annals of humble history;
THE PRISONERS


concentrating in these few, the lamentable
consequences which, unhappily, are not con-
fined to exceptions, but are rather, the too
general result of neglected servants.
Perhaps one of the most touching cases
which I can remember, amongst many others
of similar story, was that of a young woman
named Amy, a child of poor but honest
parents, who had trained her well, and given
her the best advantages which their situation
admitted, in the sequestered village where her
father was employed as a farm labourer; and
was a thriving man, until a long and severe
illness reduced him to poverty: his subse-
quent death dispersed his little family. Amy
was much beloved in the circle of her lowly
home, as an artless and obliging girl; and
was soon well recommended to the service of
a lady, who, finding “London servants so
had,” resolved to try some from the country:
she had married a man possessed of consider-
able property, and was the mistress of a very
large establishment. To poor Amy the situ-
ation offered every temptation, and cordially
was she congratulated by her village friends
h 2


upon the bright prospects to which she
seemed so unexpectedly destined ; her
mother, alone, expressed something like
anxious foreboding, lest 44 Amy should grow
proud,” and forget her station among the
44 great servants” of a 44 great ladybut
their circumstances admitted of no choice, and
giving her child the best advice in her power,
especially entreating her never to forget her
religious duties, nor the 44 sabbath day,” she
parted from her with that aching heart which
is, perhaps, inseparable from the maternal
character, when, for the first time, the tie of a
child’s dependence upon herself is loosened
at least, if not for ever broken. But she, too,
was soon called from such earthly cares, and
the orphaned Amy was left with no other
dowry save her own principles and industry !
She entered her new home with the buoyant
hopes of sixteen: all around her was splen-
dour and luxury; and even her wages, as an
under-housemaid, far exceeded the expecta-
tions to which she had been trained. Her
mistress had herself engaged her, during an
accidental visit in the neighbourhood whence
THE PRISONERS


Amy was removed; and there was so much
of sweetness and condescending kindness in
the lady’s manner; so much in her whole
aspect, which, at once, claimed the love of
those whom she addressed, that the mother of
Amy felt comforted in believing that her child
would be under the authority and guidance
of so gentle a spirit. But, alas ! that spirit
held little, or no influence over the depen-
dents of her own power. All authority was
assigned to the housekeeper, and other upper
servants of the establishment; while their
mistress remained ignorant, not only of the
tyranny exercised over the subordinate mem-
bers of her household, but of the yet more
important evil of vice and immorality prac-
tised, without restraint, by many of them.
And, it is a remarkable fact, that from the
first hour of her engagement to that of her
leaving the situation, a period of nearly three
years, Amy never but once again saw the
mistress by whom she had been hired ! The
poor girl soon found “ all was not gold that
glitteredthat, in entering service, she had
entered a world of wickedness, surrounded by


examples such as she had been taught to
shun. The account of her first sabbath there
was peculiarly touching, and it was related to
me by her own lips, on her dying bed. Ac-
customed, at home, to regard it as 44 a day set
apart,” she, as was her wont, dressed herself
in all her best, to be in readiness for church,
haying, with great alacrity, got through all,
that she considered was her due portion of
work. Meeting the housekeeper, she was
immediately asked, 44 Why in the name of
wonder she was dressed out at that time of
day I” and having simply answered, that it was
time to go to church, the housekeeper ex-
claimed, 44 Bless the girl! why, your betters
cannot get to church: much less you , who
are wanted high and low ! Don’t you know,
child, we have more to do here on Sundays
than on any other day of the week ? so, like
a good girl, go take off those nice clothes
again, and do all you can to help us, both up
stairs and down.” This was not spoken un-
kindly, far from it; but Amy thought of her
mother, and her home, and she wept bitterly.
Some weeks elapsed, and she made no effort
THE PRISONERS


to do what seemed contrary to the general
rule of her master’s house, but rather became
more reconciled to its ungodliness. A letter,
however, received from her mother, reminded
her of duties which she was neglecting; and in
accordance with the wishes of that honest
parent, she determined to seek an interview
with her mistress, to obtain from her, permission
to go to church, at least once on every Sun-
day. An opportunity for this soon occurred,
although only through an accidental meeting.
Her mistress listened with smiles to her
request, but merely replied, “You are a
good girl for wishing to go to church, so I
cannot be angry with you ; but you must ask
leave of Mrs. Harding, for perhaps you can-
not always be spared, and you know, work
must not be neglected. When we go to the
country, you will, I dare say, have more
time; but, Amy, you must not be a little
methodist, or think yourself better than other
people.” This, too, was said without either
anger or unkindness; her mistress passed on,
and she saw her no more .


From that hour may be dated the final
ruin of a girl, well brought up, and naturally
of a most docile temper; who, had she fallen
under better guidance, might have been a
blessing to herself and others. But, during
the three years of her servitude in the family
alluded to, she rarely went to church; —she
never read her Bible; nor did the Gospel|reach
her ears from the lips of any individual with
whom she was associated. She saw vice coun-
tenanced, and religion set at naught, not only
among her fellows, but also in the higher
ranks of her master’s household.
It would neither be profitable nor pleasing
to describe, circumstantially, the scenes of
j *
deceit, dishonesty, and disorder, to which this
unfortunate Amy was continually exposed
among her fellow servants; nor the routine
of company, balls, theatres, &c., &c., which
engaged the time of her master’s family and
guests. But if, at first, her mind revolted
from taking part in the one, or feeling recon-
ciled to the other, she soon lost all such
repugnance to do the like. Her simple attire
r-f r m . jMi j


gave place to that which was not only highly
inconsistent with her station, but was such as
her wages, liberal as they might be, were by
no means adequate to afford: this led to
pilfering, in which she became more and more
bold; and at length, discovered by the house-
keeper in the very act of a serious theft, she
was turned out of doors with only an hour’s
warning, friendless and dishonoured; without
a home, without character, without resource ;
—save one, too horrible, even for a mind
perverted as hers w r as, to contemplate, or
immediately embrace, without alarm and
shame. But where could she go ? not to her
mother, for she was in heaven: not to her
friends, for she had disgraced them : and in
that hour of dreadful destitution, she was
enticed into paths of yet deeper guilt and
wretchedness ! These at length, acting upon
a sensitive and, humanly speaking, not natu-
rally a depraved mind, she subsequently
became deranged , and when I first saw her
she was in a state of inoffensive idiocy, con-
fined within the sick ward of her own parish
workhouse. She was at all times so gentle


106 THE PRISONERS
and tractable, that she was an object of far
greater pity than reproach ; and her sad his-
tory claimed the forbearing sympathy of all
who had known her in the happier days of
her childhood, and comparative innocence.
Her sole occupation was sitting on the
ground, making, with strips of paper, or
flowers and grass, when she could get
them, what she called “ poor Amy’s grave.”
Her age was then not more than two-and-
twenty; her countenance was still very sweet,
although her features were wan and pale;
lj and her figure, singularly slight, was ne-
■1 vertheless far from being emaciated. I gave
( | her a shilling to buy some tea, which, I un-
, derstood, was what she most enjoyed; but
jj she threw it back to me again with a languid
ij smile, and said, (e Ladies shouldn’t give poor
1 girls money to live in fine houses —it was bad,
w J
l'; all had! They should let them go to church,
| i and make them good;’’—thus, evidently as-
1 sociating with money her own life in service,
! and all its fatal results upon her peace, her
character, her happiness! It was some
months before I saw her again, when she was
TB rt j_ £|-li£ *** m4*~**^***4 ' ; ** w&n — ft -1 niM<fVii i , n<tiil'


occupying a. room, to which kind friends had
removed her, in the house of a poor but most
respectable and pious widow. Mental ma-
lady had now wholly yielded to bodily dis-
ease ; she was greatly wasted in appearance;
so much so, that I could scarcely have recog-
nized her, even faded as she was before; but
her mind had recovered its native tone, and
although remorse of conscience was still too
deep for happiness , yet she was resigned to
the will of God in her sufferings, and sweetly
awaiting the deliverance of her wearied soul!
O
She spoke little, but seemed very patient
and grateful to all who showed her kindness.
I was told that such was generally her state,
excepting during the occasional paroxysms of
aggravated fever, w 7 hen she frequently became
delirious, and then it was a piteous thing to
hear her call for the mistress who had “ taken
her away from her own dear motherand she
would speak, as if imploring leave to go home
again; beseeching her mistress not to let her
perish, where ail was death around her, both
of body and of soul. 1 ’ She was visited con-
stantly by a dissenting minister, (I a


Wesleyan,) who had known her parents, and
for their sakes, as well as from feelings of a
higher motive, was kind and liberal in admi-
nistering both to her temporal wants, and to
her spiritual consolation. At length poor
Amy died I—we humbly believe a sincere pe-
nitent; manifesting her simple, but entire
dependence on Him who had not forsaken
that child of u righteous parents” and of
“ many prayers, v although others had drawn
her from His own blessed fold, and taught
her to forsake His paths of , for those
where peace could never be !
11l li
■; •
: mm v
I *
I heard a case, not very dissimilar to this
last, in a few of its leading circumstances,
from the lips of one of the most abandoned
women in New South Wales, who gave me
an outline of her wretched life, and I always
thought it a redeeming point of her charac-
ter, that whenever allusion was made to the
training of her early childhood, she would
warmly exonerate her mother from all blame;
assuring me, that whatever had been her own
sins—and she thought there were few which
she had not committed—her parents were, if
THE PRISONERS


not religious, strictly honest and upright in
all their moral conduct. But she told me,
that it was not possible to detail —nor did I
wish she should attempt it—the scenes of
iniquity she had witnessed, and in w hich she
had but too soon taken part, when young in
service, as a kitchen maid, in one of the first
families of wealth, residing in the west end
of London; and from the examples of that
i
service she dated all her after career of guilt.
Although, when I left the colony, she was
married, and gave some evidences of reforma-
tion, I cannot say she was in any measure a
converted character, nor did she manifest that
shame which the remembrance of such a life
must have awakened, in a heart not seared
against all conviction of its awful consequences
and tremendous doom. In justice to her, I
must, however, so far add, that she never be-
came either angry or sullen, hard to bear, as
must have been the appalling truths of which
she was continually, and faithfully reminded.
She ever met me with smiles of welcome,
and expressed herself grateful to those who
took an interest in her welfare. This was a
OF AUSTRALIA.


promising trait, and I would fain hope that,
by the grace and blessing of God, she may
yet be led to seek the “ better part.”
Another instance is that of a woman, now
also a convict at Sydney, sentenced to trans-
portation for life upon the charge of robbing,
to a considerable extent, the lady with whom
she had lived for many years> in the high and
respectable capacity of ladies’ maid. Her
history, too, is replete with the lament-
able results arising from an irreligious mis-
tress ; but we will not detail more than a
brief outline of her story. She was most
respectably connected —entered service in
her nineteenth year, and became exceedingly
attached to her mistress, who deemed her
worthy of unbounded confidence. But she
totally neglected all her religious duties, was
persuaded to believe it no harm to work on
Sundays, which her mistress frequently re-
quired her to do ; she rarely went to church ;
she never prayed ; nor did she even read her
Bible. On returning to England, after an
absence of some months on the continent,
whither she had accompanied her mistress,


she passed a short time with a sister who lived
as upper servant in a pious family, and
who, grieving to see the total indifference of
poor Maria to all that concerned a future
state, ventured seriously to expostulate with
her upon the sin of remaining longer in a fa-
mily, whose ungodly habits had so fatally in-
fluenced her own mind ; earnestly reminding
\
her, that no blessing could rest upon such an
engagement, however lucrative it might be.
But it was all in vain. She was happy and
prosperous in a worldly sense, and scorning
the affectionate, and, as she thought, the
“ puritanical’’ counsel of her sister, she re-
turned to where, she feared neither God nor
man, in her thoughtless course of impiety.
Soon did that sister, whose warning she de-
spised, see her again, but it was a 'prison !
She wept over her, prayed for her, and, with-
out a reproach, now patiently endeavoured to
urge her to “ repent and believeand it
was then, as she told me herself, that she
would have given all she possessed, could
she have begun life again as the poorest and
meanest of creatures, to be the humble, ho-
I:
. I:
i i
* ill


nest, happy Christian which she was, whose
religion she had so often ridiculed and de-
nied ! Vain was now alike the wish and the
regret! Allured by a bad man to commit a
deed of most aggravated dishonesty, and that
too against a mistress, who, with all her faults,
had loved and trusted her, she was about to
suffer for life, the just, but dreadful sentence
of perpetual exile. Yet, it is a striking fact,
that, softened and self-condemned as she was in
many respects, she expressed a bitterness of
remembrance towards her mistress, tracing
all her own wickedness to the ungodliness
in which, under her guardianship and example,
she had been trained,—both painful to hear
and unprincipled in her to admit, against one
who had been to her at least a kind and
generous benefactress. True, it manifested
the worst soil of human nature, untouched by
divine grace; but, would it have thus sprung
up in weeds of such deadly and unhallowed
passions, had it been cultured, watered, and
planted with seeds of heavenly instruction, by
the hand of a Christian guardian ? No; bad
and ungrateful as the reproach was, uttered
THE PRISONERS


under such circumstances, what was it but
the reaction of principles ; —evil, falling back
upon evil; — 44 the grain reproduced, but with
thorns around the ear ?” For, 44 whatsoever
a man soweth, that also shall he reap.” Here
the mistress sowed the seeds of infidelity
against God, within the mind of her depend-
ant ; and she reaped a harvest of infidelity and
reproach against herself, from the treachery
of that dependant!
One more history is worthy of our subject,
as illustrative of the evils also arising from in-
judicious indulgence and careless extrava-
gance towards servants, although without
any direct want of religious principles on
the part of the master and mistress. A
woman, suffering great poverty, entreated
assistance for an invalid child of a friend who
frequently visited her, and from whom I re-
ceived the following detail of circumstances,
J
which had thus reduced her from compara-
tive comfort.
In early life Margaret entered service,
with an excellent character from the national
school in which she had been trained. Her
OF AUSTRALIA.


first situation was in a nursery, for which her
health proved unequal; but, being a steady
girl, she soon became engaged as housemaid
in an affluent family, greatly beloved by all
who knew them for kindness and benevo-
lence. It was also considered a religious fa-
mily, the servants being required by their
master to attend domestic worship every
morning; although, beyond this, he never
interfered in the arrangement of his house-
hold affairs. The lady was one of those
amiable and sweet-tempered persons, who
loved to see all around her happy, —according
to her own ideas of happiness ; but, thought-
less and inconsiderate, her views extended no
further than those of present enjoyment. Her
children were spoilt; her servants allowed to
do as they pleased; both one and the other
became most unreasonable in their demands
for increased indulgence, and were dissatisfied
if denied them. Hours were late and irregu-
lar; profusion was in every department, and
the servants, taking advantage of their liberty,
soon became equally improvident, wasteful,
and careless in all their duties, and tins with-


out reproof, for their mistress disliked finding
fault; and still more so, changing servants,
however they might wrong and impose upon
her. This was called a good place,” and a
happy family ! But the master died leaving
his affairs, affluent as he had been, in a state
of so much embarrassment, that his estate
was sold, and the servants, for the most part,
/ •
dispersed. Poor Margaret, thus cast upon
the world again, sought other service ; but she
was too much spoilt now to bear the re-
straints of a well-regulated family. She tried
many places, but finding none like her last,
was dissatisfied with all; and at length, con-
trary to the advice of her friends, became
bar-maid in a public-house; married a man
of drunken habits; and, confirmed herself in
those of waste and idleness, she became,
finally, a wretched wifeher health destroy-
ed by hardships and privations, to which she
had been so unaccustomed; and her children
pining around her, in want of food and cloth-
ing, which she had now no longer power to
earn ! Often w r as she heard to say, “Oh I
that I could gather but a fragment of w hat
i 2
11
1c
OF AUSTRALIA.


was wasted before my eyes ! —but I, too,
helped' to waste, and now I must justly
wantand once speaking of her little girl,
she added, 44 If it please God she lives to
go to service, never with my consent shall she
enter the doors of a rich man’s house! It
does not do for a poor girl to get into such
ways of plenty and extravagance; they were
my ruin, and the ruin of those who were by
far my betters !”
Such, then, is the sad history of only a few
individuals, out of thousands probably, whose
happiness has been wrecked by the influence
and bad examples of others ! For where, let
me ask, lay the greater guilt in each of these
cases ? Look at the mistress of poor Amy,
and at the mistress of Margaret. Kind and
amiable, and admired as these ladies doubtless
were in the society of the world, what were
they as stewards of a high trust ? If we con-
sign to an agent, on whose affections we have
strong claim, and on whose integrity we fear-
lessly rely, treasures of gold and silver —per-
adventure all that is valuable and necessary
to us in life, that it may advance his interests


—dependent as they are upon his agency,
and increase our own by his skill and dili-
gence ; what should we think of that agent,
who taking our treasure on such grounds ,
kept no account of it; but, using it only for
his own pleasure, lost it , and that, too, through
carelessness, apathy, and extravagance ? Let
him tell you, that he had been hospitable be-
yond his means; that he had been kind and
generous to all under his control; lavish to-
wards others, as well as lavish in his own ex-
penditure. Let the world speak well of his
benevolence ; —of his hospitality, of his luxu-
rious table, of his good taste, and generous
disposition: would we> whose treasures he
had lost, whose prospects were blighted,
whose home was devastated by that loss; —
would we think him faithful to his trust, ge-
nerous, benevolent, honourable, or well prin-
cipled? Should we not rather justly depre-
cate his base ingratitude, his selfish waste,
his cruel carelessness, and pronounce him
wholly unworthy of our further friendship
and confidence ?—ay, unworthy even of our
presence ? Then, how far—far more base


and dishonourable, and ungrateful, must that
mortal being be, who is all this to in the
charge of His immortal treasures ?—treasures
too of such price , that to reclaim them from
the treacherous bankruptcy of human agency,
Jehovah gave up his own Son to suffer and
to die; because, without such sacrifice, not
one iota of that treasure could be found again!
O !|not the whole mass of precious ore—not
every jewel which is, and has been, and shall
be embowelled within our unfathomable uni-
verse, could compare in worth with the value
of one deathless soul, however mean the cas-
ket of mortal workmanship may be, in which
it is to expand and fructify for the Eden of
God’s paradise! No ; what then must be
their account to God, who have made w r reck
of one such jewel ? And when, at the coming
of our Lord, to claim His own from the trea-
sury of human stewardship, how many among
the matrons of our highly favoured country
will be found standing at His right hand, and
looking round her on the multitude who,
whether as servant, or friend, or child, on
earth called her “ blessed,” can meekly and


joyfully reply, 44 Behold, Lord, I and the
children whom thou hast given me.” Thy
one talent multiplied to five; thy five multi-
plied to ten ? Or, what will it be to those
who, having received largely of God’s bless-
ings here, give back none other than life
abused ?—but must, with that risen life, ra-
ther hide the shame of their unfaithfulness by
charging it impiously on God ? 44 Lord, I
knew thee, that thou art an austere man,
W
and 46 I hid thy talent in the earth: Lo, there
thou hast that is thine.” The answer to both
is recorded, where no lie can find a place !
To the one, 44 Well done, good and faithful
servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
To the other, “ Cast ye the unprofitable ser-
vant into outer darkness: there shall be weep-
ing and gnashing of teeth/’ 44 These shall go
away into everlasting punishment; but the
righteous into everlasting life.” Yes ! 44 God
is not mocked/’ He is just as He is merci-
ful ; true to His promises, whether for wrath
1 A
i’
or blessing; and, while He graciously ac-
cepts the imperfect services of a sincere disci-
ple, acknowledging, as done to Himself, every
yL
:r


effort of Christian philanthropy exerted in
behalf of 44 the least ” among 44 His bre-
thren,” —will not spare one, who, reckless
alike of His gifts and His commands, has
lived for the service of the 44 world, the flesh,
and the devil.” Oh ! this is no language of
exaggerated figure—no cant of fanaticism to
work upon the imaginations of the weak and
fearful! It is a picture drawn from the sa-
cred truth of Jehovah’s revealed will, —
will, which, 44 the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever,” can never change in the counsels of
Almighty wisdom !
Or, if we reason merely upon the ground
of common sense, and venture, for a moment,
to bring Almighty thought down to the mea-
%
sure of our thoughts, or God’s ways to the
low standard of our ways, let us ask, for
purpose are good gifts bestowed ? Would a
parent bequeath to a beloved child a legacy of
wealth, or endow him with all the advantages
of education, and power, and influence, for
the purpose of doing evil ?—of bringing dis-
grace and ruin on himself and others?
Would it not rather be, to honour that child
*u~
1 •-■ Ift S\t
a' • m


—to make him worthy of his name and his
inheritance ? If ye then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto children,”
how much more must the rich gifts of our
heavenly Father be bestowed for purposes of
good, unto the 66 sons of men ?” But, alas !
how are they, in too many cases, received ?
How is wealth disposed of, how is honour ho-
noured ; how is influence exerted ? Go to
our prisons—to our penitentiaries —to the
factory at Paramatta, and there learn the an-
swer ! there see the fruits, and weep over
the histories of wealth abused, of honour dis-
honoured, of influence accursed! Yes; go
and look upon the dreadful ravages of peace,
virtue, and affection —of all the better prin-
ciples—all the kindlier feelings of hearts once
happy in moral worth at least, and see the
human wretchedness the never-ending
wretchedness, perhaps, of thousands who, se-
duced by fair promises, by the allurements of
unhallowed pleasures, or betrayed by the yet
more cruel, if less offensive wrong of ill re-
quited and deceived affection, must linger out
the long residue of a young life in unavailing


sorrow and needless remorse, so far as thi«
world’s happiness is at stake: for, when
woman falls, she falls to rise no more an ho-
noured link of social life. No; the chances
are that she sinks yet lower in disgrace and
shame; her seared heart, callous even to the
appeals of reason or religion. Or, if not that—
if through Divine grace she goes like another
Magdalen to weep tears of a contrite spirit
at the feet of Him who will never “ break the
bruised reed,” nor bid a penitent “ depart;”
still her joy of heart is gone for ever; and
though she may, indeed, rise up in peace, be-
lieving that her sins, though many, are for-
given she must henceforth walk, self-con-
demned, among her fellows, an alien from
woman’s best rights: the praise of human-
kind her reproach, and their reproach a probe
she cannot brook ! “ Her sorrow is continu-
ally before her;” and did she not, in the
meek submission of humble faith, both “ hope
and quietly wait for the salvation of the
Lord,” life would be to her a burden heavier
than she could bear! But, oh !if such be
the mournful history of one who still has a
MTinpßßr ■! .


hope beyond the grave, which 44 maketh not
ashamed,”—a portion in the blessed promises
of the redeemed, what must be life’s evening
to her , who is not thus converted from the
error of her transgression ? —who, lost to all
that woman holds most dear on earth, goes on
in her sin, from evil 44 to yet deeper guilt?
to die at last in her despair ? I could not, if
I would, depict her appalling career !—the
fearful end of thousands who are thus de-
praved, and yet even these are born to better
hopes, —they were created for a glorious in-
heritance.
Such, then, are the sorrows arising from
the sins of real life; but, for these things,
God will surely visit those from whose selfish
influence they spring. Yes ! 44 Wo unto the
world because of offences !” and, 44 though it
be impossible but that offences should come,
wo unto him through whom the offence -
eth. v Better had it been, 44 had that man
never been born.” This is strong language
—language which, if spoken by mortal
lips to mortal ears, might be censured as
44 uncharitable,” as wronging the mercy of a
Hr A-*


merciful God. But it is God Himself who
speaks them I they are words indited by His
own Spirit, and written by a pen which dared
not write a lie . They are words taken from
the 66 Book of Life,” inspired by the Divine
will, as the consummation of Divine wisdom
—a wisdom which cannot err, and will not,
must not, be doubted or denied. Then ten-
fold is the woe on him who ventures to do the
one, or dares to do the other. Oh ! rather
let us listen to them and obey, hear them and
believe, and so lay these things to heart,
that by the mighty power of c< a still, small
voice,” they may “ refrain our feet from every
evil way,” and enable us meekly to do the
will of God in all things, with a conscience
void of offence, both towards God and towards
man !
■f
• * j


“The fearful sheep hearken to the voice of the
shepherd, and follow Him who leadeth them forth
t
to pasture.”— King.
Gladly do we now turn our thoughts to the
happier and better side of our subject; while,
with grateful pleasure, we record a few among
the many instances in which a master or mis-
tress, faithful to their trust, have been
eminently blest in their labours over the
vintage of their appointed heritage ; and have
consequently reaped for themselves a rich
. harvest of those promised blessings, which are
inseparable from the works of well-doing,
springing from obedience towards God. But
first, fain would we meet the adversaries of
our cause on the grounds of objection, which
they maintain against the influence, we hold,


they have right to exercise over every depen-
dent member of their household. We are
aware that it will be asked, how can the prin-
cipals of a large establishment, in private life,
hold personal superintendence over the con-
duct of every individual thus placed under
their control ? How can a lady of rank and
wealth stoop to the daily inspection of her
kitchen maid, or give heed to the passing
incidents connected with the lower depart-
ments of her exalted home ? We say not
that she could do this, nor is it required of
her; but she doubtless can and ought to take
heed, that those who must act as her substi-
tutes are persons worthy the trust; that her
own pursuits and habits are such as can
be neither a hindrance nor means of offence to
others ; and that however extensive the mem-
bers of her household may be, she can and
ought to meet them all , without exception,
once a day, at least , for prayer and religious
instruction; by which means she not only
provides them with 44 the lamp ” which can
lighten their path, and guide them through
the 44 strait gate” of a Christian’s career ; but


she experimentally proves in her own exam-
ple the duty of submission to the ordinances
and commands of a superior power. Yes,
sitting beside them at the altar of sacrifice,
she manifests herself as a servant of the Most
High ; and that she is there, not only to teach
and exhort them in their respective duties,
but to be also taught herself of Him, without
whose grace and constant direction she, as
well as they, must fail in all that can please
God, and advance the interests of her family.
And we do say, that a servant returning to
her work from such a lesson must carry with
her a consciousness of its importance, and a
conviction that if she would herself be blest,
she must be faithful and well principled to-
wards others: “obedient to them that are their
masters according |to the flesh, with fear and
» \
trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto
Christ; not with eye-service, but as the ser-
vants of Christ, doing the will of God from
the heart, knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man doeth, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free.” Nor do we think that a mistress who


has thus, in the spirit of sincere and humble
faith, cast her cares upon the Lord, can go
forth to the claims of her own station, without
remembering that she too has a “ Master in
heaven,” with whom is “no respect of per-
sons and strong in the power of His might,
she may 64 hope all things,” whatever difficul-
ties or trials lie in the pathway of her duties.
Thus, then, we maintain that the Almighty
requires nothing from the hands of His
stewards, incompatible or derogatory to the
office which He has Himself appointed them.
So that if there be failure in the work
assigned, the unfitness manifestly lies in the
individual who undertakes its accomplish-
ment, and not in any inconsistency on the
part of God. But, it will be said, do we then
choose our own allotment in life ? Not so,
as regards position , of birth or other circum-
stances, over which the human will holds no
control; but surely, we may be said so far to
be the arbiters of our own destiny, when we
accept, or take to ourselves, the adventitious
privileges annexed to certain conditions in
life, which our will is left at liberty to take
THE PRISONERS


or reject; although it is in our power to
separate from them the duties which, by the
will of God, irrevocably blend with those
privileges, and that condition. For instance,
God compels* none of His creatures to the
office of householder; but the man or the
woman who becomes one, whether to advance
V
their happiness or their interests, must do so
upon the terms on which alone God acknow-
ledges the compact, —a compact which admits
neither separation from the will of God, nor of
compromise in the terms prescribed; so that,
the moment a man becomes a master, or a
woman becomes a matron, they become indi-
vidually, and essentially, the stewards of
God’s husbandry; pledged, therefore, to
plough the ground and sow the seed, as well
as to partake of the fruit, and reap the har-
vest. They may leave the ground untilled,
{
and the tares to overspread the herbage, but
of this there must be fearful account; and un-
less we prove that we can hold aught, save in
dependence upon a higher sovereignty than
our own, we must acknowledge the supremacy
of God, and bow to His indisputable right of


lordship over all our concerns, as involving
the concerns of His own providence; and with
that right ? we must concede to Him submis-
sion to all His known commands. This truth
admitted, we next assume, also, that as the
office of stewardship involves account betwixt
God and ourselves, we have no power to can-
cel the authority which forms a prominent
part of our office, —authority over the subordi-
nates of our jurisdiction ; but are rather
i
pledged to act towards them , in all things, as
God acts, towards us, wffio are the subordi-
nates of His will.
Now, it is far beyond the powers of finite
reason to meet the Infinite, in His wonderful
superintendence over a multitude too vast
for human calculation: giving to the least and
lowest among that multitude the same super-
intending care as if each one formed His only
charge. Day and night, His eye, which neither
“slumbereth nor sleepeth,” rests on every
pulse which throbs through life’s mysterious
fountain. His ear is open to the faintest cry;
His arm outstretched to save the feeblest
sufferer who supplicates His aid; and when
THE PRISONERS


we look upon the government of the natural,
as well as the moral and intellectual world,
even limiting our ideas to the narrow con-
fines of our own earth, we are lost in the con-
templation of almighty sovereignty; for oh !
it is, indeed, a thought surpassing human com-
prehension, that while there we recognize
Him, as “ King of kings,” and “ Lord of
lords;” we find him, on the other hand, ad-
ministering to the necessities of every soul
within the universe, as emphatically “our
Father,” and our Friend. Now we cannot
f
compass the example of Jehovah in the mag-
nitude of His power, but we can, for we are
commanded to follow his example in prin-
ciple. And, just because we cannot attain to
Omnipotence, we must feel, if we reflect at
all, that neither can we hold a single posses-
sion that does not strictly belong to God,
subject to the alone control of His own com-
mands. Look at the whole life of Jesus
Christ on earth. He, as being in His human
nature inferior to the Father, became His
Father’s “servant;” a term, applicable to
His office of Mediator, working out the
K 2
OF AUSTRALIA.


redemption of apostate man. What was His
life, we ask? Great as He was in His own
power. He was, nevertheless, perfectly obedient
i
to the will of Jehovah, in His assigned duties
towards mankind. Yes; He who was born
“ a King,” thought it not derogatory to hold
a fellowship in the interests of the lowest
menial of His Father’s household. So far
V
from neglecting the least of His vast charge,
did He not rebuke His own disciples, because
they were about to send the poor suppliant
away, who pressed through the crowd which
thronged Him ? rebuking them , He bade her
draw nigh and be healed, both in body and in
soul. Or, was there one to whom he was not,
at all times, accessible, as the “ Friend who
sticketh closer than a brother ?” whether the
lowly sister of Lazarus, sitting at His feet for
counsel; or the poor Magdalen who bathed
them with her tears; or the little children
who gathered round Him for His precious
love and blessing ? No, whether we contem-
plate His history as a child in the temple,
“asking questions,” for the “business” of
His Father’s mission; or as the “ Man of
THE PRISONERS


sorrows,” suffering the extreme of mortal
agony, to do, not His own, but the will of
God; drinking, to the last drop of wrath, the
cup which, but for the ministration of angels,
had been too much, even for His mortal
nature to endure. We do say that it is a
history of self-denial, and self-surrender, in all
connected with the duties of His unequalled sa-
crifice, such as we are solemnly bound to imi-
tate in our respective appointments, although
to attain the measure of such an example is
neither possible, nor required. But let no
one, however exalted their earthly rank may
be, say that it is incompatible with that sta-
tion to hold personal superintendence over
the interests of a household. It must be
done, if we would be faithful towards God;
\
and it may be done, without any compromise
of that characteristic dignity of a noble mind,
and noble station, which is both honourable
and highly important to exercise ; and we
bless God, that there are living examples
which prove, that if peculiar difficulties lie in
a rich man’s path, all is made easy, by the
grace of God, to such as will, in humble
OF AUSTRALIA.


reliance on that grace, walk heavenward,
making every step an altar for prayer, and
every duty a censer for the sacrifice of faith
and obedience. We need not reiterate in what
that obedience consists, as connected with the
obvious duties between master and servant.
We trust that nothing has been advanced,
which is not warranted by the word of God ;
to the conscience of each individual concerned
in the great and momentous question, we
must now leave the answer, and to God him-
self the solemn judgment, and its result.
*
They who can lightly 44 make excuses” for the
neglect of that obedience, and tarry amid the
selfish pleasures or frivolous cares of the
world, when 44 bidden” to the 44 high places”
of a heavenly summons, will hardly assent to
the feeble reasoning of one, who can never
9
take up her pen, without prayer for help and
guidance in her own stewardship as an
author; nor ever lay it down again, without
very sincerely feeling her own utter inablity
to do justice to a subject, meet for the fire of a
prophet’s zeal.
As regards human agency, however, let me
THE PRISONERS


not be misunderstood. God forbid that I
should subscribe to so unscriptural and dan-
gerous a theory as human power, indepen-
dent of “power from on high.” My own
views are what the world terms “ calvinistic
but, while T hold as one of the most essential
truths of divine revelation, that man can do
nothing meritorious of himself; nor be suc-
cessful in any one of his designs, without the
grace of God acting directly upon both his
will and his abilities; I also hold it as
sacredly true, that man must diligently use
the means which are appointed by God, to
promote the ends of divine wisdom; and they,
who neglect the means because God elects
the end, are like the mariner who refuses to
steer with helm and chart, giving Up his ship
to wreck, because he cannot control the
waters and the winds, through which he must
pilot her to the promised haven of rest and
security. O no: I have nothing to do with
God’s supremacy; but I have everything to
do with submission to that supremacy; so
when He bids me run for a prize, what right
have I to assume the victory, if I sit down in
OF AUSTRALIA.


place of running ? And sure I am, that if I
want a witness within me, of my personal
election to cc a crown of glory,” I must seek
it, not amid the secret counsels of Jehovah,
into which no human eye may pierce, but in
the obedience by which my faith is “ working
by love,” in fruits which I well know can only
spring from God’s electing power. These
• ,
remarks may appear a digression from the
I
subject of our present work, but nevertheless
they bear upon it by analogy, and may, I trust,
tend to give force to our own feeble persua-
sion.
To return, then, to practical illustration
of our theory, I may record an instance of a
nobleman s family whose household is very
extensive, and of course varied in the grada-
tion of domestic offices. There is the house
steward and the stable boy, the housekeeper
and the kitchen maid; yet, twice a day are
they all brought before the master’s eye,
assembled by his own appointment, to unite
with himself and family in divine worship ;
and I have been told that once a week, ex-
clusively of a Sunday evening’s lecture, he


assembles his servants, and (in the absence
of a clerical minister) reads to them some
familiar exposition of Scripture, adapting the
subject to circumstances, and seldom omits,
again and again, to press upon every member
of his establishment, that he desires to be
considered, not only as their master, but as
their friend and adviser; encouraging the
humblest of his dependents to come fearlessly,
either to himself or to their noble mistress,
under any circumstances needing advice, or
help, or protection under any grievance within
their power to redress. Nor is this all: con-
sistent in his own conduct, he asks no self-
denial of others, which he does not himself
exercise as regards religious principle. He
forbids the theatre and the race-course as
unhallowed pleasures, but from both, he too
is <s separate.” Now, what must be the result
of such mastership? We say not that all
the servants of that family are, therefore, con-
verted characters; but we do say, that such
management has the promise of God’s bless-
ing, and it must do all that human means can
effect towards conversion; and that the ser-
OF AUSTRALIA.


vant who sins under such a master, sins
against light and knowledge, of which account
must be rendered at the yet higher tribunal
of an Almighty Judge. And how very small
a sacrifice of time is really required for
such high and important claims !—sacrifice do
we say ? it seems an insult to Christian feeling
to talk of sacrifice, where the well-being of an
immortal soul demands it: nevertheless, no
more than a small portion of time need be set
apart for this, from secular and domestic
duties, which we gladly admit should never
be neglected; while we also maintain that
beyond all peradventure, these will prosper
but the more vigorously, where those of prior
claim are not left undone. We have recorded
)
but one case illustrative of this among the
i
higher ranks of life, but we trust and believe
there are many similar, which, if known to us,
I
might offer examples equally honourable to
the nobility of our country; and many more
in every grade, would, we are persuaded, go
and do the like, if its deep importance were
considered, and the evils of its neglect prac-
tically brought before the mind, in the full


extent of its consequent and extensive ruin.
Oh 1 let me ask all who know anything of life,
whether it be not an unspeakable blessing, to
be one of a well-regulated family ? or, if they
have ever found outward comfort and happi-
ness in homes not wisely governed ? There
is, in the former, an habitual peace, order,
harmony, pervading throughout the whole
range of domestic economy, which tend to
advance even our spiritual progress, far more
than can be imagined; while in the latter
there is a confusion, an irregularity, insubor-
dination, and waste of time and property,
which cannot but ordinarily create their
*
desultory and retrograding effects, within the
minds of all who are, unhappily, placed under
their control. This applies, in an important
degree, to children as well as to servants; for
it is generally true, that a good mother will
make a good mistress ; but how seldom will a
bad mistress make a good mother, in the
highest and better sense of the word ! There
may be great kindness, great indulgence,
great forbearance exercised towards both;
but all this, attractive and endearing as it
m
JI r
' It I


may appear, is, without the principles of a
nobler groundwork, like the poison of a
sweet flower, which destroys what it feeds ;
and the children of such a mother, and the
servants of such a mistress, will never respect ,
even if they love her. No; it is far more
probable, that in after life their very defects
of character, matured under the influence of
mistaken kindness, will fall with reproach
upon herself, so true is it, that wherever we
yield a paramount duty, to the selfish consi-
deration of pleasing, or to the indolence of
moral weakness, we must inevitably fail,
where—did we seriously consider the impor-
tant effect which the present has upon the
future —we should be most anxious to ensure
I
success. Why then is it ever thus? espe-
cially, where the defect lies not in any wilful
breach of principle ? We think it often arises
from great inconsiderateness, from indolence,
or an undue desire of pleasing, for which
many a better and nobler motive is sacrificed ;
and, in some cases, from a want of moral
courage to exercise the discipline which is
necessary, where timely and judicious reproof
■ '■


might prevent the occurrence of greater
delinquency. O ! if there be a sight among
the pleasant things of earth, on which we
believe angels might look down with appro-
bation and delight, it is that of a Christian
parent in the midst of a Christian family;
whether, as training the young mind for use-
fulness here, and happiness in heaven; or
resting, after the toils of such hallowed cares,
in the bosom of a home, where the evening of
life is sweetened by the duteous obedience of
sons and daughters, and of faithful servants,
matured in character, but still bending, with
reverential and devoted respect, to the pious
counsels of an aged parent and benefactor;
who, as an oak still strong in its venerable
decay, gives vigour and support to the foliage,
which clings around its honoured and beau-
tiful remains! We have sometimes sat for
a while beneath the shadows of such a home,
and felt how great was the privilege, even of
a brief sojournment among the people of God.
But, alas ! the present system, both of educa-
tion and domestic management, is against
the extension of homes like this. How rarely
W ft
i l (
9 h
OF AUSTRALIA.


do we now meet with children trained in the
principles of religion and self-government,
reared 44 to honour and obey their parents
to acknowledge subjection towards their elders
and superiors; to be subservient to the will of
those appointed to hold authority over them !
No, the will that should guide them, and be
the master-spring of a family, rather yields to
that of spoilt and petted children, who, allowed
to consider themselves of first importance,
and objects of first consideration, inevitably
grow up with ideas altogether opposed to the
meekness and humility of a Christian ; and
the parent whose fond, but ill-judged indul-
gence, has left selfishness to overspread the
soil of nobler principles, herself becomes the
object of their negligence, and O how often
of their contempt! These are the sourcces
of radicalism, the .breaking away of all those
sweet and sacred bulwarks, which God has
placed around the paternal character; and as
with children, so it is with servants; their
will becoming paramount, they, whom a ser-
vant should reverence and obey, must at
length resign the authority, which ought ever
THE PRISONERS


to be the master's prerogative, respected by
himself, and honoured by all around him.
This recals to my rembrance a very sweet
and striking instance of the blessedness aris-
ing from the influence of a really pious and
well-governed family, in the history of a
woman, who became accidentally known to
me, when, having walked far one summer’s
evening, I entreated permission to rest at a
small cottage, beautifully situated on the road-
side, but within a garden which corresponded
with the extreme neatness of the dwelling.
Its tenant gladly welcomed me, and wiping
a chair for me, bade me be seated. She was
a middle-aged woman of very pleasing man-
ners, and, although quite in the humbler rank
of life, appeared above the ordinary class of
poor people. She was engaged in ironing at
the time of which I speak, and by her side sat
two little girls, who especially attracted my
notice, the elder not exceeding eight years
of age. They were most plainly dressed, but
so beautifully clean, that their appearance
spoke volumes for their mother’s character;
especially so, as they were both engaged in
OE AUSTRALIA.


learning texts of scripture, which induced me
to question them upon their lesson, and I
found them remarkably well informed upon
the general history of the Bible. Expressing
myself greatly pleased to find them thus well
taught, their mother, with great simplicity,
replied that she had little merit in the work,
for she was only endeavouring to bring up
her children as those were trained, who were
blessings to themselves and all belonging to
them, and whose parents had been more than
parents to herself. This led to further inquiry
on my part, but as I gathered her story only
by fragments, when, from time to time, I
afterwards visited her, I will concentrate it in
a more regular detail, which I scarcely think
will be uninteresting. She was the daughter
of very poor but industrious parents, her natu-
ral character one of great vivacity, which
made them often anxious as to her future
welfare, unable as they were to provide for
her beyond an early age. Her first place was
not such as was calculated to improve her,
but her high spirit and careless habits soon
gave offence, and she returned to her parents,
THE PRISONERS


who, in their simple way, upbraided her un-
« ‘ L.
steadiness, and gave her the best advice in
their power. Happily it was not long before
she was again engaged as an under-servant in
a highly respectable and pious family, who,
although her character was not quite satis-
factory, consented to receive her for the sake
of her parents, whose industrious and sober
habits were well known; conditionally that
she conformed to the regulations of their
household, which were considered by many
fit very strict.” She was by no means pleased
with the prospect of her engagement, but she
had no alternative; and receiving from her
honest father a serious lecture upon her past
conduct, especially respecting her love of
finery, which had induced her to spend all her
late wages upon dress, now wholly useless to
her, she entered her new service inwardly
resolved to remain there only until she could
hear of a situation more in accordance with
>
her own taste. Plainness of dress being one
of the stipulations to which she had acceded
in her engagement, she was compelled to ap-
pear very unlike her former self, without
*1
1
K j j


flowers in her bonnet or bows in her cap;
and this she thought a most unreasonable
restriction. She was, however, surprised to
find the servants all very cheerful and happy;
and she was even told by some of them that
she was a fortunate girl in having obtained so
good a place; upon this she remarked to one
about her own age, 44 1 am sure it must be
very dull here with so much strictness, and
such queer ways.” 44 Dull!” exclaimed her
companion, 44 O no, we have too much to do
to be dull; and master is so good, and the
mistress such a sweet kind lady, that I would
sooner work for them in a prison than leave
them for twenty pounds a year.” This
greatly astonished Mary, but she found she
must say no more. They were summoned at
nine o’clock to family prayers; but she
resolved not to listen, or heed anything that
she heard, and in this spirit she, for the first
time, sat down in a Christian family to learn the
power of Him who can break down the 44 lofty
places” of a proud and stubborn heart. She
expressed herself to me as feeling at once awed
by the novel scene before her. Her master


and mistress, surrounded by a large family of
children, sitting at the upper end of the room,
their servants ranged before them, each pro-
vided with a Bible and a hymn-book; and so
deep was the attention of the whole circle,
that, before her master commenced reading,
O "
“ a pin,” to use her own expression, “ might
have been heard to fall.” He first prayed for
God’s blessing, then read a chapter from the
New Testament, without comment, and after-
wards prayed, but in a tone of such solemn
reverence and deep feeling, that she could
not help giving heed to his words, and to her
great surprise he prayed individually for her-
self, asking power from on high to do his
duty as a master, and for her, grace to walk
uprightly in her new home, as a servant of
the “ living God.”
Mary went to bed that night, feeling she
knew not how : evidently struggling with
pride, shame, and some better feeling which
would not suffer her to be angry. The next
morning before prayers she was summoned
to her master’s study, where she received
i
from him a Bible and a hymn-book, in which
l 2
I I
y
:< ij


her name was already inserted. He then
read to her the character, which he had
received of her from her late mistress, seri-
ously pointing out to her the evils of an un-
steady mind; exhorting her, for the future, to
be more diligent; to watch against her beset-
ting sins with prayer; assuring her that she
should receive every encouragement, if she
would endeavour to do her duty according to
the wishes of her mistress. Poor Mary felt
greatly touched by the kindness of her master,
so unlike anything she had seen before ; and
, although she was still far from happy at the
prospect of a situation so strict in all its
requirements, she could not but feel sensible
of her advantages. A few weeks passed
away, and with them the impressions which
had at first been awakened by the example
of this excellent family. She began to feel
weary of well-doing, of the restraints to which
she was subjected, and was again resolved to
quit her place, whenever opportunity offered
for her so doing. The moment at length
arrived. She asked a day’s holiday to go to
the fair in a neighbouring town, some friends
THE PRISONERS


having invited her there, and also to join them
at a dance, which was a yearly meeting among
certain members of a club. This was at
once refused by her mistress; but not without
much kind, though serious expostulation.
Unmoved by this, and complaining only of
> %
her disappointment, Mary gave warning .
No further notice was taken of this until after
prayers the ensuing morning, when her mas-
ter bade her follow him to his study. She
dreaded the interview, conscious of what she
deserved, for, high-spirited as she was, she
always felt indescribably awed in the presence
of her master. But he evinced nothing of
anger in his manner; he desired her, in a
tone rather of seriousness than displeasure, to
be seated; and after a few moments’ silence,
in which she thought he was engaged in
prayer, he said, with his characteristic mild-
ness, “ Mary, I find you have given warning
to leave your mistress, and that, because she
refused your going to the fair and to a dance.”
He paused, and she replied that she thought
it very hard never to have a holiday; that
many respectable servants were going, and
*
A
——■' —
i I■< 1 1 i i 0
H .Ml


she did not see why she could not go also.
According to the detail she gave me of this
interview, it appears that her master entered
fully into the evils of a fair, of dances,
theatres, See. ; and having done this, he asked
her if he, knowing these things to be not only
highly injurious, but contrary to the spirit of
the Gospel, would be justified, either as a
parent or a master, in allowing his children
or his servants to go where God’s blessing
could not go with them. He bade her think
of these things, giving her one week to do so;
without any further interference on his part,
beyond earnest prayer, that she might be
guided for the best. If, at the expiration of
that week, she persisted in her wish of leav-
ing them, he would write to her father, and
consign her at once to her own parents’ care;
—if, on the contrary, she felt convinced of her
error, of the evil consequences of sinful plea-
sures, and desired further trial on the part of
her mistress, once, and only once more, would
that trial be granted ; at the same time ex-
plaining to her, that although he could never
suffer his servants to enter into amusements


r
I
I
OF AUSTRALIA. 151
incompatible with their station, and with ins
permission as a Christian master, he alw r ays
gave them stated holidays at reasonable |
intervals to visit their parents, or such friends
as he considered eligible as companions for
... * i i
them ; an indulgence which should be granted
to herself in turn with the rest, if her general
conduct merited the reward. Again, he
exhorted her to be much in prayer, and giving
her some appropriate tracts, bade her return
to her work. She told me that it was impos*
sible to describe the state of her feelings after
that interview. Pride at first preponderated,
but she dreaded her father’s displeasure, and
she could not but acknowledge her master to
be a kind one, her mistress the best of human
beings, and that after all, if they were strict
towards their servants, they required nothing
of them which they, and their children, did not
also enforce by their own example. Still
temper and self-will for a time prevailed; and
at length, unable longer to contend with these
conflicting passions, she wept bitterly, until
aroused by an old servant of the family, who
reasoned with her upon her folly and ingra-
:0k r - - ■
' «nir


titude, endeavouring to convince her of her
many privileges, and that a time would come
when she would bless the hour, in which the
gracious providence of God had led her to
such a family. 6C And why, Mary,” said the
excellent creature, “ set your heart upon these
foolish pleasures, which are soon over, and
seldom leave anything behind them but dis-
appointment and sorrow, in some way or
our Miss Fanny and Miss
Emily, creatures of your own age, that are
as happy as birds, bless them, and never
\
so much as think of going to fairs, and dances,
and plays, and such like places; why then
should a poor girl like you think it so bard to
be without them ?” This and much more she
said, leaving Mary at last ashamed of her own
childish and unreasonable vexation; and as
she related it to me, she added; “ Yes, nurse
was right, and the time soon came when, in-
deed, I learnt to bless God for his goodness to
me ; for happy as I am as a wife, and favoured
in many respects beyond others of my station,
the years I was in that family were the best
and happiest of my life.” She then ex-


pressed her conviction, that had she been per-
mitted to leave them in pursuance of her own
will, or had she been led to the service of a
less disciplined family, she would have become
one of the most abandoned of women : not
that she was ever morally unprincipled; so far
from it, she could remember no period of her
life, in which she would not “have startled at
* Q
the idea of wilful departure from moral vir-
tue; yet with her thoughtless exuberance of
spirits, her love of dress and pleasure, added
to her natural independence of will, she would
have encountered the temptations of as much
dissipation as was within the reach of her
means, and that acting in her own strength,
and pursuing a path in itself sinful, she made
no doubt that her unchecked career must
have led to an eventual fall, and finally to an
utter abandonment of character. She blessed
God, however, and secondarily her precious
benefactors, that far otherwise had been her
destiny. Seven years she lived in the family
alluded to, becoming progressively more con-
vinced that in Christianity only can be found
true peace of mind, and more fully rejoicing in
I f
'Li


fellowship with the people of God, and in all
their ei ways of pleasantness/’ She then
married their gardener; and had been a happy
wife for some years, wdien I became acquaint-
ed with her, although not wholly exempt from
the trials incident to a life of labour and oc-
casional poverty. She was training her little
girls upon the same principles as had been
so blessed to herself and many others ; and as
it had been a custom in her master’s family
that his children should every night learn a
portion of the Bible, which they repeated to
him on the ensuing morning, she made her
own children do the same, their father or
herself always hearing the lesson before they
commenced their breakfast; and the tears
filled her eyes when she added, that her hus-
band was a pious man, and took <c great de-
light” in explaining the Scriptures to them,
as well as he could do so, “ in his own poor
way.”
This, I believe, is no exaggerated detail.
A similar one, as regards its blessings, might
also be given of a servant once in the employ-
ment of the late Rev. Legh Richmond; and


they who have read the deeply interesting
life of the venerable and pious Venn, may re-
member how important considered the spi-
ritual interests of his domestics ! —how greatly
his influence was blessed towards them; and
how devoted was their grateful faithfulness
and respect! Oh ! how many, many of our
poor outcasts might have been in like manner,
through the grace of God, snatched from
early ruin, who now languish in Australian
bondage ! —a bondage of disgrace and shame,
far heavier to the soul w r hich bends beneath
its curse, than the manacles and the chains
that can bind no more than the mortal frame,
which in a little while must pass away, and
be no longer the subject of earthly pain or
I
it
i
imprisonment!
An admirable tract, entitled 44 Our Female
Servants,” has lately fallen into my hands,
recommending much that would, but for such
a publication, have formed part of this little
work. To this, then, I refer others, rather than
%
repeat what might now only appear borrowed,
and which is more ably condensed, than could
here have been the case. There will be found


an instance, in which twenty servants have
been, humanly speaking, really converted
under the influence of one family; and many
excellent suggestions are offered in that tract
which it would be well, could they be ren-
dered extensively practicable.
That our “ female servants’’ have hitherto
been a most neglected class, generally speak-
ing, can scarcely be denied, and yet they
form a very important part of society. Look
at the influence which nursery servants ne-
cessarily hold over the infant minds of little
children; and we confess it is often matter of
surprise and sorrow to see how lamentably
this influence is overlooked by parents, espe-
cially so when by such, as profess to be Chris-
tian parents ! It has often pained us to ob-
serve the light and careless manner in which
a child is left to say its prayers, in the midst
of surrounding noise and bustle; hurried
through them by an impetuous or careless
nurse ; or, if herself pressed by multi plied occu-
pations, altogether allowed to neglect them !
And yet, how deeply important is it, that a
child’s first impression of prayer should be>
(f '
' ■ • • iVTtiy*


that it is indeed “ holy ground” that to omit
prayer is in itself sinful; but to pray with
heedless inattention is a mockery —the draw-
ing down God’s anger, rather than a blessing
—therefore a sin, for which a child should
never go unpunished or unreproved. But if
the servant knows not this, or knowing, dis-
regards it, how can a child discriminate the
obligation which its nurse does not herself
enforce ? Oh ! how can a parent entrust to
an irreligious superintendence, a charge so
unspeakably precious as the first years of a
child’s life ? But the evil is seldom limited to
the nursery, if a mother overlooks, as unim-
portant, the religious principles of her ser-
vants generally —for children are ever house-
hold pets, and wonderfully influenced by the
characters with whom they thus intimately
associate; naturally more prone to imitate
evil than to imbibe the principles of better
instruction; and, alas ! how often are those
principles counteracted, by the evil com-
munications of evil-minded servants ! Surely,
then, the matter is not one of light import-
ance ; and yet, how can we expect otherwise,
3 m
* IK
ijll
ill


where no means are taken to enlighten and
improve those on whom so much, not only of
our own comfort, but of our children’s wel-
fare, may depend? For are there not in-
stances in which servants, piously trained 5
have become even instrumental of reformation
and blessing to their superiors? An inte-
resting and very striking case of this was told
me by a Christian friend, who, I think, was
personally acquainted with the parties. The
lady to whom it refers, one of rank, living
much in the world, and very thoughtless in
her religious duties, became, under God, se-
riously impressed with their vital importance,
through the practical piety of her own lady’s
maid. She was much attached to her for
some time previously to this change; for, al-
though at first she found the religious scruples
of her servant often inconvenient, and had
more than once resolved to part with her,
when respectfully but firmly declining to exe-
cute orders on a Sunday, which the girl con-
sidered a violation of God’s commands; yet
her excellent conduct, her bright integrity,
her sweet temper, and invariable propriety


under all circumstances of trial, so won upon
her ladyship, that at length, appreciating the
sterling worth of such a character, she ceased
to interfere with these scruples, submitting
to their inconvenience rather than lose the
faithful services of one so valuable to her in
all essential respects. One Saturday night,
when returning very late from the opera,
wearied in body, and vexed in mind by some
accidental disappointment connected with the
pleasures of the past evening, this lady threw
herself carelessly on the sofa, and expressing
herself tired of the world, she madly, foolishly
added, “ Oh! how I wish that I could this
moment die, and leave it all!”— 46 God for-
bid that? solemnly exclaimed her faithful at-
tendant, “ until your ladyship be better pre-
pared.” Thus unwarily led to speak with more
than her wonted freedom, and fearing lest,
in her devoted zeal, she may have said more
than her situation justified, the poor girl
burst into tears, and entreating the forgive-
ness of her mistress, she pleaded in excuse,
that deeply grateful to her for the indulgent
and generous kindness which she had ever re-


ceived, she could not bear to see her ladyship
waste the precious moments of her life, dear
to so many who loved her, and that too, upon
a world which she saw gave her no happiness
here, nor left her time to seek the blessedness
of a world to come !” The lady had returned
from her evening’s dissipation, just in that
peculiar state of an irritated mind, which
gladly seizes upon any idea that can turn the
current of painful thought, or give vent to re-
pressed feelings. She, too, wept long and
bitterly; but at length, undressing in silence,
she made no remark, until her attendant was
about to leave her, when turning to her, she
said, “ Lucy, you have spoken a bold word, but
I believe it may be a true one ! Good night;
I forgive you freely.” The ensuing day was
the sabbath. Too much fatigued to rise in
time for church, she bade her servant go and
leave her to herself; and when alone, the inci-
dents of the preceding evening filled her mind.
The past, the present, and the future, each al-
ternately occupied her thoughts, and a fear-
ful review of her own w r aste of time, as con-
nected with eternity, acting on the conscious-
THE PRISONERS


ness of immortality, filled her with alarm, and
she felt it it was indeed too true, that this
world afforded her no happiness, and yet in
the happiness of heaven she could have no
part nor lot! This led to the solemn inquiry,
44 What must I do to be saved ?” and from
that time she frequently sought instruction of
her humble friend, and eventually became
i
herself, a beautiful example of devoted and
consistent piety.
The case of the late Mrs. Hemans was also
illustrative of the same, in its essential fea-
tures; at least, it has been publicly recorded,
that to the sweet influence of a pious ser-
vant she was indebted for clearer views of
Christian hope and holiness than she had pre-
viously attained ; and a letter, most eloquently
written by that humble but devoted friend,
offers a touching evidence of the strong link
which binds the soul of a believer, to one who
is 46 kindred in Christ,” however earthly af-
fections may be distanced by human distinc-
tions. Both mistress and servant are now, we
111
may humbly believe, rejoicing together in the
44 better land ” of hallowed companionhip,”
OF AUSTRALIA.


through the merits and mercy of Him whose
Spirit consecrated their union here, to per-
fect it in Himself hereafter ! The letter al-
luded to appeared a few weeks ago in the
pages of that invaluable and dauntless paper,
« The Record,” and we regret that we can-
not give the extract connected with it, as we
read it there.
Another pleasing testimony in favour of
our theory, is an anecdote worthy of our little
work, of a servant’s grateful remembrance of
a mistress once deeply interested in her spiri-
tual well-being. Circumstances had compel-
led them to part, but it was with much sorrow
*
on both sides. The mistress became seriously
ill, and the claims attendant upon protracted
illness pressed heavily upon means inade-
quate to afford any of those expensive com-
forts which tend to renovate the weakened
frame, unaccustomed to privation. In her
loneliness she was visited by one, once a be-
loved and treasured servant, who, hearing of
her situation, obtained leave of a day’s ab-
sence from the family in whose service she
was then engaged. Her joy at once more


meeting her mistress, mingled with the unaf-
fected sorrow of finding her thus alone, and
sick, and deprived of outward succour, can
scarcely be described, and, perhaps, but
faintly imagined. Tears and blessings alter-
nately betrayed the emotions of her overflow-
ing heart, while to the sufferer they were me-
dicine beyond the art of human science to
administer, or the power of gold to purchase !
The faithful creature passed that day in close
attendance upon her former mistress, but
with a delicate and devoted deference which
admitted of no repulse. She made her bed ;
she arranged her room; prepared a dinner,
such as she thought best adapted to the ap-
petite of the feeble invalid; and yet all this,
with such unchanged respect, that scarcely
could she be persuaded to sit down in her
presence, and with great difficulty was made
to partake of that meal herself. The evening
came, when she was compelled to prepare for
her departure. She hesitated—delayed; re-
turned again and again to the bedside, and
yet without the final word of farewell, until
the shadows of sunset reminded her that soon
I •
. i


it would be too late to meet the coach, by
which she had engaged to travel home. At
length, with some agitation, she abruptly en-
treated forgiveness while about to take a
liberty which she well knew 44 was not her
place to do. But indeed, ! * she added, with
much tenderness and simplicity, 44 l am terri-
fied to think how much you will have to pay,
for doctors and lodgings, and all such things,
when I have more by far than I can spend
upon any want of mineand saying this, she
offered a supply of money, adding, that she
owed her young mistress far more than was
in her power to repay; —she owed to her the
knowledge of God, and the 44 peace which
passeth understanding !” We will not at-
tempt to describe the feelings which were
mutually too deep for expression. Admira-
tion, astonishment, and gratitude, on the one
hand \ respect, affection, and gratified delight,
on the other I The generous offer was not
accepted, but was declined upon the only con-
dition which could at all reconcile the refusal,
to the noble-minded being who tendered it,
that in any hour of future need her assistance


n
\ ii
would be claimed without reserve; that hav-
ing saved a small provision, then at interest,
from the earnings of her late husband’s honest
industry, she would at any time gladly remit
twenty pounds or more as speedily as she
could herself draw it out; adding again, Re-
member, you are welcome to it all, as though
it were your own.” Apparently lightened of
a heavy weight, the faithful creature hastily
took leave, and the sufferer, when again
alone, could onlv look ud and thank God for
s •/ X.
the multitude of His consolations, and marvel
at the wonderful providences of Him who
hath truly said, “ He that keepeth thee will
not slumber;” while she felt how far “ better
it is to be of an humble mind with the lowly,
than to divide the spoil with the proud.” —
V
ii
O ! if the rich would but give of their plenty
as nobly as the poor are often seen to give
freely of their hard-earned mite, what bless-
ings might be within their power to bestow r ,
the blessedness of givin , and the twofold
blessedness of giving well!
To return to our argument; are there not
also many instances in which a pious nurse


has been eminently useful, in imparting the
lessons of early piety to the children of her
charge ? and who, in the evening of her life,
is still cherished among them as a second
mother to themselves, and a friend honoured
and beloved by her superiors. We constantly
hear it asserted, that a faithful and well-prin-
cipled servant is a rare treasure. It may be
so: but why ? Because no pains are taken
to render them this, or to engage their affec-
tions, without which duty is a heavy task.
We ask a mother, what she would expect
from others, to whom she might consign
the interests of daughters young and in-
experienced,—or, in fact, at any age ? Would
she think well of such, who not only totally
neglected their spiritual advancement, per-
haps denying them even the public service of
the sabbath-day, although strict in requiring
most unremitting attention to those things in
which her own selfish interests are concerned,
and highly displeased if these be in anymeasure
neglected ? And yet there are mothers, who,
while they could not bear this towards their
own daughters, nevertheless act thus to the


parents of their household charges. And how
often do we see servants left to themselves
in duties connected with the soul’s religion —
duties, in comparison with which all others
are indeed secondary, yet receive warning for
the slightest breach of obedience against a
master’s will! Can such inconsistency com-
mand respect, or merit the love of those on
whom the comfort of a home so largely de-
pends ? Then, even according to mere worldly
wisdom , how important is it that we teach a
servant first to obey their God, that towards
ourselves they may not be disobedient with
impunity! Indulgence, kindness, and for-
bearance, are all quite compatible with strict
moral and religious discipline, and these we
surely owe towards our dependents, who
must exercise so much towards ourselves.
Yet it is lamentable to see in many families
how little the comfort of a servant is con-
sidered. Required to rise early, and to take
late rest; —their day of toil succeeded still by
labour, which is beyond their strength and
spirits; they become careless of pleasing,
and reckless of doing right. Premature in-
11 r 4 „f
t
I
111
’ a
fil
I!
I
|
I
a
7.
jj
ii:
ft ■


firmities, or some vital disease, result from
this unfair expenditure of bodily energy; and
if they survive the wreck of this, it is to pine
away in poverty and sorrow; a suppliant for
public alms, long, long before they need have
sought the boon, had they been spared the
enervating effects of late hours, over-fatigue,
and exertion beyond the natural powers of
physical strength. We look upon the ruin
with aching hearts, while we know the devas-
tating work is going on in the very homes of
thousands, who are themselves revelling in
luxury, heedless of its woe on others,
thoughtless, unconscious, perhaps, of the
waste of human life and human happi-
ness which it involves ! But a time must
come, when Dives shall yearn for the poor
man’s blessing, and wish he had earlier re-
membered God in his prosperity.
A young girl was personally known to me a
few years since, who left her home at eighteen,
full of health, energy, and spirits, to enter the
service of a noble lady. She had learnt
mantua-making and millinery, at considerable
expense to her parents, for the purpose of
taking a superior place ; and when I first saw


her, she was a remarkably fine, robust, cheer-
ful-looking girl, delighted by the prospect of
so good a situation, as dressmaker and wait-
ing-maid to the lady and elder daughters of a
nobleman, residing in one of the western
counties of England. When I next saw her,
scarcely more than a twelvemoth subse-
quently to her departure, she had recently
returned to her parents, dangerously ill; pro-
nounced to be in a lingering consumption,
II i
i
brought on entirely by too great press ol
work, and want of sufficient rest. She was
then so greatly altered, that it was scarcely
possible to recognise her. Wasted in form,
languid, depressed, and unable to walk with-
out support, from the swelling of her feet, so
completely was nature exhausted, that she
could do little else than lie down and sleep;
but it was sleep which neither refreshed nor
renovated her. She told me, that from the
time of her leaving home to that of her return,
she had seldom been in bed before two o’clock
in the morning, being required to assist the
undressing of her lady, who very rarely retired
before one; and that she was compelled to


rise again at six, in readiness to take some
coffee to her mistress soon after that hour.
The ladies, she said, were all affable and
kind to her, but her work was never done,
and frequently she sat up the whole night to
complete her task, especially during the win-
ter months, when her young ladies went out
to dances and balls. It was then she began
to feel her strength decline, her feet swell,
and her appetite decrease: but as it was a
lucrative place, and she knew the disappoint-
ment it would be to her parents did she so
soon resign it, she resolved to i 6 keep up,”
hoping that in summer, which was then ap-
proaching, she would have less to do. She
thought it was the late hours, more than any-
thing else, which had destroyed her consti-
tution. But summer came; her strength
gradually declined, her lady obtained medical
advice for her, and she was ordered home, as
unfit for longer service !
On the other hand, there is great evil in a
system of unreasonable indulgence. We
should consider the future for our servants,
as well as their present happiness; and if we


accustom them to luxuries, or encourage
them in the love of ease, and permit them to
dress inconsistently with their station of life,
we do them cruel injury. The poor man can-
not give a wife, thus trained, the comforts to
which she has, perhaps for years, been ac-
customed in the service of her superiors ; and
to this may be traced the wretchedness of
so many, who, as wives and mothers, are unfit
for their humbler duties; discontented with
their allotment,, and so incapable of enduring
the privations of a laborious and frugal home,
that all at last is ruin, improvidence, disorder,
and dissatisfaction around them. The hus-
band is worn out by the unreasonable com-
plaints of his wife; —the wife disappointed
that he refuses to spend his earnings upon
her inconsistent claims. He becomes an alien
from his family, if not a drunkard; and she , a
pining, unhappy, careless wife !
Neither is it well to admit anything like
undue familiarity, compromising the line of
demarcation which God Himself has wisely
placed betwixt the master and the menial.
The one must command, the other must obey.
*,4
I it
if]
i vp
> s ■
k ii i
» -
i I
i i
ifc


The sceptre is an emblem of a master’s trust;
the footstool, that of a servant’s duty. But if
the servant cannot be the equal of his lord,
he may be his friend and his protector; and
if a master cannot be the companion of his
servant, he should surely be his guardian and
his guide.
As to the excuse, which too often trifles
with the higher principles of Christian govern-
ment, that a mistress has no right to exercise
authority or restraint over the religious duties
of her dependants, if not interfering with
those exclusively attaching to their appointed
office; we can only say, that we find no war-
rant in Scripture for such a limitation; and
it is a grievous thing to see a professedly
Christian master or mistress, regardless of
such important considerations, leaving their
servants on a Sunday to go to a place of wor-
ship or not, as suits their own convenience;
even giving sanction to a total neglect of
God’s commands, in making that day their
holiday, no matter where it is passed, or how
it is engaged. Is this in accordance with
the solemn charge, embodied in that empha-


tic law, (i the seventh day is the sabbath of
the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not
do any work”—nor “ thy man-servant , nor
thy maidservant a commandment decid-
edly involving compulsion on the part of the
master towards all those placed under his
control, where God’s decrees are paramount
to his own will or right. Look at the picture
of a violated sabbath described by Nehemiah,
and which bears strongly upon this very ques-
tion. The people of Tyre were openly sell-
ing all manner of fish, ware, &c. in the streets
of Jerusalem. Did Nehemiah accuse them
as the chief aggressors ? Or, with whom was
the prophet commanded to contend?
with the men of Tyre, but with the nobles of
Judah : “ what evil thing is this ye do, and
profane the sabbath-day ? Did not your fa-
thers thus; and did not our God bring all
this evil upon us and upon this city? Ye tye
bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning
the sabbath.” Thus decidedly intimating, that
they who permitted the evil on the part of
those placed under their authority and govern-
ance, were the persons most responsible for


that evil —nay, the very doers of the iniquity
complained of. 44 What evil thing is this ye
do, and profane the sabbath day ? Nor were
the restrictions of this law in any measure
abrogated or compromised, either by the ex-
ample or the precepts of our blessed Lord.
They, who had learnt of Him, and followed
Him unto death, would not so much as em-
balm His sacred body on the day hallowed by
Jehovah ! No ; with hearts overwhelmed by
anguish and sorrow ; yearning to fulfil the last
sad duties for one whom they so dearly loved,
those, devoted women —there, at the very
grave of their Redeemer, remembered God,
and would not —dared not break, even for His
sake , the sabbath law ! They 44 returned and
prepared spices and ointments; and rested
the sabbath day, according to the command-
ment ; going 44 very early” the ensuing morn-
ing to accomplish their last work of love and
duty ! Yes ; and to be faithful to our work,
we must deprecate the custom, too generally
familiar, of giving as a day of pleasure that
so sacredly set apart by God to works of
Christian mercy and Christian ministrations.


We will not spare our servants one day from
our six; but we care not, that they waste the
44 because it is the Lord’s! The
objection applies not where a servant can
pass the Sunday in the bosom of a Christian
home, to go with a pious parent, or brother
or sister, to the worship of God; but where
we are not assured of this, we see not how r a
master can conscientiously consent to absence
on the sabbath day.
That servants should have recreation is,
nevertheless, not only right, but very essen-
tial. Their situation should be rendered, as
far as possible, an indulgent and happy .
They should surely be permitted stated pe-
riods, if only a few hours once a week or
fortnight, at their own disposal. This might
be done without encroaching on higher du-
ties, either towards God or their employers,
and be a great encouragement in well-doing.
We have also seen the good effects of making
V
a servant take part with us in our pursuits as
regards the poor, giving to each the charge of
a district; and to such as are competent, the
office of teacher in a Sunday school. This
i; > 1
|jl .■
<3 1 ■
i -»\
/ 111
1 -)j :*j 'i
• ! 1.1
; i; I:
i si
» I
: I
l»l
$ If -
\\f
h
: |
I
' i? ;
I ‘
\ L
< li


affords them objects of useful interest, occu-
pies their own minds profitably, and gives
them a fellowship with ourselves in the 44 fa-
mily of God !”
Another consideration worthy of import-
ance is, the economy of a servant’s wages.
j )/ .
Over this, a master certainly has no right
to hold imperative control; but persuasion
may do much to induce a quarterly assign-
ment from their earnings to the savings
bank, as provision for a time of need or old
age ; and if a servant be judiciously restrain-
ed in her style of dress, there will be little
temptation to throw away her wages upon
frivolous and useless expenditure: and a
master also confers a lasting benefit, who, to
encourage this, adds a yearly contribution to
the amount saved, where a servant merits the
reward. Indeed, a gratuitous boon so dis-
posed, may probably tend far more to the
real interests of our dependants, than giving
them a high rate of nominal wages, which in
many instances offers great temptation to ex-
i
travagance, and renders them dissatisfied in
service, where the income of an employer is


not adequate to such demands, although in
all other respects the situation may be a really
advantageous one.
Having thus endeavoured to trace the
causes of so much immorality among the
lower classes of our population, and ven-
tured to suggest means for its prevention, I
would now fain hope, that, through God’s
blessing, the subject will become one of yet
deeper consideration among those whose ac-
tive influence could do so far more towards a
practical reformation, than any theory urged
upon grounds of private opinion. But would
indeed that they, to whom we have more es-
pecially addressed ourselves, could personally
investigate the evidences of living proof in
the penitentiaries of England, and in the pri-
sons of Australia; for these would surely
speak to the heart of every philanthropist, in
language more powerful than the most elabo-
rate appeal of descriptive eloquence could
do. O! let it be no longer, then, as a
blot upon the escutcheon of our country,
that so many of our female poor should,
year after year, be exposed to the degrading


sentence of imprisonment, and to the yet
4
more miserable necessity of transportation;
when, in the majority of cases, neither the
one nor the other need become the alternative
of justice, if mercy but found handmaids
among the rich and the influential, to execute
her work of sympathy, and to sheath the
avenging sword of judgment with the strong
arm of Christian love and Christian instruc-
tion, Alas ! why is it that from year to year
she still wings her way from heaven to earth.
bearing in one hand the “ glad tidings of good
will towards man and in the other, the cen-
ser for the prayers and works of faith, which
are alone meet for the sacrifice of a Saviour’s
altar; and yet, return again and again with the
message despised, and the censer still over-
flowing with the tears and complaints of those
whom England might , but will not save, and
whom Australia might, but will not reform !
This may be deemed the mere figure of a vivid
imagination; nevertheless it is a figure too
closely parallel with reality to be ridiculed
or disputed. For if Jesus wept over Jerusa-
lem, because in the midst of light there was
THE PRISONERS


darkness, and because, while salvation was at
hand, sin struggled for mastery, how much
more would he weep over us, as a nation
which, favoured above all other nations of the
world, abounds in rebellion against the “liv-
ing Godsending forth sin to multiply ten-
fold in a land, which, given to Britain as a
future trophy of evangelical conversion, de-
mands our religion , and not our vices. And
yet, England has turned that land into a
prison of moral captivity, far worse than the
bondage of heathen ignorance, in which
Australian children sinned, perhaps, the “ sin
which is not unto death;” because, unconscious
of a Saviour God, they have broken no law,
despised no covenant, and taken no part, as
we have done, in crucifying the “ Lord of
Life,” the “ Lamb,” slain for peace in
borders, as well as for peace in our own.
And shall Australia, then, that fair land of
hope and promise, be for ever left thus, the
charnel-ground for all that England in her
supineness casts away as refuse, unworthy of
her own rich soil ? Is it for this that the boon
of an unowned but populated continent has
Ijfl
i
il is
Ilf'


been consigned to her fostering care ? No;
it was rather that she might send forth her
sons to prepare the wilderness for the 44 Tree
of Life;” and her daughters to stand as
44 polished corners of a temple,” in which the
dark features of Australian aborigines should
be lighted up with the sweet homage of prayer
and praise, and the lips of her children lisp
the new song of 44 Glory to God in the
highest 44 saying, worthy the Lamb that was
slain.” — 44 Blessing, and honour, and glory,
and power, be unto Him that sitteth on the
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever !”
But let it be so no more. Let every heart
which beats within the bosom of a Briton,
r
respond to our appeal in behalf of English
poor, and of Australian prisoners; that the
one may grow r rich in Christian piety, and the
other rejoice as being made free in Jesus,
our common deliverer. For, who could look
upon Australia, and not feel, that although a
blight has indeed passed over her, she yet
sits in the beauty of natural magnificence, as
a bride prepared for the 44 marriage garment
and had they, who were bidden to bring her
. M


to the banquet, been faithful in the mission,
she need not thus long have languished as a
slave, in place of rising to the sovereignty of a
queen. But the “ pearl of price” is not yet
in her diadem, and without it, every sceptre
of human power is but as a broken reed,
and every coronet but as the badge of capti-
vity.
It is not our purpose, nor within the limits
of our present work, to enter upon the locali-
ties of Australia either as a country or as a
colony. My own opportunities were too
limited, to render me a fair judge of its general
character, and ill health prevented a more
extensive range of observation. But many
an abler pen than mine has made it the field
of authorship, and many more are likely to
enter the lists of its historians. Besides
which, it has been, and still is, a sort of
chameleon in the moral world, on whose
colours few persons are found to agree. For
myself, however, if I cannot beguile the san-
guine inquirer by the strong lights of its
brightest hues, neither would I discourage by
the too sombre shadings which some have
OF AUSTRALIA.
JO»9 d. -


thrown around the mystical enchanter. It is,
as I have before said, a land of hope and pro-
✓
mise, but I would fain warn those who dream
of emigration, to beware of exaggerated report;
for there is much to be done, and much to be
endured, before that hope can be realized, or
the promise obliterated by accomplishment.
This is but the seed-time of that infant
colony. Its labourers have yet to plough the
land and furrow the soil, before their children,
or their children’s children, can “ sit under
the fig-tree,” reaping the harvest which their
fathers had planted, and binding the sheaves
of ease and independence. Happy are they,
however, who, with youth and health, and
energy of mind and body, can go there as
labourers indeed, taking with them the faith
of a missionary, and the devotedness of an
apostle; to bear and to forbear, outward toils
and inward trials. But they who leave Eng-
land to see an Eden, beneath the bright skies
of an Australian sun, will surely find that they
have left the fruit-tree for the thistle and the
thorn. To woman this may more especially
apply; and many there are whose testimony


would bear me out, while I thus warn against
the delusive vision, which has drawn numbers
away from the substantial enjoyments of an
English home. It may be, indeed, that in
that home there are trials too; but they are
blended with blessings which are not else-
where, and which—shame be it said —must be
lost altogether, before they are sought for
again, as treasures worthy of a grateful and
contented mind.
The climate of Australia, or rather of New
South Wales, (for I cannot speak of the conti-
nent generally,) has been, I think, especially
magnified, as among the brightest of her
many gems; and so it is, if climate means
no more than skies, over which for weeks
together a cloud is scarcely seen to pass. But
when said that it knows neither the extremes
of heat or cold, is subject to no sudden changes
of temperature, and that it “ wakens all nature
In
i
to verdure and to song;” he who thinks so,
must be as one whom I once heard ingeniously
described as 6C having a heart of mail, nerves
of iron, and a mind troubled by nothing but
the sickness of a storm at sea” The winter
mu .■mi i,in ,
. i/m


months of Australia, from June to September,
are, I grant, almost perfection, resembling one
long unvaried May, such as poets have
painted that spring-time of our year; but
this is followed by a summer whose sun is,
indeed, enough to annihilate all nerves, save
those of our friend the iron man. The very
remembrance of its hot winds brings fever
heat to veins of mortal flesh and blood. O !
m
when I have looked upon that cloudless sky,
and vainly struggled to find one breath of air,
to bring freedom once more to lungs panting
beneath the weight of atmospheric pressure ;
how have I turned my longing thoughts to the
sweet summers of England, which, with all
their changes of cloud and mist, of sunshine
■ • r
and dew, are far more to be desired than those
golden gleams of an unshadowed sun, which
we too often envy because we know not what
they are. The sunset comes, indeed, as a
time of unparalleled glory ! the dark blue
canopy of heaven glittering with all its thou-
sand worlds, lighted by the soft and lucid
streams of the Aurora Australis, playing in
the firmament like rivers of silver, or flying


like meteors of rosy crystal. But even on
these the eye may not long take rest, or
the heart repose. Blistered by the stings of
mosquitoes, ants, and hosts of other insects
without name or number, soon is the mortal
called back to mourn its mortality, and to
depart from the beauteous vista of celestial
glories, to seek shelter from entomological
martyrdom, and that, too, where retreat is but
a choice of evils, so little were the houses of
Australia, their rooms all built upon the
ground-floor, calculated to afford protection
from the rays of a tropical sun, which pene-
trates a shingled roof, with a power not to be
remedied by the brief shadows of a midsum-
mer night. Nor is it true, that the Austra-
lian climate is subject to no sudden changes;
so far from it, in summer it is more so than
our own. Often have I known intense heat
succeeded by such chilling gusts of wind, that
in the course of twenty-four hours we have been
faint with heat, and yet glad to have a fire, and
to exchange the lightest clothing for shawls and
flannel. Its “ verdure ” I saw not, the grass
being of a very coarse kind, and generally
1J
h
1
1 " ■*—, i- ~, .—,» ■ .<am '.
** - "


both parched and brown. The foliage also
can scarcely be called green, the gum-tree,
with which the bush abounds, being of a
sombre hue, never changing with the seasons.
The underwood is, however, beautiful, the
Mimosa tribe especially, growing most luxuri-
antly: and for its “song” if, in that, be
implied the “ melody of birds,” I heard it
not; the shrill tones of the laughing jack-
ass, the monotonous note of the bell-bird,
and the mournful note of the curlew, being
the only minstrelsy which reached us from the
woods. The smaller birds, indeed, are beautiful
to the eye, and, mingling with the parrots of
a thousand hues, glitter like jewels as they
fly in the sunshine from tree to tree; and if
Australia be not without great drawbacks, it is
nevertheless a magnificent country, with many
advantages, promising future greatness.
And emigration may doubtless be a wise
and profitable undertaking to a man who,
with a large and unprovided family, can have
few resources in England adequate to his
claims; or to the young adventurer, who,
with health and dauntless energy, goes forth
1 I 1 AaiUllKPlI 1 !


f I
1 |
prepared to fight manfully with difficulties
and privations, requiring patience, resolution,
self-denial, and above all, principles of uncom-
promising integrity, to pass unscathed through
an ordeal of temptation, confident only in the
strength of his God. In such cases, Australia
offers a wide field for successful exertion,
whether for missionary labours or those of
private speculation. But to all others would
I say, leave not the favoured shores of our
native country without most urgent reasons
for so doing. A moderate income in England,
individually, is better than a fortune in foreign
lands; for blessings mingle with the one,
which the other cannot, elsewhere, purchase;
\
blessings for which the spirit must often yearn,
and the heart languish to regain. I have
traversed far and wide: have beheld the
exquisite scenery of the Rhine in all the
luxuriance of its vintage time. I have gazed
upon the mountain barriers of Saxony, and
revelled amid the beautiful and verdant val-
leys of Bohemia; and so long as memory can
retain one grateful thought of Albertine, her
tender mother, and her generous, father, my
i:
h
■AMaMIMaNMiaMMH*


heart must treasure the remembrance of Bo-
hemian gems; and of many an evening,
which, if I could , I would enjoy again ! And
mine eyes have rested with delighted wonder
upon the magnificence of Rio de Janeiro ; its
towering rocks, and yet loftier mountains;
its glowing skies, and silvery waters; its
birds of beauty, its valleys fertile with rarest
fruits and flowers; and ail these too, would I,
if I could, behold once more. But never —
never have I seen aught like mine own island-
home ! Home, did I say?—Yes; for if I
have no spot on earth which I can designate
as this, I look on England, and feel, that in
herself she is my home ! Let clouds over-
shadow her sun, as they may, there is sun-
shine enough to brighten her summers with
the gladness of “the fruit-time and harvest;”
and if her winters bring snow, she has a fire-
side, however homely it may be, where win-
ter is welcomed, and the heart warmed with
domestic blessings, universally acknowledged
to be peculiar to a British hearth ! And
above all, O who can calculate the thousand
streams of mercy flowing far and wide from


her treasury of Bibles , giving “ light and
life,” —hope and consolation to millions, who,
but for England, as God’s machinery, had
never known where, when bending beneath
the storms of human life, to seek the city of
the New Jerusalem, whose “ gates of pearl”
are opened by our risen Saviour for every
people, and sect, and nation, which shall
learn of Him, and believe —that city, where
“ God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes;
and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow nor crying, neither shall be any more
painfor the glory of the Lord is in it, and
c< the Lamb is the light thereof.”
Then, “ what manner of people” should
we be, who are thus honoured and blessed ?
Should we seek peace in the sinful pleasures
of the world, whose friends are the enemies of
God? Or, neglect for these, the “ little
flock” which we are commanded to feed,’*
8? - v
if we indeed love Him, by whom England has
been exalted? No; rather let us arise, and
*
H
“ light our lamps,’’ and “ gird our loins,” for
the warfare of sin’s last struggle, to fight on
the side of Emmanuel, not on the side of His
«
f


great antagonist! Let the Gospel be our
banner, faith the outworks of our city, and love
to God , the wings on which our every thought
shall rise, borne heavenward by the Holy
Ghost, to merge into the will of God: that,
made one in Christ, even as Christ is one
with the Father, every soul within the British
realms may rejoice when the Bridegroom is
at hand; and England stand forth a purified
church, arrayed in the garments of her Sa-
viour’s righteousness even as a Bride,
44 without blemish and without spot!”
And though the battle-ground is 44 strait
and narrow,” and the warfare fierce, through
which a Christian must 44 wrestle against
principalities and powers, against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, and against
spiritual wickedness in high places yet we
need not be dismayed. As 44 fearful sheep,”
we have but to 44 hearken unto the voice of
our Shepherd,” and follow Him, who, how-
ever 44 strait the gate,” and 44 narrow the
way,” will sweetly lead us to paths of peace
and to the fountain of 44 living waters,” where
at the right hand of God are 44 pleasures for


evermore.” Pleasures !—must the Christian
then forego all pleasure here ? O ! surely
not: for if “ the morning stars sang together,
and all the sons of God shouted for joy,” be-
cause sin was conquered, and death destroy-
ed ; need we seek higher joys than to “ con-
vert the sinner from the error of his way,”
and lead him to where death hath no stins —
o
the grave no victory ? And, “if the angels
in heaven ” rejoice because of mercy, need
we seek higher pleasures than to “bind the
broken heart,” to feed the hungry, clothe the
poor, to “ visit the fatherless and the widow in
their affliction, and to keep ourselves un-
spotted from the world ?”
Lord, to my heart, let earth as heaven be;
A world of pleasure, —when “ I live to Thee!”
C. A.
I h
THE END.
LONDON :
PRINTED BV G. 3. PALMER, SAVOY STREET.
f
/


MIRIAM ; or, the Power of Truth, a Jewish
Tale. Sixth Edition, fcap. Price 65.
INFLUENCE ; a Moral Tale, for Young Per-
sons. Third edition, fcap. Price 7s.
An ESSAY on the DISTINCTION between
BODY, SOUL and SPIRIT. 32m0. Price Is.




■
m
%
■i
|s 2 | 2 ---f-




