

■*& #■ •*&
s
&$JSZi3Sii§SliMud '>£.}'.■>, : iu SSi
o s$$fs effirs ($0
idS$ie^KoiMsfsA^Si&iai:ac<i3ii£s&E^rj/xK
%
7/^7
|k,
6>\S?>
ST
&
fi
'k i
m
Jitar 1
lastlte. 1*
»P
6
<-3
,-- x /
6 &,
Cn >>£;?>
P#
#18
'/■/ "
/ n
H
/
I
$P
M
1%*
ps,’ j <jr
wt
Bg^
fe
«?0 N <
VIG1LANS
ET AUDAX.
fe>sp?»
gtfo.
m
'
gfe
<iWg
3i'
5>x&?>
Si^5*
s£
Mi
i
j&gs
PUBLISHED
H.
ON BOARD, W
P%,
n#
•»'Kv
DURING HER
VOYAGE FROM
p|||i
LONDON TO MOHETON BAY'.
I
6 (o
i&zSi
M
fill
4g
COMMANDER —W,
H. YULE.
Surgeon-Superintendent— J. J. LUCE, M.D
% QUEENSLAND: P
Sg>
PEINTED AT THE “COUEIEE” GENEEAL FEINTING OFFICE, GEOEGE STREET, BEISBANE. gl^
gy
J 1863 ’ fc,
„ * $$ ■ls* ■sil 4& %r 4(v $1? $ 48 1 4^


®k Jfitrg Star diiitttt.
VIGIL ANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
AUGUST
29, 1863.
OUR PROSPECTUS.
We acknowledge and feel a great responsibility in sending this,
our ocean paper forth to the criticism of those who form a very
numerous party in the world, viz., “the iilnatured.” But we
hope and trust that the better-hearted members of this community
comprise our fellow passengers in the Fiery Star.
The courteous urbanity and gentlemanly manner of our respected
Captain, Doctor, and the Officers of this, our good ship Fiery
Star, together with the friendly feelings evinced towards each
other by all the passengers, lead us to expect a pleasant and
comfortable voyage.
Since we left Cork, we have got on very well, considering the
light winds that prevailed during the first few days ; and if the
prognostics with which we have started be by the Providence of
the Almighty carried out, we shall see Brisbane in a short time.
Our object is to amuse, and by all the means in our power to
promote friendly feelings, and keep up the spirits of our fellow-
passengers.
The Captain has informed us that he will have a letter-box
fixed in a conspicuous place on deck, so that intending contribu-
tors can have an opportunity of sending their productions to the
Editor. We must premise that all our correspondents must send
their names and address to the Editor, at their option as to
publication.
FACETIAE.
We have been favored by Mr. Lynde, with the following :
Why should we never starve on board the Fiery Star ? Because she is
never short ot rolls ! Oh.
What resembles an empty match-box ? Nothing—Because it is matchless.
AN ALPHABET.
A was an Angel of blushing eighteen,
B was the Ball where this angel was seen.
C was the Chaperon, who cheated at cards,
D was the Deux-Temps, with Fred of the Guards.
E was an Eye of a dangerous black.
F was the Fan, Fred would not give back.
G was the Glove of most delicate kid,
H was the Hand it so spitefully hid.
I was the Ice, fatigued nature demanded,
J was the Juvenile who hastened to hand it.
K was the Kerchief, a rare work of art,
L was the Lace which composed its chief part.
Iff was the old Maid who looked on at the dance
JJ was the Nose she turned up at each glance.
0 was the Olga just then in its prime,
P was the Partner who could not keep time.
Q was the Quadriile, let’s hope t’was the Lancers,
the Remarks that were made on the dancers,
g was the Supper to which all went in pairs,
J was tho Twaddle they talked on the stairs.
U was the Uncle who said let’s be going,
V was the Voice that his niece replied no, in.
iff was the Wailer who sat up too late,
X was the 'Xit he made not quite straight.
Y was the Yawn the day after the Ball,
Z stands for Zero and nothing at all.
SKY LARKING ; or rather, SEA LARKING.
On Monday, 25th, two gentlemen, First Cabin Passengers, challenged
one another (in a joking way) to jump overboard. Mr. Come said to
Mr. lligginson, “1 I you jump over I shall follow.” The reply was, “I
hot a penny I’ll throw your cap over and jump after it.” “If you do I’m
after you,” was the answer. Over went the cap, Higginson, and Corrie.
A bowline was at once made, and they were pulled up, cap and all, after
being some minutes in the water. Our respected Captain was greatly
annoyed and justly, as sharks are frequent in these latitudes. But it is
of sueh stuff that the bulwarks of Great Britain are composed. The man
that would not hesitate in a lark to jump overboard after a cap, with no
boat lowered, would be the first to charge a battery, or lead the boarders
in a sea light.
Sporting.
Single Stick. —We are glad to see that the above manly and
very English game is carried on. There have been some capital
matches played and most perfect good temper displayed on all
occasions, although some of the combatants shewed pretty severe weals on
the arms and legs after coming out of the action. The noble art of self-
defence is not neglected, and some neat sparring took place on Saturday
last, when the rnby stream of life issued from one gentleman’s proboscis,
and although well and toughly contested, the battle eventuated in the
member of the Saloon coming off victorious.
Quoits. —Some matches at Quoits have been played. It is a fine game,
and exercise tends more than anything to promote health and muscular
power.
Liberal odds will be laid against any one naming the day we reach the
Line; also upon the double event as to reaching the Line and Moretou
Poet’s Corner.
THE FIERY STAR. — Air, Beautiful Star.
Fiery Star tho’ far from home,
Bounding o’er the ocean’s foam.
You bear us from cur friends afar,
Star of the ocean, Fiery Star.
Fiery Star, Fiery Star,
Star of the ocean, Fiery, Fiery Star.
Dashing o’er the dark blue wave,
Treading light on the sailor’s grave,
Monsters down in the depths afar,
Gaze on thy beauty, Fiery Star.
Speed on o’er thy haughty way,
Proudly spurning the ocean’s spray,
Thy beautiful hull and tapering spars,
In harmony blend with thy fellow stars.
E. D. P.
CLASSICAL.
One of our correspondents has kindly furnished us with a liberal trans-
lation of Cicero's famous quotation, “ abiit, excessit, erupit, evasit,’ which
occurred to him the other night, in the absence of a talented member ot
the S. D. Club :—“ Abiit,’’ he went out to dine; “ excessit,’’ he drank too
much punch ; “ erupit," the natural consequences followed ; 11 evasit,’’
he said it was the salmon.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, AUGUST 29, 1863.
AMUSEMENTS.
On Wednesday evening, a pleasant reunion took place on the quarter-
deck, to the enlivening tones of the violin, well played by the ship’s
fiddler. The Ball commenced with an Irish jig, followed by the “ Perfect
Cure,’’ and after that Polkas and Quadrilles were the order of the evening,
until six bells, when the ladies having left the gay and festive scene,
was the signal for the dispersion of the rougher sex, who thereupon
formed themselves into groups, to discuss the fragrant weed, and peram-
bulate the decks previous to turning in.
Jumping. —An exciting and amusing match took place on Tuesday
evening, between the following gentlemen; Messrs. Higginson, Corrie,
Somerset, Parr, and Willmot. The height jumped was very good, con-
sidering the rolling of the ship, and all proved themselves smart active
young fellows.
Musical,. —The Pianoforte in the Ladies’ Cabin is a very sweet instru-
ment, and sends forth s concord of sweet sounds, when touched by the
taper fingers of the fair denizens of the Saloon. Wo hope to hear duets,
&c., in the evenings; there is something so soothing in the voices of the
ladies, reminding us of by-gone hours, and the contrast is great when it
follows the hoarse “ hawl the bowline” of the sailors.
Education. —Wo are glad to hear that a school is about to be instituted,
as it will not only impart instruction, but also tend to keep the young
fry out of harm’s way.
One of the young ladies has commenced a French School, which
combines amusement with instruction, and from the very perfect accent
which wc have had the pleasure of hearing, we are sure that anyone who
profits by her information will become quite aufait in the language.
Two gentlemen on Monday went up the rigging, and were hunted by
the sailors ; after a long and well-contested race from rope to rope, were
secured, and had to pav the usual fees which being paid, makes them for
the future free of their guild.
Riddle. —When is your nose not a nose ? Why, when it is a little
BATHING.
Brutal and Unmanly Outrage.
Mk. Editor, —On Monday last a brutal and atrocious outrage was
committed on one of the Cabin Passengers, by his shipmates. The un-
fortunate victim was dragged at daylight from his bed, and, despite his
yells and groans, which were heartrending, was forcibly carried to the
quarter-deck, where he was remorselessly plunged head foremost, and still
habited in his night gear into one of the tuba which our Captain has
kindly placed at the disposal of his Cabin Passengers.
The wretched victim after a long and fearful struggle, at last succeeded
in gaining his feet, and soon afterwards might have been seen, like a
half-drowned merman, with his dripping garment closely adhering to his
shivering body, slowly re-tracing his way to the Cabin, from which but
a few short moments ago, he had been so rudely torn, while reposing in
fancied security in the anus of Morpheus. We regret to say that the
victim has since been unwell, but we hope and believe that his malady
has arisen more from the novel sensation of cleanliness, than from any
more serious cause.
On the following morning a similar outrage was attempted on another
passenger, sleeping in the Second Cabin, but owing to his willingness to
be cleaned, combined with the excellent precautions taken by the denizens
of his Cabin to preclude all visitors, as well as to the evident objection of
the Second Cabin Passengers to be aroused at such unseasonable hours,
the attempt was abandoned.
Before I conclude, allow me through the medium of your columns, to
compliment the inmate of No. 25, on the strength of his lungs.
I am, Sir,
ONE OF THE RUFFIANS.
Advertisements.
ANTED, on board the Fiery Star, for first-class passengers, a
T T SPECIAL CONSTABLE, warranted to please everybody. If
the party met with has these requirements, a very liberal salary will be
given and no questions as to character asked. Apply to the disaffected
parties, at their leisure hour, from 1 to i p.m.
MISSING from his home, a GENTLEMAN, named “ Mind your own
Business." Whoever will give any information that will lead to
his recovery, will much oblige his distressed friends, and shall be hand-
somely rewarded.
THE S. D. CLUB.
On Friday evening a meeting of the above Club took place on the
quarter-deck, which was largely attended. The chair was most ably and
amply filled by E. D. Freeman, Esq., and a long list of preconcerted vocal
music was gone through. The ladies, who favored the S. D. C. with their
company during the first part of the performance, retired about 11.30,
and the music and revelry (especially the latter) were prolonged until a
late hour, or rather an early hour next morning, when “ God save the
Queen ” was sung in a most loyal manner by the chairman, and, after
giving three cheers for our noble selves, the Club broke up, and the
members betook themselves to their various berths.
I am, Sir, THE FOUNDER.
CLERICAL.
We are happy to find that the religious observance of the Sunday is not
to be neglected or forgotten by the passengers on board our good ship.
Arrangements have been made and every facility afforded by our worthy
Captain for the different denominations to hold their services. At a
quarter to eleven o’clock on each Sunday morning, the large bell of the
ship peals out her silvery notes and summons the people to prepare for
divine service. It is most edifying to observe the solemn silence which
reigns throughout the ship during the hours of service, and the decorum
with which everything is conducted. It is also very gratifying to us to
observe the good feelings which are likely to exist between the different
religious bodies, and the disposition manifested by all to respect each
other’s conscientious religious opinions. We hope this good feeling will
continue to be cherished, so that at the end of our voyage we shall all part
good friends, resolved to live in our adopted country, not as Englishmen,
Irishmen, or Scotchmen, but as Australians—forgetting old prejudices,
and uniting hand and heart for the well-being of the land we live in.
Official Reports.
To the Editor of the Mery Star Gazette.
Dear Sir, — I am very happy to state (for the first copy of your
paper) that the general health of the passengers is good, and that
there are no serious cases of illness in the ship at the present period.
Many are, however, still suffering much from sea-sickness and the
debility and prostration consequent thereon, but I anticipate being
able next week to report that the number has materially decreased,
and that the Cook is in more request than the Doctor.
With every good wish for the success of your journal, and hoping
it may prove a source of much gratification and amusement to your
numerous readers and contributors during the voyage, and that it will
also, on subsequent occasions, when conned over, recall many pleasing
associations and reminiscences of “ our life on the ocean wave ” during
the time passed on board the “ Fiery Star,”
I am, dear Sir, yours, faithfully,
(Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.,
Surgeon- Superintendent.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Dear Sir,— lt gives me much pleasure to hear that you intend
publishing the above-named gazette, and I shall endeavour so far as I
can to promote so laudable an object, well knowing it will afford
amusement and instruction to those on board the good ship, and I feel
confident it will be ably conducted under your management. I like-
wise feel happy to find such harmony and good feeling existing in the
ship amongst my passengers, and it shall be my study to encourage
that feeling. Amusement and exercise, so conducive to health, I shall
alwaj s endeavour to encourage. With regard to the good ship herself,
we have no reason to complain, although the winds have been light
and hanging far to the westward, still we have managed to make a
very fair run to Madeira. I trust that we have now got the N.E.
trades, which will soon bring us towards the Line, and, should we get
across without much delay, I anticipate rather a rapid passage to
Brisbane. We are now 180 miles to the southward of Madeira; 10
days from Cork.—l am, dear Sir, yours, faithfully,
(Signed) W. H. YULE,
Master of “Fiery Star.”
August 20th, 1803.


It Jfitrtt Jitar (c;r.cltc.
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
SEPTEMBER
5, 1863.
Geeat was the excitement on the morning of the 28th ultimo, at
seeing the first land since we left Queenstown. Early in the
morning the word went round that Porto Santo was in sight.
After breakfast anxious looks were cast to windward, but the fog
that prevailed prevented our seeing for some time. Just as we
came abreast of the Island the fog lifted up, and then we saw a
very beautiful panorama, and could see, even with the naked eye,
right down the bay, the beautifully-situated town of Porto Santo.
Several passengers brought up their sketch-books to perpetuate the
reminiscences of “ our life on the ocean wave.” Porto Santo is
one of the group of the Madeiras, and the trade in oranges and
other fruits is good. Later in the day we passed the “ Deserters,”
detached rocky islands, belonging to the Madeira group. In the
evening we sighted the Madeira herself in the distance. On
Sunday, August 30th, we got into the Tropic of Cancer. The
first flying-fish was seen on Monday last, to the great delight of the
children and the incredulous portion of our fellow-passengers, who,
like the old Scotchwoman (believed her son when he told her that
he walked dry across the sea, because she had Scripture authority
for that; but, when he told her that he saw fish fly, exclaimed
“ Na, na, Sandy, I canna believe that,”) would only believe in the
fish when they saw them with their own e’en. A shoal of grampus
also appeared, but did not come within shot. The only shooting
we have had as yet has been at bottles, casks, &c. Some capital
shots have been made, but still we feel inclined to back the bottle
against the gun.
FACETEE.
There is a station on tho Alurray Downs called the “ Pig Face Plains.”
The proprietors are named Messrs, Hogg and Bacon, and the overseer is
Mr. Ham.
Whoever has gone up the Bendigo road in 1852, may recollect a road-
side shanty (a small and old calico tent) with the legend written with
burnt stick, “Ot Kawphy sowld eer 4s. per pint.” The proprietor of that
shanty realized £500(1 in twelve months.
There was a nigger down South so black, that when he went into the
woods the birds went to roost.
A Yankee died who was so tall, that it took throe clergymen and a little
hoy to read the funeral service over him.
A man in Kentucky had a nose so long, that he was obliged to walk
three yards to blow it.
A Lady once drew a ginger-beer nottlo so like nature, that the cork
flew out before she could draw the string.
The same lady painted a snow-storm so well, that a gentleman looking
on caught cold.
Advertisements.
a BOOK, in a Bine Wrapper, a few nights ago. The owner
can claim it agahi, by giving description of the same, and applying
at No. 24 Berth. J. J. B.
LOST, a Little Girl’s Black Straw Hat, belonging to Hannah Mary
Naden, of No. 38 Berth, Steerage. Any Person haying found the
same, will oblige by returning it as above, to
GEORGE NADEN.
THE FIRST OF SEPTEMBER.
“The first of September” does not that short sentence bring back to
most of us vivid recollections of dry crackling stubbles and wet
turnips, visions of whirring partridges and glittering gun barrels,
leather gaiters, and happy faces.
Even now, while 2000 miles from home, cannot we hear in imagina-
tion, the continuous “ crack, crack” of the double-barrel, followed by
the down charge of the sportsman to his excited dog. Kind memory
sheds a tear when we reflect upon all this going on in our island home,
while we ourselves are being rapidly melted away by the scorching
rays of a verical sun.
The first of September is also the first day on which the Cabin
Passengers turned out regularly to sleep on the quarter-deck, and the
sight would have amused any disinterested spectator who could have
beheld the sleepers, closely packed on their narrow matresses. lying,
like so many corses, so grim and ghastly did they appear beneath
the silver rays of the tropical moon.
The scene is yet more ridiculous when in the twilight cold and grey,
the sleepers aie aroused between four and five a.m,, by the officer of
the watch for the purpose of washing decks, and the race then is to
get one’s bedclothes below, and then for the tub : after which a pipe
and a novel are the general order of the day until breakfast.
I am, Sir,
A CONSTANT BATHER.
Sporting. —Owing to the heat of the weather, we regret to say that
nothing in this line has to be recorded.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
There are various opinions as to whom Melville was, but one thing is
certain, the name Melville was assumed. Some say that ho was tho son
of a Baronet in the north of Ireland, others that his father was a Clergy.
man of the Scottish Church, but all agree that in personal appeareiice
and in manners, he was far above the canaille. His height was about
five feet eight or nine inches, his complexion fair, and he was of a well-
knit wiry frame.
One day a gentleman whom we shall call Dick Simpson, was in the bar
of Mr. McKenzie’s Inn, at Kilmore, when three horsemen galloped up to
the door. The first was dressed as a squatter, with leather coat, bedford
cords, and top boots. The other two were in the garb of stockmen, viz.,
blue shirts, cabbage-tree hats, and stock-whips hanging back of the
lappels of the saddles. The principal ordered a private room and some
brandy to be sent in. Well, little Dick Simpson remained at tho bar,
when a person, whom ho knew as the Sergeant of Police in private clothes
entered, accompanied by a black trooper.
Ho enquired of McKenzie whether three men, describing the first
arrivals had come. He replied that they were in the parlour. The two
policemen rctiied, and as soon as they were gone, Dick entered the
parlour, asked the leader to speak to him in private. He said, “ excuse
me, sir, but f have heard the Sergeant of Police making enquiries about
you, and I don’t like to see a man in a fix, so I thought I'd tell you, and
give you an opppoitunity to get away, if there is anything against you.’’
(To he continued )


TEE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 5, 1863.
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
he has been able to obtain since leaving New York. He says that a
most inhuman and heartless practice exists on board ships now-a-days,
so that when a man does fortunately fall overboard, the ship’s officers
always put themselves to a great deal of trouble in order to recover
him, and the sad consequence is that the mail service is almost starved
out.
To C. J. O.—Owing to the number of contributions for this week’s
paper, only one of yours can be inserted. We would also suggest that if
they were a little shorter, they would be easier for publication.
N, B.—The author of “The Young Idea”: Owing to the want of
space and the late hour of receiving it, the editor begs to state that it
cannot appear till the next number.
He solemnly avers that he will never make another run, unless we on
our part engage at regular intervals, to toss overboard some of the
small fry, who at present (as he beautifully expresses it) encumber all
our decks, in the proportions of about 15 to the square foot.
Poet’s Comer.
He brings important news from the seat of war. On the 18th,
General Meade received information to the effect that General Lee at
the head of 80,000 Confederates was in full march for Washington.
Be brave my brother, tho’ thy enemies be strong,
Victor thou shalt prove, and wave the palm ere long,
Go preach the truth, whilst it is called to-day,
Follow the good and brave, who’ve trod the narrow way.
He at once ordered out his troops, and moved forward to oppose
him. After the column had advanced about six yards in the most
imposing order, General Meade discovered that he had left his best
woollen comforter behind him. Upon the discovery of this fearful
military blunder, a halt was at once sounded, and the commanding
officer said that he very much regretted to be obliged to inform the
troops that he must go home and fetch his comforter, and, therefore,
found it absolutely necessary to order a general retreat. Upon this
the men fell back and at once retired towards their cantonments
which they reached in good order and without the loss of a single
man. In the course of a couple of hours the General slipped forward
and feelingly addressed the troops in these words ;
Be bold my brother, choose well, lean alway to the right,
Then shall thy way be clear and all thy duties light,
Go learn of Christ who lives, the way, the truth,
Of thy ministry give to all full proof.
Be wise my brother, be slow to speak, be swift to hear.
Gird on thy sword and shield, cast out all fear,
Weak, I know thou art, yet seek strength above,
Strength to bear thy burden, strength to learn and love.
Be calm my brother, calm in the solemn hour of night,
Let nought thy power disturb, or thy soul affright,
Tlio’ far from friend and home, moorland and hill,
Christ thy Lord is near, and whispers, peace, be still.
“ My hardy veterans, Mrs. Meade won’t let me out any more to-
night, because she thinks ("dear soul) that the night will be too cold
and damp for me. In consequence, our brilliant and overpowering
advance will not be continued until the genial rays of the sun render
it safe for my health. As to those tarnation rebels, why I rather
guess and calculate that the bare knowledge of the fact that such a
gallant army is in existence, under the command (here the gallant
General’s hard and war-worn features were overspread by a deep
blush ot charming modesty), under the command of, I may say, such
an experienced, valiant, and undaunted soldier as myself. Why, the
very fact ot our existence, my brave fellows, will be amply sufficient
to send them all to everlasting squash.” General Meade advised the
troops to take a large bowl of warm gruel before they went to bed,
and then, in obedience to the loudly-reiterated orders of Mrs. Meade,
he at once left the damp night air and turned in. Owing to the
gallant General’s well-known military skill and daring, a great battle
was considered imminent when our mail left. C. J. 0.
Arise then my brother, t’is not the time for resting,
Soon thou shalt be beyond the struggling and resisting,
Thy master bids thee labor, whilst thou art here,
He bought thee by his blood, he brought thee near.
G. R. SMITH.
FRIGIDUM SINE VERSUS CALLIDUM CUM.
Frigidum sine
In callido die,
Is better when dining
Than callidum cum.
But when the evening
No lush intervening,
Our principal leaning,
Is to brandy or rum.
And in those pleasant hours,
For soothing life’s powers,
When dark evening lowers,
We often take some.
Official Reports.
To the Editor of the Mery Star Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I am pleased to report, for this week’s paper, that the
cases of illness on my list are fewer than they were last week, and
that the passengers generally (with a few exceptions) are gradually
improving in health, and bear the increase of heat (the mean tempera-
ture for this week being 82 degrees) better than might have been
expected.—l am, yours, truly,
(Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
But before retiring,
When our pipes we are firing,
And our thoughts are aspiring,
Tis. Frigidum sine.
Oh 1 Then cold without,
Is the stuff that we shout,
And ere we tarn out
'Tis the same Matutine.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE.
Dear Sir, —My report of the week is not so favorable as I could
wish, having lost the N.E. trades so very soon, but since that time we
are getting slants of wind which favor the good ship, and, I trust, that
in a short time we shall have the S.E. trades, when you will all be
enabled to resume your amusements and exercises. We are now
about 480 miles from the Line, 19 days from Cork.—l am, yours,
faithfully,
(Signed) W. H. YULE, Master.
Royal Shark Mail
The express mail shark “ Snapem ” has just arrived under our lee
quarter, direct from New York, and brings despatches and advices
up to the 30th- He regrets having enjoyed fine weather on the
passage, but complains bitterly of the paucity of sailors he picked up,
and declares that two legs and an arm, comprise the only nourishment


fflie ijieii Star (Sajdtt
0 % o
VIGILAHS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
SEPTEMBER
L 12, 1863.
Hot, hot, hot, the weather still continues to be, and we have for
the last week been in the “ Doldrums.” However, our good ship
manages to creep along, and we have overhauled and passed
several ships, bound from our sea-girt native land to all parts of
the universe. On Tuesday we came up with a ship which shewed
Yankee colors —the “ stars and stripes” ran up in answer to the
English ensign. She proved to be the “ Atalanta,” of New York,
bound from Hull for Monte Video. We also signalized the “John
Bunyan,” from London for Otago, New Zealand. On Tuesday
we saw the first nautilus, called by the sailors “ Portuguese men-
of-war." They look like diminutive boats with beautiful pink sails,
but when taken on board shut up their sails and subside into a
mass of jelly or blubber. A very extraordinary sensation is
produced by touching them —an electric shock runs quite through
the body, and the fingers with which you touch the nautilus
become benumbed. Porpoises with their usual gambols have been
seen jumping and playing around our bows. Some of our
passengers went forward to try and shoot one with rifle-balls, but
did not succeed. A breeze sprang up on the 9th, which (although
not in the right direction) “ wafts us on our way.” We are
making westerly, and hope by Sunday to cross the Line, should
things go on in our good ship as favorably as they have commenced
(by the Providence of the Almighty) our run is sure to “ eventuate
in a spanker.”
Correspondence.
To the Editor of the Eiery Star Gazette.
Dear Sir, —I picked up the following verses on the quarter-deck. I
presume they must have been written by some maniac, viz,;—
This is the ship, called the Fiery Star,
Commanded hy Yule, a regular tar ;
This is the Mate, so very sedate,
Who keeps the good ship all neat and straight;
This is the Doctor, so weary and worn,
Looking after the sick from night till morn;
This is the Purser, who talks so fine,
And bids us make merry “ on bad port wine
This is the Lady, all forlorn,
Who weeps over crinoline ragged and torn;
This is the Parson, who bids us pray,
And says smoking’s not right on the Sabbath Day;
And these are the Ladies, so blithe and gay,
Both singing and dancing all the day ;
And this is the Lady, “ so very straight-laced,”
Who declares such doings are quite misplaced;
And these are the Gents, “ so very polite,”
Who sat drinking and singing through all the night;
And this is the Steward, driven nearly mad,
By the conduct of gentlemen really too bad ;
And this is the celebrated S. D. Club,
About which there has been so much hubbub;
And this is the Baker, who bakes the bread,
And oftentimes makes it heavy as lead ;
And these are the Priests, “all shaven and shorn,”
As jolly good fellows as ever were born ;
In Christian charity they excel,
And from our hearts we wish them well;
So—so, success to the Crew of the Fiery Star,
May they always prosper wherever they are.
September 9, 1863. Ist CABIN, Fiery Star.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette,
Dear Mr. Kjiituk, —May I trespass on a portion of your very interest-
ing journal for the insertion of the accompanying verses on the “ Ocean,”
suggested while watching from the poop the other night.—l am, dear Sir,
your obedient servant, THOS. P. HASLAM.
Oh, monstrous ocean, what thoughts possessed me,
While on your bosom my first sleep I took;
What strange sensations crept stealing o’er me,
As on your wildness I cast a look.
Oh, fearful ocean, who can behold thee
Without emotions of joy and fear ;
What heart can fathom thy strangeful dealings,
Which gladden some men, make others fear.
Oh, sublime ocean, how grand to gaze on
Thy surging billows when lashed by storm ;
Oh, Sea Majestic, thy sight is awful,
When waves like mountains upon thee form.
Oh, wond’rous ocean, to man how useful,
Though fury lash thee or foam bestride,
Upon thy waters he rides securely.
And masters thee by wind and tide.
Oh, mighty ocean, in strength how noble,
In expanse greater than twice all lands,
In wealth abounding more than is found in
Australia’s fields, or in Africa’s sands.
Oh, glorious ocean, thy roaring billows,
In accents sweet aloud proclaim
The mighty power of Him who bade thee
Stretch far and wide thy grand domain.
Ob, man then join it, in raising praises,
To Him, the Author of all we see,
Let not the waters, so foully shame thee,
By Solus singing His majesty.
T. P. H.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
“ Thank you, young follow,” replied the stranger, “ you are a jolly
cock. Here," he reached forward his hand, and pressed twenty sovereigns
upon Simpson’s acceptance, who, however, declined it, with thanks.
“Well,” he said, “we 11 most likely meet again, and believe me, you
won’t find me ungrateful.” One of the party had left the room, and just
then came up to the front door with the horses. They finished their grog,
mounted, and made off. Dick Simpson remained in Kilmore for some
days after, in fact (in the old colonial style) until his money was nearly
gone. He then thought it time to mount his horse and go up the bush,
and knock in somewhere. In those days the Ovens diggings were going
a-head. Eldorado and the woolshed were yielding enormous _ fortunes.
I have known men go on to those diggings with only thirty shillings for
license fee, a pick, shovel, and pair of blankets, who in six months were
worth ten thousand pounds. The general way with men was (if unlucky)
to go on a station, and either shear, wash, or sort wool, or press ; or. in
fact, to turn to any job they could get. Their pay was very good. The
lowest wages given being, one pound per week with rations. Hundreds
of young men of family and education came out, as well as professional
men. I have known on Moke Billy station (belonging to Donald
Campbell, near the Wimmera), a lawyer, and Dr., a captain in the army,
and a civil engineer, shepherding and hutkeeping. To return from this
digression, Dick Simpson rode on until he came to a station, the propriety
of which we shall call Fanshaw. Dick rode up to the station and asked if tha


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 1863.
shearing had begun. Oh, Dick, replied Mr. Fanshawe, we should make
out a job for you under any circumstances, however you are just in time
for the shearing; put your horses in the paddock, and go down to the
hut. Come up this evening and we can sign the agreement, I give thirty
shillings a hundred and rations, two pairs of shears, so we can set to
work to-morrow morning.
{To he continued,.')
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Dear Mb. Editor, —From the general tenor of your widely circulated
journal, which is read by nearly all our population on board, I perceive
you not only advocate all amusements tending to promote the physical
condition of the passengers, but by your example stimulate them to
healthful exercise, which is so needful for persons whose sphere of action
is so circumscribed, and whose dietary scale is so different from what they
have been accustomed to.
Seeing, then, you take so active a part in encouraging by precept and
example what is so essential to health, lam greatly puzzled to know why
a greater number do not avail themselves of the sports, which seem
almost exclusively confined to the first cabin passengers, as if the others
did not require any cheerful exercise whatever to break the monotony of
the voyage, independently of healthful considerations. It appears to me
the amusement should be more general, for the welfare of the more
healthy depends largely on that of the less, as, should sickness seize on the
latter either from inertness or aught else, the contagion may extend to
the former; hence, for the general safety, it is incumbent on those who
possess influence not only to promote their own health but to look in time
to the health of others, and strive energetically to create a taste for manly
exercises among those who, from day to day, lie listlessly stretched under a
tropical sun. There are many musicians among us, and, as dancing is a
favorite pastime and healthy recreation, it appears to me if the polka,
quadrille, jig, and reel were but encouraged, the feeling of ennui which
possesses many would give way to joy and gladness, and the fear of sick-
ness be little thought of. Many objections may be raised by the authori-
ties against the promiscuous mingling of the sexes, as must needs be, in
the dance; but, in reply, to all such I would say that if the ladies and
gentlemen of the first cabin can, without harm, whirl through the mazy
waltz and exciting jig, there should be a privilege allowed the more hum-
ble passengers, many of whom are, I am sure, as choice of their reputation
as their more wealthy brethren. Let the dancing cease when darkness
prevails or when evils are likely to arise, but to prevent healthful recrea-
tion because of imaginary abuses, is little mindedness and unworthy of
philanthropy.—l am, dear Mr. Editor, A LOVEE OF FAIR FLAY.
AMUSEMENTS.
Quoits —On Wednesday morning this amusing game came suddenly
into fashion, and the passion for it has since been raging madly throughout
the ship. We believe it was commenced after bathing on Wednesday
morning, by Messrs. Lynde and Somerset, and Wilmot and Corrie playing
a match, which, after being well contested, resulted in a victory for the
former. Since then, as we have before remarked, quoits seem to be the
ruling passion in the ship. With regard to other more athletic sports, we
arc sony to say that the heat of the weather, combined with the excee 1-
ingly short interval between sunset and dark, have almost entirely
debarred any one from taking part in them, but we trust that when we
get into cooler latitudes we may see them renewed with as much vigour
as they were previously carried on.
Dancing, however, has been carried on, nightly, to the tune of the
fiddle, and from the amount of amusement it creates, should certainly
have had the first instead of the last place in the list.
Boxing.—A most amusing boxing match took place yesterday, between
Mr. F and Mr. C . The former is a gentleman of about six feet
two, and about the same width round the waist; the latter considerably
smaller, in fact, about a quarter the size and weight of his adversary,
it appears to have originated through the playfulness of Mr. C., who
threw a quoit at Mr. F.’s head. That gentleman thought it was a ease
where satisfaction was required. Whereupon a meeting was agreed on
the next morning, at 4 a.m., when they were to present themselves duly
armed with pistols. It was then suggested by a bystander, that they
should be respectively slung up to the mizen and mainyard-arms, and, in
that position to pop at each other, in which case the man who received his
adversay’s ball, would drop overboard, and thus save the trouble of a
general service. However they came to a more amicable arrangement,
and it was agreeed that they should set to with the gloves. Mr. C.
being the more active, succeeded in finding his way pretty smartly into
the rotund bread-basket of his adversary. Mr. P. was not loth in returning
on his adversary’s nut, with one of which he sent him sprawling on the
deck, being the first knock-down blow for Mr. F. Several rounds followed,
in which various advantages were obtained, and one or other of them figured
on the deck; but Mr. G.’s well-directed blows at his gigantic adversary’s
middle waistcoat button began to tell fearfully, as might be seen from the
puffing and panting that ensued. Mr. F. began now to set to work in
earnest, but many of his heavy blows fell short of the object in view, viz.
(Mr. C.’s nose), or else passed harmlessly over his head. In the last
round, after Mr. 0. had dealt a heavy and well-placed blow on the bread-
basket, they came to close quarters, and Mr. P. endeavoured to get his
adversary's head in chancery, but not quite succeeding, he dealt him a
b.ow on his nasal projection, which tapped his claret, and thus brought
an end to a scene which might otherwise have lasted much longer. We
hove only to thank them both for the amusement they afforded to the
spectators, and to hope that they are neither of them the worse for the
struggle. A. Spectator, No. 1 Cabin.
Mr. Editor, —Having seen this morning a communication from a
“ Lover of Fair Play,’’ I think the same calls for an answer. In the first
instance, a “ Lover of Fair Play ” wonders why the second cabin passen-
gers do not, as well as the first, make up some sports by which to while
away the long hours—so do I. Surely, however, the fault rests entirely
with themselves and not with us. Your correspondent allows that there
are many musicians on board, and may I enquire who it is that wishes to
prevent him from dancing. There are, I believe, several ladies in the
second cabin who would not object to dancing, neither, as far as I can see,
would the Doctor raise any objection, except, perhaps, as regards those
placed more particularly under bis care. Then, as regards athletic exer-
cises, there are boxing-gloves, quoits, and single-stick always at band,
either for first or second passengers, and the day is long enough for all
hands to jump and play leap frog as long as they see fit, w hich, however,
in these latitudes, is rendered nearly impossible by the heat of the sun.
One thing I arn certain of, viz., that neither Captain Yule nor any of the
cabin passengers would, on any account, throw any unnecessary obstacle
in tile way of the others enjoying any of the few recreations that can
possibly be obtained on board ship, and as an earnest I would propose that
the second cabin passengers should select five men from amongst them-
selves to jump against five from the cuddy. By inserting this in reply to
a “ Lover of Fair Play,” you will oblige, yours, sincerely, ANOTHER.
AN IRISHMAN’S LAMENT.
Official Seports.
Oh, Ireland, mavourneen, it’s you that I’m laving,
To sail o’er the distant blue say,
Och, it’s sorry I am that from you I e’er parted,
B id luck that I e’er came aw’ay.
Tho’ sailing away from thee, o’er the wide ocean,
My loving gaze turns still to thee,
liedad, it’s the place wdiere you should be I’m inaning,
For my eyes only fall on the say.
Oh, Erin, avourneen, it’s oppressed by the Saxon,
'Thou land of the brave that thou art,
When I think of thy wrongs it’s the fire of devotion,
And of patriotism thrills thro’ my heart.
And I feel as if now I could skip o’er the ocean,
And ne’er let my dire veogence cool,
TUI the proud haughty Saxon had learned to tremble
At the dread name of Phelim O'Toole.
But, all, these proud thoughts which a patriot make me,
Only drames of my fancy they are,
For my proud heart I’m bound to be after restraining,
To the bounds of this ould Fiery Star.
But though to Australia it’s now I am going,
Still my tlioughs fondly turn o’er the say,
And be sure Erin dirlint when fortune has blessed me,
I’ll return, oh my country, to thee.
Dear Sib, —During the last week I have to report a greater number
of oases than usual (of various kinds) although none, I am
glad to add, assuming a dangerous character, with the exception of throe
or four children who remain in a low and emaciated condition, with
but little hope of their rallying. The sanitary condition of the ship,
however (for the crowded state of her), is, on the whole, satisfactory, but
I would nevertheless stiongly advise all, particularly those in the ’tween
decks, to lie especially careful to keep their berths clean, and get all the
ventilation the}' possibly can; also, on no account to wash any clothes,
or allow an} 7 damp things to hang up in them, such being very likely to
give rise (if not having already done so) to many complaints which other-
wise might be avoided. I would likewise earnestly recommend every one
who is able, to be on deck as much as possible during the day while we
are so highly favoured with this most auspicious and cool weather.
I am, dear Sir, yours, faithfully, (Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir,— In my report for the week I am sorry to say I cannot
record much progress since last Saturday. The wind has continued
without intermission from the southward, which has delayed our good
ship a considerable time to the northward of the Line. We are stiil 100
miles from the L'ne, and 1 think, from observation, that we have now
got the trade wind, if so, we may still expect a very fair run to Moreton
Bay, as you are well aware there are few, if any, ships afloat which will
outsail the Fiery Star. Trusting I shall not have another week’s un-
favourable report to make between this and your desired haven.—l remain,
PHELIM O’TOOLE.
yours, faithfully,
(Signed) W. H. YULE.


®lje Jfitrjj Jitirr li'M'.rttc.
SATURDAY,
On the 14th instant we crossed the Line. The old custom of
Shaving has been exploded, but various were the dead “marines”
of champagne, claret, beer, and porter, on the great occasion.
Showing the Line to the “New Chums” caused a good deal of
merriment, but only a few were to be caught with chaff; the
dodge of the hair across the glass, being now-a-days pretty well
known. We had very warm weather up to the 16th, but it is now
getting gradually cooler, and is very pleasent on deck. Dancing
in the evening has been latterly kept up with vigour, and the
ladies’ “beauty sleep” rendered sounder and more refreshing. We
can assert from our own observation that the roses on the cheeks
of our fair friends look clearer and more brilliant, since they have
resumed “the light fantastic mazes ” than they did before. The
Schottische, Polka, Quadrilles, Sir Roger, &c., were kept up with
great spirit last night. The bull-board is the game during the
day and the gentlemen seldom allow the board to remain idle. The
ladies also intend getting up a match. It is an athletic and
graceful game. On Wednesday we were 160 miles from Per-
nambuco on the coast of South America. The currents setting in
landward have obliged us to sail very near the wind. But when
once we get down a little more south, we shall (D. Y.) not be long
before we reach the Cape of Good Hope, and hurrah for Queensland.
FACETIAE.
A Donkey Race. — A nice-looking squad “ o’ hoys,’’ girls, men, women,
and children, to whom might be applied the Ballyporeen stanza; —
“ The banks of ould Shannon ne’er saw such a group ”
entered the Court promiscuously, and were with no little difficulty put into
tolerable order. After a while it was ascertained that a cadaverous looking
individual, rejoicing in the cognomen of “Batt Purtill,” was the complain-
ant, aud an equally interesting young man, a Mr. Owen Hawaiian, the
oefendant. It appeared that these gentlemen were possessed of a good strong
donkey each, and, having frequently differed on the mettle and speed of
the quadrupeds, agreed, on their way home from work a few evenings
before, “to try a hand-gallop for a piece,” both parties having been taking
a little refreshment previous to the start, and, of course, became head d
and greater asses than the beasts that bore them. “ ‘ That was just the
way, Sir,’ continued Batt, after a long and elaborate account of the affair.
‘ Push over, Owen,’ sis I, and the crathurs goin’ undher like mad, and
the back-baskets hoppiu’, hoppin’, an’ sihiildn’ ns on the legs. ‘Push
over agin,’ sis myself; 4 and give me room to dhraw my sthrike, or I’ll
make you.’ 4 Keep your own side of the road,’ sis he. 4 if you’re able,’
giviu’ me a fut undher the sowl of my shoe, an’ shpreadiu’ me out on the
place.” A host of witnesses now pressed forward to show that Owen
Hanrahan had been belied, and one, being sworn, deposed that 44 the
racin’asses (I don’t mane you, Batt, nor you, Owen) passed him on the
road, Misther Hanrahan holding down his head, an’ his baste lashin’ out
the hind legs like raurtin-r. Maybe Misther Purtill ’id dhraw near, an’
whin lie got a vacancy in the kicks ’tis a welt o’ the whip he’d give Owen
on the sate, cryin’, 4 give mo room to dhraw me sthroke,’ an’ 4 keep your
own side o’ the road.’ ’’ After a little farther investigation the Bench,
perceiving that the business bail originated in mirth and whiskey, gave
toe parties a lecture and dismissed them.
Laugh when you Must. —Connubial Felicity.— Mr, Slang used to
say "My horses, my boys.” Mr. Slang (availably now says 44 Our
horses, our hoys,” or 44 our farm.’’ This substitution of 44 our ’’ for 44 my’’
by Mr. Slang was brought about thus: —Mr. Slang had just married a
second wife. Oa tire day alter the wedding Mr. Slang casually remarked,
“ I now intend to enlarge my dairy.’’ “ You mean our dairy, mv dear, 1 ’
replied Mrs. Slang. “No,’’ quoth Mr. Slang, “I said, my' dairy.”
“ Say our dairy.’’ Mr. Slang, “ No, my dairy.’ “ Say our dairy, say
our dairy,” screamed Mrs. Slang, seizing the poker. “My dairy, my
dairy,” vociferated the husband. “ Our dairy, our dairy,’’ re-echoed the
wife, emphasising each “ our ” with a blow of the poker on the back of
the cringing spouse. Mr. Slang retreated under the bed-clothes and
remained there several minutes waiting for a calm. At length his wife
saw him thrusting his head out at the foot of the bed, much like a turtle’s
from his shell. “ What are you looking for, Mr. Slang ?’’ said she. “ I’m
looking, rny dear,” snivelled he, to see anything of oub hat !’’ The
struggle was over. It was “ our horses, our dairyand on the next
Sunday morning he very humbly asked her if he might not wear “ our
clean linen breeches ” to church!
Interesting to our Future Bushmen. —Why are shepherds like
clerks? The latter use the pen, and the former pen the ewes.
Will the Fiery Star lighten up the Yule Log with a blaze of reputation ?
We hope so.
CHARADE.
My first, when fixed in heart of man,
Makes passion reign supreme;
My second through a concave’s span
Shines forth with twinkling beam.
But both united through the foam
Dash with the lightnings speed,
While hundreds safe within it roam
And at its table feed.
To Readers. —The Editor begs to intimate that all contributions of
Paeßtiffi, Conundrums, Enigmas, &c., will be highly acceptable, and trusts
that all passengers will exercise their ingenuity to provide a fund of
amusement for the voyage.
The Editor lias much pleasure in inserting the following letter which,
by some oversight, was omitted in last week’s issue. It is but one of the
many good opinions which prevail regarding our worthy Doctor ;
Ship Fiery Star, September, 1863.
Dr. Luce —Sir, — l beg to return you my sincere thanks for the kind
attention I have received from you and others on board tie Fiery Star,
during my late severe illness, the memory of which will leave a grateful
and lasting impression on my heart, also on that of my fond parents, and
those in my happy and distant home.—l am, Sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) BESSIE JOHNS.
Poet’s Corner.
REFLECTIONS OF A VOYAGER.
How little I thought in the glad days of childhood,
My fortune I’d seek in a country afar,
Who then could persuade me, the ocean, I now would
Be rocked on, for weeks iu the ship “ Fiery Star. ”
In youth’s pleasant years other feelings possessed me,
Not then did my fancy lead roving so far,
I would not believe it, had prophesy told me,
I’d sail for Brisbane in the ship 44 Fiery Star.”
E’en manhoods’ ripe years for a season n’er dreamt of
Aught likely to rice my youths pleasures to mar ;
Till fortune cruel jade looked iu darkle upon me,
And forced me from home in the ship •’ Fiery Star ’’
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SEPTEMBER
19, 1863.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 1863.
Alas for my country thou sweet little island,
Though heaven has blessed thee with much that is fair,
Though noble thy children, hospitable, brave, and
Possesed of all virtues, none others can share.
the charm from spectators’ eyes, and ladies whomight have won admiration
in another scene, lose the power of their attractions, in the obscurity of
light. But we know the ladies have another aim in view. They want
exercise, which, with this exception, is denied to them. Then we can
only say once more, “On with the dance, let joy be unconfined.’’
Q norma.—Since the bull board was introduced this game has suffered
total neglect, but as these two amusements are almost similar and require
the same kind of skill, we may anticipate that quoits will be in request
when the novelty of the bull-board has somewhat lessened. We have
still, however, to record one interesting match at quoits, which took place
a few days ago. Fath«r Goulding and Mr. Higginson represented th.
first, and Messrs. Hunter and Bell the second cabin. The side which hat
the best of the rubber—three games—was to be declared winner. The
first score was well contested, but the second cabin suffered defeat, which,
however, they cleverly reversed in the second game. The match was
now equal, and each side left no stone unturned to win the deciding
score. Victory at length favoured the first cabin, after a very exciting
game. The sides were nearly equal, and it is but possible Messrs. Hunter
and Bell may retrieve their defeat on some future day.
Yet fate’s dark decree has declared that your masters
Be those who are aliens in kindred and creed ;
Therefore are her feelings despised and neglected,
And everything done, save what you most need.
But away with reflections so darkly disheartening,
We’Jl turn to a picture much brighter by far
And cheer up our souls with thoughts more enlivening,
While we dash through the waves in our good “ Fiery Star. ”
We’ll think on the rich land to which we are going,
Its freedom from all that is selfish and low,
We’ll raise up our spirits ond keep them high-flowing
Till we feel disappointed-which may none of us know.
And if fortune blesses our earnest endeavour
Hereafter to gain the prize we all seek,
To our homes aud our country, we yet shall return
And gladden the hearts, our absence that weep.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
On the next morning the shearing commenced. Now, a person
unacquainted with Australian bush life can form no idea as to the
excitement caused on a station by the shearing time. A man who,
perhaps, yesterday was wandering with his swag on his back from
shepherd’s hut to shepherd’s hut, as soon as he has knocked in for
shearing, becomes suddenly as rowdy as possible, and most difficult to
be pleased. The shearers must have the fattest sheep in the flock,
or the best bullock in the herd, not only that, but they must have
brandy, rum, &c., three times a day, and chutney, mustard, vinegar,
red pepper, &c. (things that are hardly ever thought of in the bush)
become “ household words.”
Then hurrah, loud hurrah for expected Queensland,
May the winds and the waters our journey not mar,
May no evils arise from the passenger’s own hand,
Then landed we’ll drink—“ To our good Fiery Star. ”
T. P. H, 2nd Cabin.
FORWARD,
As the soldier, when beseiging.
Bravely climbs the circling wall,
And attains its topmost ridging,
Though the faint heart hopeless fall.
So be yours—to climb unceasing
Up the height that leads to fame,
Not contented with the leasing
Of a perishable name.
On the first morning of Mr. Fanshaw’s shearing the men returned
to breakfast about nine o’clock in the morning. While they sat at
breakfast (the doors were open and every means taken to keep cool)
a traveller, carrying a bundle which appeared to contain one shirt,
came up to the hut. Now, any person that comes to a hut in the
colonies is heartily welcomed at any time, more particularly during
shearing. On the morning of which we speak the men were coiling
and enjoying themselves, when a very weary-looking traveller came
in. _ “ Good morning, boys,” said the new comer. A man who was
sitting next the door replied “ Good morning.” The hospitable feel-
ing of an Australian shearer, shepherd, stockman, or, in fact, whatever
position a man fills, is always, “ Oomme il faut.” So the people on
the Seven Creeks sat down to breakfast.
So be yours—though others tiring—
Flag behind the onward flow,
With such aims, your heart inspiring,
To uphold you as you go.
Yet remember—fame comprises
’Neath her massive silver wings,
The whisper’d rumour which arises
From the doing sinful things.
With thy mind—such actions shunning—
Firmly fixed on her best goal,
The stream of life—while constant running—
Will make heaven of thy soul.
To the Editor of the Mery Star Gazette.
Mu. Editor, —Daring the past few days the monotony of the voyage
appears to have been felt more than ever among all classes of our
passengers. Even the excitement caused by the first appearance of the
bull-board seems to have worn off, and, except for the few hours between
tubbing and breakfast-time, and after sunset, there appears to be but little
lite left in any one of the community. The sole object of everybody’s life
now seems to be how to kill time, from morning till bed time, and of all
the various expedients we have seen tried, sleeping and eating appear to
be the most approved methods. If any of your correspondents can sug-
gest any better mode of whiling away the sultry hours, which does not
involve the slightest exertion either mental or physical, he will confer
a great favor upon the afflicted portion of our community, and espe-
cially upon Yours, sincerely, A VICTIM TO ENNUI.
Thus the sweetest consolations —
Life well spent —and duty done, —
Will cheer thy death—while great ovations
Wait thee for the victory won.
JUVENIS.
THE THIRTY REQUISITES.
Thirty points of perfection each judge understands,
The standard of feminine beauty demands,
Three white, and without further prelude we know,
That the hands skin and teeth should be pearly as snow;
Three black, and our standard departure forbids,
From dark eyes, darksome tresses, and darkly fringed lids;
Three red. and the lover of comliness seeks,
For the line of the rose in the lips, nails, and cheeks ;
Three long, and of this you no donbt are aware.
Long the body should be, long the hands, long the hair;
Three short and herein nicest beauty appears.
Feet short as fairies, short teeth, and short ears ;
Three large, and remember this rule as to size,
Embraces the shoulders, the forehead, the eyes;
Three narrow, a maxim to every man’s taste.
Circumference small in mouth, ankle, and waist.
Three round, and in this I see infinite charms,
Rounded mlness apparent in leg, hip. and arms;
Three fine, and can aught the enchantment eclipse,
Of fine rapering fingers, fine hair, and fine hips,
Three small, aud my thirty essentials are t -Id,
Small the head, nose, and bosom compact in its mould.
Now the dame who comprises attractions like these,
Will not need the cestus of Venn* to please,
Whilst he who has met with a union so rare
Has had better luck, than has fallen to my share.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —During the week there have been two deaths among the
children I alluded to in my last week’s report. There have been also
two births, and I am glad to add that at the present time both mothers
and babes (ocean sons) are doing well. The amount of sickness and
debility throughout the vessel is, on the whole, rather decreasing, and the
cool and balmy zephvrs we have been so highly favored with lately (and
which X sincerely trust may continue) certainly tend in no small measure
to improve the health, strength, and spirits of the invalids generally,
(Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir,— My report for the week is rather unfavourable, having
made little progress. The B.E. trades have been very shy, hanging from
the southward, which has driven us down off the Brazil coast. In all
my experience I hare never yet met with a worse S.E. trade, being light
and scant. However, vve must not complain, as we have had fine cool
weather, which is a great blessing, for the sake of .my passengers’ health.
My good ship is now like a race-horse bridled in, ready to go off when she
gets a chance. We are now 30 days out, lat. 14 deg. 18 min.; long. 36
deg. 26 min., which is a very long time, hut 1 hope with favourable winds
and a flowing sea still to reach our desired haven after a fair passage. X
hope to reach Brisbane in about 50 days from this date. W. H. YULE.
Duel Board—-As remarked in another column, this game like every
) ■ velty has created great excitement among the athletic of the community.
Tor several days the game was carried on by the Ist Cabin passengers
with accustomed vigour. However the board was removed yesterday to
the poop-deck, and doubtless several interesting, matches will ensue, when
practice has given the gentlemen of the second Cabin, a knowledge of
the game.
Dancino—As the shades of night close oe’r us the fiddler finds himself a
man of importance, and we only regret that the graceful movements of the
nanceis cannot be displaced to greater advantage, Darkness takes away


$T v XCT IT
6 yi <o
§tar (iajtttt
VIGILANS ET ATJDAX.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 1863.
W* have at length got a fair wind and are lying our course,
which is a great source of gratification to our worthy and
respected Captain, as well as to all in the good ship “ Fiery
Star.” Many eases of an hysterical nature have occurred in
the single female’s cabin, which have caused much anxiety
to our indefatigable and much respected Doctor. We are
happy to say that, notwithstanding his severe work, both
mental and bodily, his usual good looks and good humour
remain in statu quo. We have had wet weather for some few
days, which drives many below, and the numbers collected
in the cabin make it uncomfortably warm, but when we are
able to wrap ourselves in two coats and keep on deck, we
shall both eat and sleep better, and “ what is the world to
the man who can’t eat and sleep.” One good has accrued,
however, viz., the ladies who have hitherto neglected the
piano now come down and regale our ears with a concord of
sweet sounds, both vocal and instrumental.
A melancholy cermonial took place on Tuesday, viz., the
burial of an interesting little girl, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Black, of the second cabin. A burial at sea is a solemn and
trying cemrony, and has often been described, but no one who
has not witnessed it can know the feelings of deep regret with
which even a stranger sees the body consigned to the vasty
deep. YVhat then must be the grief of the bereaved parents,
around whose knees the departed had played or prattled in
happier hours, and whose tottering footsteps they watched
with such anxious hopefulness.
The second cabin passengeis, who have hitherto kept aloof
from their brethern of the cuddy, we are very glad to see now
fraternize and enjoy the amusements. Concerts, dancing,
quoits, hull-board, &c., have been much indulged in, and that
great source of health and comfort, the cold water butt, early
in the morning, has become the order of the day. On Thurs-
day last we experienced the first calm of any duration since
we left home, and though of course very annoying to our
worthy Captain and his passengers, it afforded a capital
opportunity for pistol and rifle practice, and the bottles that
floated round the ship made first-rate targets. Some capital
shooting was made by both first and second cabin passengers ;
but a floating bottle, especially when fired at from a rolling
vessel, is a most difficult mark to hit, and though some hun-
dred shots were fired, about half-a-dozen bottles and two tir-
pots were, we believe, the extent of the bag. A splendid
breeze, however, sprung up in the afternoon, which has
steadily been increasing, and the good ship has since been
speeding to the southward, at the rate of 11 and 12 knots per
hour. On Friday afternoon the wind increased considerably,
and the sky wore so threatening an aspect that the ship was
soon stripped of her “ muslin,” and thrashing her onward
way under close-reefed topsails and reefed foresail. The wind
continued through the night, and the ship, as might have
been expected, gave us a little rolling. Just as we are going
“to press ” we are glad to be able to report that the wind has
shifted right aft, and even as we now write we hear the wel-
ome voice of the seamen singing cheerily while they make sail.
TRIAL BY COURT MARTIAL.
A drum-head court-martial was formed the other day by the members of
the first cabin to try certain of the younger members of the community
for a grand breach of order and regularity, whereby much annoyance and
inconvenience was caused to the rest of their fellow-passengers. Th»
prisoners, attended by two sworn constables, were accordingly brought
forward, and their examination proceeded with one by one. The prisoners
and jury having been put upon their “bob," the president commenced
their cross-examination. The first prisoner totally denied the charges put
against him, and attempted to shew that he had no hand in the affair; but
from questions brought forward in the examination of the other prisoner,
the first was found guilty of having petjured himself, which the court
considered a very grave offence. The prisoners frequently showed great
contempt of the court before which they were arraigned, and had to be
called to their senses by the constables. The examinatn n being finished,
the president declared all the charges proven except 01 e ; but suspicions
rested so strongly upon one of tire prisoners, that it was not till after a
most able defence from the advocate of the prisoners (represented by the
Doctor) that the favor of the doubt was yielded to them. One prisoner
was acquitted with a severe reprimand against a like proceeding! and the
other two were sentenced to tub every morning under the supervision of
the court then assembled, which sentence was rigourously carried out th«
next morning.
A JUROR.
ACROSTIC.
Air.—“ Gaily Goes the Ship,"
F ar from our Island home,
1 n the Fiery Star we roam,
E upland we leave behind us on our lee;
K ight a-head we quickly glide,
Y acht-like with wind and tide,
S cudding o’er the troubled waters of the sea ;
T ill the oc an in our wake.
E. A, C.
AN ALPHABET.
A is the Anchor of the Fiery Star.
B is the Bowsprit, a magnificent spar.
0 is the Captain so courteous and gay.
I) is the Doctor who works night and day.
E is the Ensign all nations respect.
F is the Forefoot the ocean that cleft.
G are the Gaskets for furling the sail.
H is the Helm which we hope will not fail.
1 is the Island which behind us we’ve left.
J is the Jib which lately was reft.
K is the Keel in the waters so deep.
L is the Loir which our skinper doth keep.
M are the Mates who keep watch all the night.
N are the Nips in which sailors dedght.
O i- the t >akum which keeps the ship sound.
P is the Port to v, hieh we are bound.
Q is the Quarter-master who ne’er opens lip.
K is the Rudder that guides the good ship.
S are the Sails swiftly wafting us on.
T are the Topmasts both pliant and strong.
U is the Uppermost sail on the mast,
V is the Vane which above it is fast.
W is the Wake which behind us we leave.
X are the X-trees we really believe.
Y stands for Yule whom we, all of us love.
Z for the Zany who wrote the above.
(Signed) E. D. F. & E. A. C.
A s our watery way we make,
K oars—gaily goes the ship when the wind blows free,


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 1863.
Poet’s Corner.
OCEAN VERSES.
Of the Fiery Star’s officers I’ll give you a sketch,
Which I send in the light of a friend,
Pardon me if in some things the long bow I stretch,
For I’m sure I’ve no wish to offend.
First comes the Captain of this gallant ship,
Who a responsible position dues hold,
His praises resound on every lip,
No matter of young or of old.
Next comes the Doctor, who, when you are ill,
You must own is a most welcome man ;
To keep people healthy, with potion and pill,
I assure you he’ll do all he can.
Next comes the First Mate, a mod seamanliko fellow,
Who to his power always gives sway.
When giving his orders, Oh! Lord don’t he bellow,
Him the seaman do well to obey.
Then comes the Second Mate, who I know you will swear
Is a regular jolly old cock,
At spinning a yarn none with him can compare,
He’s a regular chip of the block.
Next comes the Third Mate, I’ll not mention his name,
He’s always found at his post;
The officers in general I’m -uro none can blame,
But on the other hand, of them can boast.
To the officers then this toast I will give,
In our esteem ne’er may they fall,
In health and prosperity long may they live,
So let’s drink success to them all.
(Signed) E. R. C
Advertisement.
IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT.
A PUBLIC AUCTION of Miscellaneous Articles will take place on
Friday next, October 2nd, at 10*30 a.ra.. in the house on deck.
Any parties having articles for Sale will please advhe the Auctioneer with
particulars before Thursday, as no articles will be received after 12 o’clock
on that day. (Signed) G. R. BELL,
Auctioneer.
LOST, a BUNCH of KEYS, Four in Number, fixed on a Steed Ring.
Any person finding them will please give them to the STEWARD
of the Second Cabin Deck-house.
AMUSEMENTS.
Whist.— On Saturday evening a very interesting game of whist was
played between the first and second cabin passengers. Two rubbers were
well contested and resulted in the defeat of the first cabin in both rubbers.
We understand that the first cabin are not satisfied and the second cabin
players will be happy to give them an opportunity to turn the tables on
them. The players were—first—Messrs. Beaumont and Higginson;
second— Messrs. C. H. Smith and Hunter. On Friday evening the
return mitch referred to above was played between the first and sec-nd
cabin, ou which occasion the second cai in was represented by Messrs,
bmith and Hunter, and the first by Messrs. Beaumont and Corrie.
The blind goddess this time favored the first cabin who won two out of
the three rubbers played. The game was most evenly contested through-
out, and we shall be glad to see another match organised to decide
whether first or second cabin is to bear the palm.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
Contrary to the colonial custom of hospitality alluded to above, not one
of the shearers on Mr. Fanshaw’s station asked the stranger to break-
fast, who sat down upon a log outside the door and said, “Well, I
suppose I may stop here long enough before any of you ask me whether
I have a mouth.” “ Yes, replied a surly-looking fellow, sit there like
any other b~y dog.’’ “Oh, mate,” said the stranger, ‘'you might
offbr a fellow who has been ah the night in the bush a drink of tea.”
Wait tdl your betters are served,” replied the surly man, and the
other inmates laughed approval. The stranger took up his bundle and
| turned to go away, when a young woman, the wife of the bullock-driver,
| who had a but to himself, as bullock-drivers, who are generally married
i men have, said, “ come in here, mister, and have a drink of milk.” The
I stranger turned, with a flashed lace, and said, in a broad Scotch accent,
“Thank ye, missis, kindly. I will take your offer, an’believe me ye
shanna be sorry that ye extended the richt hand of fellowship to the
stranger.” He entered the hut and the woman put down bread and
butter and milk, and told him that he could cut off chopsC om a quarter
of mutton which hung behind the door. “ Na, na, mist he replied.
“ ye couldna gie me a feed more to my satisfaction than ye ha gien me.”
He then went over to the fire place, took up a Are-stick, lit his pipe,
saying, “ Well, good day, missis, I shall see ye again,” and departed. That
day was the best they had done for the season, many having by dinner-
time “ balled off” from fifty to eighty, and to dinner (12 o’clock) they
sat down in the highest spirits. Just as the cook had served up a roast
saddle of mutton, and was placing a most tempting looking pie on the
table, the clatter of horses’ hoofs were heaid, and four men galloped
into the yard. The person who appeared the principal called out,
“Within there, turn out every man.” The hut in a moment was
cleared, and all the men stood in the yard. “Here you cook,” said
the horseman, “ get as much rope as you can.’’ In the meantime the
other three stood with their revolvers in their hands pointed towards the
group of shearers. “Now,’’ said the new comer, “begin at the right,
and let each man tie his neighbour’s hands. The first who refuses will
get a ball through him.’’ They did so, and they were no sooner tied
all in a row than Mr. Fanshaw came down from the house. “ Mr. Fan-
shaw,” said the leader, “ you have a two-gallon keg of brandy. Let it
be brought down ; one of my men will help the cook to bring it.” He
then said, “ Mr. Fanshaw, bring down all your saddles and bridles here.”
The saddles were brought and the horseman turning to a man near
him, and whom they all recognized as the stranger who that morning
had come to the station. “ Here, Duncan, take your choice of those
saddles and bridles, and you, Bill, go and iide in the horses. Now,
Mr. Fanshaw,” he continued, “how many sheep have these men shorn
since they have commenced. I know the wages you give, viz., 30s.
per hundred, so you will be kind enough to draw a cheque for the full
amount and hand it over to me. Now, my men, take a nobbier each,
then unloose one of the shearers and let him serve out the brandy
while they can drink it. Duncan, point out the man who told you to
sit there like any other dog.’’ Duncan looked, and said he could not
tell. “ That’s queer,” returned the other, “ but I can see the pale
trembling coward myself: but you think I’d shoot him, I wouldn’t
waste a charge on the dirty varmint; but here, men, I’ll let you all
loose, and tell you Id scorn to take a fraction of your earnings if a
man could be found among you to ask my mate this morning to take
his breakfast.” Dick Simpson here stood forward and said, “ I saw you
before, and I hope you don’t think I’d see any man want a feed while I
could give it to him, I was fast asleep at breakfast-time or your mate
should have had as much as he could eat. Didn’t I see you in Kilmore?’’
“Yes. 5 ' “Mr. Fanshaw, what is coming to this man?’’ “Two
pounds.” “ Take it from that (handing back the cheque) and give it to
him and his missis.” He called to the bullock-driver’s wife. “ Here
are ten sous, and recollect whenever you meet hereafter gentlemen of
my profession to mention Captain Melville and you will be all right.”
The horses in the meantime had been ridden into the stockyard, and
Melville turning to Duncan said, “Take your choice.’’ Duncan fixed on
a nice-looking chesnut, and took Mr. Fanshaw’s own saddle and bridle,
put it on the horse and mounted. They then turned the rest of the horses
into the bush, ripped up the other saddles and rode off. The brandy now
tailing effect ui on the shearers, their grievances began to stare them in
the face, and they to a man turned upon the surly man, saying, “ You
b y wretch, only for you this would not have happened.” They
forthwith set to and nearly killed him.
{To he continued .)
LINES AFTER THE STYLE OF HIAWATHA.
From the shores of dear old England,
From the mighty town of London,
Sailed forth our goodly vessel,
Sailed forth upon the ocean ;
To contend with storms and tempests,
And in triumph bear us onwards
To the distant Port of Brisbane—
To the colony of Queensland.
And when night had come upon her,
And darkness cast her mantle o’er us,
Then the S. D. Club assembled —
Met together on the poop-dock,
Drank their sherry from a soap-dish,
Talked, and laughed, and quaffed their sherry,
While the ship was speeding onwards—
Onwards to her destination.


When we got into the “ Doldrums,’’
Quite becalmed our noble ship was,
Floating round upon the ocean,
'Round and round the .-hip wa- floating
Like a cork upsm a cock-pood—
Empty bottles floating round her,
While the passengers with pi-tols
Aimed and fired at the bottles.
Then arose the mighty east wind,
Hashing, roaring, from the eastward,
Raised on high, the surging billows,
Blew the spray into our faces.
Stowed, or reefed, was all our canvas,
Close-reefed was the mizen-topsail,
Sti'l the ship was struggling' onward —
Onward to her destination.
E. A. C.
Correspondence.
To the 'Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette .
Mr, Editor, — I have no doubt, from your previous experience of life
on board ship, that the idea of a Concert will be familiar to your mind.
Mow such an object could be as easily accomplished on board the Fiery
Star as in other emigrant ships. "We have a piano, and we have ladies to
play it, and I am sure there is sufficient musical talent in our first and
second cabins to furnish the vocal pare of the entertainment. lam also
inclined to think many of the passengers would feel grateful for the
amusement a Concert would provide : and, Mr. Editor, you would earn
their sincere thanks by lending your valuable assistance in the promotion
of such an object. I have no doubt you will find amateur performers
willing to render their best services, and a sufficient number of them to
give the Concert a tinge of variety.—l am, &c.,
JUVENIS.
Official Reports.
My Dear-Sir, —l have much pleasure in stating that the sanitary
condition of our good ship continues improving, and that the cases on my
daily list are consequently fewer in number. I must, however, beg you
will excuse my again urging the great importance 1 attach to the strictest
attention being paid to ventilation and cleanliness in every person’s berth
thioagbout the vessel, and the latter essential especially as regards the
surface of the decks both above and below. This I am fully persuaded,
from the long experience I have had and the close attention I have given
to sanitary measures generally, will tend more th ni any other means that
can be adopted on board the Fiery Star (which has a larger number of
passengers 1 believe by far, than any ship that has yet preceded her to
Queensland), to confirm the truth of the well-known proverb, that
ti Prevention is better than Cure.’’ I am sorry, however, I cannot
close my weekly bulletin without having to record one death amongst our
number during the past week, viz:., that of an affectionate and most
interesting little girl, between two and three years obi, the chi.d of our
respected and esteemed second-cabin passengers, Mr. and Mrs. Black. Sho
was taken ill about a fortnight since, with a cold and febrile attack,
followed, towards the end of her illness, by inflammation of the lungs,
which she sunk under after the most p ttient endurance of her sufferings
(fiom beginning to end) on Tuesday last. I need scarcely add, that the
warmest and sincerest sympathy has been alike felt and expressed for the
bereaved pirents by all around them, who have the pleasure of their
acquaintance ; and I am glad further to add, that they sustain their loss
with the most exemplary Christian fortitude and submission. Trusting
that the health-promoting and spirit-enlivening breeze with which we
have been so highly favored to-day, may accompany our track “ o’er the
deep blue sea” for days to come, so as to materially lessen the
number of miles we have to traverse ere we arrive at our desired haven,
and begging to compliment you for the talent and research displayed in
the leading articles of the Gazette , also to thank you very much for your
unceasing and praiseworthy exerrions to issue a journal so calculated to
amuse, instruct, dispel ennui , and drive dull care away,
I am, dear Sir, yours, faithfully,
(Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.,
Surgeou-Superintendent.
P.S.—Since my report of yesterday, I have to inform you that another
death occurred this morning, viz., that of a baby, who had been ill some
time with diarrhea, the child of Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt, between decks.
(Signed) J. J. L.
Dear Sir, —I am sorry to say my report for the week is still unfavorable,
having been delayed by light winds, and altogether unfavorable weather.
I feel afraid there is not much chance of our good ship distinguishing
herself this trip by a very rapid passage, as the season of the year has been
very much against us, both with the N. and S.E. trades. lam sorry that
the last few days has been unfavorable for those amusements and sports
which are necessary on so monotonous a vovage to dispel that languid
feeling which is sometimes unbearable; but it gives me much pleasure to
observe the gentlemanly and kind feeling amongst all my passengers
throughout the ship as at the commencement of the voyage.
(Signed) W. H. YULE,
Master of “ Fiery Star.”


fit Jfkrji Jlto (I'Mititr.
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
OCTOBER
3, 1863.
“ Now the steady breeze is blowing to waft us over the ocean
*toi my breast.” The rolling of the good ship has caused alarm
to the lair ladies, and the destruction of crockery and glass has
been tremendous. One lady received a ham in her lap the other
morning ; while the same day, at dinner, the plum-pudding de-
scribed a most eccentric evolution before the Captain, and rendered
the lovers of that dish minus their shares. “ The wild sea birds
still follow in the air,” with several accessions as to species. The
beautiful little Cape pigeon, together with the nut-brown molly-
hawk and the booming graceful albatross, keep soaring around the
ship, not minding being constantly popped at from the quarter-
deck ; and the delightfully bracing breezes keep us all in rude
health, following so soon upon the nasty close weather we had in
the tropics. An interesting court-martial was held on two young
gentlemen on Wednesday morning, it having appeared that the pri-
soners bad been guilty of riotous conduct on the previous evening,
owing to their having “ dined out.” They were found guilty,
and, after much consideration, were sentenced by the worthy and
gallant President to pay half-a-crown into the subscription box,
kept by the Captain for the Merchant Seaman’s Orphan Asylum.
We understand that the auction is, as we write, going on with
vigour— each article realizing a very high price, particularly warm
clothing, which is now in high request among those who came to
sea insuffieiently prepared.
We regret much to say that Mr. Collinson met with an accident
this morning, having slipped against the lea-rail, against which his
forehead came with a crash that stunned him for a time. His
eye-brows were severely cut, and he lost a valuable ring (supposed
overboard) in the struggle to save himself. Good harmony and
good fellowship maintain their sway in our good ship, and we hope
and trust that such shall continue to be the case until we part in
Brisbane, perhaps nevermore to meet. We say with Virgil:
“ Ha:c oiim meminisse juvahit .” From Thursday to Friday noon,
our run was 295 miles, which is the greatest that has yet been ac-
complished.
JOTTINGS A TOUT THE FIERY STAR.
A short account of the ship in which they emigrate will generally he
foruul interesting to the pa- engm-s : —The Fiery Star (late the Cornet)
was built some years ago at New York, and, under the latter' name, earned
f«-r herself an unrivalled reputation in the China trade. Her run from
Liverpvv-I to Hong Kong in 7b days gives sufficient proof, if anv were
wanting, of the g; eat speed she possesses. On this present vm. ago she has
even registered Id knots per hour, and, under a favorable wind, the log
no doubt would :-how a c uple of knots more. Her framework is of live
oak, her build carvel, and her stern square ; she has two di cky main and
lower, the former being broken by a raised poop deck ; Imr length is 229
I’oet 2 incises; main breadth, 41 feet 6 inches; arid depth in hold. 22 feet
2 inches. The nett register tonnage is 13G0 065 tons. The beauty of
her model has been the theme of general comment, and the American
builders have well-sustained their reputation in the graceful proportions of
the Fiery Star.
The Black Ball Company, deeming such a ship suitable for their Aus-
tralian trade, arranged for the purchase; she was accordingly added to
its present numerous fleet, and laid on the berth for Queen-land. Captain
Yule was placed in command of lie)', and, as ad die pas-nge s c-n testify,
tiie owner- have been most fortunate in their appointment. Ou her trans-
ference from American to British registry, the name Comet was altered to
Fiery Star, and we only trust that she and her commander will make the
latter appellation familiar as household words, and a fit compeer for the
Lightning, Marco Polo, and other famous clippers of the Black Ball Line.
MELVILLE THE BUSHRANGER.
The horsemen rode off, and the shearers returned next morning to their
daily routine. The next morning, a party just arrived, were on their, way
to the diggings of Bendigo ; they mustered twenty men all armed. Just
as they entered the Black Forest they met five men in the garb of police.
The police drew up and asked if they met the bushrangers. “ No,” was
the answer, “ but we met several who had been stuck up.’’ “Oh ! then,’’
replied the sergeant, “we are sure to fall in with them.” “ Where do
you camp hoys, for dinner?” “At the next water-hole.” “How far is
it?” “ Five miles.” Good day, and the police rode on. The embryo
diggers proceeded, and, arriving at their camping ground, piled their
arms, and some collected wood for the fires, others cooked the chops and
made the tea, while the rest were employed in attending to the horses.
Dinner wag just ready, a most appetizing savour proceeded from the
frying-pan, when the policemen returned, and, saying “ that looks nice,
will you give us a feed,” dismounted and joined in a hearty meal. The
dinner concluded, and each man engaged in various occupations, preparing
for a star t, the policemen drawing revolvers and placing themselves be-
tween the others and their arms, ordered them to tie each other. 'When
this was done they robbed them of their money and whatever valuables
they had, and rode off, the sergeant turning and saying, “tell anyone that
you meet, who asks questions, that Captain Melville robbed you.’’
(To he continued )
A STORY OF THE EOAD.
The north coach stopped at a smuil place, not many stapes from Carlisle,
to change horses. A middle-aged gentleman, wrapped up in a cloak,
stepped out of the inside ; he entered the inn, pulh d his travelling cap off,
exposing a determined bilious complexion, and called for a glass of brandy
and water; in the room sat chattering the landlord and a friend; the
brandy was brought and raid for ; the traveller paced up and down the
room in evident distress, cither of mind or body, frequently pressing his
hand to his forehead. At last he pulled out a small blue paper parcel from
his pocket, coolly emptied the contents (a white powder) into the glass,
and was in the act of putting it to his mouth, when the landlord rushed
forward and seized his ai m. while on the other side he was collared by the
friend. “ Oam, sir, that won’t doa!” “ Won’t do; what the devil do you
mean?’’ Nay, nay, sur; but you ought tube ashamed to want to dis-
grace the Arms by such an act.” The gentleman waxed wroth ;
“Damn you sir, I paid for the brandy, and I don’t want to swallow the
glass; come, my good fellow, please take’onr hand off my collar! —
What the d—l possesses you hah ?” Attracted by the noise, in came the
hostess, followed by the household, and the coachman impatient at being
detained. AH talk -d and screamed at once ; the traveller "’as bewildered ;
he looked round with unfeigned astonishmentat the crowd of horror-stricken
count-nances that surrounded him. ’i he next moment the glass was
dashed from his hand, and the word “poison” was whispered round the
room. To him now all was explained ; he burst into an immoderate fit of
laughter; the people withdrew a pace or two in horror, believing him to
be mad. He seized the opportunity and elbowed his wav out of the
house, muttering, a? he went along, “ well, it is a hard case indeed, if,
when a poor devil like me has a headache, he cannot please himself
whether or not he should take a seidlitz powder.’’
Poet’s Comer.
TO A LADY.
Dear lady, I met thee in life’s cady morning,
Thy voice was cheery, thy sphifcs were gay;
Thy dark hair in ringlets those sweet cheeks adorning,
Mingled Autumn s deep leaf-fall with Summer’s May day.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1863.
In the dance no one ever thy fair shape could rival,
And the ladies all longed to adopt thy address;
But no, not till Eve, our first mother’s revival,
Could any fair creature gain thy loveliness.
Then what could I do, fairest Bessy, hut love thee,
No pen can express the affection I bore ;
And 1 now only hope in the heaven above me,
'Mid saints and ’mid angels to see thee once more.
THE FEMALE OPIUM EATER.
There was a noble lady as fair as fair could be,
And when she did whate’er she pleased, a gentle dame was she;
But when controlled, her dark eyes told, of rage within restrained,
And she ceased to be a gentle dame until her point was gained.
Her lover in the city dwelt, full three long leagues away,
Her uncle bade her spurn the youth; oh ! how could she obey;
She nightly wept, she never slept, at length she thought she’d try
An Opium draught, which every morn, the page went forth to buy.
“ Why daily goes thy page to town ?’’ her noble uncle cries,
“ To seek the doctor’s shop” says she, “ where opium draughts he buys.”
*’ What need hast thou of opium draughts ?” “ I’d fain forget the past,
And all my former foolishness is fading from me fast.”
The uncle smiled, well pleased at this, and walked away content,
And, unmolested, to the town, the page was daily sent;
And daily from the town he brought, a bottle of small size.
His lady snatched it from his hand, and bore away the prize.
She bore it to her secret bower, and there she turned the key,
And there were none her words to hear, and none her acts to see.
She daily round the bottle found, a short sweet sentence traced,
She broke the seal, and then began unfolding it in haste.
And thus she read with throbbing heart (love’s ardour never stops
Till she’d devoured the contents) the writing, not the drops ;
And daily from her casement high, the opium draught did flow,
Till on a shelf stood fifty empty bottles in a row.
Upon the grim and ghastly row the lady’s maid did gaze,
The footman at their hollowness, a wondering glance did raise ;
The Page who saw them simp’ring said, “Alas! ’tis pretty clear,
If she takes so much doctor’s stuff, she will not long be here.”
Her uncle saw the bottles too, and saw them with affright.
He counted them, he scarcely could believe he counted right;
“ The dose too strong, thou’lt dose too long, a counsel do not scoff,
“ Some night my dear, a drop too much may chance to take thee off.”
Next morn the page went early forth, along the well-known track,
And soon with the composing draught, composedly rode back ;
A doctor (it was rumored) muffled up, was by his side,
But one, beneath the doctor’s cloak, a soldier’s garb espied.
That night (by medical advice) the dame tried change of air,
This bulletin her uncle read next morning, in despair—
“ The dear departed owns your warning words were true enough,
“ By bottle number fifty-one your niece was talen off.
AN IRISH SCENE.
Ooh ! Norry my dear, ’twill grieve you to hear,
What Patrick has now got to tell;
Ma coomah Macree, here sit down by me,
And hearken to what me befel.
Dear Patrick come tell me, poor Norry said,
I’ll calmly sit still on your knee;
Surely those thoughts have gone out of your head,
Which often you whispered to me.
Alas 1 my poor Colleen, my heart has grown sad,
The cause of which patiently hear;
The crops of my acres are fearfully bad,
And away for Brisbane I must steer.
Now Patrick, said Norry, don’t dishearten’d be,
Till we see what the landlord will do;
I’ll down to his manor, and, on bended knee,
Most humbly appeal there for you.
My darling, sweet Norry, poor Pat sadly said,
No use to the landlord to spake ;
Hhis cowld-hearted Agent the Master is led,
By ence ’void the appeal you would make.
No matter, ma Bouchal, I'll make the appeal,
No more than refuse can he do;
And such being the case, your fate does mine seal,
For I’ll sail to Brisbane, dear, with you.
Poor Norry’s entreaties were heedlessly heard,
Despised her most fervid appeal;
The landlord’s cold heart was firmly nerved,
And Norry's, with Bat’s fortune, sealed.
To Brisbane they both o’er the wide ocean sailed.
Away from their country and kinds;
With hearts full to flowing of bitterest grief,
The landlord’s cruel act in their minds.
In Queensland they found what at home they ne’er met,
Good wages for work fairly done ;
And often they hoped each other would yet
Look once more on Ireland’s fair sun.
They worked and they toiled, with head and with hand,
A fortune to honestly make ;
At length they succeeded, and home to Ireland
Their passage they joyously take.
The winds and the waters with each seemed to vie,
Those two hearts soon happy to make;
For, in a few weeks they beheld their fair sky,
And to their own village they take.
The landlord no longer holds there his cruel sway
O’er the tenants he once had control;
His body now lies in the workhouse church-yard,
I leave you to guess where’s his soul.
His manor and lands just then were to let,
With heavy debts laden, 'tis true ;
So Patrick and Norry before the sun set
Were the owners, I tell entre nous.
How different the system now carried on
Where once cruel tyranny reigned.
The tenants are happy, and everyone
Made joyful where oft they felt pained.
Rejoice then, ye emigrants, poor though you be—
Be cheerful in work and in toil;
The day may yet come when your old home you’ll see.
And tread once again your fair soil.
That green fertile island, thou “ land of the west,”
From which none might e’er wish to roam ;
That fond and fair land, by Heaven thrice blest,
None other I’ll e’er call my home.
T. P. H., 2nd
WRECK OF THE BURMAH.
A ship sailed forth from Britain
On a cloudless summer day,
And bore a host of emigrants
From their native land away.
Two hundred souls and fifty
Their lives and fortunes placed.
And trusted all to the goodly ship
That sailed o’er the ocean waste.
No thought had they of danger
As their noble ship held on,
For they hoped to make their fortunes
Far from their English home.
Three months had passed since the vessel sailed,
And they neared the wished for shore,
When she signalled her name to a homeward ship,
Bet was never heard of more.
We know not now, nor shall we know,
How the Burmah met her fate;
But not one soul on board of her
Has been heard of since that date.
Then let us trust that the Fiery Star
Will land us on terra Jirma.
Heaven keep us safe from sickness.
Or, the fate of the luckless Burmah,


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1863.
Air.— tl Logie O'Buchan
Who's the dearest of maids to my wild throbbing heart,
Who’s the maid from whose presence I never would part;
Ah I would that she’d east but one smile on me,
She’s my ain bonny Mary, the pride of the sea ;
Her hair is sae glossy, sae blue are her een,
Her forehead the fairest that ever was seen,
Her lips are sae rosy, her footsteps sae free,
She’s my ain bonny Mary, the pride of the sea.
Good nature shall never from Mary depart,
Good humour excels in her dear little heart,
To others she always is courteous and kind;
Oh ! who can describe the sweet gifts of her mind;
You can see when you look in her angelic face,
That religion’s true feelings her countenance grace;
No, no, not for ever and ever can be,
One more lovely than Mary, the pride of the sea.
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is a clown like a glass filled with water ? Because he is a tumbler
fool (full).
Why is Westminster Abbey like a fender? Because it encloses the
ashes of the great (grate).
From a number that’s odd cut off the head,
It even then will be ;
It’s tail, I pray 7, take next away,
Your mother then you’ll see.
What two letters iu the Alphabet make a philosopher ?
An old woman in a red cloak was crossing a field in which a goat was
feeding. What strange transformation suddenly took place ?
Why is a new-born baby like a gale of wind ?
Why is a pretty young lady like a locomotive engine ?
[Readers will please send in answers to the above, which will be
published iu next week’s issue — Ed.]
Advertisements.
LOST, a SCREW-DRIVER, belonging to the Ist Cabin. Anyone
returning the same to the Editor will be rewarded by a notification
of his noble action in the next week’s issue; but whoever retains the
same in his possession after this date, will be pilloried in the magazine as
sure as fate.
NOTICE. —A Sale by public auction will take place on Friday next
the 9th of October, on the Poop (weather permitting) at 10'30 a.m
All Articles for sale to be sent to No. 3 Deck-house, on or before Thursd a
the Bth instant.
AMUSEMENTS.
Owing to the inclemency of the weather those games and amusements
in which our young men so eagerly engaged, have ceased en tirely.
Passengers are even very chary of their appearance on deck, and see m
not at all willing “to bide the pelting of the pitiless storm and, indeed,
they are quite right. We only trust the same good humour we have seen
displayed at the bull-board will likewise be the prevailing sentiment of
the card-table. The ladies, we hope, will take advantage of the present
disagreeable weather, by securing the co-operation and company of the
gentlemen in those in-door games over which they reign supreme.
Some of the cabin gentleman have, during the last few days, like true
sportsmen, betaken themselves to the extermination of our constant
attendants—the birds ; but, notwithstanding the great havoc committed
among them, their numbers are apparently undiminished. We can boast
of several very fair shots on board, and have to record a very interesting
match which took place to-day. Mr. Corrie engaged himself to kill six
birds or more out of twelve shots ; when the seventh shot was fired he
had only brought down one bird, but was happily successful in each of the
last five shots, thereby saving himself with characteristic coolness and
determination from losing the match. A day or two ago Mr. 0. killed
nine birds out of ten; and, if we consider the incessant rolling of the ship,
such shooting will be found of no ordinary character.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —Our having got into a much colder latitude this week (and
having had much rain besides) has been the cause of an accession of
patients suffering from colds, influenza, &0., being added to my list. They
are, nevertheless, at present in a fair way to do well, and with care, good
nursing, keeping warm and dry, and digesting a goodly quantity of gruel,
sago, arrowroot, broth, &c., I hope in my next to be able to report most of
them convalescent. With congratulations to all in our gallant ship on
the rapid progress she has made during the recent more favorable state of
the weather, and the magnificent style in which she is now achieving her
fourteen knots per hour,
I remain, dear sir, &0.,
J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir, —My report for the week is more favorable as the good ship
is now beginning to make rapid strides towards her destination,
although the weather has been very unfavorable for my passengers, having
had a continuation of wet and strong winds ; for the last ten days the sun
has not made his appearance, which made me rather anxious, being in
the vicinity of islands mid thick foggy weather; but now we have plenty
of sea room, and our gallant ship is speeding free.
Yours, faithfully,
W. H. YULE.
(Signed)


VIGILANS ET ATJDAX.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 10, 1863.
We have had a good ran up till Saturday, when the wind
came more a-head, and we are making but slow progress ; but
the good ship Fiery Star, however the elements combine
against her, is sure (please God) to make a “ spanking ran”
as friend Jonathan would say. The sanitary condition, we are
happy to report from our worthy Doctor, continues good, with
the exception of a few cases of cold. The hints given by our
correspondent “ Juvenis,” we are happy to say, have been
acted up to, and we have had some very pleasant musical
reunions. The Church of England service continues to be
carried on every Sabbath day (our respected Doctor officiating)
and also very sweet hymn-singing on the Sunday evenings,
the presiding lady being Mrs. Lynde, whose very sweet and
effective rendering of sacred music is delightful to hear,
bringing vividly to our minds the old familiar faces and long-
loved scenes of home. On the whole, our party keeps up
friendly feelings towards each other, and amiability and good
nature towards all classes in our ship; we trust such will
continue to he until our arrival at our destination. The
weather continues fine, with dry and bracing breezes, which
induce the beauty and fashion of our ship to join the pro-
menaders on the poop ; and the sweet creatures gladden our
eyes as they gracefully pace the decks, their foot-steps
rendered more firm as well as lighter by the cool air, and
from long residence on board, more free and elastic.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Nothinq contributes more to the effectiveness of genius than geniality.
A cross frozen-hearted man, however great his natural endowments, is
never apt to illuminate the world, or brighten the prospects of its inhabi-
tants ; the greatest and most brilliant human conceptions have been the
births of genial moments, and not the wooden carvings of vinegar-
visaged logic.
When the celebrated actress, Mrs. Cribber, was in Dublin, she sang in
the Oratorios of the Messiah ; a certain Bishop was so overcome by the
extreme beauty of her singing that he exclaimed, with a loud voice,
“ Woman, thy sins be forgiven thee.”
Advertisement.
FOR SALE, a COLT’S REVOLVER, comprising all the most recent
Improvements. May he had at cost price, by applying to Mr.
CHIPS, at his Dormitory, in the Deck house.
Poet’s Comer.
Am. —“ Tm a Young Man from the Country."
I’m a young man from the country,
From Ireland just come o’er;
I’ve been into the colonies
Just once or twice before.
I know my way about a bit,
At home and on the sea ;
Beware all you young fellows.
Don’t have no larks with me.
Choeds. For
I’m a young man from the country,
But mind, for by my Sam,
I’ll ne’er by you insulted be,
Or any other man.
You’ve only just to look at me
To see I am no fool,
So mind your eye, and always try
To keep me nice and cool.
Look at the biceps in my arm,
Consider, and be wise,
And never let, if possible,
My angry passions rise.
For, &c.
My life I count as nothing
When my honor is at stake ;
Of honor I am brimming full,
Though something of a rake ;
So mind young friends, don’t try me
With any of your larks;
By Cromwell’s curse, for if you do.
You’ll go to feed the sharks.
For, &c.
The first that lays a finger
On my most manly form.
Sure better had it been for him
That he had ne’er been born ;
For he a corpse next moment,
Bleeding and stunned will be,
And sooner than be hung fbr’t
I’ll glide into the sea.
For, &c.
My soap-dish friends take warning,
Don’t insult my dignity.
Lest I treat you pigmy mortals
As I should treat a flea.
These lines I wish inserted
If you’ve any room at all,
They'll save so many gentlemen
From going to the wall.
For, &c.
TO A LADY WEEPING.
Why doth the tear bedew thine eye;
Why doth thy bosom throb ;
Why show such fearful agony,
And heave that heavy sob;
Has fond affection turned to scorn,
Is he you love untrue,
And dost thou now his falseness mourn—.
Is he so dear to you.
Weep not fair maid, let rather pride
Excite your bosom’s wrath,
Stoop not one false heart to chide
But onward keep thy path ;
Thy path of beauty keep still free.
For tho’ one prove untrue
Believe me you will ever see
Some fond heart beat for you.
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK’S CONUNDRUMS.
Seven (S-eve n).
Y Z (wise head).
The goat turned to butter and the woman became a scarlet-runner.
Because it begins with a squall.
Because she sends off sparks, transports the male* (mails), has a train
following her, and passes over the plain.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 10, 1863.
A REMINISCENCE OF THE VOYAGE.
See that magnificent vessel, the Fiery Star; how proudly she sits upon
the placid waters of Cork harbor. Behold her when the breeze stirs the
sleeping ocean; how majestically she sways from side to side, and, in
stern grandeur, seems to say, “ I’m mistress still.” And when the iron
grasp which binds her to the deep is removed, and when her snowy
pinions are unloosed, hark to the sudden whistle of the wind, as it rustles
through her sails, and then with a bound and plash she darts onwards
through the waves like some living thing. And now with sails unreefed
and spanker spread, she scuds on as a sea-gull, laughing as it were at the
bouncing billows that temps et temps lash against her with mad revenge at
being disturbed in her onward way. And now, when the few last friends
that saw her off are leaving in the boat, listen to the loud hurrah that
breaks forth from the crowded poop in answer to the parting cheer, and
then with renewed vigor, as if excited by the tumult, our good ship scuds
on. making for the first day the splendid run of 290 miles.
Leaving our splendid clipper for the present to her onward course, let
us turn our eyes to the human freight wherewith she is loaded, and try to
discover there the thoughts and feelings that sway their souls. Who are
those daring people, over 500 in number, despising the dangers of the deep,
and. regardless of the tedious monotony of a long confinement, that leave
their homes and country, and trust themselves to the fickle humor of the
mind and hands ? They are fortune-seekers, energetic men and women
from Ireland, England, and Scotland, bound to the utmost limits of the
earth, with the fond hope of creating an independence there thay could
hardly attain at home. They are enterprising men and women from
every grade in society, fully resolved on working out a fortune by honest
industry, no matter how. Just look at them, and you will see all, from
the man of wealth and station, ambitious of more, to the humbler peasant
seeking a comfort denied at home ; from the well-dressed lady, handsome
and accomplished, to the servant girl, plainly mannered, all are now
inhabitants of the Fiery Star and comprise the monarchy of the seas.
Tell me, who is that tall,-athletic, bushy-whiskered individual, whose
portly person and muscular frame pourtray the man of exercise and good
keeping; and who is that delicate boy, whose pale emaciated features
bespeak a constitution of no iron-mould. Tell me the motive that
influences toe emigration of that handsome young lady, whose existence
seems more fitted for the drawing-room than the bush ; and why do these
brisk, hardy, and labor-practised girls leave their native land. It appears
tome the brawny-armed emigrant has better chance of success in our
adopted country than the more delicate; but my province is not to divine
the motives of ray fellow-passengers in selecting Queensland as the sphere
of their labors, and leaving, therefore, each one to his and her own
thoughts on the matter, I will now change from the contemplation of the
various characters that compose our good ship’s freight, to the scenes
which, from time to time, presented themselves on the way. T. P. H.
MELVILLE THE BUSHRANGER.
Three days after the visit of Melville to Mr. Fanshawe’s station, Dick
Simpson started for the Ovens diggings by himself. He proceeded until
he came to Middle-missis’ public-house, now called Longwood, then a low
roadside shanty. In those days you were charged for the shelter of a
shed you would scarce put a dog into at home—using your own blankets—
four shillings. You spread the blankets on the ground and turned in, and
a man thought himself in the height of luck who could secure a sheepskin
or a couple of bags to sleep on. The room into which our friend Dick was
shown, contained about a dozen men ; some were sitting smoking round a
wood tire, while others were making down their blankets for the night. A
man who was sitting in a dark corner, saw Simpson enter. The fire
showed him plainly, while he could not see well. After Dick had lit his
pipe and given the usual salutation “Good evening, mates,” the stranger
gradually edged round to where he sat, and whispered in his ear—
“ Hush ! don’t say anything, but follow me outside in about five minutes,
and I’ll tell you something to your advantage.’’ “ All right,” he replied,
and after the stranger had been about five minutes outside, Dick joined.
“ Just step round this bit of scrub’’ he said, “ as I don’t want anyone to
hear our conversation.” They went on till they came to a secluded
corner, just between a creek and some scrub, in a place where they were
not likely to be interrupted. The stranger turned to Simpson and said,
“ I have seen you before, and I know you can keep counsel —should you
like to earn twenty pounds?” “Certainly I should” was the answer,
“ provided it is nothing to get me into trouble.’’ “ You need not fear
that, it is only to take a letter to Mr. Tracy’s station, and deliver it
privately to a young lady there; you have a good horse, and as the place
is only ten miles distant, you could ride it in an hour ; the moon will be
up directly, and if you perform your mission, and bring back an answer, I
shall hand you over twenty sovereigns.” “ AH right,’’ said Dick, “ I’ll
do it, but how can I see her at this hour ?” “ Take this flageolet, and
when you reach the wool-shed, play the first part of 1 Meet me b y
moonlight alone,’ and wait the result.” Dick departed. It was a
beautifully-elear moonlight night, and to give tou an idea of what a
moonlight night is in Australia, I have read small print by moonlight.
The magpies sing by moonlight, and it is no uncommon thing to practice
kangaroiing, &c., by moonlight. Dick Simpson mounted his horse, and
proceeded at a hand-gallop to Mr. Tracy’s. Arrived at the wool-shed, a
short distance from the house, he played the first part of the air which
the stranger had mentioned. He waited above ten minutes, when he saw
a female form wrapped in a mantle, glide through the gum trees in his
direction. As she approached she sang, in a sweet low voice, the second
part of the tune, and said “ Edward, is it you ?’’ Simpson came out from
the shadow of the shed. When she saw a stranger she started back, with
a slight exclamation but his coming forward re-assured her by showing the
letter. When she received it she pressed it to her lips and heart, and
saying “Wait a few moments, please,” ran back to the house. Richard
waited, and in about a quarter of an hour she re-appeared with a note in
her hand, and saying “ Give that to him,’’ disappeared a second time.
Dick mounted, and rode back to Middle-missis’, where he found the
stranger anxiously waiting by the creek. He snatched the letter eagerly,
and saying “ Many thanks, young fellow,’’ pulled out a purse of gold and
gave it to Simpson. When he opened it, he found forty sovereigns
instead of twenty. {To he continued.)
CONUNDRUMS.
Why is a woman like a lump of pitch ?
We are just two and two, we are warm, we are cold,
Our number of parents cannot be told,
We are lawful, unlawful, a duty, a fault,
We are often sold dear—good for nothing when bought,
An extraordinary boon, or a matter of course,
Oft yielded with pleasure, oft taken by force.
We are a score, or something more, within a cave reside;
Altho’ we seldom disagree we very oft divide,
If we fall out it is a doubt if e’er we meet again.
And then the seperation is seldom without pain ;
The ladies gay, in bright array, do very often show us,
And much indeed would be succeed who’d find a plan to grow us.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —The dry and bracing weather we have had the last few
days has been of much benefit to the invalids generally, and I am happy
to say that several of those who were ill with influenza and colds last
week are now much better. A few fresh cases of a similar type have,
however, been added to the number, but I trust the fine weather and
morning sunshine we are now enjoying will soon put a stop to any farther
increase, and also enable me to write —“off the list’’—against many o
the names now appearing. I must, nevertheless add, that Ido not con-
sider sufficient attention has been paid by the majority of persons on board
to the reduction of temperature within the last fortnight or three weeks.
I can perceive but very little (if any) difference in their habiliments, and
they certainly do not put on anything like the extra garments that the
much colder condition of the atmosphere demands. Hence, in my
opinion, have originated in a great measure (if not wholly), the influenza
and colds which so many are now laid up with, and several more com-
plaining of. By far too many also, especially the females, sit much too
long at a time on the poop, merely chatting to each other, and staring at
others, instead of briskly walking about, thereby securing a good appetite
and aiding the powers of digestion, likewise imparting fresh impetus and
vigour to a dull and languid circulation, increased tone and strength to
their nervous systems, and a healthy and powerful stimulus to all the
various organs in their bodies. Such inactivity (I had almost written
laziness) as I have alluded to is very greatly to be deprecated, and cannot
too speedily be amended; if, therefore, on the principle of ‘ forewarned being
forearmed,’ those who are yet well will act on the hints I have offered
by taking plenty of available exercise and wearing suitable clothing, they
will, I have no doubt, render themselves much less liable to colds, or any
other kind of sickness overtaking them during the remainder of their
voyage, and experience (at least I should imagine so) a far greater amount
of inward comfort, health, and happiness by so doing.
I must not omit to record the accouchement of Mrs. Booth on the 6th
instant, of a daughter, her seventh child—and all girls. Mrs. B. and
the baby are both doing well. (Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sib, —My report for the week is still more favorable, having ex-
perienced strong breezes from W. and N.W., and the healthful influence
of the sun’s rays, which occasionally shine on us, gives a new life to us
all. I think there are few ships afloat, if there are any, which make such
rapid strides when she gets a chance, as the run she made on Saturday
will prove—3lo miles in 23 hours with royals set. lam sorry to say I
have not yet had a 24 hours good breezesince leaving England to give our
good ship a fair trial, having experienced, since leaving the S.E. trades,
nothing but foggy rainy weather, nor having seen the sun, moon, or stars
for the purpose of observation for 18 days, which is very perplexing to
me ; but one great comfort to me is, to see ray passengers so healthy and
comfortable. Nothing shall be left undone by me to further every amuse-
ment necessary. I would suggest that a Rifle Brigade might be got up, as
you have a first-rate poop, and ample room for carrying out so desirable an
object in this cold weather, and 1 am sure there are some on board who
would make excellent drill sergeants.
Trusting that the hint which I give will lead to the formation of a
brigade, as I am sure they would all feel its beneficial influence.
(Signed) W. H. YULE, Master.


fflje Jfiirjj JSlar
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
OCTOBER
17, 1863.
On the 14th of October we overhauled and passed the Danish
barque Salamander, hound from Batavia from Cardiff, 75
days out The Fiery Star has beaten every ship she has as
yet fallen in with, and with the great judgment and excellent
seamanship exercised by our universally looked-up to and
highly respected commander, and his most efficient and well-
tried officers, we hope, notwithstanding the contrary winds
which we have experienced, yet to arrive in good time at our
destination. The colds and influenzas with which some of
our fellow-passengers have been afflicted, are now giving way
under Dr. Luce’s judicious treatment, and the generally
healthy condition of all on hoard is evinced by the laughing
faces and rubicund complexions met with each day on the
poop-deck promenade. The suggestion made by the Captain
in his last week’s report, viz., the establishment of a rifle
corps, would not only conduce to health, but would he of
great use to many on their arrival in the colonies. We are
aware, from our own former colonial experience, that straight,
smart young fellows who know their drill are highly acceptable
for police appointments, which are very good, a private
trooper’s pay being £9 per month, with rations. Now, there
is plenty of time on board for a man to get some inkling of
the drill, which, if he understands, would save time and
trouble ashore, and obtain for him a good appointment;
besides that, instead of sitting idle in cold weather, he would
keep his blood in circulation, and get an appetite—a great
desideratum. People on board ship find fault with their
provisions, not from the badness of the food, hut from their
own inability to eat, owing to idleness and ennui, whereas a
man at hard work or taking good exercise, can eat anything.
W r e have had a splendid run for the last few days, and the
breeze continued steady until Friday morning, at fourteen
knots per hour, but about ten o’clock a.m. fell away ; however,
we trust that e’er long we shall get a wind again to waft us
on our way. We are sorry to say that theft has been committed
on board, Mr. Beaumont having left his port-hole open, and
some half-dozen Crimean shirts and some pairs of trousers on
his bed-post, close to the port-hole, some adept at irregular
appropriation, managed to get at them, much to the inconve-
nience of the unfortunate victim of those very unprincipled
persons ; but we hope by some means that they may yet he
found and handed over to condign punishment. On the
night of Thursday, or Friday morning, the half of a sheep
that was hung up in one of the boats, was stolen, much to
the dissatisfaction of the Steward of the first cabin, who nearly
wept briny tears when he ascertained his sad loss. The
constables should he on the alert, and if the malefactors can
by any means be found, they should he held up as examples
to deter others from similar proceedings. Our run. from
noon on Thursday till noon on Friday, has been 334 miles.
The great occupation of our ladies just now is assorting the
Church Service. One lady, with her usual good taste, has
undertaken to lead the choir, and takes great pains to punctuate
the Psalms, in order to secure a good choir on Sunday. The
ladies all deserve our most heartfelt thanks for their inde-
fatigahle efforts to promote the comfort of all on board, and
also for the trouble they are giving themselves in 'writing the
music and marking the accentuations in the Morning Service.
We hope to be able to produce, with their assistance, a good
choir on Sunday.
AMUSEMENTS.
Single-stick is again in fashion, and some capital bouts have been
played. A good match was played on Friday between Messrs. Somerset
and Wilmot, in which the latter, after a well contested bottle, came off
victorious. We understand, however, that a return match will be played,
Mr. Somerset not considering that he can be beaten.
The boxing gloves are also in requisition, and we are glad to see that
the noble art of self-defence is again in vogue. Masters Haggar and
Graham had a hard-fought battle with the gloves on Friday. Both
parties showed indomitable resolution, and fought alout thirty rounds,
wben the Doctor said “ Hold, enough,” and it ended in a drawn battle.
Phillipines were for some time very much the fashion among the ladies,
and we nave had the pleasure of having some lovely specimens of work
shown to us, the prizes obtained by the lucky winners of the various
double almonds. This amusement has, however, latterly fallen into
disuse.
conundrums.
My first makes all nature appear with one face,
My second has music, and beauty, and grace ;
And if this charade is not easily said,
My whole you deserve to have thrown at your bead.
My first denotes equality; my second denotes ability; my whole’s a
sort of simile.
My first destroys my second, and my whole destroys my first.
My first marks time ; my second spends ib; and my whole tells it.
My first does innocence express,
My second is a pari, of dress,
United, they a period show,
Free from passion, guilt, or woe.
r ANSWER TO LAST WEEK’S CONUNDRUMS.
I.—Because when melted she takes any form you please.
2 —A kiss.
3.—The teeth.
Poet’s Comer.
SONG.—ERIN MACHREE.
When Ireland's released from the yoke of the Saxon,
Och! then will our hearts heat with glee;
When we’ve no foreign ’inimy there to be taxin’,
Our small little, isle of the sea.
Ooh ! Erin Machree,
It’s dear ye’re to me,
Thou small little isle of the sea.
Tlien rise oh my country men, rise to defend her,
And fight till ould Ireland is free ;
Conquer or die, hut ne’er dvame of surrender.
Since it’s all for onr isle of the sea,
Och ! Erin Machree, &c.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1863.
Jist a word in your ear, when the foe is before ye,
Ye’ve a bad trick of running away :
Arrah ! now when this failin’ begins to stale oe’r ye,
Jist think of our isle of the sea.
Och ! Erin Machree, &c.
And the wrongs she’s endured from the hand of the stranger,
How he’s robbed her by night and by day ;
It will nerve up your hearts to endure every danger,
For our small little isle of the sea.
Och 1 Erin Machree, &c.
And oh! when we’ve freed our dear isle of the ocean,
It’s a brave model people we’ll be ;
No taxes, no hardship, to damp our devotion
To Brin, our isle of the sea.
Och 1 Erin Machree, &o, Phelim O’Toole.
FROM AN INVALID.
Tramp, tramp, tramp.
Till the head is ready to swim ;
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
Is there ever an end to this din ?
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
Oh ! the irreverent dogs ;
With their tramp, tramp, tramp,
Sounding like Lancashire clogs.
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
The whole of the long night thro’;
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
What can a poor devil do.
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
Here comes a regular team ;
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
One would think that their legs
worked by steam.
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
Backward and forward he goes;
With his tramp tramp, tramp,
Increasing a poor invalid’s woes.
A REMINISCENCE OP THE VOYAGE.
Our good ship having cleared the Irish coast, and being fairly launched
on the broad Atlantic, nearly all the passengers were subjected to the
trying ordeal of sea-sickness. Hardly had the pilot steamer quitted us,
when the swelling waves, beating against our bulwarks, tossed our vessel
to and fro, and in doing so prostrated many of the “new hands;” in
consequence of which, the first forty-eight hours of sailing were pitilessly
painful. Here might be seen the stalwart man ghastly pale, there the
delicate woman paler still, while the tender child seemed more dead than
living. Yonder by the water’s edge sits an Irish paddy, with lead-like
features, struggling with his foe ; here you see a Johnny Bull rushing
towards a bucket, while the canny Scotchman tumbles into hammock, and
fights the feeling with his blanket. Human respects are forgotten, and
the mania for spirting has become so lively, that safe-footing and pleasant
sights are at a premium. In fact, I should say three-fourths of our goodly
freight were “ martyrs to circumstances.’’ The expansive poop, which
during the above malady had worn a deserted appearance, now, as the
sufferers become themselves again, puts on life anew, and animation
reigns supreme. Matches of single-stick, boxing-gloves, high leap, &0.,
are organised, and while the many are recreated by the encounters of the
combatants, and the hours whiled away by the less sensitive amusements,
not a few of the prize-fighters find their muscles more swollen, while an
occasional “blue eye” and “red nose” are the lot of the vanquished.
And when the shades of evening cast their sombre hue over the merry-
making of the day, and darkness prevented the continuation of the
athletic sports referred to, the genial exercise of promenading was indulged
in, and thus might be seen ladies and gentlemen, arm in arm, sauntering
along with as much seeming pleasure as if enjoying an evening’s walk
along the banks of some shining river in their own dear lands ; while
groups here and there formed themselves for the more violent exercise of
their limbs by getting up quadrilles and polkas, and doing full justice to
the Irish jig and Scotch reel. Temps et temps these scenes were varied
by the unwashed amongst us, who, despising the more gentle recreations
above described, pitched into each other in regular prize-ring style, save
and except being stript at their work, in consequence of which obstructions
their “ pats” told less fearfully than if in their buffs. These pugilistic
encounters were oft’times novel indeed, as, in general, they resulted in a
canine battle, when the champion had to be “ drawn” by the legs. The
belt is still at large, and from the system carried on is likely to continue
so, for entre nous the candidates competing are no more than novices, and
appear more disposed to jaw and bite, than stand and fight.
T. P. H.
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
Their numbers decreasing fast;
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
The pace is telling at last.
Tramp, tramp, tramp,
I believe they have all gone to
bed ;
But that tramp, tramp, tramp,
Keeping his watch overhead.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
The next morning Simpson started at early down on his way to the
Ovens, and had ridden about ten miles before he came to water. He then
pulled up, tethered out his horse, made a fire and began to prepare his
breakfast. While the quart-pot was boiling, and the chops roasting, he
sat by the creek and smoked his pipe. Suddenly he heard the sound of
horses galloping, and in about ten minutes a lady, closely veiled, ac-
companied by a geutlemanly.looking man, rode up. “ Good morning,
mate,” “ Good morning, sir,’’ were the salute and reply. “ Will you have
a drink of tea ” “ Thank you, I think this lady would like some.”
Simpson filled his pannikin from the quart-port, and handed it to the lady.
As she lifted her veil he started, for she was the same to whom he had
taken the letter the previous night. He then looked at the gentleman,
who was engaged in adjusting his stirrup-leather, and recognised him, not
only as the man he had met at Middle-missis, but also as the leader of the
men whom he had some time before seen at Kilmore. “ Will you take
something to eat” said he. “ Well, I don’t care if I do,’’ said the other
dismounting and assisting the lady from her horse. They sat down on
the green turf and had some breakfast. After that meal Dick went to
assist in saddling the horses. “ Tell me, young fellow, did you know
me?” said the stranger. “Well, I saw you before,” he replied, “ but I
know very little about you, but one thing I beg of you, don’t injure that
young lady.” “ That young lady is my wife,” he replied, “so you need
not tell me that, and now I am off for the Sydney side, and it is not pro-
bable you will ever see me again.’’ He then assisted the lady on to her
horse and they rode off. Great was the consternation that morning at
Mr. Tracey’s, when it was discovered that his niece, Miss Sarah, was
missing. Simpson rode on to the Ovens, and set to work there. The
stranger and lady rode on until they came to Albany; they put up at tha
inn there, and the next morning the lady was not to be seen, but tha
gentleraau came out in company with a very handsome young man. A
few days after the Albany mail was robbed by a man and a boy. In a
shepherd’s hut one evening, near the Billiboy, were assembled the two
shepherds and the hutkeeper. They were just sitting down to their
evening meal of salt-mutton, damper, and tea, when the hutkeeper
hearing the dogs bark, went out, and there were two horsemen riding
round the yard. “ Good evening, shepherd, can we stop here to-night,”
said one. “Oh yes ; come in.” They entered, and the hutkeeper made
them as comfortable as possible. In course of conversation the exploits of
Captain Melville became the topic, and many were the opinions expressed
about him. The strangers said little, but a close observer might see an
exchange of glances between the two now and then. One shepherd said that
Melville was six feet high with great black whiskers, another that he was
short and fair, &c., when the elder-looking stranger said, “ now, you fellows
are talking about a thing you know nothing of, for Melville is as like me
as one man can be like another; he is as like myself—-for lam he. Now
my worst enemy cannot say that I ever injured or robbed a poor man, and
there is for you, mates —among you for this night’s hospitality ; —we have
had a long ride to-day, for the traps are after us, and should like to turn
in.’’ So saying he laid down five sovereigns. The next morning the
shepherd said, “ you can stop here for a day or two and spell ; there is
plenty of scrub here, and you can easily get away if anyone comes after
you; in a bend of the river there is food for your horses.” They stayed
that day, and about ten the next morning prepared to start. They were
saddling their horses, when one of the shepherds came running in;
“hide, hide,’’ he said, as he came up out of breath ; “there’s three peelers
coming down the plain and the cove with them.” They had just time to
conceal themselves, when the police and the proprietor of the station rode
up. The fresh track of horses’ hoofs showed that some persons had been
there lately. They tracked the horses through the scrub, and across a
shallow part of the river, when, just as they emerged from the thick
scrub, they perceived two horsemen riding at full speed across the plain.
(To he continued.)
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —I have nothing particular to report this week, but am
happy to add that the sanitary condition of our good ship still continues
satisfactory. The splendid breeze that sprung up yesterday (from the
right quarter) bringing with it the welcome and pleasing prospect of our
reaching Brisbane, sooner than had been latterly anticipated, seems to
have acted as a powerful “ refresher” to the minds and bodies of all our
voyagers, and has, I think I may fairly state, not only tended to animate
and cheer their spirits, but already to improve the health of those who
are ill. In the earnest hope that we may be favored by Providence with
a continuance of the same till we have the pleasure of sighting Australian
land, and that I may be enabled to present a clean bill of health, on our
arrival. (Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear SrR, —I am sorry to state that all chance of our good ship
making a speedy passage is now at an end. I was in hopes of having
westerly winds after rounding the Gape, but such lias not been the case;
we have had for the last week N.E. and S.E. winds, and although we
have had one good day’s run of 334 miles, yet the prevailing wind from
the eustw rd has blasted all my anticipations ; therefore 1 must content
myself with doing the best I can to push our noble ship to her destination.
I am much pleased to see all my passengers well and enjoying themselves.
(Signed)
W. H. YULE.


(Tin- Jjtrg Jitur (WHitc.
YIGILANS ET AUDAS.
24, 1863.
SATURDAY,
OCTOBER
Wb are journeying on our way, though slowly. In the
commencement of the week we had a fourteen-knot breeze,
but on Thursday it came on foggy and calm, so that we are
nearly stationary. The drawing of the sweepstakes for the
day we first see land, and the day of first dropping anchor,
caused much excitement. The lucky person of course is not
to be guessed at as yet, but the probability is that between
the Bth and 14th of November will he the day of first seeing
land, and then about five days after we may calculate on
dropping anchor. Whales have been seen during the week,
causing much excitement to the “ new chums.” A great
source of amusement is fishing, if we may use the expression,
for Cape pigeons, with thread lines. have been
caught. The musical parties assemble as usual every evening,
and, in fact, the internal condition of our ship is, as usual,
full of good fellowship and good feeling. The monotony
necessarily consequent on so long a voyage renders it difficult
to make out a good leading article, so we hope our readers
will pardon our lack of matter.
The vide vorld you may search, and my fellow not find,
I dwells in a wacuum deficient in vind ;
In the wisage I’m seen, in the woioe I am heard,
And yet I’m inwisible, gives went to no vord.
I’m not much of a vag, for I’m vanting in vit,
But distinguished in worse for the volum s I’ve writ;
I’m the head of the Williams, yet far from the vorst,
I’m the foremost in wice, tho’ in wirtue the first.
I’m not used to veapons, and ne’er goes to var.
Though in walour iuwincible, in wiotory sure ,
The first of all wiands and wictnals is mine,
Eioh in wen’son and weal, but deficient in vine.
To wanity given, I in welvets abound.
But in voman, in vife, and in vidow not found ;
Yet conspicuous in wirgins, and I’ll tell you between us,
To persons of taste I’m a bit of a wenus.
Yet none take me for veal or for voe in its stead.
For I ranks not among the sweet voo’d, von, and ved.
Poet’s Comer.
WHAT IS LIFE?
The shades of night were falling fast,
As swiftly through the cuddy passed
A youth, who bore mid scarf so nice,
A pin, with wonderful device,
0, Callaghan.
Life has been compared to a voyage, and hence many interpreting the
expression somewhat too literally, have actually steered their course
through a Ked Sea of Port and Claret, sailed across a Pacific Ocean of
Burgundy and Champagne , navigated a Rhine, whose stream has been
genuine Rhenish, and cruised up and down the Gulf of Malaga , visiting
alternately Maderia and the Cape; now touching at the Canaries, and
now at Oporto or Lisbon, calling frequently at Jamaica ; in short, circum-
navigating the globe, and having spiritual intercourse with all creation ;
and after such a long and tedious voyage it is often found that the craft
has to lay up and refit—a survey having been held on the hull, and the
timbers found in a state of decay. If anyone wish to study geography,
you may see it with your feet under a mahogany table.
His collar smooth, his hair so neat,
Must equal admiration meet
From all the world who ever knew,
But most of all I think from you,
O, Callaghan.
Reclining on a chair he lay ;
A sculptor’s chisel ’twould repay
To carve that sprightly form in stone,
While tottering with many a groan,
0, Callaghan.
ENIGMA.
I dwells in the Hearth, and I breathes in the Hair,
If you searches the Hocean you’ll find that I’m there;
The first of all Hangels in Holympus am Hi,
Yet I’m banished from 'Baveu, expelled from on Tgh;
But though on this Horb 1 am destined to grovel,
I’m ne’er seen in an ’Ouse, in an ’Ut, nor in ’Ovel;
Not an 'Oss nor an ’Unter e’er bears me alas!
’Tis hopeless murmured the young man,
With face so pale and lips so wan,
He rose impatiently to go,
When, at the door he heard a toe,
0, Callaghan’s.
But often I’m found on the top of an Hass ;
X resides in an Hattie, ami loves not to roam,
And yet I'm invariably absent from 'Cme ;
Tho’ ’Ushed in the ’Urricane, of the Hatmosphere part
1 enters no 'Ed, I enters no ’Art:
Only look, you will see in the Heye I appear,
Only hark and you’ll ’ear me just breathe in the Hear,
Though in sex not an ’E, I am (strange paradox)
Not a bit of an ’Eifev, but partly an Hox.
Of Heternity I'm the beginning ! and mark,
Though I goes not with Noar. I’m first in the Hark.
I’m never in ’Ealth, have with Fysic no power,
I dies in a month, but comes back in a Hour.
His color rose, his eyes flashed fire,
He pocketed at once his ire,
And all at once in accents wild,
Cried, as piece on piece he piled,
Now, Callaghan.
The dancing o’er, a song was sung,
Quick joined the chorus, every tongue,
Save one which far above the rest,
Shouted, as if his lungs to test,
0, Callaghan.
The evening’s passed, that form has fled,
Most likely snug asleep in bed,
But still tiie youth sits gazing there,
Where last he saw the lady fair,
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK’S CONUNDRUMS.
1. —A snowball. 2.—A parable. 3,—Wormwood, 4.—Watchman.
s.—Childhood.
0, Callaghan.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 24, 1863.
TO JESSIE.
Charming Jessie, how enticing
Are these winning smiles of thine;
With the blushes ever rising
As from some exhaustless mine.
Summer saw thee peerless blooming,
Bearing off the my rtle crown ;
Jealousy, herself though glooming,
Named you belle of all the town.
Just as sunbeams brightly glowing,
Gild, with flowers, the vernal plains;
So thy glances were bestowing
Floods of light on dazzled brains.
Charming Jessie, when earth found thee
Far eclipsing all her seed;
Then with modesty she crowned thee,
Best of gifts for maiden’s need.
Winter comes, his icy folding
Seals the treasures of the earth ;
Sullenly his care seems holding
Fruits to greet a season’s birth.
But e’en then your heart is beating.
Warmly as the summer morn ;
Time, to others swiftly fleeting,
Serves but Jessie to adorn.
Blue-eyed Jessie, how magnetic
Is the sparkle in these eyes ;
Fit to move the worst ascetic,
Who e’er shunned his native skies.
Summer comes again and finds thee,
Reigning in all hearts at will;
With tire gayest wreaths she binds thee
Raising blushes sweeter still.
80 may days and seasons rolling,
Breathe but lightly over you,
And shall all, thy praise extolling,
Only render what is due.
Yet while many round thee hover,
Rivals for thy fond embrace;
Shun each one who’d be thy lover,
Fur the beauties of the face.
Beauties these that serve th’adorning,
Only of your gentler heart;
Which, like dew upon the morning,
Soothes what beauties first impart.
Fondly as the light breeze waving,
Bears the fragrance of the flower;
So could I, a constant laving
In the smiles your love must shower.
The cold winds that we have lately experienced, coupled with the
passing rain-squalls and the rolling of the ship, have prevented many
of the passengers from appearing much upon deck and though we have
now a bright sun to enliven us, it has but little ptwer to instil warmth
in these southern latitudes. All these discomfmts, however, we gladly
look over, when we see our gallant ship speeding over the waters, at
the rate of 14 or 15 knots per hour, towards her destination. It is to
be hoped now, at least, that we have broken the neck of the voyage, and
that the adverse and light winds which have prevailed throughout our
previous voyage have now left ns for good and all, and that in another
fortnight we shall be safely anchored in Moreton Bay. Let us all hope,
then, that the present breeze will continue until we drop our anchor,
and the snowy sails of the Fiery Star are furled for good at the mouth
of the Brisbane river.
E. A. C.
AMUSEMENTS.
Whist.—On Thursday evening a game at whist was played between
two first and two second cabin passengers, when the latter won two
rubbers out of three. The first cabin players, not being satisfied, chal-
lenged their opponents to another game, which was played on Friday
■evening. _ The second cabin was again successful, having won three
•'afebers in succession. Some good play was exhibited on both sides.
Single Stick.—ln our record last week of the match between Messrs,
Wilmot and Somerset, we incorrectly stated that the former gentleman
gained the victory. On that occasion Mr. Somerset was successful; and,
we believe, is quite ready to give his adversary an early opportunity of
retrieving defeat, if he can.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
The police at once gave chase after the fugitives, who managed to give
them the slip when they came to some scrub. For some days after, the
Ovens’ road was infested by bushrangers. Scarcely a party returning
from the diggings but were stuck up, and policemen were to be seen riding
at full gallop up and down the road, never venturing into the bush, but
asking the victims, who had just been deprived of their personal property,
if they had seen the bushrangers, thereby adding insult to injury. The
police of that day, being half of them old convicts, most likely in league
with the bushrangers, and the other half new chums, who, if they were
taken one hundred yards off the track, turned round three times, and
given a slap on the back, and told to find their way, would be sure to get
bushed. Sergeant Ellis, of the Melbourne City Police, was one day
walking down Great Collins-street, dressed in private clothes, as was the
custom before the establishment of the detective, when his notice was
attracted by a handsome chesnut horse. He took the Government
Gazette out of his pocket and examined it. The following advertisement
met his eyes :—“£100 Reward. —Stolen or strayed, from the station of
Mr. Fanshaw, on the Devil’s River, on the night of October 14th, a dark
chesnut horse, off fetlock white, white star on forehead, branded SF on
the near shoulder. £5O will be given on recovery of the horse, and £lOO
on conviction of the thief. The horse was last seen in the possession of a
middle-aged, well-looking man, with red beard and whiskers, fresh
complexion, alrout five feet ten inches in height. He was dressed in a
Newmarket coat, cabbage-tree hat, top-boots, and Bedford cord breeches—
supposed to he the notorious bushranger, Melville. If so, the person
arresting him will be entitled to a farther reward of £500.” The sergeant
looked closely at the horse, and then waited ; atiently looking into a shop
window, until a man came out of the public-house, took the horse by the
bridle, and put his foot into the stirrup. No sooner had he done so than
a hand was laid on his collar, a revolver presented to his head, and the
words whispered in his ear, “If you stir hand, leg, or foot, jon are a
dead man.’’ He turned round and made an effort to gain the saddle, but
was pulled back by the sergeant, who, in a second, had three men to
assist him. That evening it was known all over Melbourne that the
celebrated Melville was lodged at Mr Winkle's hotel, alias the city
gaol. Just as the sergeant, assisted oy two policemen, was marching
off Melville, and another leading the horse, a shriek was heard from an
upper window in the public-house, and the form of a beautiful-looking
lad, flashly dressed in red shirt and vest, and top-boots, was seen, held
back by three screaming women, to endeavour to jump from the ease-
ment into the street. The same evening a closely-veiled female asked
permission of the governor of the gaol to see the prisoner, which was
granted. She entered the prisoner's cell, and with a hysterical sob, threw
herself into Melville’s arms, and fainted.
(To he continued.)
OUR ADOPTED LAND.
Queensland dates its existence from the year 1859. The history of
colonization affords no parallel to its progress. In the short space of
four years it has assumed an importance equal to any of its sister
dependencies, and taken a high rank among the jewels of the British
crown. Tire lovely country round Moreton Bay has been rendered as
attractive in the eyes of thousands as the golden treasures of Victoria
or the fertile plains of New Zealand. The land system adopted by the
Government has been eminently successful in promoting immigration—
-10,000 people having bees conveyed to the colony during last year. A
few years ago these emigrants would have sought shelter and independence
in the backwoods of America, or earned a precarious existence among
the hovels of British Columbia. But now when a new field for enter-
prise and industry has been opened, and when the liberal policy of the
Government has rendered the means of emigration easy, the current of
surplus population has been gradually diverted from other channels, and
Queensland, with its waving bush and grassy plain, its fields blooming
with the cotton-plant, and its orchards groaning in the luxuriance of the
vine-tree, swarms with thousands, d-sirons only of a happier home,
ambitious only of a nobler 1 independence. Perhaps one of the brightest
features of the present emigration is the combination of the Celtic and
the Anglo-Saxon races. Til! lately it was the footstep of the latter
that perilled existence in the jungles of Bengal, and his arm that
defended the ruined hut against the aborigines of Australia. But now,
Ireland, with a spirit of industry worthy of the most enlightened policy,
has responded to the call of colonization, and despatched hundreds of
her sons to the shores of Queensland. And there will the dauntless
spirit of the Celt find ample, scope to vie in honest rivalry with the
boundless enterprise of the Anglo-Saxon. Through their united.energy
will be ensured the prosperity of their adopted country. The character


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 24, 1863.
of the emigration to Queensland is essentially distinct from the emigration
of late years. The people who were attracted and dazzled by the glitter-
ing caverns of California, and the fabled riches of Victoria, differ widely
from the class which swells the tide of emigration to this flourishing
colony. A thirst for riches, without the simpler though far nobler aim
of an honest independence, chiefly distinguishes the actions of the
former, while the latter seeks but a happy existence, without revelling
in dreams of unbounded wealth. The population that dwells near the
hanks of the Fitzroy and the Brisbane will ever prove a gentler race
than the rough and reckless miners who swarm on the plains of
Bendigo. In calculating the future progress of Queensland, the
geographical position of the country must not he forgotten. When
Torres’ Straits shall he rendered safe for navigation, and when an over-
land communication with the Bast shall have been consummated, the
full tide of prosperity now setting on China and our Indian possessions
will likewise flow- to the shores of Queensland, and create a commerce
whose benefits future generations will enjoy. From the very situation
of the country, its connection with the East will, undoubtedly, take
precedence of the neighboring colonies in a monopoly of Indian trade.
With a soil where vegetation luxuriates rapidly, and a climate where
genial health may be enjoyed to the full, the land of our adoption is
surely endowed with all the blessings which can conduce to a happy
existence. And though far from home, exposed to many a danger, yet
the thousands who seek shelter in the colony for which we are bound
will not want that security which the protection of Britain ensures to
every subject, from the mantling turrets of Quebec, to the pathless
wilds of Tasmania.
Correspondence-
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Mr. Editor, —In perusing one of your last papers I came across a most
w'onderful and romantic production, entitled “ A Reminiscence of the
Voyage,” and which, I feel convinced, ought not to be passed over without
some few remarks, to show that your readers are not insensible to the
author’s poetical genius. We are invited to see the magnificent vessel—
the Fiery Star—first in the placid waters of Cork harbor, afterwards
majestically swaying about from side to side, from which epithet we infer
that the writer was in no way affected by that common infliction which
he so beautifully describes in the continuation of his “ Reminiscence,”
and which so effectually drove all romantic feeling from so many of us,
or his praise would have been more limited. He proceeds, in the most
flowery language, to expatiate on the beauty of the good ship, hut pays
rather a doubtful compliment to her “ snowy pinions" as he so expressively
calls her sails, by saying the wind whistles through them; this, however,
we must put down to a lapsus linyuce, or rather a lapsus pluma, which
might have happened to anyone. A vivid imagination has evidently
come to the assistance of the writer in his description of our departure
from Cork. A “ loud hurrah” he says, burst from the crowded poop in
answer to the parting cheer. Now, we feel perfectly convinced that the
good people of Queenstown would have cheered lustily our or any other
ship, had they been awake, as all Irish worthy of the name will never
lose an opportunity of kicking up a row when they have a sort of excuse
for so doing ; but the hour of sailing being three o’clock in the morning,
the inhabitants of the said town were in the arms of Morpheus, so that
save a few inebriated boatmen, there were none to cheer. On the other
hand, he does not for an instant admit, when he speaks of the good ship
scudding on as if excited by the tumult, the vulgar interposition of the
steam-tug which towed us out of the harbor, but the reader, with anything
of the poet in his composition, will pardon any such little inaccuracy, and
give the license due to so poetical a writer. We feel ourselves to he
heroes indeed, when we are included among the daring five hundred, who
despising the dangers of the deep, have left their homes and country, and
are going to the distant shore of Australia. The writer asks (we must
excuse his spirit of enquiry) why we are leaving our native country?
Now a general answer can be given, as regards most of us, by the mere
fact that the vessel is, to all intents and purposes, an emigrant ship.
Necessity may be styled the mother of emigration as well as of invention,
and we are going to Australia, like Mahomet to the mountain, because
Australia will not come to us. There is yet one little error (we can
scarcely call it error, and yet it is one) in his production, which is perhaps
owing to the pardonable pride the writer appears to have for his country,
viz., placing Ireland first on the list. We are certainly given to believe
that the first shall be last, and the last first, but let us keep our places of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, until divine interposition alters them.
Yours, &0.,
A CONSTANT HEADER.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —My bulletin for the past week is, I am again pleased to
write, favorable, owing, 1 have no doubt in a great measure, to the
cheering and brisk breeze, bringing with it an additional supply of life-
sustaining and spirit inspiring oxygen, which we have all had the full
benefit of for the last few days. My list of “ sick and unable’’ is, lam
also happy to add, becoming much reduced, and my morning “levees’’ at
the hospital gradually getting thinner. The prospect, moreover, of 'ere
long seeing land, and soon afterwards anchoring in the long-looked-for and
much-desired haven of Moreton Bay, will also, I venture to prognosticate,
tend far more than the “ medicine chest” or even “ medical comforts’’
(which latter are always greatly in request) to further diminish the list,
and keep the case-book freer from fresh entries. I presume you will make
some allusion in this week’s Gazette to the interesting and exciting
sweepstake respecting our gallant ship—sighting land and dropping
anchor—that was drawn for on Friday last; therefore trusting that
nothing may occur to check the racing-like speed with which she is now
proudly dashing through the waves and hurling aside the foam, and in
the further hope (which I think you will excuse me for expressing) that
you and I may prove to be the holders of the lucky days.
I am, dear sir, &c.,
(Signed) J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir, —My report for this week is very unfavorable, having had a
continuation of S.B. and E. winds, which has driven the good ship far to
the northward. All my endeavors to get to the southward have been
unavailing, as the easterly winds prevail to the southward of us. I am
happy to find all the passengers in such good health, and many thanks
are due to our worthy and much-respected doctor. We have now got
hold of a fine westerly wind, and I trust we may hold it for many days,
and although the good ship cannot make a quick passage, yet 1 trust to
make a fair run to Brisbane.
I am, dear Sir, &c.,
(Signed) W. H. YULE, Master.


tte Jficrg Jilitr dayttt
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1863.
The splendid breeze that has favored us for nearly a week has
now failed us and drawn ahead, so that the good ship can barely
lie her course, but we are still running on towards our destination,
and every hour is bringing us nearer to the Brisbane water. The
rainy and cloudy weather seems also now to have closed over us,
but as long as we have not a foul wind and are going on, we must
not despair, especially as when once we clear Cape Howe we shall
be getting into hot weather again, and as the change from hot
weather to cold has laid up so many of our passengers, we must
hope that the change from cold to hot will prove equally beneficial
sis the other was detrimental to our health. We have still over
3000 miles to run before we reach the desired haven, but with
good luck we hope to reach it in a fortnight from this. It is
pleasing to report that the good humor and good fellowship on
board the ship seem rather to increase than diminish, and we only
trust this feeling will continue to prevail till the end of the voyage,
which cannot be much longer. Every evening we have music in
the ladies’ saloon, and the mirth and good humor that prevail are
most gratifying to our feelings. The fact is, that never did a ship
leave England in which real friendliness was more prevalent
among all, than on board the Fiery Star. Our jolly, good-natured,
kind-hearted Captain sets the example, as also our very excellent,
much-liked, and respected Doctor. There is one thing certain,
that although we all, as a matter of course, look forward impa-
tiently to our landing, still it will be a subject of regret to part
from our old familiar comrades, and it is like leaving home a
second time. Whatever the objects in life of each person may be,
still the heart must grieve at quitting the society of those with
whom we have been so long intimate, and (throwing overboard
every feeling of selfishness) we feel anxious as to the future of our
friends. We have all been friends indeed to each other, and never
can we forget the happy moments we have passed in the Fiery
Star.
CHARADES,
My first when joined with any name,
A royal title shows ;
My second bounds the ocean’s rage,
And means of living grows.
My whole denotes a spot of earth,
To all our people dear ;
Though not the place which saw our birth,
Our death ’twill see, I fear.
One evening lovely Mary said
“ Come, Doctor, write me a charade ;”
“ Alas ! I cried, what must it be
“ Oil,” cried the fair, “ write one on me.’’
“ Write one on you, my lovely friend,’’
“ I’ll try my pen,” sweet muse descend !
My first is you, all call you so,
E’en friend and stranger, belle and beau ;
Had you my next, with those sweet charms,
Dovers would flock in perfect swarms;
Ah ' then, perhaps, some swain preferred,
May doom me ever to my third.
My first in ink is found,
My next is simply round.
My last the globe has bound;
In the three you will see
A noble fleet,
On whose sails blow the gales,
With freedom meet.
Poet’s Comer.
See that man with lowering brow,
Stamping up and down the Poop;
What is it that he wanteth now 7
The Steward bringing in the soup —
The key.
Regardless of his dinner, he
With hurried step and restless eye;
Facing the rain and wind so free,
Murmurs deep, with many a curse, I
Want the key.
Another man’at dinner sate,
Unmindful of the wretch so cross;
With bad pea soup he filled his plate,
And gorged himself without remorse,
About the key.
The dinner o’er, the cheese was dene,
We ad arose, and turned around;
And went on deck, our dinner done,
When in his pocket, there was found
The key.
E. A, 0.
A REMINISCENCE OP THE VOYAGE.
What with promenading, dancing, single stick, boxing-gloves, and an
occasional pugilistic encounter, nothing interfered to disturb the quiet
harmony that reigned amongst us, till on the night of the 3rd September,
in the latitude of 14 deg. 36 min. N., longitude 26 deg. 13 min. W., a
circumstance occurred which, during the time it lasted, spread conster-
nation and dismay on all aboard, and threw a fearful solemnity on every
feature. The dusky shades ot the above evening fell upon us with sad
forebodings. The fitful flashes of sheet lightning now and then lit up the
vast expanse of waters around us, the wind was high and constant, the
moon hidden, and to add to our misery the falling rain pelted in merciless
pity, thus driving us all to the shelter of our cabins, and leaving our
heretofore crowded poop dreary and desolate. About 9 o’clock p.m., while
the steerage passengers underneath the deck-house were dancing to the
music of the well-played flute, and the wiiter, with his fellow cabin-men,
were whiling away the tedious hours at whist and novels, a confused
tumultuous rush attracted our attention, and instantly after a wild
uproarious cry arose upon the gale, carrying the fearful word “ Fire” to
our well-set ears, and electrifying our nerves with a terrible shock. The
effect of the dreadful word was talismanic; the gamesters forgot their
stakes, the readers their story; the former threw down their “hands,’’
the latter their books, and catching the contagion of the •* rushers”
underneath, pushed out to learn the truth of the word. The rush up the
hatchways was terribly awful, and the confusion on the companion ladder
dreadful to look at; here dashed on a mass of terror-stricken men, wild
with consternation, asking each other what would they do ; there you
encountered infuriate women pouring onward, in mad disorder, to the
Captain’s quarters ; while one or two invalided individuals, leit in their
berths, fainted away. At first, from the darkness abroad, coupled with


THE FIEBY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1863.
the lamplight still up, I could only see the contour of the dark figures as
they swiftly passed, but after a little I began to discern more clearly the
Eictures below me, and the sight was sickening to gaze on. The ears
aving listened for some moments to the reigning tumult of crying women
and talking men, as all looked out for safety, I now, as an occasional flash
of lightning illumined the scene, scanned the faces of all around, and read
there the saddening thoughts and wild dismay that settled in their hearts.
Yonder by the cuddy door stood a group of helpless girls, with despairing
faces, calling on the Captain for help; behind these some chicken-hearted
men talking wildly ; while mothers with infant babes, rushed towards the
rigging as a means of escape. Diving into the souls of all these, what
must have been the thoughts therein. From the hurried ejaculation and
upturned eyes,l could read the fervent appeal to heavenfor safety, while now
and then the word ‘home’ came softly towards me, and even my own feelings
were that way inclined. That tender, fond, and consoling word; how it
does kindle up recollections of the past, and hopes for the future ; how it
brings vividly before one the affectionate parents, the gentle sister, and
loving brother, as also the scenes of one’s early love, and the lover that is
left behind. But I digress. The bustle and confused noises “ around
the cabin door” soon brought the skipper on deck, and hearing the awful
word passing from one to one, reckless of the shrieking women and
brawling children, he darted hurriedly towards the scene of the fire, taking
the gangway at a leap. Soon at the hospital portion of the ship, where
the panic originated, he found that through the mindfulness of a man
named Daly, who threw himself to his work, the fire was got under and
soon extinguished. From the consternation displayed at the first mention
of the occurrence, I thought the accident of more importance, but learning
the true state of affairs, found the cry arose from parties perceiving the
flame of ignited ether (which had been fired by some accident) and who
without waiting for reasons, rushed out with the dreadful cry upon their
lips. It is pleasing to record, that though there were over 500 human
beings on board, and though the confusion was confounded, yet not one
was hurt save Daly, who was a little scorched in his manly effort to
subdue the flame. For hours after the termination of the word ‘ ‘ all’s
right,” the fear that possessed us had not died away, for scattered here
and there might be seen in deep discourse on the one only topic, crowds
of persons of every age, who, thankful for their deliverance from so
frightful a catastrophe, were projecting means for the prevention of such
accidents in future. T. P. H.
MELVILLE, THE BUSHRANGER.
“ Sabah,” said he, “ Sarah, beloved of my heart, my own love, who
hast given up rank and station to follow the fortunes of a bushranger;
cheer up darling, now is the time to make an effort to he a man, as you
have been a boy, and throw off the woman.” Melville was tried on four
different charges, and condemned on each; his several sentences (one
to take place at the expiration of the other) amounted to sixty years.
He said, when the Judge, Sir Redmond Barry, passed sentence on him,
“ I’ll die a young man yet, your honor.” He was sent on board the
hulks at Williamstown, and made an attempt at escape, for which he got
an additional sentence, and was sent to Pentridge. One morning the
turnkey went into his room and found him a corpse on his bed, having
strangled himself with his cravat. Such was the end of Melville.
She made every effort to assist Melville, and »t all events to make out
extenuating circumstances, hut to no avail. She went about to all the
most influential people, and a petition, most numerously and respectably
signed, was got up in favor of Melville.
‘‘ When the heart of man is oppressed with care
What will not gentle woman dare.”
And so it was then. She left no stone unturned in order to save him.
Melville, one day before his trial came on, told Sarah to try if she could
find Dick Simpson. After a great deal of trouble she saw him one day
at the Limerick Castle, in Elizabeth-street, and told him that Melville
wanted to see him. Some three months after Melville’s death a man and
a woman might have been seen travel ing up the country by the Ayoca;
the man was a little, round shouldered, black-eyed fellow ; the woman
was very lovely, but the signs of grief, deep and impressible, showed
themselves in her eyes, and generally dejected mien. ‘‘Ah, Richard,”
she said, as they toiled along at a slow pace, in their spring-cart, “ what
would I not give that I had never seen him—but now my heart is broken.”
Not far from the Wild Duck Greek is a lovely farm, and the proprietor is
most hospitable to all that come hs wav. A pale melancholy-looking
young woman, who looks prematurely old from grief or some other cause,
assists in the duties and hospitalities of the farm. That jolly good
natured little farmer is Diek Simpson ; that broken-down spirited young
woman is Mrs. Simpson, 'erewhile the chosen of Melville the bushranger.
Such was the reward that Melville conferred on Dick on the day when
he was called to the cell, When Simpson entered, the unfortunate con-
vict said, “ Here, young fellow, I am done with this world, and will you
promise me to look after Sarah when I am gone; she is a lady of birth
and education, and God knows unlucky was the day for her when she
first saw me. I have concealed near M Unt Cole about a thousand ounces
of gold, besides a bag containing 500 sovereigns. Here is the direction,
young fellow, by which you can find them,” So saying he handed Dick
a rudely-constructed map of the locality. Mount Cole lies to the north-
west of Ballaarat, and east of the Hopkins Stiver. I believe that all that
part of the country is now a gold-field, but in the times of which I te 1 no
pick or shovel had ever been put in the ground, no shanties been
established, or grog shops on the ground. Arcadian simplicity existed,
and one might travel the live long day without seeing the face of a white
man, unless he made a shepherd’s hut. Here Dick Simpson found the
treasure, which had been deposited there for safety by Melville the
bushranger, and with it was able to purchase the lovely farm by the Wild
Duck Creek. finis. E. D. F.
REFORM CLUB.
Yesterdav, at 2 p.m., a full meeting of this club was held to take into
consideration a complaint which had been made against one of its mem-
bers. The President having taken the chair, said: “ I have deemed it
necessary to call you together to-day in vindication of the interests of tne
Reform Club, to which we all have the honor to belong. One of the
most vital rules instituted for its better management, and indispensable to
the comfort of all, appears from the complaint made me to have been
openly violated by Mr. Lynde, one of its members. As President I treated
the ease with the promptitude and severity I deemed it to deserve, and
assembled as many members, who happened to be in the dub at the time,
by which means I was enabled to form a quorum. The members of the
quorum were of opinion that the case was of so flagrant a nature that ll.e
most rigid investigation ought to take place before a full committee, and
declined taking by themselves any farther steps in the matter. Acting
on their decision I sent a notice to Mr. H. Lynde, as well as the other
members present, and I cannot sufficiently express my feelings of satisfac-
tion at seeing Mr. Lynde and yourselves attend to a man ; Mr. Lynde, as
it will afford him an opportunity of rebutting the charges made against
him, and if not able to do that, mav give him an opportunity of vindi-
cating his conduct; Yourselves, as I shall be able to take a more general
opinion, and also shows that that spirit is still alive and undiminished
which has hitherto caused our elub to be the most cleanly and best
regulated amongst others I could mention. We will now proceed to read
the notice sent to Mr. Lynde, and will then lay the complaint before you.
We shall then be prepared to hear whatever Mr. Lynde may have to say
in his defence. He will then be requested to withdraw, to enable us to
discuss more privately the merits and demerits of the case, with due
regard to the rules of the club, upon which all our proceedings must be
guided.” The Secretary then read the following letter and complaint:—
Saloon, Fiery Star, October 29, 18G3.
Dear Sir, —Certain rules having been drawn up with due consideration
for the interests of the Reform Club, as also the mutual comfort and
accommodation of its members, and to which club you have hitheito
belonged ; I have been directed by the President to inform you that a
complaint has been made against yon, for having yesterday, the 2Sth
October, infringed one of tbe rules, most vital to the interests oi the
club, as also havin’ discommoded a large body of the members, of which
the club is composed. The X J resident has farther directed me to state that
the complaint was of so grave a nature that he deemed it expedient to
assemble as many members as could be called together on the spot; by
that means a quorum was formed ; the members of which being of
opinion that the breach of rule No, IX. was too flagrant to be decided but
in full committee, resolved-^ 11 That Mr, Lynde’s conduct be arraigned
before a full committee to-morrow, the 80th October, and that due notice
be sent to that gentleman, as also to the different members of the club.
Committee to assemble at 2 p.m.” 1 was farther directed to furnish you
with a true copy of rule No. IX., which runs as followsNo person
belonging to the Reform Club shall, under any pretence whatsoever,
remove from the library to any other part ot such club any book or paper
found therein, as they are placed there for the accommodation of all, and
shall, after unlocking and opening the bookshelf, replace the volumes as
he found tjrem, and return the key to the place from which he took it.
I am, yours, &c.
(Signed) W. BRUCE, Secretary Reform Club.
H. Lynde, Esq,
Complaint.
A serious complaint has been made to the President that one of the
members of our Reform Club did infringe the latter clause of rule No. IX.
by placing the key of the library in his pocket, and retaining it there for
nearly two hours, to the great inconvenience of several of the members.
The President then rose and asked Mr. Lynde what he had got to reply
to the foregoing charge, Mr. Lynde, in vindication of his conduct,
stated that he was influenced at the time by an hereditary complaint in
his family, namely, a defective memory, and further stated that
having met some ladies on the poop was obliged to walk with
them, having the key in his possession at the time. Mr. Lynde, having
nothing farther to state, was requested to withdraw, and after some dis-
cussion upon the statements made by Mr. Lynde in defence of his conduct^


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1863.
the committee was of unanimous opinion that Mr. Lynde was guilty of a
fligrant breach of the latter clause of rule No, IX., and that the complaint
bad been fully proved. A vote of censure was duly parsed upon Mr.
Lyndc’s conduct, and the secretary directed to warn that gentleman
‘■ 'that any infringement in future on bis part of the established rules of
the club would cause his name to he erased from the list of members, and
from that time he would cease to make use of the Reform Club either as
a stranger or a guest.’’ The meeting was thereupon dissolved after a vote
of thanks had been passed to the President.
Correspondence.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Sir, —I really am at quite a loss to understand how, with so many able
correspondents as you have at your command, you can leave a pen so
inadequate as that of your humble servant to the task of doing justice to
such an extraordinary production as the “ Reminiscence of the Voyage.”
I cannot help thinking that the writer has chosen, as a commencement
to his reminiscence, a very difficult as well as unromantic subject, but
must allow that he has accomplished his arduous task, and described the
one great drawback to the pleasure of a sea-voyage with a delicacy of
description, which even the best writer might envy, and I almost feel
inclined to think that it was to show his wonderful ability to cope with
any subject whatever, that induced him to attempt what requires so much
delicacy of description. “ Hardly had the pilot steamer quilted us,” says
the writer, “when the swelling waves, beating against our bulwarks,
tossed our vessel to and fro, and. in doing so, prostrated many new
hands.” Now, here is a charming uncertainty as to the cause of pros-
tration Was it from sea-sickness or from the fact of some of us not
being able to keep on our legs ? It is quite certain that either would,
as he expresses it, make our life “ pitilessly painful.” The, writer, I am
sorry to see, has, in the continuation of his “ reminiscence,” fallen into
exactly the same error as he did in his first letter, viz., giving his
country the precedence, when he mentioned the Irish Paddy first, de-
scribing him as “ sitting at the water’s edge, with lead-like face, strug-
gling with his foe.” lam not quite sure I have caught, in this particular
passage, his meaning, but I presume he is wishing to represent Paddy
with not a particularly clean physiognomy, whereas he, in the second
place, describes John Bull rushing to a bucket for the purpose, X suppose,
of performing his ablutions, which, had he known more of Englishmen,
would not have surprised him. As I remarked before, lam not quite
certain if I have hit the meaning of the writer’s last sentence, but as the
one is nearly as hard a subject to write about as the other, it cannot
be considered as a mistake on the writer's part
I am, yours, &c.,
A CONSTANT READER.
The ship was scudding o’er the deep,
The passengers had gone to bed ;
And all were wrapt in kindly sleep,
Or should have been, I might have said.
The morning sun shone bright and gay,
The passengers were still asleep ;
In the ship that sailed for Moreton Bay—
None thought about the missing sheep.
The officer paced the deck irate,
And cried “ I do not care a button,
(It was our watchful Second Mate)
But I'll find the chap who stole the mutton.
A!a« 1 ’twas true, the sheep was missing,
Where gone, the Mate he could not say ;
But from his lips the words came hissing,—
“The thief, for this, shall dearly pay.’’
Another day its course had run,
Morpheus again had claimed his due,
When morning broke a goose had gone,
Alas ! but who can tell where to ?
Again, our Second Mate, so keen,
With fury rigged a hangman’s noose,
And cried, “ his neck shall stretch, I ween.
If I find the brute who stole the goose.’’
Day upon day has passed away,
And to his mind brought no relief,
Search all he can, try all he may,
He cannot find the sinful thief.
Saloon, Fiery Star, Oct. 30.
Dear Sib, —Will you kindly allow me, through the medium of your
columns, publicly to express my thanks to Dr. Luce for the extreme
kindness and attention that he has shown me, through my late illness.
With many thanks to our worthy Doctor, and best wishes for prosperity
to himself and all our passengers, as well as for a quick passage to our
good ship, I remain, dear Sir, yours, sincerely,
(Signed) E. ASHTON COERIE.
A week has passed, the theft is booked,
So ’tis no use to grumble more,
’Tis proved the mutton ne’er was cooked,
They surely can't have eat it raw.
E. A. C.
ODE TO QUEENSLAND.
Official Reports.
Know ye the land whose fragrant shores
Await our coming free,
Where smiling Brisbane swiftly pours
Its waters to tlm sea,
1 he hind where cheering plenty reigns,
And sheds a glory round her plains,
That ages cannot dim;
Where shines the sun with genial glow,
And lets the homeless wanderer know,
A home is there for him.
Dear Sir, —Again, this week, 1 am thankful to say I can send you
a satisfactory report of our sanitary condition, and the health of our
voyagers. To be able to issue this statement at nearly the termination
of the voyage, with a population on board exceeding five hundred, is, I
can assure you, a source of much gratification to myself, and, I doubt not,
equally so ’■ to all whom it may concern.” It is, also, a cause for much
thankfulness to Divine Providence on the part of each one of us, and
we should, I think, be failing in gratitude to Him who alone “ orders
the winds,” “rules the waves,” and “ whom the tempests obey,” if we
did not, at our ensuing Sunday services, offer up a sincere prayer of
thanksgiving for the preservation of our lives, and the mercies vouch-
safed to us during the voyage.
I cannot but heartily congratulate our gallant, and much esteemed
Captain, on the splendid runs his matchless and unrivalled ship has made
during the last few days, and in the pleasing hope that the glorious
breeze, which is still blowing, will soon waft us “ o’er the deep blue
waters,’’ and “ o’er the deep blue sea,” to our harbour of refuge, also,
with every sincere and fervent wish, that the anticipations of all in our
noble vessel, may be far more than realized regarding the new country
to which they are now fast approaching.—l am, dear Sir, faithfully youra >
Hark to the music on the wind,
That gently greets the ear,
While streaming down the vale behind
The snowy flocks appear.
Queensland ! ’tis here thy beauty lies.
And spreads thy fame to distant skies,
Where grows the fond desire,
To mingle life with happy hours
Among thy sweet Arcadian bowers,
Where blessings never tire.
The birds among thy bushes sing
A welcome to thy stiand,
And prosp’rons gales a people bring
To thee from fatherland.
Thine is the peace that ancient lays
Had sweetly sung of earlier days,
A shepherd’s simple age.
Thine are the joys the later bard,
Hath claimed from heaven — a just reward, —
J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir,.— ln my report to you for this week, I have much pleasure
in stating that we have made some excellent runs the last few days, and,
should we be favoured with a continuation of the same, Brisbane would
only be a few days sail from us, but I have been so often disappointed
with the winds this voyage, that I feel afraid they are too good to last.
May God speed the ship.—l am, yours, faithfully,
To gild the modern page.
W. H. YULE, Master.


mt f\im mmt
(j ■ 1 f o o
VIGILANS
ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1863.
The prosperous wind that has so long favored us has now turned
dead against us; and proves to be as bitter an enemy as ere
it was friend to us. I write this in the middle of the week
(Thursday night), and of course cannot foretell what the weather
may be at the issue of the journal, but I fear that for the last two
days our good ship has made but little progress. It is a true
saying that “ there is many a slip between the cup and the lip,”
and I think we have it pretty well exemplified to us in the present
case. The tediousness of the voyage, in spite of the good health
and spirits of all on board, is now beginning to make itself felt,
and sorry as we must all be to part from our many familiar and
well-tried friends that we have made on board, still I think that
our dropping our anchor in Moretou Bay will be a great source of
gratification to all of us. Great thanks are certainly due to our
esteemed Captain, who has done all in his power to facilitate the
exercises and amusements of all classes of his passengers, from
the cuddy to the steerage, and also to our worthy Doctor for the
attention he has daily shown to all the sick since we left Cork.
I expect we have, all of us, now seen enough of ocean life to
convince us that a sailor’s life is not a bed of roses, and shall, one
and all of us, be glad when once again we are able to eat our
meals without hanging like grim death on to our plates to save
the contents from being upset into the lee-scuppers.
ALL-HALLOW’S EVE.
{From our Special Reporter.)
The time-honored custom of celebrating All-Hallow’s Eve in the old \
country was not forgotten by the passengers on board our good ship. Most
of the people indulged in a little extra luxury on this festive occasion,
but the great attraction of the night was the full dress hall , which came
off in the single women’s compartment. By the kind permission of the
Doctor, under whose special charge the single women are placed, and
through the kindness of our worthy Captain, who is always ready to
promote and encourage anything calculated to make his passengers com-
fortable and happy, the strict discipline of the ship was relaxed for the
evening, and the girls were allowed to enjoy themselves, which they did
to their hearts’ content. Each young lady had the privilege of inviting
her beau, which, of course, she did to the unspeakable delight of the
chosen few, and to the great disappointment of her various suitors. By
seven o’clock the whole party assembled in the spacious ball-room, which
was cleared of all unnecessary furniture, and tastefully fitted up for the
occasion. After the tea, coffee and cakes were served, which the whole
party seemed to pa 1 ticularly relbh, dancing was commenced and kept up
with great spirit till a late hour. The Captain, the Doctor, and Father
Dunne were amongst the honored guests, and three cheers were called for
each of them, and heartily responded to—the ladies as well as the gentle-
men joining in the chorus. I will not attempt to describe the elegance,
beauty, and richness of the dresses of some of the most fashionable
belles of the night: it would not be fair to particularise where all were so
graceful and becoming. Polkas, waltzes, quadrilles, country dances, and
though last, not least, the Irish jig were indulged in till all were pretty
well tired, When the young men had whispered their “Goodnight,
love,” and made their last bow, the angelic forms glided away one by one,
and in a short time all were rocked by the Fiery Star into a sound sleep,
dreaming, no donut of the happy evening they had spent, and which will
be looked back to with the must pleasurable reminiscence by each and
everyone of the party for many a long year to come.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES OF LAST WEEK.
X. —Queensland. 2.—Misfortune. 3.—Black Ball Line.
Poet’s Corner.
Air.—“ Z’m Afloat ”
Onward, still onward our good strip speeds on,
With a dash and a plash, the wild waves among;
Onward, still onward, she sc ids through the spray
To anchor ere long in our muoh-wished-for Bay.
Watch, watch, when the west wind blows a strong gale,
And the angry waters her bulwarks assail;
See—see how with pride she tops o’er the spray,
Apparently anxious for Moretou Bay.
List—list to the tread of the mate while he beeps
His watch o’er the vessel, as onward she sweeps ;
Hark—hark to the song of the crew as they haul
The sails and the sheets when threatens a squall.
The breeze strengthens stiffly, the clouds look like lead,
The poop is deserted, its tenants are fled ;
Tile sails are all reeled —two men at the wheel;
The Captain’s on deck—say what does he feel.
He watches with care, with vigilance guards;
His orders he issues: “ Ho ! there, square the yards.’’
His post he ne’er leaves while danger appears,
For he’s a good Captain, who no danger fears.
Now past is the squall, the waters less wild,
Our good ship moves onward, more swiftly yet mild :
She rolls not so horridly, dips not so low,
But smoothly and proudly rides over her foe.
Now nearing our port, how joyous her crew ;
There’s laughing and jollity-—bets not a few ;
There’s money for first laud—there’s more for the d ly
We cast out the anchor in Moreton Bay.
Then drink to our Fiery Star passengers all,
May no dangers her human freight ever befall;
Ami ere we depart on our various ways,
Let’s sing all, together—success to her days.
In one loud huzza then let all of us join,
And pledge her good fortune in bumpers of wine;
Huzza, boys, huzza, the land is in view,
And thus with your leave I make my adieu.
TO A LADY SINGING.
What sweet voice thro’ our cabin rings.
What concord of sweet sound;
Hark it is Mrs. L who sings,
Shedding harmony around.
The “ Power of Love” is now her song;
List to that swelling note,
Warbling sweet, and rich, and strong,
As from a song-bird’s throat.
“Wait for the Waggon’’ strikes the ear
With chorus wild and free ;
And then—an air to me most dear —
“ The tears of Memory.”
Lady sing on, thy sweet voice lends
A charm, my breast to soothe;
And may thy path, that onward tends,
Be ever calm and smooth.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1863,
AMUSEMENTS.
Perhaps the only amusement which can fix the attention of passengers
at the present time is the game of cards; all other amusements have
gradually become neglected and apparently forgotten. Instead of enjoying
themselves with manly exercise as at the commencement ot the voyage,
the passengers now assume a listless ease and indulge in speculations
regarding the probable length of the passage. That many of these
speculations have been di-appointed no one can doubt, and if the pas-
sengers do not bear their disappointment with proper equanimity the fault
lies with themselves, for their anticipations of a run were far too sanguine,
while no allowance was made for the season of the year. If the Fiery
Star had made an unrivalled passage she would necessarily have made a
rough one, and by contrasting the pleasantness* if the voyage with its seem-
ing tediousness, passengers may find a comfortable assurance. It is much
to be desired that the remaining portion of the run to Brisbane will bring
fine weather, as in that case we all might have a better opportunity of
indulging in the amusements that were formerly prevalent, and taking
plenty of exercise to brace our nerves and regain our strength preparatory
to disembarkation. The perfectness of the physical is always necessary
to a pioper display of the mental faculties, and even those who spend the
long evenings in many a nihber at whist, would assuredly find their
powers of memory and calculation all the more acute, from the stimulus
of bodily exercise. Meantime in <dl the cabins parties assemble everv
evening, with the most astonishing regularity to play Iheii favorite game.
The * points’ at whist swell up rapidly and as rapidly decrease, till success,
from being so varied, becomes all the mote equal Matches between the
fiist and second cabins have been occasionally played, but hitherto victory
has given no decided preference. A most exciting game came off this
week between the two opposing parties, and after a display of most
superior skill on both sides, success crowned the efforts of the first cabin
players. The game took place in the second cabin, whose occupants
manifested great excitement on the occasion, and watched the varying
progress of the match with keen and eager interest.
■ ■■ "■■■■au w
CHAHABES.
My first is heard but never seen,
My next can charm the ear;
Bisect my whole, you close the scene,
And fuii-di life’s career.
To he my first, in ev’ry age,
My second has desired;
Unlike the slave, my whole is brave.
With liberty inspired.
My first is the voice of the innocent lamb,
As be frisks by the side of his loud-bleating dam;
My second is oftentimes taken, 1 think,
A beverage to make, which most Irishmen drink;
Mv whole is a damsel both lovely and sweet,
And suitors in multitudes bow at her feet.
My first annuls my second,
My second annuls my first,
Combined produce my answer.
My first you’d think comprised my whole,
My second it is I,
My third an article so neat,
Of dress by farmer’s worn ;
My whole if e’er you chance to meet,
You’d wish you'd ne’er been born.
CONUNDRUM.
What was the most common fruit in Noah’s Ark? Preserved pears
Advertisements.
HP WO POUNDS REGARD to any person or persons who shall give
1 such information as will lead to the discovery of the person who
Stole and Killed one of the WHITE DECKS from the House on Deck.
W. C. SAEGANT, Chief Officer.
TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE EEWAED.
LOST, a. silver mounted ivory LFAD PENCIL. The owner (Ist :
cabin) will give the above reward to anyone who shall return it tu :
the Editor.
Correspondence.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Me. Editor, — As a matter of justice I beg you will give insertion in
the next issue of your very interesting journal) to the accompanying
letter, in reply to those of a “Constant Header,” which have lately
appeared. Your obedient servant, T. P. HASLAM.
“Me. Constant Reader.—Net having seen the number of the Fiery
Star Gazette , dated 2Ath October, 1 had no opportunity of replying to
your remarks therein, in my ‘ Reminiscence of the Voyage,’ nor would I
have seen “ Constant Reader’s” criticism in the last issue, had not a friend
handed me the paper and pointed out the letter alluded to. but now having
seen and read both productions, I am in a position to defend my ei*say,
I while I expose the littleness of my critic. In the first place I feel it but
justice to myself to say, that you, ‘ Mr. Constant Reader,’ must have very
little to do, and still less to say, when you had to select my waitings as a
theme for your pen. 1 am totally ignorant of whom I address, hut
whoever you be I feel extremely thankful for your flattering allusions to
my ‘ poetic style,’ classing me with tome of the best writers. Had you
“Mr. Constant Reader,” confined yourself to finding fault with my
method of expression. I could easily understand you, but while you praise
me in one part you blame me in another, thus contradicting jour own
words, and leaving yourself open to suspicion. If 1 judge rightly, you feci
pained that Ireland should precede England iu my essays, and this appears to
be the greatest (if not the only) fault, and biggest blunder I have made.
Well then, to settle this point at once, allow me to inform you. Sir, that
1 am an Irishman, and, consequently, hold my own country first in my
estimation (no matter how' poor or despFed she may seem to yon) and I
would be a knave or a sycophant did I smother this feeling by placing her
in any but the first place. Were you writing of England, no doubt you
would give her precedence, and why not? Am I therefore to be called to
order because I do what you claim for yourself? I am no bigot, but I
would be undeserving the name of man did I not love “ my own, my
native land” better than any other, for does not Scott say, —
“ Breathes there a man, with soul sc dead,
Who never to himself hath said, —
This is my own, my native land.”
I Here then, Sir, is my reply to jour charge of putting Ireland before
i England, and no conscientious man will blame me. Now then, as regards
|| the little inaccuracies you tax me with, I have only to say, that what I
Ij stated of the parting cheer is perfectly coirect, and though you make out
ii we set sail at three o’clock in the morning, when there were none to cheer
j! save a few inebriate boatmen, I maintain the inaccuracy is on your ovrn
j| side, and unless you make Messrs. Baines, Taylor, Percival, and Father
!j Quinn, with some other gentlemen (who parted from us with a “loud
i l l huzza,’’) drunken boatmen, your statement is a direct false one. as is also
j( the hour of sailing. The sneering bigoted remark,that the Irish are only
ij ‘Moo anxious to cheer or row at, anything,’’is undeserving of refutation,
I; and the man who could barefacedly use such an expression, has little
j 1 experience of the Celtic r«ee, and therefore unworthy of notice. Your
1,, stale and far-ietched pun of 11 Australia not coming tu us,” is a poor reply
! to my query. 1 asked the question you cavil at, not for an answer, but
; that all might catechise themselves, as “Mr. Constant Readei” might
easily see had he the smallest penetration whatever. ’Tis of course
i nothing to me what biings “Constant Reader,’’ or any other readers, to
Queensland ; my object is solely to “ mind myself,” and as I undertook to
I write mv own ideas of the voyage, it was nut of* Constant Reader’ 1 asked
! the question, though he might ‘‘wear the c-p should it fit him.” The
poor attempt of raising a joke at my description of Paddy with sea-
sickness, is unworthy of an “ Enlightened Englishman,” whom 1 presume
“ Constant Reader’’ to be ; and the partiality he manifests for “Johnny
Bull rudiiiig towuids the bucket,” is claiming for himself what he refuses
to me ; but I need not marvel at this, as I have already had too many
opportunities of seeing how big and selfi.'h such bullies are, as the Nom de
\ i>luyne I have to battle with. It would require no very sharp intellect to
I come at my meaning when describing the scene you, Sir, have so foully
i distorted , but from the tautological style of your epistle, I don’t wond- r
| at your mistaking what delicacy prevented me from naming, and therefore,
1 in pity, I pass you by, leaving you to “bask in the mud” of your own
creation, while I sink down in the interminable chaos your literary sarcasm
has opened.
Yours, &c.,
T. P. H.
Sir, —“Constant Reader’’ has perused, with some degree of surprise, a
rejoinder to his criticism of Mr. HasUm’s “ ReminFccnces of our present
Voyage.” His surprise consists iu the discrepancies that exist elth riu
the oiiginal, or, as it appears, revised by the Editor of the Fiery Star
Gazette, “ Const mt Render'’ presumes that it must be his limited know-
ledge of grammar ami spelling which Mr. HusUm alludes to, that led him
to give the palm to the Fditor. “ Constant Reader” iniuhi, perhaps, have
1 been mistaken, but Mr. ILvdam’s rejoinder has so criminated him, as m


THE FIERY STAR G AZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1863.
place the matter beyond the possibility of a doubt It was not “ Constant
Reader's” intention to ever carry on a paper w*r with Mr. Haslam, and in
now declining to remain a constant reader of Mr. Haslam’s very able
productions, must acknowledge he Ins been taught a lesson, for he was,
until now, quite ignorant that so much impertinence, though voluminous,
could be contained on so small a piece of paper, and in wishing Mr. H. the
success he deserves, subscribes himself,
Yours, &c„ (Signed) B. O. PARR.
OUR WATER CONDENSER.
Jest let the passenger step into the galley of the Fiery Star, and he will
there see one of those inventions that make steam subservient to all our
necessary requirements, and assert once more the civilizing influence of
the great engineer who first discovered its power. “ Many a time and
oftships hive ploughed the ocean, while their passengers and crew
were sunk in despondency and suffered all the pangs of a burning thirst;
often have their parched throats refused to echo a cry of joy even when a
welcome sail appeared on the horizon. They had “ water, water, every-
where, but not a drop to drink.” The exhaustless ocean was before them,
but its waters were as yet a bane and not an antidote. Now all such
difficulties have been surmounted, and ships can proceed to sea without
the slightest risk of failure in their water supplies. Water condensers are
now substituted for the old water casks. In this respect the passengers
of the Fiery Star have certainly been more fortunate than many emigrants
who have preceded them. The water condenser on board has been fitted
up with all the latest improvements, and is one of the most perfect
machines of its kind that have ever been produced. Ur. Norman by was
the first inventor of the condenser, and most emigrant ships are supplied
with one of Ids manufacture. The Fiery Star’s condenser, however, has
been constructed on improved princi les, which have been lately patented
by Mr, Gravely, of the firm of Messrs. Winchester, Gravely, and Co,
London, and there is no doubt that the patentee has developed more
tally all the capabilities of the original invention. The boiler, which is
live Let in length and three feet nine inches in diameter, is fed by a pipe,
through which water is pumped from the sea. The steam generated
Irom this passes through another pipe, where it meets a body of cold
water, whose influence condenses it. The water now falls through a
filter into the tanks. The salt water being converted into steam, is also
diverted of every impurity, and as it subsequently undergoes the process
of filtering we can easily find a reason here why it is so superior to
the water that has been shipped in casks. When the water falls into the
tanks it is quite hot, and requires some time to cool ere it can he used for
culiuaiy or drinking purposes. This wonderful machine is capable on
any emergency of condensing 1009 gallons of salt, into fresh, water, in 24
hours, and produces on an average about 350 gallons in a working day of
10 hours. This is surely quite sufficient to supply such a vessel as the
Fiery Star, and even though an accident should occur to the machinery,
recourse would only be made to the plentiful store of water in casks. Only
seven to eight hundred weight of coals are required to condense 1000
gallons, and we must all allow that the fuel consumed is proportionally
small to the result obtained. The condenser, however, has other virtues,
and serves other purposes. The coppers in the galley can hold 132 gal-
lons. The steam of the condenser, at a pressure of 20 lbs., can boil all
this, in the incredibly short period of 20 minutes. Again, it can work a
fire engine whose hose would serve to extinguish flames, if we had ever
such a misfortune. Luckily we have had no opportunity of testing the
fire-engine, but we have often seen the power of the hose displayed in the
more agreeable operation of cleaning the decks. Another most useful
feature in the condenser has yet to be mentioned. The boiler works a
steam winch of five horse-power, for the purpose of loading and discharging
cargo, and in a ship like the Fiery Star, where despatch is so necessary to
its success, a machine like this must prove of great service. Thus we see
that the condenser in our galley does all the cooking, washes the decks,
serves to extinguish tire, loads and discharges cargo, in addition to its
most; essential attribute of converting salt into fresh water. And who,
that has partaken of the water so condensed, has yet been able to discover
the slightest taste of acidity, or even detect the smallest particle of
impurity. Assuredly the passengers on board the Fiery Star will judge
more impartially of its merits, when perhaps they strive in vain to allay
their unquenchable thirst, with the scanty and indifferent water to be
found in Queensland.
Correspondence.
To the Editor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Sir, —In sending in a contribution for this, as I expect, our last ocean
paper, I am utterly at a loss to know what to write about, unless 1 return
to the old never-failing theme of the wind and weather, which, however,
Ido not wish to do. There is, as far as I can see, very little of anything
interesting going on among any class of our passengers, with the excep-
tion of siugle-st'ck, which has suddenly come into fashion again, after
having very nearly died a natural death. The monotony of the voyage
is now making itself fully felt by all of us, and though even now there
are occasional starts and violent efforts to renew the divers sports and
occupations which amu>ed ns during the first two months of the voyage
yet these efforts are now getting fewer, feebler, and farther between. We
must now hope that another w<-ek will see us safely anchored at Brisbane
when all the discomforts of the voyage will be forgotten, and the lallen
spirits of the passengers be again raised at least to the elevation of their
normal state. —Yours, &c. VIATOR.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir, —In anticipation of this being my last week’s report, I have
the satisfaction to be able to state that the general good health that has
prevailed amongst all classes on boat d has proved our voyage to have
been, in a sanitary point of view, one of the most fortunate on record. I
must attribute it in a great measure to the favorable circumstances under
which, with the thermometer at 82 degrees, we were wafted in one of the
smartest ships afloat, through the low latitudes, as also to the feeling of
mutual accommodation that I have observed amongst all. We shall now,
in all probability reach Brisbane in the coursed next week, when I trust
to have the pleasure of furnishing the Health Officer with a carte blanche
report, and when I hope to see all in such good health as will enable them
to “ turn to with a will,’’ which, in many instances, will be owing to
their voyage on board the Fiery Star. The games and exeicises of
various desedptions, of which our Captain has proved himself so great
an advocate, have materially tended to lessen the monotony and tedious-
ness of a long sea voyage, and the cheerfulness and sphit that have
been manifested, will cause many to look back with pleasure, coupled
with invigorated health, upon the trip across the mighty ocean to the
land of their adoption. The more genial climate which we shall expe-
rience after changing our course to the northward, will, I trust, restore
the few who are still suffering from the effects of the mure rigid weather
of the high latitudes, and when they are so restoied, there is no one,
who more sincerely wishes them (and all their fellow voyagers) a continu-
ation of good health and prosperity in their undertakings, than
Yours, very faithfully,
J. J. LUCE, M.D.
Dear Sir, —In my report for this week I cannot give any very favo-able
account, having experienced, for three days, easterly winds, which have
retarded our good ship considerably; in fact, in all my reports the order
of the day lias been, with one or two exceptions, unfavorable. We are
now 79 days out, and I suppose a liner passage, as far as good weather
goes, never could be equalled, not once having a gale of wind since we
left Cork. As I expect your Gazette will appear next week, I shall enter
into further particulais. The meridian of Van Diemen’s Land was
accomplished in 76 days out from Cork, and I trust we shall now soon
reach Brisbane, all in good health and spirits.—l am, dear Sir, &c..
W. H, YULE.


lie Am Star doaicttc,
0 1 6
VIGILANS ET AUDAX.
SATURDAY,
NOVEMBER
14, 1863.
The last few days have brought us much nearer to our destination,
and it is very probable that the process of disembarkation will
have commenced before the present number of the Gazette has
been circulated among all its readers. The weather has been
remarkably fine, and the hundreds on board who are visiting this
part of the world for the first time, will be pleased with the
appearance and geniality of a cloudless day in the Australian
spring time. The vicinity of our adopted land and the beneficial
influence of the weather, have raised every sanguine anticipation,
and shed a glow of health and happiness on all the faces we see
around us. Indeed, we are gratified in more ways than one ;
pleased to see the invalid appear on deck, rendered convalescent
by the balmy atmosphere ; pleased to observe that passengers seem
determined, at the end of the voyage, to banish every feeling of
acrimony, and cherish friendships which even the coming parting
will not dissolve. On Thursday afternoon a shoal of whales was
observed on the weather side of the vessel. Incessantly they
spouted up the spray, and occasionally displayed their huge bulks
above the waves, to the great gratification of the spectators.
The work of cleaning and repairing has already begun, and there
is no doubt that the Fiery Star will arrive in Moreton Bay with
colors flying, and her beautiful model enhanced by internal order
and arrangement. The sailors are busy scraping the masts,
painting and varnishing everything that is capable of adornment,
and making every preparation to facilitate our arrival and landing.
The anchors are in readiness for their approaching service, and
the very side-ladder is swung for immediate use. The passenger
cannot observe all these preparations without being excited by
pleasurable emotions ; the hopes which induced him to emigrate
arc now about to be realised, or at least proved ; the land of his
adoption has but to greet him with a welcome hand to ensure his
happiness and its own prosperity.
CRICKETANA.
The readers of our Journal will, no doubt, be glad to hear that a Cricket
Match is contemplated on our arrival at Brisbane, between an Eleven of
the Fiery Star and the Brisbane Cricket Club. Such an amusement will
serve to enliven our short stay at that place, and may prove the means of
making friends who may be useful hereafter, besides affording the
opportunity of seeing the manners and customs of the people amongst
whom we are to mix. We may add that the Flying Cloud, which sailed
last year for the same place, got up an Eleven to play the same club, but
suffered defeat. Such defeat cannot W'ell be wondered at; a three months’
voyage, with all its attendant troubles, is not at all calculated to increase
the strength and muscles of those on board. On the contrary,
the lassitude and ennui consequent to the lazy life on board ship, will
render anybody unfit for the exertions necessary to a Cricket Match. But
we hear from an authority who has been in both ships, that from the
material on board the Flying Cloud and our own good vessel, we ought
to produce an Eleven more likely to prove victorious. Our Captain has
kindly granted us his full co-operation in the attempt, and we hope our
readers and friends will do the same. The Eleven must, of necessity,
labor under great difficulties, such as the total ignorance of each other’s
play; but these, we hope, will be overcome. Three or four days’ practice
is proposed, after which time we hope to see a smart team take the field
against their adversaries, and ready to die game to the last. A meeting
was held during the week for the purpose of electing a captain. Such a
step everybody must know to be perfectly necessary, as no part}' can pull
well together without a leader. C. Higginson, Esq., was duly and
unanimously chosen for that post, which we have every reason to believe
he will ably fulfil. A committee of four was also chosen —two from the
first, and two from the second cabin. Fourteen players have sent in their
names, but, of course, only the best Eleven will take the field
0. Higginson, Esq. (captain) Mr. Bell Mr. Harrison
Mr. Harrison
F. K. Somerset, Esq. Mr. Hunter Mr. Ramsay
E. Eardley Wilmot, Esq. Mr. Latour Mr. Algar
\V. A. Ilruce, Esq. r. W mdlock Mr. Statter (14).
W. Butler, Esq. Mr. Howarth
A THUNDER-STORM AT SEA.
The following account of a thunder-storm is taken from the log of
our worthy Captain, on his last voyage in the ship Cit} 7 of Manchester,
bound from Calcutta for Mauritius. Our passengers will, no doubt,
be thankful that they have hitherto escaped all such dangers, and
been wafted o’er the waves without encountering the combined fury
of the elements
Friday, 12th February, 1863.
Lat. 11 deg. 10 min. S.; uong. 87 deg. E.
At 4 p.m. the sky assumed a very wild appearance ; towards six
o’clock heavy thunder was heard in the distance, but from which
quarter I was unable to say. At 8 p.m. the thunder increased and
lightning glared all round the horizon. The ship appeared to be
right in the centre of a severe storm. As the glass was falling
rapidly I took in and furled all the small sail, handed the foresail and
mainsail, and left nothing on the ship but the topsails, in order to be
in readiness for any emergency that might occur. The thunder and
lightning were most fearfully grand. The ship seemed enveloped in a
continuous blue flame, and the thunder overhead was something
beyond description. Expecting every moment to be struck, I ordered
the pumps to be secured by choking them up with bags and old
canvas. Had it been a common lightning and thunder-storm I should
have thought nothing of it, but it was an endless stream of liquid
fire, darting from the heavens and rushing into the water with a fearful
sound, while the awful thunder overhead, which shook the ship and
made the chain cables on deck rattle as if we had let go the anchor
brought very forcibly to my mind that day of judgment when the
heavens and the e irth shall pass away. It seemed as if the Almighty
were pouring out his whole wrath, and I feel confident had any of that
liquid fire struck our ship that she would have been immediately
destroyed ; in fact it was only a miracle that effected our escape, as
the fire was rushing down on each side within a few yards of the
vessel. This storm raged continuously for 12 hours.
“FIERY STAR GAZETTE.”
A meetixg of the cabin passengers was held in the saloon at 3 p.m. on
Friday, for the purpose of considering the proper measures to be adopted
in the printing and publishing of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Father Dunne, who was unanimously called to the chair, briefly ex-
pressed his concurrence with the aim of the meeting, and strongly urged
the necessity of taking every means to promote such a desirable object,
which would place in the hands of every passenger a memento of the
happy days he spent on the deep blue sea.
Dr. Luce, in proposing the first resolution—“ That the Fiery Star
Gazette he printed and published in Brisbane,” suggested several plans,
any of which might be adopted in carrying into effect this pumary
object, and arranging with the printer regarding the character and form


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1863.
of the Gazette. But he justly remarked that it would he premature to
attempt any definite resolution on this point until our arrival in Brisbane,
where a committee subsequently to be appointed would complete all the
necessary details. The motion was seconded by Mr. Freeman, and carried
unanimously.
Mr. E. Butler in few words proposed, and Dr. Luce seconded, the
next resolution—" That a committee of gentlemen be appointed to collect
subscriptions for defraying the expenses of printing and publishing the
Fiery Star Gazette.” Committee; Messrs. Freeman, Bruce, Corrie,
Butler, and Father Dunne : Dr. Luce, treasurer.
Mr. Bruce having briefly adverted to the necessity of keeping the copy-
right of the Gazette for the benefit of the subscribers, moved accordingly,
—‘‘That the right of publication be reserved.” This resolution was
seconded by Mr. E. A. Corrie, and carried with universal approbation.
Father Dunne again rose to say that all the subscribers who quitted
Brisbane before the printing was completed would probably find some
difficulty in procuring their copies, and in order to avert such a difficulty
he stated his willingness to forward the papers on receipt of the necessary
directions.
In accordance with this kind offer of services, Dr. Luce moved the
following resolution ;—“ That all subscribers be requested to send their
addresses to Father Dunne on the earliest opportunity.’’ He strongly
enforced the mportance of this motion, so that no disappointment what-
ever should occur. The resolution was seconded by Mr. Bruce, and
approved of by the meeting.
On the motion of Mr. B. A. Corrie a most cordial vote of thanks was
tendered to Mr. Freeman for the discharge of his editorial duties, as also
to Messrs. Wilmot and Young for acting as amanuenses in the publication
of the Gazette. This concluded the business of the meeting, which was
dissolved, after Father Dunne’s efficient services in the chair had been
duly acknowledged.
To the Fditor of the Fiery Star Gazette.
Sir. —Allow me through the medium of your paper to tender my most
sincere thanks to Dr. Luce for his kind attention during my late severe
indisposition, caused by a fall, which seveiely injured my back, and
through which my life was a long time despaired of. Trusting you will
be able to accord me a space for inserting this in your valuable paper,
1 am, Sir, &c„
JOHN CASEY.
LECTURE ON QUEENSLAND.
A most interesting and practical lecture was delivered last night on the
poop-deck by Father Dunne to the passengers, who heard him throughout
with the deepest interest and attention. The subject was “ Queensland,”
and from the lecturer’s intimate knowledge of the country the audience
received a great deal of most useful instruction.
Dr. Luce was voted to the chair, who, in a few appropriate words,
introduced the lecturer, who commenced by saying that he felt very great
pleasure in coming forward at the desire of many of his respected fellow
passengers to give them the benefit of his experience in the “ bush,’’ and
to convey to them some slight idea of the country where the great
majority of them were going to build up their future homes, as also to
E repare them for the difficulties and disappointments which they might
ave to encounter in the new country. He referred in feeling and pathetic
language to our having severed those strong links which bound us to
home, Iriends, and fatherland; but as he remarked it was not of the
land we left we were now to bethink ourselves, but of that beautiful land
which lay open before us, and along whose rocky shores the gentle
breeze was at that very moment wafting us. He briefly touched on the
discovery of Australia by Captain Cook nearly a century ago, and came
at once to the subject of his lecture— 1 “ Queensland” —whose history
commences with 1859, but whose rapid progress and prosperity have
exceeded that of any other new country on the face of the globe. He
stated Queensland contained an area of between six and seven hundred
thousand square miles, and its soil was capable of producing every
necessary and luxury which man could desire. He conducted the
emigrants from the ship to the shore, and pointed out in the plainest and
most intelligible language what each class of persons should do on their
arrival. He particularly warned the emigrants to be on their guard
against the snare of intemperance, and that if they wished to succeed in
their adopted country they should be sober, truthful, industrious, and
persevering. He advised the single women to be cautious before taking
a situation, to find out from the matron at the government depot, who is
supposed to know the parties who come to engage them, whether it would
be a safe place for them or not, and in a very humourous anecdote he
showed how girls were sometimes too ready to give up good situations in
order to get into other places, where they would have a greater facility of
meeting with bachelors.
We are sorry our space will permit us only to give a mere outline of
this most interesting lecture, which was received with frequent outbursts
of applause during its delivery.
At the conclusion of the lecture Dr. Luce rose and said: lam sure
I am but speaking the sentiments of all around me when I sav how
deeply grateful and obliged we feel to Father Dunne for Ids very
gratifying and instructive address. 1 hope all wi 1 remember, and
seriously think over, the experience and valuable advice he has given.
The pleasing duty devolves upon me to propose a vote of thanks to him,
which I am confident will meet with a warm response in all your hearts,
and be carried with acclamation and loud huzzahs, such as will not only
he heard on the poop and between decks, but thrill and resound throughout
the whole length and breadtir of the Fiery Star.
The cheering to Father Dunne then commenced, and was kept up
unceasingly for several minutes. Votes of thanks were also proposed to
the Doctor and Captain, and heartily responded to.
CHARADES.
Infirm and feeble by my second made,
To expiate his crimes;
Upon my whole my first sets out,
To visit foreign climes.
My first is smart at repartee,
My next lives in the spacious sea ;
Attempt my first, and miss your aim,
Depend my whole will be your name.
My first is a sound but imperfectly heard,
My second, though small, is an object of terror;
Join these with skill, and you’ll find in my third,
The offspring of fancy, and parent of error.
My first an interjection is;
My second the nom de guerre given
To a well remembered wild young prince,
Who long since has gone to heaven.
My third Johnny Crapaud mostly uses in song,
When to his true lover he’s singing,
The refrain sounds well as he swaggers along,
And the notes on the air are ringing.
My fourth is the past tense of a verb that means fast.
And oft proves to the sportsman a stinger;
My first three conjoined, and combined with my last,
Make the name of a beautiful singer;
At whose touch the piano gives brilliantly forth
Its most delicate notes when she plays ;
And now she has changed to the South from the North,
May good fortune he her’s, all her days.
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK’S CHARADES.
1. —Windpipe. 2. —Freeman. 3.—Mary. 4.—Cannot. s,—Alligator
LINES ON LEAVING THE FIERY STAR.
Farewell dear ladies all, within my heart your memory will dwell,
And whether gay saloon or crowded hall, far-off station, or gome
sequestered dell
May be your place of residence— none wish you better,
Than he who sends to you this farewell letter.
How many a gay re-union we have had,
Within the saloon of the Fiery Star;
Whether the wind blew high or low, or good or bad.
Merry were we upon the ocean far.
As we roamed (the sweeping billows round us hurled),
Ploughing our way across the briny foam;
To seek in Queensland a new and distant world,
And form in far Australia, a new and happy home.
Farewell, and may your ways be always bright,
Where’er you go, and whatsoever be your lot;
Oh I may your morning ne’er turn into night,
May blessings reign on all those eyes so bright,
Prays one who also hopes that you’ll forget him not.
It was a gay saloon, and when the notes
Came thrilling forth from Madame H’s fingers;
And sweet the song was swelling tfom the throats
Of many a fair; the charming memory lingers.
And still will linger, many and many a day,
When we are all patted, far and far away.
Farewell too, my well-tried comrades, than whom
A jollier set of fellows never met;
And now, though pat ting sheds a certain gloom
Around me, still I hope to meet you yet,
And see you all in happiness and wealth,
When we shall drink round many a jolly health.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1863.
And not forget the Captain of the Fiery Star,
While Yule is on the wave, and we in the wild bush far.
And unto you I also say —Farewell
Dear Doctor, who ever kind hast been ;
You may be sure that I shall ever tell
Where’er my path may be, be it dark or green—
I’ll speak of Dr. Luce as of a friend,
As kindly-hearted as I have ever seen;
And may your homeward path as prosperous he,
As was your voyage when first you went to sea.
Good bye Captain Yule, and good bye jolly crew,
With whom we’ve spent full many a happy day;
You may be certain, I shall still remember you,
When we are separated many a mile away.
And you, too, Father Dunne, the pious good and kind,
Who never saw a sin in harmless joviality;
“ Many a time and oft” you’ll return to my mind,
You, whose mind’s sincere and virtues all reality.
Oft when inland roaming, far removed from the sea’s roar,
My fancy shall revert to those scenes of mirth and harmony;
To ‘ Tara’s Halls,’ ‘A Gipsying,’and 1 Sweet Molly Asthoro,’
Those good old songs I never hear, without their music charming
Fare you well, good pious man, most kind and worthy pastor,
Long may you live to serve with zeal, your great and Heavenly
Master;
And now we’ll give a parting cheer, and let the echo swell.
Success and joy be with you all, farewell, dear friends, farewell.
E. D. Freeman.
A REMINISCENCE OP THE VOYAGE.
Before entering the zone of heat, our fancies led us to suppose that
the sun’s influence would be powerful indeed, and that the tempera-
ture would be unbearable, but even below the Line we experienced
not those dreadful scorchings so much thought of, and which we
deemed inevitable. True the zenith sun told oppressingly where his
rays fell full upon us, but, shaded from his power, we enjoyed the
days more fully thin in the more temperate latitudes of the voyage.
For a day or two during the still calm weather, when Sol poured
forth his greatest heat, we experienced a killing lassitude, which, for
the time, kept us listlessly inert, and threw a damper on those sports
we had hitherto enjoyed; here and there might be seen the passengers
stretched at length in some shady place, whiling the time away.
During these few days of feverish warmth animation seemed fled from
all, save when now and then some sister vessel appeared to view, and
curiosity to learn her “ where to ” and “ where from ” roused up the
loungers ; when the vessel came near to hand we hailed her with a
stunning cheer, thus compensating for our bodily exercise by the less
violent exercise of the lungs—our wild huzzas wake up the lazy of
the sighted craft, and then, after the ordinary flag salutes, things
resumed their former tone, each to the shade he but lately left.
Passing below the Line the cool fresh breezes again grew up, and the
lifeless passengers once more put on their animation as of old, but the
sports of the early days of the voyage growing stale, fowling and
fishing reigned supreme; hence marksmen and netters vied with each
other in killing ot birds and taking of fish. Some capital shots were
made, and many a pigeon, albatross, and hen, that a moment before
sported in pleasure amid the surging billows, now fell wounded or
lifeless on their own wide bed, where condoled over by their sorrowing
mates, they drifted away till lost to our view. The fishers drew forth to
deck some trophies of their baiting skill, and among the hooked was
a splendid specimen of the molly-hawk, a magnificent bird, over six
feet long, with powerful talons and plumage rich. These birds as
well as those before named are all web-footed, and ’tis very remark-
able that when brought to deck they become heavily sick, and throw
up large quantities of oil. On passing the Cape and steering east-
ward, across the Southern Ocean, the change in temperature became
strikingly apparent. The light summer costume now gives place to
the wintry suit, and the poop, heretofore crowded with the listless
and lazy, is almost forsaken, save by the courageous and brave. The
coll soothwind, coupled with the tossing vessel, deters the timid from
a w dk, and even the hardy have at times to ackn«wledge, by their
bluish colour and buttoned coats, the cold that reigns above. Many
a hearty laugh broke from those in view, as a bouncing wave, speed-
ing onwards with more force than others, dashed right o' - er our
vessel's side, bathing iu piercing brine the already too-cold wight,
who, trying to escape from a second splash, went skating down on
hands and knees the whole ship's breath, mixing no little dirt with
his dripping duds, thus giving him the look of an eel in mud, or a pig
in pound. These scenes were varied by the cry “ a whale,” which
caused a rush to the bulwark’s side, but on more than one occasion
we found a “ lark ” and not a whale, but soon these “ larks ” became
too stale.
T. P. H.
Sighting Land. —For many days past our passengers have been on the
tiptoe of expectation, regarding the expected appearance of Australian
land, and about four o’clock this morning our early risers were rewarded
with a sight of the long-wished-for shore. The highland of Port Stephens
was distinctly visible, but the sun’s rays and the direction of our course
obscured it from view in a few hours.
Official Reports.
Dear Sir,— The calms that have intervened between the light favor-
able winds we have experienced since my last report have afforded me one
more opportunity of subscribing a few lines to your Gazette. Ido so
with much pleasure, as the anticipation then expressed has since
amounted to a reality, not only as regards the beautiful weather we are
now enjoying, but also its restorative eff'.-ct upon many who were then
included amongst the number of patients in my journal. Change of
weather ex necessitate, always stands high in tire ILt of trials that the
constitution has to put up with, and the many changes necessarily arising
during a vovage such as we have undertaken, must affect in a greater or
less degree very many amongst so large a number as we have on board. I
am thankful, therefore, to be able to state that the cases under the above
head have not exceeded in number my belief, that if a statistical health
report were to be published of the many passages made to Australia
during the last twelve months, that of the Fiery Star would stand forth as
a bright exception to most, if not all the others, as regards the general
state of health maintained throughout the voyage. lam happy to add,
in conclusion, that there are only a few invalids now remaining under
treatment, and I have every reason to hope that even these wnen they
disembark will find themselves sufficiently recruited to enable them to
commence- at once the avocations they have determined on pursuing. Once
more, therefore, wishing all in our good ship health, long life, happiness,
and prosperity, I would also bid them adieu through tire medium of your
columns, and sincerely trust they may always have reason to rejoice and
be thankful, for having selected Queensland tor their new home.
I remain, &c.,
J. J. LUCE, M.D.
p.S, —All hail to the Australian mountains of Port Stephens, first
sighted at four o’clock this morning, and though neither you nor I have
secured the prize for that most welcome event, I am sure we may con-
gratulate each other (and the rest of the members) far more that it has
been won by a young lady, who can never fail to win, also, the esteem
and best wishes of all who have the pleasure of her acquaintance.
J. J. L.
Dear Sm,—l was in hope that before this week was out, I
should have the pleasure of seeing you all salely landed in Brisbane,
but, unfortunately, all my sanguine hop -s have been blighted, although
we reached the meridian of Tasmania in 7G days, with contrary winds and
unfavourable weather. I was in hopes to reach Brisbane in a few days.
Since leaving Tasmania we have had to contend with light winds, for
the most part northerly, and at the time I address you, we have a strong
head wind. We are now 350 miles from our desired haven, and, in
all probability, before another week expires, you will all be landed safe.
You are aware of the capabilities of our good ship, with regald to her
sailing qualities, and I can assure you if the Fiery Star had had the
winds, which are generally expected after passing the Cape, we should
have made an unrivalled passage. Wa have not in the whole passage
had 24 hours’ steady wind, and I suppose not one ship in a hundred can
say that they left England and arrived in Australia without experiencing
a gale of wind; such, however, has been the ease with us. We have had a
continuation of too tine weather and foul winds, but this much I can
say, there is not a ship afloat that will outsail our noble vessel—the Fiery
Star. It affords me much gratification and pleasure to find my passengers
in such excellent spirits and good health, and the unanimous good feeling
that prevails throughout the length and breadth of our ship. Thus much
I will say, that a nobler and more respectable class of passengers never has,
and never will arrive in Brisbane, than the emigrants, ex the Fiery Star;
and the Queensland Government may well be thankful for the valuable
acquisition from the mother-country, and may God speed you ail. As in
all probability you will have another issue, I shall reserve further remarks.
Yours, very faithfully.
(Signed) W. H. YULE.


flic Jfkra jltar
VIGIL AITS ET ATJDAX
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
*fnfiiiinrowrißtiWßTtncTMwrTWwr~BTTimnmjiiiiiiHgr‘irs7rni v TriKTmw~'iii ■-" l n j *—t l - 11 "'" 1 **'«™»i
As this is our concluding number, we would take the opportunity
of assuring our readers that even our regret at leaving the Fiery
Star is far less than we now feel in bringing to a termination
our editorial labours among them. We shall not conceal the
difficulties we experienced in producing the earlier issues of the
Gazette, but gradually a fresh spirit was infused into this desir-
able object, till at last, number after number appeared, with in-
creasing merit, and proved that our first efforts were not in vain.
Many passengers at the commencement of the voyage, asserted
that our foundling would find its infancy nipped in the bud, but we
are proud to say, that it has reached the maturity of completion,
and presently is assuming a full and perfect form at the hands of
the printer, in Brisbane.
If in future days, on perusal of the Gazette, the subscribers and
passengers will find a recollection of happy hours enjoyed in the
Fiery Star, if it will reoal to them the kind associations, and the
lasting friendships, which a long sea voyage inevitably forms, if
they find in the relation of events on board, a store of amusement
to pass a few idle moments with pleasure, we shall consider that
our editorial duties have been discharged, and amply rewarded.
Our match with the Brisbane cricketers, resulted unsuccessfully
for us, but no one, who was at all acquainted with the numerous
obstacles, our team had to encounter, could doubt for a moment
the side which victory would favor.
Defeat, however, could not damp the enthusiasm, which some
of the cricketers, and all the Saloon Passengers displayed at the
Banquet given the same evening.
The Captain and Doctor, in whose honor the dinner was
arranged, were received with a warmth of feeling, and a depth of
kimllieartedness, which must have been truly gratifying to them.
Well did they deserve it, for, on their character and conduct on
board the Fiery Star, materially depended the interests and
welfare of the immigrants in the land of their adoption. This
is the explanation of the demand for labour from the Fiery Star.
Poet’s Corner.
LINES TO A LADY.
Fair lady one short question I would ask,
Why set me such a very cruel task ?
You give to me your Album —bid me write,
Some sentimental verses to indite.
Dame Nature never meant me f r a poet,
Tnere’s not a soul on board but well might know it.
Were I some hermit sage, or ill-starred Robin Crusoe,
With leisure on my bauds, I surely then might do so;
But know, oh lady fair, my time I occupy
With graver things—l’ve other fish to fry.
Besides, you know Australia was my school,
And there we have no time to play the fool.
Our heads are full of horses, sheep, and cattle,
We have not time to spend in silly prattle.
Lady, forgive me, if I tell you this,
The power indeed is wanting—not tbe wish.
One Sine from Holy Scriptures, let me speak :
“ Tile spirit indeed is willing—the flesh is weak.”
I really cannot in jour Album write,
I in mildest, and tbe thought unnerves me quite.
To disappoint y.u 1 »in really very sorry.
But, ever sincerely, yours—E. Ashton Corrie.
Albatrosses. —On the 16th, as we lay almost becalmed, the first
these birds took the bait, and was safely hauled on board. The excite-
ment among the passengers was great, and the quarter-deck was swarming
with nura' ers, anxious to have one glance at the splendid trophy that
had been taken. In a few minutes, however, there was increased interest
mir ife ted, when another albatross was brought on deck, and many of
the emigrants expressed an earnest desire to possess a feather or a bone,
as a remembrance of the lucky captures. The larger of the two birds
measured 12 feet from the tip of one wing to that of the other. Farther
fishing was unavailing, for soon after all the albatrosses took their depar-
ture, no doubt frightened either by the havoc committed among them, or
the appearance of a shark which kept swimming round the ship for some
time.
An Australian Sunset. —On Tuesday evening the hearts of all our
passengers must have thrilled with pleasure when they gazed on the
magnificent panorama of a sunset in Australia. That such a scene should
h ive welcomed their approach to their adopted country must have been
a source of gladness and delight to all those who have lived till now in
the British isles without conceiving anything grander than tbe sunrise
and sunset of home. Even our old colonists on board bore testimony to
the unrivalled splendour of the sight, and in all their experience of
Au-tralian life, not one of them remembered Phoebus sinking with such a
gloving panoply, and diffusing such bright and golden hues ail over the
horizon. Many were entranced by the beautiful picture, and remained on
deck gazing long after the shades of darkness had extinguished the last
solitary ray. The sun must go its course ; may the Fiery Star do so too.
Moreton Light. —Now we may shout—hurrah for Queensland. On
Thursday night we arrived off Moreton Island and could plainly dis-
tinguish the above light. The ship was put under easy sail, so that she
might be in a position to receive the pilot on the morning. As she lay
almost motionless several rockets were fired for the gratification of the
emigrants, and as the red and blue lights shot upwards to the sky, cheer
upon cheer burst from tbe crowded poop.
The Pilot.— From the very earliest hour on the morning of the 20ih
every eye was straiued to catch a sight of the pilot coming off from the
shore. At length the long-expected boat was seen making towards us, and
in a very short time the pilot was issuing his command.' on the poop-
deek. He was immediately dubbed the “ new man,” and (he passengers
did not find their curiosity allayed till their eyes bad scrutinized tbe
“ illustrious stranger’’ for a considerable period.
Anchoring. —Five hours after the pilot took tbe Fiery Star in charge
we found ourselves safely swinging at anchor in Moreton Bay. We had
been very lucky on our passage from the island to the anchorage. Ships
are occasionally delayed in going up the bay for two or three days, but
we have only been altogether a few bouts. At two o’clock the order was
given to let go tbe anchors, and, as it was executed, bringing the. vessel
to a stand-still, many a loud hurrah broke from the emigrants, and
assuredly many a thanksgiving was offered to Divine Providence lor
convoying them across the pathless ocean in safety.
ADDRESSES TO THE CAPTAIN AND DOCTOR.
On Friday afternoon, at the finish of dinner in the Saloon, the Rev.
Father Dunne rose to present an address of congratulation and esteem
to our worthy Captain. He remarked that in all his varied
experience of sea voyages, he had never met a more generous man,
or a more skilful officer.
ADDRESS FROM THE PASSENGERS PER THE SHIP FIERY
STAR TO CAPTAIN W. H. YULE.
To W. H. Yule, Esq., Commander Ship Fiery Star.
Dear Sin,—As we are about to anchor in the pmt of our distinction,
we would wish, before separating, to tender you our moMsioceie acknow-
ledgments for your unceasing efforts to promote our comfort and happiness
during the voyage.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
We, Sir, have ever found in you, from the day of o'vr first acquaintance,
those qualities combined which constitute the man, n authority and the
sincere friend. The pleasures and pastimes which t"c instituted on board,
■when they did not immediately interfere with tho internal economy of
your vessel, and were a source of amusement to us, have not only been
encouraged by you, but on many occasions you have joined in them with
as much spirit as ourselves. These acts of kindness have tended
materially to lessen our otherwise monotonous voyage, and your urbanity
has ever rendered it a pleasure on our part to( make known to you any
little grievance we might have considered necessary for redress.
While we congratulate you iu commanding one of the fastest vessels
afloat, we cannot refrain from expressing our sympathy with you
regarding the winds we have experienced since leaving Cork ; even
those for which we are taught to look witli confidence amounting almost
to certainty have in both hemispheres failed to render your ship the
assistance which generally secures to others far less worthy a clipper
passage.
In taking farewell, we would wish you from our hearts every happiness
and success, and trust the Great Euler of all our destinies will guide you
and your noble ship speedily back, and that you may once more find
yourself restored iu perfect health and safety to the bosom of your
family.
We are, dear Sir, yours, sincerely,
Patrick Dunne, C. Clergyman E. Eardley Wilmot
E. Deane Freeman, B.A. Andrew Young
Fifzroy Somerset C. A. Bartleet
Clinton Higginson Patrick Golden, 0. Clergyman
W. A. B ruoe, Lieut. late Ind. Navy W. M. Collinson
H. G. Lynde Julia Lynde
E. Ashton Corrie Bessie Tilson
E. C. Beaumont Mary Hagger
B. 0. Parr Georgina Hagger
Edmund Butler Fanny Tilson
E. Howard Brooke Jane Carter
Walter S. Butler Mary Graham
James Graham
Moreton Bay, November 19, 1863.
Captain Yule, on receiving the address briefly replied, and stated
that he would always cherish the happy associations he had formed
amongst the saloon passengers of the Fiery Star.
E. D. Freeman, Esq., then read, and presented in happy terras, a
most affectionate address to the Doctor.
ADDEESS FEOM THE PASSENGEES PEE THE SHIP FIEEY
STAB TO DE. J. J. LUCE.
To Dr. J. J. Luce, Surgeon-Superintendent Fiery Star.
Dear Sir, —Now that our voyage has drawn to a close, we would
express to you not only our high appreciation of the manner in which
your professional duties have been performed, but also our grateful
recognition of the kindness you have displayed to us on all occasions.
As passengers you have invariably treated us with all the urbanity and
courtesy of a benevolent nature, and even as patients we have reason to
regard your untiring exertions in the cause of health with feelings of the
deepest gratitude.
We beg to congratulate you on having brought your first experience of
medical service at sea to such a happy conclusion, and while we consider
the onerous nature of your charge, which implies the comfort and welfare
of more than 500 passengers, we cannot but acknowledge that the success
attained has been entirely the fruit of your own efforts.
Be assured that our earnest wishes shall ever be for your happiness and
prosperity, and the memory of so kind a friend will always be gratefully
cherished by us.
We are, dear Sir, yours, sincerely,
Edw. Deane Freeman, B.A. James Graham
W. A. Bruce, Lieut, late Ind. Navy G. Augustus Bartleet
Patrick Dunne, E. C. Clergyman E. Ashton Corrie
E. Howard Brooke Edward Eardley Wilmot
Walter Selby Butler Fitzroy Somerset
Edmund Butler Andrew Young
Patrick Golden, E. C. Clergyman Julia Lynde
I!. C. Parr Bessie Tilson
W. M. Collinson Mary Graham
L. G. Lynde Mary Hagger
Robert C. Beaumont Georgina Hagger
Clinton Higginson Fanny Tilson
Jane Carter
November 20, 1863
Dr. Luce replied in his usual eloquent style, and expressed himself
very deeply indebted to his First Cabin associates, for the very
flattering address they had tendered him, and trusted they would all
find in Queensland a home happier than even the desire of their hearts.
The Health Offices. —As nobody is allowed to board, or land
from, an immigrant ship, till this official has passed all the people, his
appearance was looked for with great anxiety. Many, who were
eager to be ashore, grumbled at the delay, and were not at all
particular about the unenviable character for expedition and despatch,
which Government employees possess all over the world. At length
the Health Officer did appear on Saturday afternoon, and passed the
ship as anticipated. We were told that a steamer would take ns up
to Brisbane on Monday morning, and, therefore, we all settled our-
selves quietly for our coming lauding.
Visitors. —On Saturday night and during, all Sunday, parties
came in boats from the various ships in the Bay, ,o pay us a visit, and
we were also honored with the company of several gentlemen, who
came down from Brisbane, to pay their respects to the Fiery Star,
and her passengers. Fresh provisions were obtained from one of the
steamers ; and accordingly our visitors, perhaps, fared better than
they would have done, had they appeared earlier, when the supplies
of fresh meat were wanting altogether.
The Disembarkation. —The steamer Queensland, which arrived
in the Bay from Brisbane, on Sunday afternoon, came alongside at
6 o’clock, next morning, and in the course of three hours, Hanshippei
all the passengers, with a large part of their luggage. At 8 o’clock
the Queensland started amid many a parting “ hurrah ” for the Fiery
Star. The emigrants seemed all elated, with the speedy prospect of
setting foot not only on land, but on the land of their adoption, and
as the steamer sped onwards among the windings of the river, they
could not but admire the appearance of the country, and the comfort-
able settlements that lined the banks here and there. Brisbane soon
showed in sight, and was hailed with universal delight. The Queens-
land arrived quickly at the landing wharf, and by 12 o’clock, noon,
the passengers found themselves and luggage, at their own disposal.
They were now to shift for themselves, but we have not the slightest
doubt, from our experience of their conduct on board ship, that
success and prosperity, achieved by honest industry, will crown the
efforts of the great majority. May the calm and prosperous passage
they enjoyed in the Fiery Star, be an emblem of their future voyage
through life.
THE FIEEY STAB.
{From the Courier, November 23 rd, 1863.)
The Black Ball clipper ship Fiery Star, 1360 tons register, dropped her
anchor in Brisbane Eoads at 2 p.m. on Friday last, after a passage of 93
days from Queenstown. She is originally from London, at which port
she embarked 324 passengers, and sailed from Gravesend on the Hth
August. She took her departure from Queenstown on the 19th of the
same month, having taken on board at that place 230 emigrants, all ot
whom were under the medical superintendence of Dr, J. J. Luce. She
has in addition to the large number of passengers, 800 tons of general
merchandize. The ship is under the command of Captain W. H. Ynle,
who, we understand, visited this port some 15 years ago in a ship called
the Lima.
The whole of the immigrants, 554 souls in all, were in good health at
the time of the Health Officer’s visit, with the exception of six persons,
who were suffering from debility. During the voyage, measles, in-
fluenza, and other catarrhal complaints were common, but considering
the crowded state of the vessel, the mortality was very little, only nine
deaths, all of which were those of infants, having taken place. The
last occurred on the 26th of October, and resulted from diarrhoea. There
were four births, of which two were males. The emigrants from Queens-
town were accompanied by the Eev. Father Dunne, E.0.C., and the Eev.
Mr. Golden, E.C.C., who performed the services of the Eoman Catholic
Church for such as belonged to the creed. The Eev. J. Hinton, Baptist
Minister, officiated for a portion of the passengers, and the surgeon-
superintendent, Dr. Luce, read the Anglican services for those belonging
to the Episcopalian Church. We may further mention that, notwith-
standing the great diversity of religious opinion which prevailed, there
was no unpleasantness throughout the passage from that cause.
The following is an analysis of the nationality of the passengers:—327
English, 174 Irish, and 53 Scotch. Of the total number 248 are single
men, and 73 single women, the remainder being married couples with
their families.
The following are the names of the saloon passengers:—Eev. J.
Hinton ani Mrs. Hinton, Eev. Father Dunne, and Eev. Mr. Golden,
E.C.C., Mr. and Miss Graham, Mr. and Mrs. Lynde, Mrs. Tilson and two
children, Miss Fanny Tilson, Miss Jane Garter, Messrs. E. Butler, W.
Butler, J.G. Higginson, Fitzroy Somerset, W. Bruce, E. E. Whmot, E.
Beaumont, E. D. Freeman, W. Collinson, C. Bartleet, B. C. Parr,
Hagger (3), and E. A. Corrie.
During Friday night sixteen of the crew of the Fiery Star lowered
one of the boats hanging from the davits and deserted. It is supposed


J. B. Dixon, b. Woodloek
.. 12
J. Wilkie, b. Woodloek
.. 4
G. Cowlisliaw, b, Woodloek ..
... 44
J. Bolder, run out
7
W. Macnish, c. Somerset, b. Latour
. . d
T. 0. Oldham, l.b.w., b. Latour
6
J. Si room, i.b.w., b. Woodloek
.. 16
D. Jacobs, c. VVilmott, b. 'Woodloek
0
T. A, Oostin, nut out ..
.. 42
J. Adams, b. Latour ..
1
Langslev b. Higgiason
... 2 J
Byes
7
Leg bvea
.. i
Wides
... 16
No balls
J
Total
.. 1%
FIERY STAR.—Final Isxixas.
F. Somerset, b. Bolger
.. 4
Ramsay, b. Sircom
. . 4
Latour, b. Sircom
i
Bell, st. and b. Bolger
0
E. WUmo-tt, b« Bolger
.. 8
Higginson, at. aud b. Bolger..
2
Butler, b. Bolger
1
Woodloek, b. Sir com ..
3
Howarth, c. Adams, b. Sircom
2
Ennis, c. Oldham, b. Bulger..
0
Harrison, not out
. .
0
lives
.. ii
Wides ..
2
Total
.. 41
SECOND L\Ni.NG3.
Ramsay, ran out
. .
.. 1
F Somerset, b. Q. Cowlisliaw
. ,
.. 7
Latour, c. Oldham, b. Boiler
.. 0
Harrison, b. Bulger
0
E. Wilmott, c. Bolger, b. Suemu
.. 21
liigginson. run out ..
,. •->
Bell, run out
.
4
Howarth, c. and b. Siieom ..
. .
7
Butler, not out..
.. 3
Ennis, b. Bulger
0
Wooulock, b. Bolger ..
... 0
Byes
.. 11
1
Leg bvea
No bail .. .. .,
1
Total
.. 62
THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
that several of the passengers who could not he found when the Immi-
gration Agent mustered the passengers have been induced to go with the
. unaway sailors. The Health Officer visited the ship on Saturday last
hi the Settler, steamer, which, on her return, brought up a large num-
ber of the passengers. The remainder will be brought up to-day iu the
steuner Queensland, which left Brisbane at half-past four o’clock yester-
day evening to proceed to the bay for that purpose, A saloon passenger
by this vessel has furnished us with the following information, which
may be relied on as strictly correct: —
The Black Ball ship Fiery Star, Captain Yule, sailed from London on
the 10th, and Queenstown on the 19tli of August. The first da>’s run
from Queenstown, made with a favorable breeze, was 290 mile*; from
that to the Madeiras, which we sighted on the 28th, tiie winds were
light and variable. We fell in with the trades a little north of Madeira,
which were also very light, and the equator was crossed on the I4ih of
September, twenty-five days from Queenstown. The south-east tiadea
were very unfavorable, which obliged us to run closer to the Brazilian
const than is usually done. We passed the men dan of the C<pe on the
Bth of October, and reached Tasmania on she 7th of November. From
that to Moreton Heads, which we reached on the 19th, we experienced
u continual succesai-jii of calms and heal winds. Had our ship met
with anything like favorable weather from the Cape, we could easily
have made the passage from pilot to pilot in seventy days.
The Fiery Star, which has been lately purchased by Messrs. James
Baines and Co. for the Queensland trade, is 2500 tons burthen, and
1360 tons register. She is the most perfect model of a clipper I have
ever seen, and is fully equal to her appearance. During the _ voyage
we never got twenty-four hours continuous ol a good, strong, favorable
wind; and on one occasion she ran 334 miles in twenty-two hours.
The Fiery Star brings out 554 souls, equd to 502 statute adults, not
including the captain, officers, or crew. Of these. 80 are in the saloon,
71 in the second cabin, 42 in the intermediate, and 411 in the steerage.
324 embarked at London, and 230 at Queenstown. 327 are English, 174
Irish, and 53 Scotch. There are 49 from Lancashire, and 224 assisted
passengers sent out by Mr. Jordan ; of these, 148 are from England, 46
from Ireland, and 30 from Scotland. There are 68 married couples, 248
single men, 73 single women, 8 married females whose husbands are
not on board, 3 widows, 69 children, and 17 infants. Wo have had
very little sickness during the voyage ; any that has taken place has
been principally owing to the changes in the weather and variations of
temperature. Nine deaths only have occurred out of the whole number
of passengers, and these have been entirely amongst infants and very
young children, most of whom were in a sickly and enfeebled state of
health when they embarked. Four births occurred, and all the infants
are doing well. Much credit is due to Dr. Luce, the surgon-superin-
tendent, for the efficient manner in which ho discharged his duty, and
for having maintained strict order and discipline during the voyage.
The paternal care with which he watched over and protected the single
women, who were especially under his charge, cannot be 100 highly com-
mended, and the services ot so vigilant an officer will, I have no doubt, be
acknowledged by the Queensland Government. AVo spoke the following
vessels during the voyage September 6, exchanged signals with the
American ship tineas, from Liverpool to Bombay, 34 days out. September
8, exchanged signals with the American ship Atalanta, from Hull to
Monte Video. On the same day exchanged signals with the British ship
John Banyan, from London for Otago, 25 days out. On the 13ih,
exchanged signals with the British ship Robert Henderson, from Glasgow
for Otago; and on October 14, exchanged signals with the Danish baique
Salamander, from Cardiff for Batavia, 74 dais out.
The Fiery Star brings as respectable a body of passengers as ever came
to the colony. Most of the young men are from the higher and middle
classes iu England and Ireland, and bring with them what is essential to
success iu a new country—viz., energy, enterprise, and capital. Notwith-
standing the head winds and calms we experienced, particularly f.om
Tasmania to Moreton Heads, our voyage was one of the happiest and
most agreeable. The best feeling prevailed amongs all clas.es of the
passengers, irrespective of their creed or country. The captain gained the
sinoerest esteem and respect of every one on board by his gentleman-like
conduct and his unceasing attention to promote the social happiness and
comfort of his passengers. Complimentary addresses nave been drawn
up and signed, to himself and the D ictor, and will be published iu a few
days. Captain Yule is no stranger in Queensland ; some of the old
in lonista will remember him. He came out about 13 yeais ago in lire
baique Lima, which carried emigrants to Moreton Bay, and which was
commanded by his father, Captain Adam Yule.
CEICKETANA.
As mentioned in our last paper a match was arranged with the
Brisbane players. Thursday, the 26th November, was the day
appointed for the game ; wickets to be pitched at 10 a.m., and play
to commence at 11 a.m. Punctual to the hour, both elevens were on
the ground, and the Brisbane gentlemen, who were selected from the
Victorian and Brisbane Clubs, were the first to handle the willow.
The Fiery Star players, owing to their previo«s want ot exercise,
ignorance of each other’s play, and the uneven character of tlm
ground they had to contend with, failed to make any display of
fielding, and accordingly the Brisbane eleven ran up a large score for
their first innings. The representatives of the Fiery ritar now took
possession of the wickets, but all their efforts were unavailing, and
they were speedily disposed of for a very small score. Our eleven
were again sent in, and this time they made a far better show. It was
all in vain however; they could not recover their 1 st ground ; they
were unable to surmount the difficulties and character of their situa-
tion. In equal circumstances, and with a little practice, they might
have changed the side of victory, but in the present case they can
surely submit to their defeat with a good grace. Messrs. Higginson,
Wilmot, and Latour, highly distinguished themselves on the occasion,
and proved by their play they were thorough bred cricketers; so
indeed were all of them, and it only needed some slight practice to
show the skill they evidently possessed. The Brisbane eleven treated
their opponents with great kindness and courtesy, while general
harmony prevailed throughout the game. The spectators did not
apnear in great numbers till the afternoon, but by that time a con-
siderable crowd had collected to observe the progress i f the match.
On the ground we noticed with pleasure our Captain and Doctor and
many of the passengers. The scores an; as follows;
BRISBANE. — First Issixgs.


J. B. Dixon, h. Woodloek
.. 12
J. Wilkie, b. Woodloek
.. 4
(}. Cowlishaw, b. Woodloek ..
.. 44
J. Bolder, run out
7
W. Macnish, c. Somerset, b. Latour
. . O
T. 0. Oldham, l.b.w., b. Latour
6
J. Sircom, i.b.w., b. Woodloek
U. Jacobs, c. Wiimott, b. Woodloek
.. 1G
0
T. A. Costiii, not out ..
.. 42
J. Adams, b. Latour ..
1
Langslev, b. Higginson
.. 2J
Byes
7
Leg bvea
1
Wides
... 1 : »
So balls
y
Total
.. iy«
FIERY STAR.—FibcT Isxtxas.
F. Somerset, b. Bolger
.. 4
Kainsay, b. Sircom
.. 4
Latour, b. Sircom
1
Bell, st. and b. Bolger
.. 0
E. Wiimott, b. Baiger
.. S
Higginson, at and b. Bolger..
2
Butler, b. Bolger
1
Woodloek, l). Sitcom ..
.. 3
Hovvarth, c. Adams, b. Sircom
2
Ennis, c. Oldham, b. Bulger..
0
Harrison, nut out
0
Byes
.. 11
Wides
2
Total
.. 41
Second Innesgs.
Ramsay, ran out
, ,
.. 1
F Somerset, b. G. Cowiishaw
, t
.. 7
Lntour, c. Oldham, b. B).'j*er
.. 0
Harrison, b. Bolder
.. 0
E Wiimott, c. Bolger, h. Sucmn
.. 2 L
Higginson. ran out ..
Bell, rati out ..
4
Howariii. c. and b. Siicoiu ..
.. 7
Butler, not out..
3
Ennis, b. Bolger
Wouub'ck, u. Bolger ..
0
... 0
Byes
.. U
Leg bves
4
No bull
1
Total
.. 62
THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
that several of the passengers who could not he found when the Immi-
gration Agent mustered the passengers have been induced to go with the
runaway sailors. The Health Offijer visited the ship on Saturday last
hi the Settler, steamer, which, on her return, brought up a large num-
ber of the passengers. The remainder will he brought up to-day in the
>te imer Queensland, which left. Brisbane at half-past four o’clock yester-
day evening to proceed to the bay for that purpose. A saloon passenger
by this vessel has furnished us with the following information, which
may be relied on as strictly correct: —
The Black Ball ship Fiery Star, Captain Yule, sailed from London on
the 10th, and Queenstown on the 19th of August. The first da}’s run
from Queenstown, made with a favorable breeze, was 290 mile*; from
that to the Madeiras, which we sighted on the 2Bth, the winds were
light and variable. We fell in with the trades a little north of .Madeira,
which were also very light, and the equator was crossed on the l4ih of
September, twenty-five days from Queenstown. The trades
were very unfavorable, which obliged us to run closer to the Brazilian
ooast than is usually done. We passed the meri dan of the C--*pa on the
Bth of October, and reached Tasmania on ihe 7th of November. From
that to Moreton Head*, which we reached on the 19th, we experienced
a continual succession of calms and head winds. Had our ship met
with anything like favorable weather from the Cape, we could easily
have made the passage from pilot to pilot in seventy days.
The. Fiery Star, which has been lately purchased by Messrs. James
Bailies and Co. lor the Queensland trade, is 2500 tons burthen, and
1360 tons register. She is the most perfect model of a clipper I have
ever seen, and is fully equal to her appearance. During the voyage
we never got twenty-four hours continuous ot a good, strong, favorable
wind ; and on one occasion she ran 334 miles in twenty-two hours.
The Fiery Star brings out 554; souls, equd to 502 statute adults, not
including the captain, officers, or crew. Of these. 80 are iu the saloon,
71 in the second cabin, 42 in the intermediate, and 411 iu the steerage.
324 embarked at Loudon, and 230 at Queenstown. 327 are English, 174
Irish, and 53 Scotch. There arc 49 from Lancashire, and 224 assisted
passengers sent out by Mr. Jordan ; of these, 148 are from England, 46
from Ireland, and 30 from Scotland. There are 68 married couples, 24S
single men, 73 single women, 8 married females whose husbands are
not on board, 3 widows, 69 children, and 17 infants. We have had
very little sickness during the voyage ; any that has taken place has
been principally owing to the changes in the weather and variations of
temperature. Nine deaths only have occurred out of the whole number
of passengers, and these have been entirely amongst infants and very
young children, moat of whom were in a sickly and enfeebled state of
nealth when they embarked. Four births occurred, and all the infants
are doing well. Much credit is due to Dr. Luce, the surgon-superin-
tendent, for the efficient manner in which ho discharged his duty, and
for having maintained strict order and discipline during the voyage.
The paternal care with which be watched over and protected the single
women, who were especially under his charge, cannot be too highly com-
mended, and the services of so vigilant an officer will, I have no doubt, be
acknowledged by the Queensland Government. We spoke the following
vessels during the voyage:—September 6, exchanged signals with the
American ship Uncas, from Liverpool to Bombay. 34 days out. September
8, exchanged signals with the American ship Atalanta, from Hull to
Monte Video. On the same day exchanged signals with the British ship
John Bunyan, from London for Otago, 25 days out. On the 13th,
exchanged signals with the British ship Robert Henderson, from Glasgow
for Otago; and on October 14, exchanged signals with the Danish barque
Salamander, from Cardiff for Batavia, 74 da\s out.
The Fiery Star brings as respectable a body of passengers as ever came
to the colony. Most of the young men are from the higher and middle
classes iu England and Ireland, and bring with them what is essential to
success in a new country—viz., energy, enterprise, and capital. Notwith-
standing the head winds and calms we experienced, particularly from
Tasmania to Moreton Heads, our voyage was one of the happiest and
most agreeable. The best feeling prevailed amongs all claves of the
passengers, irrespective of their creed or country. The captain gained the
sincereat esteem and respect of every one on board by his gentleman-like
conduct and his unceasing attention to promote the social happiness and
comlort of his passengers. Complimentary addresses nave been drawn
up and signed, to himself and the Doctor, and will be published in a few
days. Captain Yule is no stranger in Queensland ; some of the old
colonists will remember him. He came out, about 13 yea is ago in the
baique Lima, which carried emigrants to Moreton B.iy, and which was
commanded by his father, Captain Adam Yule.
CRICKETANA.
As mentioned in our last paper a match was arranged with the
Brisbane players. Thursday, the 26th November, was the clay
appointed for the gams ; wickets to be pitched at 10 a.m., and play
to commence at IX a.m. Punctual to the hour, both elevens were on
the ground, and the Brisbane gentlemen, who were selected from the
Victorian and Brisbane Clubs, were the first to handle the willow.
The Fiery Star players, owing to their previots want ot exercise,
ignorance of each other’s play, and the uneven character of the
ground they had to contend with, failed to make any display of
fielding, and accordingly the Brisbane eleven ran up a large score for
their first innings. The representatives of the Fiery Star now took
possession of the wickets, but all their efforts were unavailing, and
they were speedily disposed of for a very small score. Our eleven
were again sent in, and this time they made a far better show. It was
all in vain however; they could not recover their Ist ground ; they
were unable to surmount the difficulties and character of their situa-
tion. In equal circumstances, and with a little practice, they might
have changed the side of victory, but in the present case they can
surely submit to their defeat with a good grace. Messrs. Higginson,
VFihnot, and Latour, highly distinguished themselves on the occasion,
.and proved by their play they were thorough-bred cricketers; so
indeed were all of them, and it only needed some slight practice to
show the skill they evidently possessed. The Brisbane eleven treated
their opponents with great kindness and courtesy, while general
harmony prevailed throughout the game. The spectators did not
appear in great numbers till the afternoon, but by that time a con-
siderable crowd had collected to observe the progress i-f the match.
On the ground we uoticed with pleasure our Captain and Doctor and
many of the passengers. The scores are as follows:
BRISBANE.—Fikst Is.ni.nq3.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
3/VNQUET TO THE CAPTAIN AND DOCTOR OF THE FIERY
{From the Courier, November 30.)
The saloon passengers of the Fiery Star entertained Captain Yule and
Dr. Luce, the captain and surgeon-superintendent of that ship, at a public
dinner, on Thursday evening last, at the Royal Hotel.
The chair was occupied by the Rev. P. Dunne, and the vice-chair by
E. D. Freeman, Esq., B.A. Besides the saloon passengers, Captain
Phillips, of the Young Australia, and other friends were present.
When the cloth was removed, the Chairman gave the health of the
Quean and Royal Family, which was received with that enthusiasm
suggestive of the love which British subjects feel for their most gracious
sovereign. The health of the Governor, Sir George Bowen, was next
given, and duly honored.
The Chairman, on rising, next asked the gentlemen to fill their glasses
for one of the the toasts of the evening. He felt exceedingly grateful
for the proud position in which his fellow-passengers had placed him.
He regretted that some other person had not been selected to fill the chair,
who would be more capable of giving expression to those feelings of
respect and esteem which they all entertained for their worthy Captain.
He (the chairman) had seen voyages to and from Australia, and could
speak from experience, he would say with the utmost sincerity that he
never met with a more kind-hearted, generous, agreeable man in his
position than Captain Yule. An ungenerous attempt had been made to
damage Captain Yule with some of the government officials, but he (the
chairman) was proud to see the saloon passengers there on that evening,
amongst whom were men of the highest rank and education, to refute any
unfounded insinuations which might have been made against the Fiery
S ar, or her worthy commander. He was happy to say that a better con-
ducted free-passeuger ship never crossed the ocean, or a more respectable
body of immigrants never landed in Brisbane than those brought by the
Fiery Star, under the command of Captain Yule. He would not detain
them any longer by recounting (he many excellent qualities which Captain
Yule possessed, and which endeared him to each and every of his pas-
sengers, but would call on them to drink his good health, long life, and
prosperity.
The toast was received enthusiastically.
Captain Yule, in responding, said that he could not find words to express
what he wished to convey to them. Ever since leaving London he had
been pleased to notice that among his saloon passengers the greatest
harmony had prevailed. There had been none of that bickering and petty
feeling displayed which so ofien render a long voyage not only monoton-
ous, bat very disagreeable. The same spirit manifested itself among the
lady passengers (God bless them), one and all of whom had endeavored
to make themselves as happy and contented as circumstances would
permit; and he was quite sure that none present at that meeting would
f Tget the many hours spent in the company of the ladies on board the
Fiery Star. It was the imperative order of his employers, when starting,
to render all the assistance in his power towards promoting the comfort of
his passengers. Whether he had done his duty it was for them to say;
but he could assert that a more respectable class of passengers never
entered Moreton Bay. Before sitting down he could not rafrain from
expressing his high appreciation of the very valuable assistance he had
received from Dr. Luce, the surgeon-superintendent; and there was no
doubt but that the appointment of that gentleman had been a very happy
one. He would conclude by wishing them God speed; and if they
intended to go boms they would find the Fiery Star ever the same as long
as she was under his command.
The Chairman next propose 1 the health of Dr. Luce, and in doing so
spoke in the highest terras of his abilities as a professional man, his
demeanour as a gentleman, and his unceasing efforts and unswerving
determination to maintain order and discipline on board the ship during
the voyage. He said that Dr. Luce was placed in a difficult and dis •
agreeable osition ; he was expected to carry out certain rules and regula-
tions laid down for him by Mr. Jordan and the colonial government, but
neither the one nor the other afforded him proper facilities for doing so.
Under the circumstances too much praise could not be given to Dr. Luce,
and he (the Chairman) hoped the government would do all in their power
to retain him in the service, as so much depended for the future of this
young colony on the class of immigrants to he introduced, and the morality
and discipline observed on board the immigrant ships during the voyage.
The toast having been well received,
Dr. Luce rose to respond, and said he was extremely obliged to their
worthy and respected chairman for the very kind manner in which he
had proposed the toast; and he (Dr. Luce) was also grateful to all his
valued friends for the flattering reception it had met. Nothing could be
more pleasing to anyone, after having filled a responsible and difficult
position for some time, than to meet with the esteem and good wishes of
those with whom he has been intimately and closely associated ; and
although it was but natural to expect that some few misunderstandings
would arise during a long voyage, it was most satisfactory and gratifying
to know and feel that those little “ inevitables ” had been far more than
eclipsed by the happy associations that had been formed, and the warmth
of friendship which had been manifested. He would assure them that he
should always cherish pleasing reminiscences of his first trip to Queens-
land ; and if it pleased God that he again visited this glorious, free, and
apparently happy colony, nothing would afford him more pleasure and
delight than to meet again those with whom the three last months of his
life had been so pleasantly spent. As regarded tbeir worthy captain, he
(Dr. L.) was sure he but echoed their own feelings and sentiments when
he said that they were under a deep obligation to him for his courtesy,
kindness of heart, and desire to please all classes of passengers in his
good ship, and it was to be wished that every vessel, especially those
with upwards of 500 passengers on board, possessed so kind, noble-hearted,
and skilful a commander. Regarding Mr. Sargant (chief mate) and the
other officers, he thought they would coincide with him in his opinion,
that they had all been extremely kind and attentive, and had well and
bravely done their duty. He would conclude by again returning his best
thanks for the compliment which had been paid him, and wishing them
all the blessings, happiness, and prosperity this world could afford.
Dr. Luce then proposed the “ Lady passengers,’’ and took the oppor-
tunity of expressing his grateful sense of the obligations he was under to
them. They hail at various times rendered him material assistance, and
had endeavored to deprive the voyage of much of its monotony.
The toast was well received and responded to. Various other toasts
were drank, and the party broke up shortly before eleven o’clock, after
having enjoyed a pleasant evening.


THE FIERY STAR GAZETTE, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 1863.
LOG OF SHIP FIERY STAR.
LOG OF THE
SHIP FIERY STAR. — Continued.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist-
ance.
Miles
Winds,
REMARKS,
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist-
ance
Miles
Wind*,
REMARKS.
1863.
N.
W.
s.
B.
Aug. 19
NWbyW
At 5 a.m. got ship underweigb ; fine
Oct. 5
43- 2
344
29C
N.
Increasing breeze, thick weather.
strong breeze ; at 10 a.m. Old Head
„ 6
43-27
9-31
255
N.
Strong breeze, thick weather.
of Kinsale bore N. 14 miles.
„ 7
43-32
13-54
193
N.E.
Gentle breeze, with fog.
„ 20
47-37
10-40
280
N.
Light winds and clear weather; wind
„ 8
42-16
19-29
250
S.
Moderate, and foggy.
dying away.
9
40-13
22 32
190
S.E.
Light breeze, and hazy.
„ 21
45- 5
11-50
168
N.W.
Light breeze and clear weather.
„ 10
39-30
28-23
280
S.
Strong breeze, and squally.
„ 22
43- 4
12-50
92
N.W.
Cloudy weather, with light airs.
.. H
37-41
31- 1
181
S.S.E.
Gentle breeze, and fine.
42-46
12-15
72
S.W.
Light airs, and cloudy.
„ 12
37-54
32-17
118
E.
Light breeze, and cloudy.
„ 24
40-57
12-43
107
Vble.
Light breeze, and cloudy.
„ 13
39-25
33- 5
118
E.S.E.
Light breeze, clear weather.
„ 2s
39-13
13- 3
107
Vble.
Light breeze, and clear.
.. 14
41-20
36-11
190
E.N.E.
Moderate, fine, clear.
26
36- 4
12-32
194
S.W-
Fine breeze, hazy weather.
42-33
42-10
283
N.E.
Strong breeze, and squally.
,, 27
35-16
14-41
120
Vble.
Light winds, and squally.
16
43-14
49-25
338
N.
Fine, strong breeze.
28
32.53
16- 2
185
N.E.
Fresh breeze, and cloudy weather.
„ 17
4323
52- 4
122
Light breeze, very thick.
» 29
30-47
18-27
182
E.N.E.
Light breeze, and clear weather.
.. 18
43- 8
58’o2
302
S.
Strong breeze, and squally.
„ 3 0
27- 8
20-42
262
N.W.
Moderate breeze, and cloudy.
„ 19
41-18
60-10
180
S.E.
Strong breeze, and squally.
„ 3i
24- 9
22-33
200
N.E.
Light airs, ship laboring heavily.
„ 20
40-19
62-44
70
E.
Light airs, cloudy weather.
Sept. 1
21-10
24-28
212
E.
Mouetate breeze, clear weather.
„ 21
40- 6
67-13
213
N.N.W.
Moderate breeze, and cloudy.
2
18- 2
26- 8
212
Vble.
Moderate breeze, and fine.
„ 22
39-41
70-13
142
Vble.
Light variable breeze, rain.
» 3
14-36
2613
210
S.E.
Light breeze, and fine.
„ 23
39-41
73-43
170
W.
Light breeze, and thick fog.
„ 4:12-43
26- 1
123
S.
Light airs, and cloudy.
„ 24
39- 0
78-31
223
N. by W.
Increasing breeze, thick fog.
»» 5
10-58
2611
105
Vble.
Light variable airs, and showery.
M 2o
39-19
84-36
310
W. S.W.
Fresh breeze, heavy squalls.
.. 6
9-58
25-13
85
S.S.W.
Calm and cloudy, light airs.
„ 26
40-50
90-50
292
N.W.
Moderate breeze, and equally.
» 7
7-59
2319
175
S.W.
Light winds, and squally.
„ 27
42. 5
96 48
315
N.N.W.
Fine strong breeze, and clear.
>» 8
7-10
21- 3
140
S.W.
Squally, with rain.
„ 28
43-30
102-43
294
N.
Fine steady breeze.
.. 9
6*ot>
20-44
140
Vble.
Light breeze, and fine weather.
„ 29
44-38
106-54
194
N.N.W.
Moderate breeze, thieit fog.
„ 10
4-13
16-59
214
S.S.W.
Fine breeze, with squalls.
30
44-34
110-46
180
Vble.
Gentle breeze, and clear.
„ H
3-37
18-42
201
S.S.W.
Light breeze, and fine.
„ 31
44-45
113-59
180
Vble.
Moderate breeze, and cloudv.
„ 12
2 34
21-40
184
S.S.W.
Light breeze, and cloudy weather.
Nov. 1
4o'o8
121-20
332
N.
Fine strong breeze, with rain.
» 13
1-34
24- 2
184
s.
Light breeze, and fine.
„ 2
45-57
123-46
280
N.N.W.
Moderate breeze, and thick weather,
S.
.. 3
47-48
134-28
302
N.E.byN
Strong breeze, and squally.
» 14
0-32
27-32
240
Vble.
Moderate breeze, and fine.
4
49-24
139- 2
203
E.N.E.
Strong breeze, and cloudy.
,, 15
3-35
30-22
260
S.S.E.
Strong breeze, and squally.
5
48-21
138-29
186
E.N.E.
Strong breeze, and clear weather.
„ 16
6-38
32- 1
211
S.S.E.
Moderate breeze, and cloudy.
6
48-10
138-40
40
N.E.
Strong breeze, barometer low— 23-90
» 17
9-17
33 32
190
S.S.E.
Cloudv weather, and squally.
.. 7
47-33
138-37
83
E.
Fine and clear, barometer low-23-90.
„ 18
11-46
34-37
195
S.S.E.
Light breeze, and fine.
Meridian of Tasmania ; heavy sea.
>• 19
1419
36-25
193
S.E. by S.
Moderate breeze, with squalls.
„ 8
46- 0
144-15
250
N. N. W.
Strong breeze, and squally.
„ 20
16-16
37-
119
Vble.
Moderate breeze, fine weather.
„ 9
44-22
149-47
250
N. N. W.
Moderate breeze, squally.
„ 21
18-44
35- 6
190
E.N.E.
Gentle breeze, and fine.
„ 10
41-16
151-11
215
N.W.
Fine breeze, hazy.
„ 22i
21-24
32-15
235
N-E.
Light winds, and cloudy.
„ 11
39-14
151-44
130
N. by W.
Light airs, and variable.
„ 23
22-30
3057
9-1
E.N.E.
Light airs, and cloudy.
„ 12
37- 6
153-17
130
N.W.
Fine breeze, variable.
24
22-20
30-30
46
Vble.
Calms, and light airs.
„ 13
34-23
152-42
170
Vble.
Light airs, and calms.
„ 25
25‘27
31- 1
184
S.E.
Moderate breeze, and cloudy.
„ 14
32-51
163-18
58
Vble.
Gentle breeze and fine. Sighted land.
„ 26
2835
31-11
192
S.E.
Moderate gale, and cloudy.
Port Stephens.
2 7
30-37
27-42
214
N.E.
Strong breeze, and squally.
,. 15
31-48
155-43
144
N.E-
Fresh breeze, and clear.
„ 28
32-38
24-34
195
N.E-
Fresh breeze, heavy squalls.
„ 16
30-24
155‘ 1
90
S.E.
Light breeze, and thick.
„ 29
31-38
21-41
211
N.E.
Fine breeze, cloudy weather.
17
29.52
154-14
113
N.W.
Light breeze, and fine.
30
36-20
18-25
210
N.E-
Moderate breeze, hazy weather.
„ 18
29-45
154-19
115
N.W.
Gentle breeze, and fine.
Oct. 1
38-36
1510
206
N.E.
Fresh gale, and squally.
„ 19
28-18
154-10
159
S.S.E.
Light breeze, and fine.
V 2
41-15
10 33
216
N.
Fresh breeze, with rain.
„ 20
Vble.
Light variable breeze, and fine clear
„ 3
43-11
7. 3
205
N. N. W.
Light breeze, and thick
weather; 9 a.m. received Mr.Cooper
i
42-48
2-44
198
Vble.
Moderate breeze, and cloudy.
(pilot) on board ; 2 p m. came to an
anchor in Brisbane Boads.
Total, 17,215 Miles.
QUEENSLAND:
PRINTED
AT THE “COUBXEr” GENERAL FEINTING OFFICE,
GEOEGE-STBEET, BRISBANE,
