













THE STORY
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGERS
BY
GEO. E. BOXALL
LONDON:
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO., LIM.
PATERNOSTER SQUARE
1899




PREFACE.
In this story of the bushrangers I do not pretend to have
included the names of all those who have at various times been
called bushrangers in Australia. That, as will be seen from
what I have said in the earlier chapters, would be not merely
impossible but useless. I believe, however, that I have collected
some particulars about all those who succeeded in winning even
a local notoriety, and I have also endeavoured to supply such
personal characteristics of the leaders in the movement as may
throw some light on the causes which induced them to “take to
the bush.” My principal object, however, has been to make the
picture as complete as possible, so that the magnitude of the
social evil which the Australians set themselves to cure may be
realised ; and it is generally believed in Australia that this cure
has been so complete that bushranging will never again become
epidemic.
The story is a terrible one. Some of the incidents related
are no doubt revolting, but it is necessary that even these should
be told to show how civilised man may be degraded by unjust
and oppressive laws. We are all creatures of the educational
influences to which we are subjected in our youth, and therefore
it is unfair to blame the earlier bushrangers; because they were
the products of the civilisation of their day, and were not them-
selves responsible. But sensational as the story is, its tendency
is rather to depress than to exhilarate the reader, for the story
is a sad one, in that it shows a deplorable waste of what under
happier conditions might have been useful lives. As a rule I


have adhered very closely to the newspaper reports of the time,
but to make the story (which naturally tends to be scrappy and
disconnected) as homogeneous and continuous as possible, I
have followed one gang to the close of its career, and then
returned to take up the history of another gang. I have paid
special attention to the geography of the country, and the
reader who possesses a fairly good map of each of the colonies
should have no difficulty in following the movements of each of
the gangs, and may thus obtain an idea of the extent of the
area over which it operated.
Hitherto the histories of Australia have passed very lightly
over the bushrangers, but there can be no doubt that they
exercised some influence, and not always for evil, for to their
influence is due some of the sturdy Republicanism of the
modern Australians. The publication of this story may
perhaps assist the future historian in tracing the growth of
public opinion in Australia, and will therefore not be without
its use. It is in this hope that I submit it to the public.
G. E. B.


AUTHORITIES QUOTED.
Reports of the Select Committees of the House of Commons on Trans-
portation, Sessions 1837 and 1838: Chapters 1., 11., ill., iv.
Report of the Special Commission of Enquiry into the state of the Colony
of New South Wales. By John Thomas Bigge, 1822 and 1823 :
Chapters 1., 11.. iv.
Despatches of Governors Macquarie, Bourke, Sorell, Arthur, Franklin,
Denison, Latrobe, &c., to the Colonial Office: Chapters 1., 11., in.,
IV., XII.
History of Van Diemen’s Land, from 1820 to 1835. Anonymous.
Chapters 1., 11.
History of Bendigo. By George Mackay. Chapter xil.
The Last of the Tasmanians. By James Bonwick, F.R.G.S. Chapter 11.
The Spectator. Chapter IX.
Hobart Town Gazette. Chapters 1., 11., 111.
Hobart Town Courier and Murray's Review. Chapters 1., 11., VI., X.,
XI., xv.
Colonial Times. Chapters x., XI. , xv.
Cornwall Chronicle. Chapters 1., 11., 111., VI., IX., X., XI.
Launceston Advertiser. Chapters 1., 11., VI., IX., X.
Launceston Examiner. Chapters VI., IX., XI.
Sydney Gazette. Chapters 1. , IV., VI., VII.
Sydney Monitor. Chapters 1., iv.
Sydney Australian. Chapters 1., IV.
Sydney Morning Herald. Chapters V., VI., VII., VIII. IX., XV., XVI.,
XVII., XVIII., XIX., XX., XXI., XXII., XXIII., XXIV., XXVIII.
Melbourne Argus. Chapters iv., xm., xiv., xv., XXI., xxv., xxvm.,
XXIX., XXX., XXXI.
Port Phillip Herald. Chapters VI., vn., vm.
Geelong Advertiser. Chapters XII., XIII., XIV,, XV.
Melbourne Herald. Chapters xil., xiv., xv.
Melbourne Age. Chapters xxix., xxx., xxxi.
South Australian Register. Chapters VIII., XXIV.
Brisbane Courier. Chapter XXVII.
New Zealand Herald. Chapter xxvi.
The quotations from numerous provincial papers acknowledged in
the text have been taken at second hand, principally from the metropolitan
papers of the colony referred to, and which are included in this list.




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
CHAPTER I.—Characteristics of the Convicts sent to
Australia; Bushranging ; Origin and Meaning of
the Term ; The Cat and the Double Cat; Condition
of the Prisoners ; Some Terrible Revelations ; The
Desperation of Despair ; Some Flogging Stories ;
The Bushranging Act and its Abuses ; Some
Opinions of the Magistrates ; Savage Treatment of
Criminals Continued to the Present Time ; Brutality
not Cured by Brutal Punishment ; When Bush-
ranging First Began ....... i
Chapter II. —Van Diemen’s Land; The First Bush-
ranger ; Mike Howe, the King of the Ranges ; The
Raid on the Blacks ; The Black War; Musquito ;
Outrages by the Blacks; Brutal Treatment of the
Blacks by Bushrangers ; A War of Reprisals ;
Gigantic Scheme to Capture the Blacks ; A Cordon
Drawn Round the Disaffected District; Details
of the Scheme ; Its Failure ; Only Two Blacks
Captured ; Estimated Cost ; Fate of the Blacks . 17
Chapter lll.—Pierce the Cannibal; A Terrible Journey ;
A Shocking Confession ; Escapes from the Western
Hell ; The Ruffian Jefferies ; Brady the Bush-
ranger ; Escapes from Macquarie Harbour : Sticks
up the Town of Sorell ; The Governor’s Proclama-
tion ; Brady Laughs at it ; The Fight with Captain
Balfour ; Betrayed by a Comrade ; Captured by
John Batman ; Sympathy at his Trial; End of the
Epoch 33


PAGE.
Chapter IV.—Bushranging in New South Wales ; Manu-
facturing Bushrangers ; Employing Bushrangers ;
The First Bank Robbery in Australia ; Major Mudie
and his Assigned Servants ; Terrible Hollow ;
Murder of Dr. Wardell; The Story of Jack the
Rammer ; Hall, Mayne and Others .... 48
Chapter V.—John Lynch ; Murder of Kearns Land-
regan ; Lynch’s Trial and Sentence ; His Terrible
Confession; Murder of the Frazers, Father and
Son ; Murder and Cremation of the Mulligans ;
His Appeals to Almighty God .... 60
Chapter Vl.—Jackey Jackey, the Gentleman Bush-
ranger ; His Dispute with Paddy Curran ; Some
Legends About Him ; Jackey Jackey Always Well
Dressed and Mounted ; His Capture at Bungendore ;
His Escape at Bargo Brush ; Jackey Jackey visits
Sydney ; His Capture by Miss Gray ; Paddy
Curran’s Fight with the Police : Recaptured and
Hung ; John Wright Threatens to Make a Clean
Sweep 7i
Chapter VII. —The Jewboy Gang; “Come and Shoot
the Bushrangers ; ” Constable Refuses to Leave
his Work to Hunt Bushrangers ; Saved by his
Wife ; Robberies in Maitland ; Bushrangers in
High Hats ; The Bullock-driver Captures the
Bushrangers ; An Attempt to Reach the Dutch
Settlements ; Mr. E. D. Day Captures the Gang ;
Assigned Servants’ Attempt at Bushranging ; Some
Other Gangs 82
Chapter Vlll.—Bushranging in South Australia; The
Robbers Captured in Melbourne ; A Remarkable
Raid in Port Phillip; Going Out for a Fight with
the Bushrangers ; A Bloody Battle ; Cashan and
Mclntyre ; The Fight with the Mail Passengers ;
Cashan Escapes from the Lock-up ; Is Recaptured ;
Mclntyre Caught at Gammon Plains . . . 95


PAGE.
Chapter IX.—Bushrangers and Pirates ; Capture of
H.M. Brig Cyprus by Bushrangers ; A Piratical
Voyage ; Stealing the Schooners Edward and
Waterwitch ; Mutiny of Prisoners on H.M. Brig
Governor Phillip at Norfolk Island ; The Trial of
the Mutineers at Sydney; How Captain Boyle
Recaptured the Vessel io 3
Chapter X. —Van Diemen’s Land Again ; A Hunt for
Bushrangers in the Mountains ; Some Brutal
Attacks ; “Stand !” “ No, thanks, Pm very Com-
fortable Sitting ; ” A Degrading Exhibition ; A
Determined Judge; Cash, Kavanagh, and Jones,
an Enterprising Firm ; The Art of Politeness as
Exhibited by Bushrangers ; A Bushranger Hunt
in the Streets of Hobart Town ; The Capture of
Cash ; Break Up of the Gang; a Doubtful Mercy in
Chapter XI. —Norfolk Island ; Its Founding as a Penal
Station ; The Terrible Discipline in Norfolk Island ;
An Attempt to Ameliorate it ; Its Failure ; The
Rigorous Treatment Restored ; The Consequent
Riot ; Jackey Jackey’s Revenge ; An Unparalleled
Tale of Ferocity ; The Soldiers Overawe the
Rioters ; Thirteen Condemned to the Gallows ;
Jackey Jackey’s Remarkable Letter ; The End of
Several Notorious Bushrangers . • • .124
Chapter XlL—The Third Epoch of Bushranging;
The Gold Digging Era ; Influx of Convicts from
Van Diemen’s Land ; Passing of the Criminals’
Influx Prevention Act ; Attitude of the Diggers
Towards the Bushrangers and other Thieves ; The
Nelson Gold Robbery ; Some Pitiful Stories ; A
Rapid Raid; Insecurity of the Melbourne Streets 134
Chapter Xlll. —Captain Melville Takes to the Road;
He Ties and Robs Eighteen Men ; He Goes to


PAGE.
Geelong for a Spree and Boasts of his Exploits; His
Sensational Capture ; Sent to the Hulks ; Murder of
Corporal Owens ; Melville Removed from the Hulk
Success to the Gaol ; Murder of Mr. John Price,
and Mutiny of the Convicts ; Melville Attacks Mr.
Wintle ; Death of the Noted Bushranger . . . 14S
Chapter XlV.—Murder of a Bullock-driver; Sticking
Up in the Melbourne Streets ; Stealing ,£lOO,OOO in
Bank Notes ; Want of Efficient Police Protection ;
Murders and Robberies at Ballarat, Bendigo, Mount
Alexander, and other Diggings ; The Robbery of
the MclvorGold Escort; A Bushranger Intimidated
by a Bottle of Brandy ; Robbery of the Bank of
Victoria at Ballarat; Capture of Garrett in London ;
Prevalence of Horse Stealing; The Doctor’s
“Creamy” 158
Chapter XV.—An Escape from Norfolk Island; Stealing
a Government Boat; The Convicts of New South
Wales ; A Terrible Indictment; Thomas Willmore ;
Murder of Philip Alger ; Murder of Malachi Daly ;
Fight Between Two Bushrangers ; Hunting Down
Willmore ; His Capture While Asleep ; The Last of
the Van Diemen’s Land Bushangers ; Wilson and
Dido; Some Minor Offenders ; An Unfounded
Charge; A Change of Name to Rid the Island of
Evil Associations 173
CHAPTER XVl.—The New Bushranging Era; Fallacy
of the Belief that Highwaymen Rob the Rich to
Enrich the Poor; The Cattle Duffers and Horse
Planters; The Riot at Lambing Flat; Frank
Gardiner, the Butcher; Charged with Obtaining
Beasts “On the Cross,” He Abandons His
Butcher’s Shop; Efforts to Establish a Reign of
Terror in the District; A Letter from Gardiner ;
The Great Escort Robbery 188


PAGE.
Chapter XVll.—Johnny Gilbert; His First Appearance
in Australia ; Miscellaneous Bushranging Exploits ;
Mr. Robert Lowe Makes a Stand ; Mr. Inspector
Norton Captured by the Bushrangers ; A Plucky
Black Boy ; “ Mine Know it, Patsy Daly Like it,
Brudder;” A Brave Boy; O’Meally Shoots Mr.
Barnes; A Bootless Bushranger; Capture of John
Foley; Something about the Foley Family; Ben
Hall 205
Chapter XVlll.—Racers as Mounts for the Bush-
rangers ; The Shooting of Lowry ; The Bush-
rangers Visit Bathurst ; They Hold the Town
of Canowindra for Three Days; Burke Shot by
Mr. Keightley; Female Bushrangers; Death of
O’Meally at Goimbla; A Newspaper Man and
His Wife Stuck up; Lively Times During the
Christmas Holidays . . . . . . .218
Chapter XIX.—A Heavy Sessions at Goulburn ; Ben
Hall Hard Pushed ; An Amateur Mail Robber ;
Discovery of Frank Gardiner ; His Trial and
Sentence ; The Old Man ; A Brush with the Police ;
The Chinkies Show Fight; Messrs. Hall & Co. Take
a Lease of the Main Southern Road ; Capture of
Mount and Dunleavy ; Johnny Dunn ; A Desperate
Duel and Death of Sergeant Parry ; A Country Ball
and Its Sequel 232
Chapter XX.—Meeting the Gold Escort ; Murder of
Constable Nelson ; A Brush with the Police ;
Attempt to Stick up the Araluen Escort ; Death
of Constable Kelly, and Pluck of Constable Burns ;
Sir Frederick Pottinger Resigns ; Death of Ben
Hall; A Sketch of His Life ; Death of Johnny
Gilbert; Record of Johnny Dunn and the Gang;
Capture and Trial of Dunn ; His Execution ; Fate
of the Chief Members of the Gang . . . 246


PAGE.
CHAPTER XXI. Boodthirsty Morgan ; Morgan’s
Opinion of the Police ; Murder of Sergeant
McGinnerty ; Murder at the Round Hill Station ;
A Pseudo Morgan ; Morgan Threatens to Brand
All Hands ; He Shoots Sergeant Smyth; Chal-
lenged to Visit Victoria; He Accepts the
Challenge; His Death at Peechelba . . . 258
Chapter XXII. —The Brothers Clarke ; The Raid at
Nerigundah; Deaths of William Fletcher and
Constable O’Grady; Murder of Four Special
Constables at Jinden ; Annie Clarke at Goulburn ;
Capture of Thomas and John Clarke ; A Terrible
Record; A Plucky Woman; An Attempt to
Escape Custody ; “ Shoot Away I Can’t Stop
You”; Some Daring Robberies ; Murder and
Cremation of the Brothers Pohlmann; Blue Cap 269
CHAPTER XXlll.—Bushranging in the Northern District
of New South Wales ; Captain Thunderbolt Robs
the Toll-bar ; A Chinaman Bushranger; A Long
Chase; A Fight with the Police; “Next, Please”;
The Bushranger Rutherford; Captain Thunder-
bolt and the German Band ; Desperate Duel
between Captain Thunderbolt and Constable
Walker ; Thunderbolt’s Death .... 287
Chapter XXIV. —Bushranging in the Wild Paroo;
A Raid into South Australia ; A Relic of the
Bushranging Era; Agitation for the Release of
Gardiner ; Official Reports as to Twenty-four
Bushrangers Still in Gaol ; The Cases of Gardiner
and William Brookman ; Gardiner and the other
Bushrangers Released ; Gardiner leaves the
Country 304
Chapter XXV.—Bushranging in Victoria; Robert
Bourke ; Harry Power ; He Escapes from Pentridge


. PAGE.
Gaol and Sticks up the Mail ; An Amateur Bush-
ranger ; The Police Hunt Power Down and Capture
Him Asleep ; A Peacock as “ Watch Dog ; ” The
Power Procession at Beechworth ; The Trial of
Power ; His Sentence ; Engaged to Lecture on
Board the Success; His Death . . . .315
Chapter XXVl.—Bushranging in New Zealand ; Alleged
Fears of the Escort being Robbed ; The First Bush-
ranger ; Henry Beresford Garrett; The Maun-
gapatau Murders ; Arrest of Sullivan, Kelly, Burgess,
and Levy in Nelson ; Sullivan’s Confession ; The
Discovery of the Bodies ; Sullivan’s Release . . 326
Chapter XXVll.—Bushranging in Queensland ; Some
Bushrangers from Over the Southern Border ; A
Bogus Ben Hall; The Wild Scotchman ; Queens-
land’s Only Bushranger ; A Man of Many Aliases ;
He Goes to Fight a Duel with Sir Frederick
Pottinger ; He Escapes from the Steamer ; Re-
captured and Tried 335
Chapter XXVlll.—Captain Moonlite ; The “Reverend
Gentleman” Robs the Bank and Nearly Makes His
Escape ; He Breaks Out of Ballarat Gaol; He
Becomes a Reformed Character; He Sticks up the
Wantabadgery Station ; A Desperate Battle with
the Police ; His Young Companions in Crime ;
Sentenced to Death ; The Wild Horse Hunters
Turn Bushrangers ; An Abortive Attempt to Rob
a Bank 341
Chapter XXIX.—The Kelly Gang; Horse-Stealing a
Great Industry of the District; Faking the Brands ;
Assault on Constable Fitzpatrick ; The Bush
Telegraphs ; Murder of Sergeant Kennedy and
Constables Scanlon and Lonergan ; Sticking Up
of the Faithfull Creek Station ; Robbery of the
National Bank at Euroa; A Big Haul . . . 353


PAGE*.
Chapter XXX. —The Kellys Stick up the Town of
Jerilderie ; Robbery of the Bank of New South
Wales ; A Symposium in the Royal Hotel; A Three-
days’ Spree; “ Hurrah for the Good Old Times of
Morgan and Ben Hall”; The Robbers take a Rest
for a Year; The Kelly Sympathisers Again ; The
Kelly’s Reappear ; Murder of Aaron Sherritt . . 365
Chapter XXXI. —Fight between the Police and the
Bushrangers at Glenrowan; The Railway Torn
Up ; Attempt to Wreck the Police Train ; The
Glenrowan Inn Besieged; Ned Kelly in Armour;
His Capture; The Burning of the Inn; Death
of Dan Kelly, Steve Hart, and Joe Byrnes; Trial
and Conviction of Ned Kelly; His Death; The
Kelly Show; Decrease of Crime in the Colonies. 377
Index 386


CHAPTER I.
Introductory ; Characteristics of the Convicts Sent to Australia ; Bush-
ranging : Origin and Meaning of the Term ; The Cat and the
Double Cat; Condition of the Prisoners : Some Terrible Revela-
tions ; The Desperation of Despair; Some Flogging Stories ; The
Bushranging Act and Its Abuses ; Opinions of the Magistrates ;
Savage Treatment of Criminals Continued to the Present Time ;
Brutality not Cured by Brutal Punishment; Where Bushranging
First Began.
The species of brigandage known in Australia as bush-
ranging was, without doubt, evolved, more or less directly,
from the convict system established as the basis of the
earlier settlements in the island continent. The first bush-
rangers were simply men who took to the bush to escape
work and enjoy freedom of action. Under the harsh laws
of the Georgian era the greater criminals were hung, and
not transported, and the convicts sent to “ Botany Bay,” in
the eighteenth and the earlier years of the nineteenth cen-
turies, were generally men to whom the trammels of the
civilisation of their day were irksome. Many of them were
political agitators, industrial rioters, and machine-breakers.
The others were poachers and similarly comparatively mild
offenders against the laws, who, under the present laws of Great
Britain, would be sufficiently punished with a few months’
imprisonment. Many of these men, when they were removed
to a new land where the social conditions did not press so
heavily on them, became honest and reputable citizens, and,
perhaps, but for the harsh treatment they were subjected to,
numbers of others who were driven to continue their fight
against authority, might also have lived quiet and useful
lives. This subject is a very delicate one, and it is not my
intention to pursue it further here; but if it could be fully
B


treated without giving offence to numbers of worthy and, in
some cases, justly honoured residents of Australia, some
very valuable lessons might be learned from the histories of
some of those families whose founders could not live in
England without offending against the laws, but who could
and did earn the respect of their fellow colonists in Australia
who were not “sent out.”
The student of history in Australia is reminded, per-
haps more forcibly than his fellow in England, that the
humanitarian spirit, now so distinguishing a trait in the
Anglo-Saxon character, is of very recent growth. Under
the operation of this new force the criminal law of England
was rapidly softened and ameliorated, and with every ad-
vance in this direction the character of the convicts sent
out to Australia steadily deteriorated, if I may so describe
the process. With every alteration in the law a fresh class
of criminal was transported, and these with few exceptions
would, a few months before, have been hung. At first,
pickpockets, then sheep and horse-stealers, forgers and
others, who had previously only escaped the gallows in rare
instances, when they could find some influential friend to
take sufficient interest in them to plead their cause, were
now transported as a matter of course. This process con-
tinued until transportation ceased, and as the last batch of
prisoners sent out was presumably the worst, having been
guilty of more heinous crimes than their predecessors, we
are too apt to judge the earlier convicts harshly from our
knowledge of the later ones. The general effect was that
while, with the amelioration of the laws, crime steadily
decreased in England, it just as steadily increased in
Australia, and no doubt the worst criminals were trans-
ported to Van Diemen’s Land after transportation had
ceased to New South Wales in 1842. The laws of England
previously to the great changes made during the past sixty
years seem to me to have operated, whether designedly or
not, to clear the country of the disaffected and the dis-
contented, rather than the criminal. How far the intro-
duction of large numbers of this class into the country may
have paved the way for modern advances in liberal govern-
ment in Australia, is a question which it might be profitable
to study; but it only relates to the bushrangers so far as it


enables us to account for the large number of men who
“took to the bush.”
The earlier bushrangers seem to have been idle and
dissolute, rather than criminal, characters. They watched
for an opportunity to escape into a patch of scrub whenever
the eye of the sentry in charge of them was turned away, and
the nature of the country was so favourable to this method
of evasion that it constituted a continuous challenge to them
to run away, and, almost incredible as it may appear now,
numbers of men started northward or westward in hopes of
reaching the Dutch or English settlements at Batavia,
Singapore, Hong Kong, or some other place in that direction.
It must be remembered that the majority of the working
classes at the beginning of the century could not read and
had no knowledge of geography. They had heard sailors
speak of these settlements and had no idea that hundreds of
miles of sea flowed between them and Australia. How many
of these poor ignorant men lost their lives in the attempt
to achieve the impossible cannot be said, but some terrible
stories of cannibalism have been related in connection with
this phase of bushranging. The majority of the “ runaways,”
however, had no such definite ideas as these, erroneous as
they may have been. They hoped to be able to live in
freedom in the bush and to subsist on fruits, roots, or other
native growths. Some few joined a tribe of blacks and
stayed longer or shorter times with them; others simply
wandered about until hunger drove them back; while very
many remained at large until they were captured, and these
lived by stealing from farmers and other settlers any articles
which could be eaten or sold. When one of these early
bushrangers grew tired of his freedom he gave himself up at
the nearest police station and received fifty lashes. The
penalty for a second offence was twelve months in a chain
gang.
There was no adequate system of classifying the convicts.
It was the custom in advertising runaways to give the name
of the man and that of the ship in which he was transported.
Then followed the personal description, and that was all.
It was admitted to be inconvenient, but no attempt appears
to have been made to improve it. Besides this, for adminis-
tration purposes, convicts were divided into three classes


according to their sentences. Thus there were men who
had been transported for “seven” years, for “fourteen”
years, or for “life.” They were also classified as “young,”
“middle-aged,” and “old,” and usually the crime for which
they had been transported was specified, but such a descrip-
tion gave no indication of the character of the man.
Finally they were divided into “ town thieves,” “ rural
labourers,” and “gentlemen.” This was a step in the right
direction, but it was too vague to be of much use. The
educated convicts were all classified as “gentlemen” whether
they came from the towns or the rural districts.* It is worthy
of note that the proportion of skilled labourers, or tradesmen
as they are called, was very small. Very few men who had
been apprenticed to a trade were among the convicts sent
to Australia at any time.
There were no regulations as to hours of work, and the
severe taskmaster might work his assigned servants as many
hours as he pleased. It was generally understood that
Sunday was to be a holiday, or day of rest, but excuses were
readily found for making the convicts work on this day, and
this was a fruitful source of discontent. Very frequently
men absconded on Saturday night, remained in the bush on
Sunday, and returned on Monday to take the customary
fifty lashes and resume work.
If flogging is efficacious in preventing crime, it should
have made the convict colonies the most virtuous places on
earth, for the “ cat ” was in almost continuous use in New
South Wales and in Van Diemen’s Land. The “ cat ”
generally used was the ordinary military or naval cat; but
“ the cat used at Macquarie Harbour was a larger and
heavier instrument than that used generally for the punish-
ment of soldiers or sailors. It was called the thief’s cat,
or double cat-o’-nine-tails. It had only the usual number
of tails, but each of these was a double twist of whipcord,
and each tail had nine knots. It was a very formidable
instrument indeed.”! How far the influence of this
barbarous instrument of torture tended to make the
prisoners at Macquarie Harbour the most reckless and
* Evidence of Sir Francis Forbes, Chief Justice of New South Wales.
Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, July, 1837.
f Despatch from Governor Macquarie to Earl Bathurst, June 28, 1813.


ferocious of the convicts of Australia it is unnecessary to
enquire, but there can be no doubt that its influence was for
evil and not for good. It is with the ordinary “ cat,” with
which England in these barbarous times flogged her
defenders as ferociously as she did her prisoners, that we
have to deal; and, frightful as the tortures were which
were inflicted on the convicts, we have positive evidence
that their lot was looked upon with envy by the soldiers
who guarded them. Several soldiers in New South Wales
deliberately committed crime so that they might be
convicted, in the hope that, by good conduct, they might
earn some of the indulgences open to convicts. The
fact is that any prisoner who contrived, by obsequious-
ness or in any other way, to make friends with an
official, had his way made easy for him, while the
independent, whether industrious or not, were ruthlessly
persecuted until, in many cases, they were finally forced
to the gallows.
“ The prisoners of all classes in Government are fed with
the coarsest food ; governed with the most rigid discipline ;
subjected to the stern, and frequently capricious and
tyrannical will of an overseer ] for the slightest offence
(sometimes for none at all —the victim of false accusation)
brought before a magistrate, whom the Government has
armed with the tremendous powers of a summary jurisdic-
tion, and either flogged, or sentenced to solitary confinement,
or retransported to an iron gang, where he must work in
heavy irons, or to a penal settlement, where he will be
ruled with a rod of iron. If assigned to a private individual
he becomes a creature of chance. He may fall into the
hands of a kind indulgent master, who will reward his
fidelity with suitable acknowledgments; but, in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred, he will find his employer suspicious,
or whimsical, or a blockhead, not knowing good conduct
from bad, or a despot, who treats him like a slave, cursing
and abusing, and getting him flogged for no reasonable
cause. He may be harassed to the very death —he may be
worked like a horse, and fed like a chameleon. Ihe
master, though not invested by law with uncontrolled power,
has yet great authority, which may be abused in a thousand
ways precluding redress. Even his legal power is sufficiently


formidable. A single act of disobedience is a sufficient
ground of complaint before the magistrate, and is always
severely dealt with. But, besides the master’s power, the
prisoners are in some measure under a dominion to
the free population at large; any man can give him
in charge without ceremony. If seen drunk, if seen
tippling in the public-house, if met after hours in
the street, if unable to pay his trifling debt, if imper-
tinent—-the free man has nothing more to do than to
send him to the watch-house, and get him punished. The
poor prisoner is at the mercy of all men.”* This appears
to be a fair and unexaggerated statement of the conditions,
and therefore it is little cause for wonder that the general
tone of morality in the colony was low. Mr. J. T. Bigge
says that “every opportunity was seized for cheating. When
the convicts attended at the store to draw their weekly
rations, supplies were frequently drawn for men not at work
there. False lists of men employed in the various gangs
were made out.”f In fact, the Government of the Colony
was a military despotism under which corruption was ram-
pant, so that the authorities themselves set an example of
immorality which the convicts were not slow to follow.
“ The police made a considerable revenue by blackmailing
convicts who were in business.”! Those who could pay
were allowed to continue to enjoy a freedom to which they
were not legally entitled, while those who would not, or
could not, be blackmailed, to satisfy the exorbitant
demands of the so-called custodians of the peace, speedily
“got into trouble,” and were prosecuted. It was said that
if a man could escape from a country district and go to
Sydney he might, if he could afford to dress well, pass as a
free man without attracting attention. A blacksmith named
Brady, assigned to Major James Mudie, of Castle Forbes,
eluded the police in this way for nearly two years. Fie was
recognised by a fellow convict, some time before he was
captured, but this man “let him go for Such
* Sydney Gazette , November 20, 1830,
+ Commission of Enquiry into the state of the colony of New South
Wales, 1822.
+ Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons on
Transportation, July, 1837.


cases, however, were exceptions to the general rule. The
maiority of runaways went into the bush and not into the
town, and the Sydney and Hobart Town Gazettes in early
times contain numerous proclamations by the various
governors calling upon all well disposed persons to assist
the military in capturing runaways. Some of the issues ot
these Gazettes contain columns of the names and descrip-
tions of persons variously styled “absconders,” “absentees,
“ bolters,” or “ bushrangers.” In these the term bush-
ranger” appears most frequently in New South Wales, while
“ bolter ” was the more popular in Van Diemen s Land. Ihe
first bushrangers, therefore, were men who “took to the
bush ” to escape work, and therefore it was quite possible
for a man to be a bushranger without committing any
depredations on his more prosperous fellows . .
But laziness was not the sole cause of bushranging in
earlv times. A more powerful impulse perhaps was dis-
content, love of change. “ One of the most common
indications of the misery of convicts under existing circum-
stances is a passionate desire for change of place; and when
serving considerate masters they are sometimes indulged m
this by being transferred (though always as a sort of pums -
ment) to their disadvantage. In other cases, however, the
desire becomes so strong that they will steal, or commi
some equal offence, expressly to be condemned to a road
gang or penal settlement.”* In fact the monotony of their
lives became insupportable, even in those cases where they
were not cruelly treated. Captain Maconochie cites cases
of men who have so acted within a few months of their
being entitled to a ticket-of-leave, and who have thus forfeited
their chances of freedom in the near future. In some cases
this was due to the “ inhuman treatment of the master.
In one case a valuable servant a blacksmit —v ose ime
had nearly expired, was goaded into running away so that
he might be condemned to a further term of service before
obtaining his ticket-of-leave, and this was not an isolated
Ca V Generally,” said Dr. J. D. Lang, “the condition of
* Report by Captain Maconochie, forwarded to the Colonial Office by
Sir John Franklin, October 7th, 1837.


the assigned servant in New South Wales is superior to that
f the farm labourer of England. He is better clothed
better fed, and as comfortably lodged. He is
personal restraint, not being allowed to leave his master’s
property without a pass, but he has many comfoHs and
means of amusement which render his situation by no
ksome or severe.”* But it was just this restraint
w mh the persons with whom we are now dealing found
intolerable. T hey had not the patience, the long-suffering
resignation of the English farm labourer. Many of them
ad been English farm labourers and had found the
re o ahsed° n t S hm 7h Hved intolerable ’ a ”d when they
realised that they had not very much improved these
conditions by being sent to Australia, they rebelled again.
Ihe experience furnished by the penal settlements ” said
Ju ge Forbes, “ has proved that transportation is capable of
bemg carried to an extreme of suffering such as t Q P render
death desirable, and to induce many prisoners to seek it
under its most appalling aspects. . 1 ' tS*
crimes a?Noi,fif V? P T d that men ’ had emitted
crimes at Norfolk Island, for the mere purpose of being sent
to Sydney to be tried, and the cause of their desiring to be so
sent was to avoid the state of endurance in which they were
placed m Norfolk Island.” . . WrTT
occurred in which “men at Norfolk Island cut the heaS of
their fellow-prisoners with the hoe while at work, with the
certainty of being detected, and the certainty of being
executed. I hey did this without malice, and when charged
sFPicif a C F be h T g than t 0 live in such a helh”f
Sir Richard Bourke said; “Capital crimes have been
committed in that penal settlement from a desperate
determination to stake the chance of capital conviction and
punishment in Sydney against the chances of escape which
he passage might afford to the accused and to the witnesses
summoned to attend the trial.”* The early bushrangers of
A U g„*sf.'8 C ls C ° mn,it,e ' ° f th ' H °"“ ° f ™ Transportation,
Augu t s? il . e B3 B . Commit, ' e ° f H °“ Se °' Commo ” s Transportation,
"Administration of Justice a.


Australia ranged therefore from the comparatively innocent
wanderer in the bush, to such desperadoes as these, while
the crimes they committed varied from petty theft to
burglary, bank robbery, robbery on the high road, and
murder. The modern idea of a bushranger is a bold
highwayman, and no doubt many of the bushrangers come
up to this ideal, but the story of the bushrangers would not
be complete if it took no note of the others.
' The settlement on Norfolk Island was established with
the view of sending all the reconvicted prisoners there. It
was the penal settlement of a penal settlement. It was
abandoned for a time, after the founding of a similar settle-
ment on the banks of the Derwent river in Van Diemen’s
Land, but was re-established as a place of punishment in
connection with that colony, and many of the most notori-
ous of the bushrangers ended their days there, as we shall
see later. It was in the convict settlements in those
islands that the greatest brutalities were perpetrated on
the prisoners, and Norfolk Island, Macquarie Harbour, and
Port Arthur were each known as “ The Hell ” among the
“ old hands,” as the convicts were called after transporta-
tion had been abolished. It was in these settlements
that the more violent and refractory of the convicts were
gradually collected, and the history of these places tends
to prove that brutality cannot be cured by brutal means.
Flogging which was an every-day occurrence had no
reformatory effect. The early bushrangers thought nothing
of it. It certainly did not deter them from absconding
whenever they thought fit. When an absconder tired of
wandering about the bush, he returned to the settlement
to take his flogging “like a man.” In the stories told by
the old hands, the absconder or offender in some other way
was represented as walking jauntily up to the triangles,
throwing off his jumper, placing himself in position for
tying, and then, when he had been secured, telling the
flagellator to do his “ d est,” and, if the descriptions of
the manner in which the floggers performed their task which
have come down to us are true, the punishment was a
terrible one. It is said that there were two floggers in
Sydney who were regarded as artists in their profession.
These men performed together, the one being right-handed


and the other left. They prided themselves on being able
to flog a man without breaking the skin, and consequently
there was no blood spilled. But the back of the flogged
man is described as having been puffed up like “blown
veal.” The swelling “ shook like jelly,” and the effects
were felt for a much longer period than w r hen the back was
cut and scored as it generally was, for we are told that the
ground, in the Barrack Square in Sydney, all round where
the triangles stood, was saturated with human blood, and
the flogging places elsewhere must have been in the same
condition. But to return. When the man had received
his dose and w r as cast loose, he would throw his jumper
across his shoulders and walk away with a grin—or with
some such remarks as “Well, is that all you can do ?
you ! ” and afterwards boast that “ the couldn’t get a
whimper ” out of him. I have heard a story of a man w r ho
w r as flogged. The fiagellator kept hitting him low down
across the loins. The prisoner turned his head round
once and said fiercely ; “ Hit higher, blast you ! ” The
flogger took no notice, and the prisoner made no other
sign until he w r as untied. Then he knocked the flogger
down with his fist, and was immediately seized up for
another “ dose.”
“ I can assure you, from personal observation, that it is
not uncommon to see a poor wretch working on the roads,
or labouring in the fields, w r ith his coarse shirt sticking to
the green and tainted flesh of his lacerated back, and that,
too, for the most venial offence. ... I have it from
unquestionable authority, that it frequently occurs in the
summer season that the eggs of the blue-fly become inserted
and hatched in the wounds of the punished offender, from
which they are occasionally extracted by some humane
companion.”*
The blow'-fly in Australia, although frequently called
“blue-bottle,” is not blue. It deposits its young alive in
the form of maggots, and great care has always to be taken
to prevent sores on man or beast from being “ blown.”
It is very common for flannel shirts, w r hich have become
* Secondary Punishments discussed by an Emigrant of 1821.—Laun-
ceston Advertiser .


greasy from perspiration, to be blown on the backs of
workmen, and the maggots thus deposited will attack and
irritate any scratch or sore they can find if not removed
quickly.
The convict, so far from having been ashamed of being
flogged, boasted of it. But nothing pleased them better
than the relations of stories about the flogging of
“ freemen,” as those settlers who had gone to the colonies
neither as convicts nor officials were called. One story,
which may or may not be true, has been told as having
occurred in every convict district in Australia. It was to
the effect that a master one day gave a letter to an assigned
servant and told him to take it to the nearest gaol. The
servant, surmising that the letter was somewhat to the
following effect: —“ Dear Sir, —Please give the bearer fifty
for absconding (or what not), and oblige, yours truly, &c.,”
told a plausible tale to the first freeman he met and
induced him to deliver the letter. The point of the story
generally lay in the ingenuity with which the convict
induced the freeman to deliver the letter for him, but the
astonishment of the freeman when he was seized up to
the triangles in spite of his struggles and protestations, and
given the “ fifty,” was a perpetual source of joy and hilarity
to the convicts who heard the story. There is nothing
inherently improbable in this story. It is quite probable
that the incident may have occurred more than once.
Although freemen were legally exempt from flogging, unless
under sentence of a qualified Court, many authentic
instances of freemen having been flogged have been told.
Here is one. “A store-keeper in Hobart Town had offended
his neighbours, and one of them, in revenge, posted a written
placard libelling the offender. The placard was affixed to a
big gum stump at the corner of Collins and Elizabeth Streets.
Just as the complainant was putting this bill on the stump
the man libelled in it passed and called the attention of the
Military Commandant, who was near at hand at the time, to
it. A sort of informal drum-head Court Martial was held
on the spot, and the libeller was found guilty and sentenced
to receive three hundred lashes, which were administered
at once, in spite of the protests of the victim that he was a
freeman and was therefore entitled to a judicial trial. When


two hundred lashes had been administered, a cry of ‘ Ship
ho’ was raised, and the last hundred was got rid of as
quickly as possible, the Commandant, the flagellator, the
spectators, and others all rushing away to the wharf to hear
the news from Europe.”* If the law could be thus set at
defiance by a military official in the case of a free
immigrant holding a good position, what chance of justice
could there be for a convict ? A story illustrating the
reckless manner in which prisoners were flogged is told by
the Launceston Advertiser. “ A prisoner was found guilty
of absconding, and sentenced to receive fifty lashes, when
some circumstances were disclosed which proved that
the prisoner was innocent, but had lost his pass.
‘ Never mind,’ said the Launceston magistrate, c the
warrant is signed, let him be punished now ; I will
forgive him the next time he’s brought up.’” The
tyranny of the officials was boundless. One Government
rule was that all convicts should take off their hats to
officers and officials whenever they passed. In January,
1839, a party of convicts was building some steps at Woolloo-
mooloo Bay, on Sir Maurice O’Connell’s estate. Several of
them were rolling a heavy stone down to be placed in
position when an officer passed along and the convicts
immediately rose up and took their hats off. The stone
rolled quickly down the steep embankment, struck the
overseer and knocked him down, almost breaking his
leg. Captain O’Connell gave orders that the men should
not salute anybody in future while at work. A few days
later Colonel Wilson, Chief Police Magistrate of Sydney,
passed, accompanied by his daughter. The convicts con-
tinued at work without noticing him. “Take off your hats,”
cried the Colonel. Several of the men did so, but
Joseph Todd, who was carrying a heavy load, took no
notice. “Take off your hat, you scoundrel,” said the
Colonel. Todd said he had been ordered not to. The
Colonel shouted “ I’ll have your back skinned for you,
you rascal,” called the sergeant of police who acted as
guard, and gave Todd in charge. Captain O’Connell
appeared to defend his man and said Colonel Wilson was
* History of Van Diemen’s Land from 1820 to 1835.


trespassing and had no right to interfere with assigned
servants on their master’s estate. Sergeant Goodwin
deposed that the path was a common one and people
frequented it to get to the bathing place. Sergeant Mather
said that Todd had struggled when arrested. The Bench
held that Todd being an assigned servant had been guilty
of disorderly conduct in resisting the police. Had he been
a freeman he would have been justified in resisting arrest
without a warrant; but, being a prisoner, his conduct had
been highly disorderly, and he was, therefore, sentenced to
receive fifty lashes. A week later Todd was again arrested
for being out after hours, and was sentenced to receive
thirty lashes. The paper in reporting this charged Colonel
Wilson with tyrannical conduct, and says that he went to
see Todd flogged.*
I am not relating the worst cases in order to “ make
out a case ” for the bushrangers, but simply facts to
illustrate the life in the colonies at the time, and thus
account for the large number of men who “ took to the
bush,” and the special Acts passed to prevent this breach of
the law were as tyrannical as the acts of the officials or the
masters which went so far to create it. The “ Bushranging
Act” (n George IV., No. 10) authorised the military or
civil police to arrest any person on the mere suspicion that
he or she was illegally at large, and the onus of proof was
thrown on the suspected party. This Act was a fruitful
source of complaint. No one was safe except well known
officials, and it is said that the Act was extensively used for
purposes of extortion and black mail. A young woman
was arrested by an ex-constable and charged with being
illegally at large. It was in vain that she protested that she
was “ free ” and did not require a pass. He insisted on
taking her to the lock-up. Fortunately, while walking along
the street she met some one who knew her and who
threatened the ex-policeman with prosecution if he did not
release her. The fellow did so and was not prosecuted.
Probably had an enquiry been held it would have been
found that he was acting in collusion with the police.
Even the officials were not always safe, Mr. Jacques, the
* Sydney Gazette.


Government auctioneer, had been to a dinner party. Being
near the Custom House he decided to walk to the wharf
from whence the steamer, which ran to Balmain, started
and go home in her. Not having walked to the wharf
from that point before, he found it necessary to apply
to a constable for information as to which turning he
should take, and was immediately arrested as a convict
illegally at large. In spite of his protests he was conveyed
to the nearest police station. The sergeant in charge
refused to believe his story, and thought that the presence
of a well-dressed man in that quarter was suspicious. Mr,
Jacques was therefore detained till morning, when he was
recognised by the magistrate and discharged. In 1834 a
circular letter was addressed by the Governor to the various
police-magistrates in New South Wales, enquiring whether,
in their opinion, the Act should be reaffirmed or not, and
the replies were by a large majority in favour of its being
continued, while others merely suggested that it might be
amended in various ways to prevent the abuses which had
grown up under its operation. Judge Burton was almost
alone in his condemnation of the Bushranging Act, which,
he said, was repugnant to the laws of England. “ England
and the United States of America,” he said, “are the only
two countries in the world where passports are not com-
pulsory,” and he deprecated the introduction of the passport
system into Australia. It was held that the conditions
existing in the colony made such an act necessary, and it
was therefore re-enacted without amendment.* It is worthy
of note, as illustrating Colonial Office procedure of that
day, that it was the paid officials, and not the public, who
were consulted in this matter.
The facts being as I have stated, the wonder is not that
large numbers of prisoners “ took to the bush ” but that all
did not do so, and the more we study the early history of
the convict settlements the less we feel inclined to blame
the early bushrangers, however savage or atrocious their
actions were. But we have not yet quite escaped from
barbarism. In spite of the positive evidence that flogging
brutalises and does not reform it is still continued. We also
* Dispatch of Governor Bourke to the Colonial Office, 1835,


continue to hang criminals, although there is no proof that
it deters crime or effects any good whatever. I do not
belong to any society for the abolition of capital punishment.
I may admit that perhaps there may be men whose death is
desirable or expedient; but, if it is so, if there are men unfit
to live or whose death might add to the happiness or security
of the majority, then I think that we might extend to our
fellow creatures, however ferocious or abandoned they may
be, the mercy which we show to savage or superfluous dogs
and cease from torturing them in their last moments.
Hanging has had a sufficiently lengthy trial in Australia
if it has not in England. Old residents in Sydney or in
Hobart Town or in any other locality where penal settle-
ments have existed can point out numbers of places where
the gallows has been erected, and in some cases trees are
still standing where numbers of men have struggled away
their last few moments of life. This, however, is not the
place to enlarge upon this subject, but the story I have to
tell shows a lamentable waste of life, and many even of the
more notorious of the bushrangers have exhibited qualities
which might under happier conditions have fitted them for
useful work. This is specially true of the earlier bushrangers
who were the victims generally of unjust laws. Of the later
ones, the native-born bushrangers, it is impossible to speak
in the same terms. They were not driven to crime by want
or oppression, but they were the vicious products of a
vicious past. Their crimes were due to vicious environment
and education, but they are gone now and, if we may draw
some lessons of utility for the future, even their lives may
not have been altogether wasted.
From the evidence I have adduced it will be seen that
the early bushrangers were very numerous. “In one case
it became known,” said Mr. James Macarthur, “that a gang
of about sixty convicts, employed in the Government gangs
in Liverpool, intended to break out on a certain night and
take to the bush. It was considered advisable to allow them
to break out, proper precautions having been made to capture
them. It was the intention to attack our farming stations at
Camden. We armed twelve of the best-conducted of our
convict servants, but the absconders found that their design
had been discovered and did not attempt to put it in


force.”* Thus the bushrangers did not always go out singly,
or in twos or threes. Mr. J. T. Bigge says: “At Windsor,
and in the adjoining districts, the offence termed bush-
ranging, or absconding in the woods, and living upon
plunder and the robbing of orchards, are most prevalent.
. . ■ . At Emu Plains, or the district of Evan, gambling,
absence from work, insolence to overseers, neglect of work,
and stealing, are the most common offences. ... As
the population of New South Wales has, until lately, been
virtually limited to the occupation of a small tract of land
that lies between the Blue Mountains and the sea, and as
few temptations to plunder existed in the tracts contiguous
to these boundaries, excepting those that are afforded by the
wild cattle in the cow-pastures, the offence of bushranging,
or continued absence in the woods, has not of late been
common. Instances have occurred of the departure of
convicts for the purpose of traversing the country with a
view to escape, of the escape of some from Newcastle, sent
thither for punishment, and their wandering and temporary
existence in the vicinity of Windsor; and latterly, "a few
instances of escape from the road parties in the districts of
Liverpool and Bathurst; but there has been no systematic
or continued efforts of desperate convicts to defy the
attempts of the local Government in New South Wales, or
to subsist by plunder, such as have existed until a very late
period in Van Diemen’s Land.”f
It is in Van Diemen’s Land, therefore, that our story of
the more serious phases of bushranging first begins.
* Select Committee of the House of Commons on Transportation,
July, 1837.
f Commission of Enquiry into the state of the colony of New South
Wales, 1822,


CHAPTER II.
Van Diemen’s Land; The First Bushranger ; Mike Howe, the King
of the Ranges; The Raid on the Blacks; The Black War;
Musquito; Outrages by the Blacks; Brutal Treatment of Blacks
by Bushrangers ; A War of Reprisals ; Gigantic Scheme to Capture
the Blacks; A Cordon Drawn Round the Disaffected District;
Details of the Scheme ; Its Failure; Only Two Blacks Captured ;
Estimated Cost; Fate of the Blacks.
The first settlement in Van Diemen’s Land was founded
in 1803, when a penal establishment, to which the more
refractory of the prisoners in Sydney might be despatched,
was founded on the banks of the River Derwent. Subse-
quently other penal stations were opened, and of these we
shall hear later. The island continued to be the chief penal
establishment of New South Wales until 1825, when it was
erected into an independent colony. The first shipment of
convicts, direct from England to Van Diemen’s Land, took
place in 1823, and from that date, until transportation to
the island finally ceased, in 1853, 64,306 convicts were sent
to that colony from the British Isles. The number sent
previously from New South Wales was not large, nevertheless
it included the majority of the most turbulent of the convicts
and relieved the mother colony of their charge and control.
The island was in fact “nothing but a jail on a large scale.”*
The early conditions in the colony appear to have been
favourable to bushranging. In 1805 there was such a
dearth of food stuffs, owing to the non-arrival of store ships
from Sydney, that a famine appeared to be imminent and,
to relieve the store, the Lieutenant Governor ordered the
liberation of the convicts and sent them into the woods
c
* History of Van Diemen's Land from 1820 to 1835.


to catch kangaroo and other wild animals for food. When
the stores arrived and food became plentiful, the attempts
to recall the convicts were only partially successful. Many
had learned how to subsist in the bush and disregarded the
proclamations issued by the Lieutenant Governor ordering
them to return to work. At first the bushrangers or bolters
were similar to those of New South Wales and contented
themselves with petty thefts. The first proclamation in
which reference is made to “a gang of bushrangers ” was
published in the Hobart Town Gazette by Lieutenant
Governor Davey and dated September roth, 1810. It
offered rewards and indulgences to convicts for the capture
of any members of a gang which, under the leadership of a
convict named Whitehead, had been committing depreda-
tions on the property of settlers and farmers in the vicinity
of Hobart Town.
Whitehead, therefore, was the first to organise a gang
which combined highway robbery with burglary and petty
Bushrangers were not at that time specialists.
From time to time other proclamations were issued in
which this gang was mentioned, but it was not until May
14th, 1813, that a special proclamation was published,
calling upon the “bolters” to surrender. Those who
neglected to obey this order were to be proclaimed “ out-
laws ” on December Ist.
Very few particulars are published about this gang in
the newspapers, and the proclamations rarely specify the facts
in connection with the robberies committed. The news-
papers of the time seldom mention the names of the
bushrangers, and appear to have been quite as averse to
mentioning the Christian names as the modern English
papers are those of professional cricketers. Thus
Whitehead is referred to as “ the convict Whitehead,”
or the “ notorious bushranger Whitehead,” and so on.
He is debited, however, with one horrible crime. The
gang captured a half-crazy fellow named John Hopkins,
and accused him of trying to betray them. As a punish-
ment for this offence a pair of moccassins, roughly made of
bullock hide, was fitted on to his feet, and in these were
placed a number of the great red ants, commonly known in
Australia as “ bull-dog ” or “ soldier ” ants ( myrmecia gulosa).


These ants are an inch and a quarter long, and of most
ferocious appearance. They are the dread of the colonists.
They sting quite as severely as a bee or a hornet. But
a bee stings only once, while a soldier ant will continue to
sting until removed. It is always ready to fight, and never
lets go when it has taken hold ; hence its popular names.
The horrible barbarity of such a punishment can be best
appreciated, perhaps, by those who have inadvertently stood
on a “ soldier’s ” bed or nest. The victim is said to have
died in agony.
Whitehead was shot by a party of soldiers in October,
1814, and Michael Howe, commonly called the “ First of
the Australian Bushrangers,” was elected captain of the
gang in his stead. Mike Howe, as he was usually called,
was transported from England for highway robbery, and
soon after his arrival at Sydney “ got into trouble,” and was
again transported to Van Diemen’s Land, where his violence
caused him to be repeatedly flogged and otherwise punished.
He made his escape and joined AVhitehead’s gang, and
soon, by his superior education, gained an ascendency over
his comrades. His previous experiences as a footpad in
England no doubt tended to fit him for the leadership of
the gang, and he is still regarded as one of the most notable
of the revolters against law and order in the colonies. One
of his earlier achievements was to organise a raid on a tribe
of blacks for the purpose of providing himself and his
comrades with wives. This is said to have been the first
act in the tragedy which closed with the complete annihil-
ation of the blacks of the island. The savages, of course,
resisted, and many of them were shot, and the women were
forced away to the bushrangers’ camp. In revenge, the
blacks attacked, not the bushrangers’ camp, but the houses
of settlers who had no connection with the bushrangers, and
fights between the settlers and the blacks became frequent.
Some of the black women seem to have become reconciled
to the change, and Howe’s “ wife,” Black Mary, is associated
■with him in most of the stories told of him. It is said that
it was her knowledge of the bush which enabled him to
escape so frequently from the military bands sent out to
capture him.
Howe addressed a letter “ From the Bushrangers to the


Hon. T. Davey, Lieutenant Governor of Van Diemen’s
Land,” in which he protested against the charge, made
against himself and his mates in the proclamations, of
having been guilty of “ horrid and detestable crimes.” He
asserted that he had never committed murder and had only
used violence when it was necessary to avoid capture. The
letter was conveyed to Hobart Town by an American
whaler named Richard Westlick, who had an interview' with
his Excellency, and was sent back with a verbal message
that the Governor “ did not wish to take the life of any
man,” but merely to preserve order. If, therefore, Howe,
or any of his comrades, would surrender no charges should
be made against them for their acts while “in the bush.”
No notice was taken of this generous offer, and the depre-
dations continued. Later on Mike Howe addressed a letter
“ From the Governor of the Ranges to the Governor of the
Town,” and sent it to Lieutenant Governor Sorell, who had
succeeded Colonel Davey. In this the bushranger offered
to give himself up on condition that he received a free
pardon. He demanded that some recognised official should
be sent to meet him at an appointed spot, so that they
might “ confer as gentleman to gentleman.” The fact that
this insolent offer was accepted affords incontrovertible
evidence of the power of the bushrangers, and shows the
anxiety of the Governor to put a stop to the robberies
which harassed the industrious settlers and made the roads
of the colony unsafe. Captain Nairne, of the 46th Regiment,
was sent out to meet the bushranger, and the result of
their conference “as gentlemen” was that Howe accom-
panied the Captain back to Hobart Town. On his arrival
there he was informed that the Lieutenant Governor had
no power to grant pardons, but that he would write
to Governor Macquarie in Sydney and urge him to grant
a pardon without delay. Howe agreed to wait in Hobart
Town. He was liberated on parole, and soon became very
popular in the city. Then a rumour began to spread to the
effect that Howe had committed no less than four murders,
not reckoning the blacks he had killed, and that,
the Governor declined to grant him a pardon. As soon as
Howe heard this rumour he, without waiting for its con-
firmation, broke his parole and returned to the bush. A


proclamation was immediately issued declaring him an
outlaw, and offering one hundred pounds reward for his
capture, dead or alive. Smaller rewards were offered for
other members of his gang, whose names were known.
The estimates of the strength of his gang vary extremely
from time to time. Sometimes he is said to have a hundred
or more followers, while frequently he is represented as
acting alone or in company with only one or two others.
The facts appear to be that many men, who merely
“ bolted ” into the bush as a relief to the monotony of their
lives, became bushrangers; and, when hard pressed, or when
they tired of that pursuit, returned to the town, gave
themselves up, and were punished as ordinary bolters. One
day not very long after his escape from Hobart Town,
Howe was surprised while asleep by two ticket-of-leave men
named Watts and Drew. They captured and tied him.
Howe fought like a lion and contrived to break the rope
with which he was tied. He snatched a knife and stabbed
Watts. He then seized Watts’ gun and shot_ Drew dead.
Watts ran away, while Howe was employed in re-loadmg
the gun, and managed to secrete himself in the scrub for
a time. When the way was clear he crawled to a farm and
gave information. He was cared for as well as circum-
stances permitted, but he died from loss of blood before a
doctor could be brought to him. Howe was followed by
the military, but escaped.
Several skirmishes took place between Howe and his
gang and the soldiers, and more than one of his accomplices
were shot, but the chief always contrived to get away. At
length a kangaroo hunter named Warburton led ilham
Pugh a soldier commonly known as “ Big Bill, and a
seaman named John Worrall, to where Howe was camped
under a gum tree. A terrific fight took place, Howes
brains being beaten out before it was over
In his review of this period, Mr. J. T. Bigge said : The
excesses of the bushrangers in the neighbourhood of Fort
Dalrymple, and likewise near Hobart Town, had attained
their utmost height and most sanguinary character at the
latter end of the year 1813. They had been joined by two
persons w r ho had held subordinate stations mt e com
misariat department, named Peter Mills and George


upolTTh 5 ; a h n o d m« nti^ ed a SyS ‘ em 0f violent depredations
description So ! property of individuals of every
“■ sjf atwa&rttts
clamation offering rewards for the apprehension of a party
prodamatklrP pair ‘ h ® advlce ,° f Mr - Eii; s Bent anithe!
December “st. g UP ° n ATetf'°t T?" bef ° re
r i • • • 1 lie effect of this Wris
a e nd er audacitP Pf The P n ‘f nded ' I ‘, incre ased the crimes
««t Sirrs/s-ixt. ;-s;
&r? »rr “c-ir?
leader, was shot by two convicts sent in pursuit of
of four. Another was shot by a soldier of the aBth
regiment, and the other three were cantured nnrwf 4§th
viction flogged and transported.’- ? and ° n Col>
•/?* tln ? e ’ bushranging in Van Diemen’s Land was
said to have been put down, but “the Guerilla Wsr”
between the whites and the blacks, inaugurated by
bushrangers, continued. Mr. Gilbert Robertson’ was
appointed conciliator, with a view to arranging tePmsTf
peace, but he was not very successful. Severaf proclama
"' ere tssued assuring the blacks that if thl’y would
come m and make peace the Government would endeavour
o protect them against their enemies the bushrangers • but
s was pointed out at the time, issuing proclamations to
savages who could not read was absurd. Then P rictorS
proclamation was issued. In one portion fte goremo
Xrs Sh bkPks Shak d g te ndS W ' th a blac kfellow; in
UL • ? and whites were exhibited mingling
together m friendship. I n the two bottom compartment!
Life aTcSlo " b n ing h “ ng for having shot a b ' a <*.
whmaP rinT be hmg for having d
te man. Copies of this pictorial proclamation wprp
posted on trees and other places where the blacks might see
Wali^S^ 011 ° f EnqUiry int ° thC StatG ° f the of New South


I Lieutenant Governor Arthur in fact, on his arrival in
ie colony, tried by every means in his power to appeal to
ie blacks and whites alike. He endeavoured to restrain
ie settlers from attacking and driving the blacks away from
ieir farms whenever they appeared, as had become the
ustom, but some new outrage by the bushrangers gave a
ew impulse to the feud, and the settlers were compelled to
ght in self-defence. In one of his despatches to the
Colonial Secretary Governor Arthur said : It is not a
natter of surprise that the injuries real or supposed inflicted
,n the blacks, have been avenged upon the whites
whenever an occasion presents itself; and i regret
o say that the natives led on by a Sydney black, and
w two aborigines of this island, men partially civilised
a circumstance which augurs ill for any endeavour to
mstruct these abject beings), have committed many murders
upon the shepherds and herdsmen in remote settlements
F ... I have long indulged the expectation that
kindness and forbearance would have brought about some-
thing like a reconciliation, but the repeated murders which
have been committed have so greatly inflamed the passions
of the settlers, that petitions and complaints h^ ve .^ en f
presented from every part of the colony, and the feeling o
resentment now runs so high that further forbearance would
bC The^Sydney S black here mentioned was known as
Musquito. He was transported to Van Diemen’s Land for
the murder of a black gin (presumably hu> which_ is
no crime according to native law) m 1823. andI havg
been employed on a cattle station in New South V ales, wa
appointed stock-keeper. Later, he was employed as a
tracker, and aided the soldiers in capturing some of the
bushrangers. For this he was so persecuted by h is f eflow
convicts that life became a burden to him He appeale
to the authorities for protection , but, as this was
accorded to him, he became a bushranger himsel
“Perhaps taken collectively the sable natives of this cobny
are the most peaceable creatures in the universe Certainly
so taken they have never committed any acts of cruelty, o
* Despatch dated April 17th, 1828.


brprovocatln he fT’ ™ less .' vhen insufferably goaded
oy provocation. The only tribe who have done anv
mischief were corrupted by Musquito, a Sydney black who 7
own h Perve ? ed Riming, taught them a portion of his
delinquencies.”*' ato a * **« - *
d0 ’ ‘ he general cha «cter of the
ustralian blacks, it seems strange that one of thpm
siould prove himself so much superior to the Van Diemen’s
Land blacks as Musquito is represented to have done But
however that may be, there can be no douk as to his skfl
m orgamsatum. Some of his attacks on setders me so
Skilfully planned and carried out, that many persons
beheved that the blacks had been led by a white mai
ffck a rt?e Ut two tead ° f buShrangin «’ M “4uito and Black
jacic, die two leaders, were captured. Musquito was
charged with the murder of WillL, Holyoak Td Mr
1 . R ° b f tSOn a PP eared in his defence. Mr Robertson
difenci Had heh derS COmmitt « d by Musquito were in self
u h been P rotect ed by the Government as he
should have been after the services he had rendered he
vould never have taken to the bush. He related manv
“Li? tf a rhe he h d Ski “ ° f , the black ’
eis, said that he had seen him “cut the head off
a flying pigeon with a crooked stick.”! This seems to
indicate that however intimately Mr. Robertson might
e acquainted with the Van Diemen’s Land blacks g he
£ £ Sirr efts th Mus b q°„To er w£ cfitd 6
Cfenif Mu J u f* taaid -\HfiiVioTlff e f “
oiacicreitow Mr. Bisdee asked him “ Why not as good
r blackfellow as for whitefellow ? ” “Oh ” exclaimed
Musquito, “Very good for whitefellow. He used
Black Jack was convicted of the murder of Patrick
oktif " ey ; , rbe only English known by Black Tack was
of the “old hands oaths brand” Theffm i
hung in Hobart Town, but “!he Black f°r'“ofnS
* Hobart Town Gazette.
t Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, xB 3 B.


“The deadly antipathy which was excited between the
aborigines and the bushrangers of Van Diemen s
Land provoked a series of outrages which would have
terminated in the utter extinction of the whole race, if the
local Government had not interposed to remove the last
remnant of them from the island ; an act of real meicy,
though of apparent severity.”* Before proceeding to
describe this attempt to save the remnant of the race we
may perhaps give a list of the “ Atrocities committed by the
blacks.” It is not a very long one, taking into consideration
the time occupied in the war. In March, 1820, forty-nine
natives attacked Mr. Broadribb’s house. They were divided
into several parties which came up from different points
simultaneously. One man was speared m the thigh before
the blacks were repulsed. They all went away together an
stripped Mr. Thomson’s house of everything portable. I hey
then Weeded to Mr. E. Denovan’s and robbed his place.
On April Ist John Raynor was speared and dreadfully beaten
at Spring Bay. On May 18th a party of blacks attacked two
men employed by Mr. Lord. One was dangerously speared
and the other beaten. The hut was stripped. On June is
Mr Sherwin’s hut, at Weasel Plain, was plundered and on
the isth, Den Hut, at Lake River, was stripped bare, and
Mary' Daniels and her two children murdered On
August 7th, S. Stockman’s hut, at Green Ponds was
plundered. On the 9th, some muskets, powder, and shot
were stolen from the huts of Mr. Sharland, a Government
surveyor. On the same day the Government hut, between
Borthwick and Blue Ash, was robbed, several horses stolen
from Mr. Wood and Mr. Pitcairn, and a man wounded at
Mr Purvis’s. This party consisted of about forty blacks.
They were met by Mr. Howell’s party, and the blacks were
driven off after a fight. A woman living near was wnunded
with a spear. On the 23rd, the hots of Mr. J. Connell
and Mr. Robertson were attacked, and the latter plundered,
Mr. Sutherland’s shepherds were robbed ot t eir
arms and one of them wounded; some arms were taken
from Mr. Taylor’s hut. The next day James Hooper was
killed, and his hut plundered. The huts of Lieutenants
* Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons. 1838.


Bell and Watts were attacked, but the blacks WP rp
S^e“ le on an theTth r a VOUnded °?- the banksl ° f
li- kilns at Bothwell f 17Z
On the 27th hrancis Booker was killed with spears
and on the next day three men at Major Grav’s hiir
Sd W at U Mt d G PA,. the , Same da ? t™’
into the rL? a W and thdr bodies thro "' n
j 6. nven A third man was wounded bm-
evZ e lr°™, b hh h - The hOUSe stripped b of
everythmg. This robbery was so systematically carried
f v S that 11 w A as u believed that the blacks had been led
by white men. A hut on the opposite side of the road was
also stripped. On October 16 th the settlement at sorel
woundf ed F o r h man bdng ki " ed and »«her a L S e°rdy
wounaea. hour houses were stripped On thn rSt-u
Captain Stewart’s shepherd was killed and a settler Mr
Gilders, was also speared and died. On the 10th Messrs
were T don ' s house attacked, bm the blacks
rZI n P , d ‘ , hey were also driven away from Mr
Q n g I S P t CS ’ bu l not before he was severely wounded"
On November 19th two huts were robbed on the Ouse
X^manded 111 f 6pherd was killed and dread-
,7 mangled. His body was found later. On the
27 h a hut on the Esk River was stripped bare. On
ruary 3rd, 1821, an attack was made on Mr Burrell’s
house on the Tamar River. Mr. Wallace was severely
by a spZ SCT L 3 ° hild was a,so "funded
oy a spear. L. Knight’s hut was plundered three
horses belong,ng to Mr. Sutherland were killed and three
o hers were wounded. His hut at North Esk was aso
p undered. Mrs. McCaskell was killed near Westbury and
Stewt’s Pl h U o ndered 0f ev T yt a ing - An attack made on Mr d
btewart s house was repulsed. On March Bth, two sawvers
re wounded, and two huts near New Norfolk were plun-
" \ I2t bj Mrs. Cunningham and her child were
severely wounded, and her hut at East Arm plundeTed


Mr. Lawrence’s servant was wounded, and three men were
wounded on Norfolk Plains. On April sth, T. Ralton was
killed with a spear while splitting wood. On the 16th, Mr.
Fitzgerald was sitting at the door of his hut reading, when a
blackfellow sneaked up and drove a spear through him,
after which his cottage was plundered. On the 17th,
another attack was made on Fitzgerald’s house. On
May 10th, the Government store at Patrick Plains was
burned down. Mr. Kemp’s establishment at Lake Sorell
was attacked by a large mob of blacks. Two men were
killed, one wounded, the buildings were burned down and
the firearms carried away. On June 6th, several huts were
attacked at Hunter’s Hill. Mrs. 1 riffet w r as speared and
her house plundered, the huts of Messrs. Marnetti, Bell, and
Clark were robbed, and Mrs. N. Long was killed. On
September sth, Thomas Smith w r as killed at d apsley, and
his hut plundered; John Higginson w r as killed and his hut
robbed, and a sawyer's hut w r as plundered. On the 7 th,
Mr, B. B. Thomas and his overseer, Mr. Parker, were
murdered near Port Sorell, while endeavouring to carry out
the conciliatory policy of the Government. Mr. Stocker’s
hut w r as attacked, a man named Cupid killed, and a child
wounded. On the 27th, Mr. Dawson’s hut on Bushy
Plains w r as attacked, and a man severely beaten. On the
23rd, Mr. Dawson’s man Hughes again beaten with
waddies and nearly killed. On October 13th, the natives,
armed with muskets, attacked and robbed the house of
Constable Reid, and afterwards that of Mr. Amos Junior.*
This report covers only a portion of the time during
which the war lasted, but it sufficiently indicates the
character of the w r ar. When the blacks attacked the
cottages, or huts as they are called in Australia, of
shepherds, sawyers, splitters, and other w r orkers, they were
frequently successful, but were generally repulsed when they
attacked the residences or houses of the employers, ihe
manner in which the blacks fought struck terror into
the hearts of the settlers. No one was safe. At any
time, day or night, a party of blacks might sneak
* Despatch from Governor Arthur to Earl Bathurst, dated October 13,
1831.


p and, with wild yells, spear men, women, and children
old or young without warning. Their patience in tracking
vvhh f l ndomit n b S ' • ? they COuld not effect a surprise they
causfof thp d hl Vai i ed ‘ . , No doubt > as the advocates of the
ause of the blacks said, the number of whites killed was
much smaller than the number of blacks slaughtered by
defence g6rS USt , and by Settlers and ® oldiers in
defence. But it can be readily understood that the
drive°t n hp° f W \ SettlerS W f intolerable - Every attempt to
dnve the blacks away from the settled districts only
failed until at 1 While 6Very attem P t at conciliation
failed until at length it became evident that the blacks must
be either captured or killed. It was therefore with a view to
saving the blacks that Lieutenant Governor Arthur urged the
LanTto onp aP f U ih ng r ai i ld ' emovin S them fro m Van ufemen’s
Land to one of the Islands in Bass’s Straits. In his des-
Pf he , s i° Governor Bourke and to the Colonial Office
: w ? s utterl y impossible to restrain the colonists,’
■ o great was their rage at the murders of peaceful citizens
and especially of women and children, while all his attempts
at conciliation had failed in consequence of the continual
outrages committed on the blacks by the bushrangers. Mr
Gilbert Robertson said : “ One day a settler was riding across
aTof 'and f ° r Cattle> He jum P ed his horse over
a log, and while doing so caught the sparkle of a pair of eves
gleaming frorn the shadow of the log. He pulled T
fonnd ed E hlS horse , round and dismounted, thinking he had
ound a kangaroo, but on pulling some brush away saw a poor
“ S b n ymg ? hide himself > but ther c was no mercy
m the heart of the settler. He cocked his gun and shot the
black in cold blood.”* The story is a very g pmhedc one! but
perhaps the settler had had reason to know that “ the poor
cowering black was sneaking up to the settlement to
murder any unsuspecting man, woman, or child he might
me ncross. Hiding behind logs, crawling through brush
was the ordinary method of fighting employed by the Van
DaffihP S L m d ahor^ ines > and had h e not been on the war
path he would not have resorted to this secret manner of
travelling but would have stood out boldly. The blacks are
* Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, 1838.


not cowards, and are not afraid of showing themsehes,
as a rule, after their first superstitious fear of the white man
passes away. This being the general experience of
bushmen, the settler may have been justified in killing the
black. He may have been simply treating him according to
the blackfellow’s own rule in war time. But although we
may acquit the settler of blame by such reasoning, the
existence of such conditions as to necessitate such a war is
not the less deplorable. The whites all carried arms v, hen
travelling, and even while working about their homes.
Shepherds and other workmen went in pairs. Ihere was
no safety anywhere outside the cleared lands round the
larger towns. Reviewing the whole situation from oui
present standpoint, it is difficult to say what other measures
could have been adopted than those tried by the govern-
ment The authorities were apparently incapable ot
controlling the bushrangers, nor could they prevent convicts
from running away, and these outlaws appear to have
always considered the blacks as fair game Mr. Robertson
tells us that a convict known as “ Carrots boasted shortly
before his death that, “ having killed a native in his
attempt to carry off the black’s wife, he cut off the dead
man’s head and obliged the woman to go with him carrying
it suspended round her neck.”* Is it any wonder
that even such “ passive and inoffensive creatures as
the Van Diemen’s Land blacks are said to have been,
should have been aroused to fury by such methods.
But although the Government had no control over the
convicts in the bush, and such outrages as this were not
known of until long after they had occurred, it can scarcely
be said that even Governor Arthur, in spite of his earnest
desire to protect the blacks, was altogether blameless. The
whole policy of the Government in relation to the blacks
was weak and vacillating. Governor Arthur promised a
native, known as Teague, a boat on condition that he
should assist in the capture of some bushiangers. The
black performed his share of the work, but he never got his
boat, and is said to have fretted himself to death in
consequence. The Sydney black, Musquito, was forced
* Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, 1838.


into the bush ” by the failure of the Government to
rihkhTTr^b 0 Persecution due to the manner
Tnvp h hh f ha r d b o en em P lo y ed m the service of that
Government In September, 1826, two blacks were
m IX I Hobart 1 ° wn “ t 0 impress the others.” Nothing
could be more absurd than this, and it was far more
barbarous a method of reprisal than the shooting of a “poor
cowering black.” But the Government was not even in-
sistent in its savagery. At the trial of Eumarrah Mr
Robertson pleaded that the black was justified in resisting
the invaders of his country in any and every way : and on
his undertaking to remove Eumarrah to Flinders Island
where he had collected about thirty-eight blacks under the
charge of missionaries, the plea was accepted and the
prisoner was handed over to him. By this time, however
the war had become so vindictive that even the authorities
m London recognised that the blacks must be captured or
nmhilated, and consequently permission was granted to
Governor Arthur to put in practice the most extraordinary
project perhaps ever attempted.
In April, 1828, a proclamation was issued which, after
describing the state of tension which existed between whites
and blacks, exhorted all well-disposed persons to assist the
Government in attempting to establish peace and order The
proclamation went on to explain that a cordon was to be
dravn round the disturbed area and that this was
to be gradually contracted until the natives were either
captured or driven across the narrow isthmus which
connects Tasmans peninsula with the main portion of the
island. But I do, nevertheless, hereby strictly order
enjoin, and command, that the actual use of arms be in
no case resorted to, by firing against any of the natives, or
otherwise, if they can by other measures be captured.”
Ihe force employed in this gigantic scheme is said to
have been about two thousand two hundred men, of whom
five hundred and fifty were soldiers belonging to the 6-ud
the 57th, and the 17th regiments. The whole force was
divided into parties of about ten each, and one of these was
aP FTf/r ICad f • ° n ° Ctober 7th, a chain of posts was
es a bbshed from St. Patrick’s Head along the rivers St. Paul
South Esk, Macquarie, and Meander, under the command


of Major Douglas, of the 63rd regiment. A similar chain of
posts was formed from the Derwent River along the River
Dee to the Lakes, under Captain Wentworth, of the 63rd
regiment. A third party, under Captain Donaldson, of the
57 th regiment, was stationed in the rear to capture any
blacks who might escape through the front line. Captain
Moriarty, R.N., in charge of a party, was appointed to scour
between the lines and to drive the natives forward or
capture them. Mr. Gilbert Robertson and other friends of
the blacks acted with this group of parties with the object
of persuading such natives as they might meet to surrender
quietly. For about three weeks the posts were advanced
slowly, and frequent reports were circulated that the
beaters had seen parties of blacks and that they were
going in the desired direction. On the 25th Mr. Walpole
reported that he had come on a camp of blacks and saw
them lighting their fires and cooking as if nothing unusual
was going on. He watched all night, and just before day-
break crept up slowly and found five blacks asleep. He
seized one and held him after a desperate struggle, during
which the black bit him severely on the arm. A boy of
about fifteen was captured by another settler who was with
Mr. Walpole, and these two were handed over to the
authorities and conveyed to the nearest police station to
be kept until the remainder were captured. On the 26th
Lieutenant Ovens saw a black with a firestick apparently
trying to sneak through the lines. He ran forward and
the black retreated into the bush. Several other blacks
were turned back from other points in the line.
These also carried firesticks. On the 27 th the cordon had
been drawn so close that the escape of the blacks within
the line was considered impossible, but as no reports had
been made for some time of any blacks having been seen,
some discontent was manifested by the hunters. On the
31st an order was issued from the camp at Sorrell rivulet to
close in, and hopes were expressed that no blacks would be
permitted to escape in the final rush. The following day
the lines closed in, and no blacks escaped. There was
none there to escape. They had slipped through the lines
as soon as they became aware that they were being hunted,
and the man and boy caught by Mr. Walpole’s party were


the only blacks captured. A proclamation was published
next day, in which the Governor thanked the settlers for
their services, and regretted that their efforts had not been
more successful. In a despatch sent to the Colonial
Secretary, Governor Arthur said, “ I regret to report that
the measures which I had the honour to lay before you
terminated without the capture of either of the native
tribes,”* and that was all that was said about it officially.
It has been estimated that the scheme cost the colony some
but no particulars were published, and therefore
all estimates of cost are mere guesses.
Prom a humanitarian point of view it is to be regretted
that it did not succeed, but the fact that it could be
attempted proves how little was known of the blacks
by the authorities. The fact that the blacks, who were
said to be endeavouring to escape through the lines,
held firesticks in their hands proves that they were then
unaware of the intention of the whites, and they were
probably outside the lines very shortly after it had been
thus intimated to them that they were being hunted. But
it is doubtful whether the race could have been preserved
if they had been removed in large numbers from Van
Diemen’s Land. Mr. Gilbert Robertson and his successor,
Mr. G. A. Robinson, succeeded in removing about 130
blacks to Flinders Island, where, although they were under
the care of missionaries, they gradually died off. It was
not recognised in those days that compelling the blacks to
wear clothes induces skin diseases which soon prove fatal.
The only way to preserve the Australian blacks is to leave
them alone, and the knowledge of this fact came too late to
save the Tasmanians.
* Despatch dated June 27th, 1835.


CHAPTER III.
Pierce the Cannibal ; A Terrible Journey ; A Shocking Confession ;
Escapes from “ the Western Hell ”; The Ruffian Jefferies;
Brady the Bushranger ; Escapes from Macquarie Harbour;
Sticks up the Town of Sorell; The Governor’s Proclamation ;
Brady Laughs at it; The Fight with Colonel Balfour ; Betrayed by
a Comrade ; Captured by John Batman ; Sympathy at his Trial;
End of the Epoch.
In a despatch to the Colonial Secretary in 1822, Lieutenant
Governor Arthur said that bushranging had been “ totally
suppressed in Van Diemen’s Land during the past three
years,” or since the breaking up of Howe’s gang. But
the happy conditions suggested by this report were not
destined to last. There was still a number of
runaways or bolters in the bush, but bushranging had
by this time come to mean the commission of more
serious crimes than petty larceny, and it was in this sense
that the Governor made use of the term. We have, how-
ever, not yet arrived at the time when others, besides
highwaymen, can be excluded. T. he next illustration is,
perhaps, the most terrible of all the events connected with
bushranging, although it concerns only the bushrangers
themselves. On September 20th, 1822, Alexander Pierce,
Bob Greenhill, Mathew Travers, dhomas Bodenham, Bill
Cornelius or Kenelly, James_ Brown, John Mathers, and
Alexander Dalton made their escape from the recently-
founded penal station at Macquarie Harbour. According
to Pierce’s confession it appears that they “made it up for
to take a boat” and proceed to Hobart Town. Greenhill
being at work at the mines, “we had to call for him, he
being a good navigator.” Greenhill smashed up the miners
D


chests with an axe, and took all their provisions. “We
then put out all the fires with buckets of water, so that the
miners could not signal our escape; but, when we were a
quarter of a mile out we saw fires all along the beach, so
we could not have put them all out. We thought a boat
would be despatched after us, so we went a little further
and then landed. We knew it was no use trying to go by
water, so we broke up the boat. We then proceeded to
the side of the mountain right opposite the settlement. We
were afraid that Dr. Spence or the Commandant would see
us with the spy glass, the settlement being so plain to us.
So we agreed to lie down until the sun went round. When
the sun was behind the hill we went to the top, kindled a
fire, and camped all night. Next morning we started again,
and walked all day. Little Brown, who came back, and
died in the hospital, was the worst walker of all. He was
always behind, and kept cooeying. So we said we would
leave him behind if he did not keep up. We kept off
Gordon River for fear the soldiers might be after
us. We travelled from daylight till dark night over very
rough country for eight days. We were very weak for want
of provisions. Our tinder got wet and we were very cold
and hungry. Bill Cornelius said ‘ I’m so hungry I could
eat a piece of a man.’ The next morning there were four
of us for a feast. Bob Greenhill said he had ‘ seen the like
done before and it eat much like pork.’ Mathers spoke
out and said it would be murder ; and perhaps then we
could not eat it. * I’ll warrant you,’ said Greenhill, ‘ I’ll
eat the first bit ; but, you must all lend a hand, so that we’ll
all be equal in the crime.’ We consulted about who
should fall, and Greenhill said, ‘ Dalton, he volunteered to
be a flogger. We will kill him.’ We made a bit of a
breakwind with boughs, and about three in the morning
Dalton was asleep. Then Greenhill struck him on the
head with an axe and he never spoke after. Greenhill
called Travers, and he cut Dalton’s throat to bleed him.
Then we dragged him away a bit and cut him up. Travers
and Greenhill put his heart and liver on the fire and ate
them before they were right warm. The others refused to
eat any that night, but the next morning it was cut up and
divided and we all got our share. We started a little after


sunrise. One man was appointed each day to walk ahead
and make a road. He carried nothing but a tomahawk.
The others carried the things. This morning Cornelius and
Brown said they would go ahead together and carry the
pots. We had not gone far when the leaders were missing.
We went back to look for them, but could see no signs of
them. We said, ‘ They will go back and hang us all,’ but
we thought they would not find the way, so we went on.
We walked for four days through bad country, till we
came to a big river. We thought it was the Gordon.
We stopped a day and two nights looking for a place
to cross. We felled trees, but the stream was too
strong and carried them away. Travers and Bodenham
couldn’t swim, but at last we got over and cut a pole thirty
or forty feet long and reached it across, where there was a
rock jutting out into the river, and pulled them across. We
got up the hill with great difficulty, it was so steep. The
ground was very barren on the other side, and covered with
scrub. We were very weak and hungry. A consultation
was held as to who should be the next victim. Bodenham
did not know anything about it, and it was resolved to kill
him. Me and Mathers went to gather wood, Travers saying,
‘ You’ll hear it directly.’ About two minutes after Mathers
said, ‘ He’s done; Greenhill hit him with the axe and
Travers cut his throat.’ Greenhill took Bodenham’s shoes
and put them on, for his own were very bad. We ate only
the heart and liver that night. Next day we camped and
dried the meat. We travelled on for three days, and saw
many emus and kangaroos, but could not catch them.
Mathers and me went away together, and Mathers said,
‘ Let us go on by ourselves. You see what kind of a cove
Greenhill is. He’d kill his own father before he’d fast for a
day.’ We travelled on for two days more. We boiled a
piece of the meat, and it made Mathers so sick that he
began to vomit. Greenhill started up and hit him on the
forehead with the axe. Although he was cut, he was still
stronger than Greenhill. He called out, ‘ Pierce, will you
see me murdered ? ’ and rushed at Greenhill. He took the
axe from him and threw it to me. We walked on till night,
and then Travers and Greenhill collared Mathers and got
him down. They gave him half an hour to pray. When


the half-hour was up Mathers handed the prayer-book to me
and Greenhill killed him. When crossing the second tier of
mountains Travers got his foot stung by an insect and it
swelled up. On the other side we got to a big river and camped
for two nights. Me and Greenhill swam across and cut a
long wattle, and pulled Travers over as he could not swim.
Here the country got better and we travelled well for two
days. Then Travers’ foot got black, and he said he couldn’t
go any further. He asked us to leave him to die in peace.
When we were a little way away, Greenhill said : ‘ Pierce,
it’s no use for to be detained any longer ; let’s serve him
like the rest.’ I replied, ‘ I’ll have no hand in it.’ When
we went back Travers was lying on his back asleep. It was
about two o’clock in the day. Greenhill lifted the axe and
hit him on the head, and then cut his throat. We crossed
the third tier of mountains and got into fine country, the
grass being very long. Greenhill began to fret, and said he
would never reach a post. I watched Greenhill for two
nights and thought that he eyed me more than usual. He
always carried the axe and kept it under his head when
lying down. At length, just before day-break, Greenhill
dozed off to sleep, and I snatched the axe and killed him
with a blow. I took a thigh and one arm and travelled on
four more days until the last was eaten. I then walked for
two days with nothing to eat. I took off my belt meaning
to hang myself, but took another turn and travelled on till I
came to a fire with some pieces of kangaroo and opossum
lying beside it. I ate as much as I could and carried the
rest away. Some days later I came to a marsh. I saw a
duck with ten young ones, I jumped into the water and
the duck flew off, while the little ones dived. Two of them
came up close to my legs and I caught one in each hand.
Next day I saw a large mountain, and thought it was Table
Mountain. Then I came to a big river and travelled
down it for two days. I came on a flock of sheep
belonging to Tom Triffet, at the falls, and caught a
lamb. While I was eating it the shepherd came up and
said he would tell. I threatened to shoot him. Then he
got friendly and took me to the hut, and fed me for three
days. Then he told me that the master was coming up and I’d
have to go. I went to another hut and stayed three weeks.


Then I fell in with Davis and Cheetham and they said I
could join them. They had 126 newly-marked sheep and
said they were going to select some more. I shepherded
the mob while they were away. They continued robbing
the stations until the soldiers came. The soldiers captured
the gang except Bill Davis, who snatched up his gun and
ran away, Corporal Kelly followed and called on him to
stop. As he kept on Kelly fired and missed, when Davis
turned round and said, ‘ I’ve got you now.’ Kelly cried
out ‘ Murder,’ and the other soldiers ran forward and fired.
Davis was wounded in the arm and gave in.”
The confession may here be very much abridged, as the
account he gives of his acts is very rambling. About 250
sheep, a gold watch, two silver watches, and a number of
other articles were found at the camp. Several of the gang
were hung and the others sentenced to long terms of penal
servitude. Pierce denied having taken any active share in
the robberies, and as he was merely found in charge of the
stolen, or as he euphoniously calls them the selected,
sheep, he was sent back to Macquarie Harbour to be dealt
with as a bolter. On November 16th, 18235 Pieice again
absconded from Macquarie Harbour in company with
Thomas Cox. On the 21st, as the schooner Waterloo was
sailing down the harbour, a man was observed standing on
the shore and signalling with smoke from a fire. These
signals had also been observed from the settlement, and a
boat was despatched from there. Ihe boat sent by Mr.
Lucas from the schooner reached the place at the same
time that the boat from the settlement arrived. On land-
ing it was found that Alexander Pierce had made the
fire, and he was immediately arrested by Lieutenant Cuthert-
son. Pierce said that he had killed Cox and eaten part of
the body. He volunteered to show where the remainder
was. On going to the place it was found that all the fleshy
parts had been cut away, leaving the bones and viscera. It
is impossible that Pierce could have committed this murder
through want of food. He had only been away from the
settlement for a few days, and some flour, a piece of pork,
some bread, and a few fish, which Pierce and Cox had
stolen from a party of hunters, were found at the camp.
Before his trial Pierce said that he had been so horror-struck


at the crime he had committed that, when he signalled, he
did not know what he was about. After his conviction,
however, he said that man’s flesh was delicious ; far better
than fish or pork ; and his craving for it had led him to
induce Cox to abscond so that he might kill and eat him.
He was wearing the clothes of the murdered man when he
was captured. Although he made no secret of his canni-
balism after his conviction, but boasted about it, he is
believed to have very much toned down his share in the
murders perpetrated during that terrible journey across the
Western Tiers. Possibly Greenhill may have been the
moving spirit in these atrocities, but we have the fact that
Pierce was the sole survivor, and he gives but a very brief
account of the last struggle between himself and Greenhill.
We can conceive something of it. Pierce was the larger and
stronger man, but Greenhill was active though small, and
moreover he carried the axe. The two men probably
pretended to be actuated by friendly feelings towards each
other; each one endeavouring to put' the other off his
guard ; but each knew that the other was only watching
for an opportunity to slay him. For two days they walked
side by side at a safe distance apart; each afraid to let
the other get behind him, or near enough to spring
upon him; and each was also afraid to allow the other to
get out of sight because of the certainty that he would
merely dog him through the scrub until an opportunity to
strike occurred. For two nights they sat facing each other,
a short distance apart, each afraid to go to sleep or to allow
the other to go out of sight. If one rose up the other
started to his feet immediately. Every slight movement of
one caused the other to be on the alert. The tension must
have been fearful. At length, when the second night was
drawing to a close, Greenhill could bear up no longer. He
dozed, and Pierce sprang on him at once. That is some-
thing like the tradition handed down among the “old
hands,” who knew nothing of Pierce’s confession, but who
had heard the tale from companions of the cannibal himself.
There was a time when it was frequently told round the
camp fire in rough, coarse language, plentifully intermingled
with profanity, but the old hands have died out and it is
heard no longer. Pierce, the cannibal, has been almost


forgotten, and yet the story has its moral. It affords us an
example of the terrible depths of degradation to which men
can be reduced by brutal treatment, and it is not good that
the story of Alexander Pierce should be forgotten as long as
any remains of the old prison discipline which produced
such men continues to exist, either in Australia or in any
other civilised country.
The settlement at Macquarie Harbour, “the Western
Hell,” as the convicts called it, was opened as a penal
station on January the 3rd, 1822, and from that time until
its removal to Port Arthur in May, 1827, one hundred and
twelve prisoners ran away. Of these, seventy-four are
reported to have “ perished in the woods.” The remains of
a number of men have been found at various times ; but, as
a rule, too late for identification, and therefore the official
records do not assert positively that these men did perish,
but only that, as nothing had been seen or heard of them for
long periods, and remains supposed to be theirs had been
found, it was reasonable to assume that they had perished.
Two returned, as related by Pierce, namely Bill Cornelius
or Kenelly and James Brown. On both these men portions
of the murdered man Dalton were found, and Cornelius was
punished as a bolter. Brown, however, was too ill, and was
admitted to the hospital, where he died. Eight of the
hundred and twelve runaways from Macquarie Harbour are
reported to have reached Port Dalrymple or some other
settlement, but in each case the official report bears the
significant note, “ wants confirmation.” Five men were
eaten as related. Three were picked up in a wretched
condition on the beach by the steamer Waterloo , three
others of the same gang being included among those who
perished. Two were shot; two found dead. This leaves
sixteen, and these are known to have reached settled
districts. Of these, Pierce was one. Every precaution was
taken at Macquarie Harbour to prevent bolting. A line of
posts was established across the neck of land between
Pirates’ Bay and Storm Bay, and fierce dogs were chained
at these places to give notice when any one passed or
approached. This use of dogs gave rise to a report in
England that bloodhounds were used in Van Diemen’s
Land to track runaway convicts or bushrangers. This,


however, was shown not to be true. The dogs were used
as watch dogs and not as hunting or tracking dogs.*
Three other men who ran away from Macquarie Harbour
were Jefferies, Hopkins, and Russell. Like Pierce and his
mates they started to cross the Western Tiers. They lived
fairly well for several days, Jelferies having a gun and
ammunition which he had stolen, it is supposed, from a
soldier, but at length their provisions failed and they could
find no game. They therefore agreed to toss up to decide
who should die to save the others. Russell lost and was
immediately shot by Jefferies. The two men lived on the
flesh for five days, when they came to a sheep station. They
immediately threw away about five pounds weight of
Russell’s flesh and killed two sheep. The shepherd ran
forward at the sound of the shots, when Jefferies told him
that if he interfered he would “ soon be settled.” They only
wanted “a good feed.” Jefferies and Hopkins appear to
have adopted bushranging as a profession. Of Hopkins we
hear little, but Jefferies established a character for brutality
which has been rivalled by few and surpassed by none.
When he bailed up Mr. Tibbs’s house he ordered Mr. and
Mrs. Tibbs and their stockman to go into the bushes with
him. The stockman refused and was immediately shot.
The other two then went across the cleared paddock
towards the timbered country, Mrs. Tibbs carrying her
baby and Jefferies walking behind. When near the
edge of the timber Jefferies ordered Mrs. Tibbs to walk
faster. The poor woman was weeping bitterly. She
sobbed out that she was walking as fast as she could
with the baby in her arms. Jefferies immediately snatched
the baby from her and dashed its brains out against a
sapling. Then he asked her “ Can you go faster now ? ”
Mr. Tibbs turned round and rushed at the bushranger, who
shot him, and then walked away, leaving Mrs. Tibbs with her
dead and dying. At Georgetown Jefferies stuck up and
robbed Mr. Baker and then compelled him to carry his
knapsack. They had not, however, walked far along the
road when Jefferies, who was behind, shot Mr. Baker
without warning and for no apparent cause. Jefferies was
* Report of the Select Committee of the House of Commons, 1838.


captured by John Batman, a native of Parramatta, New
South Wales, and afterwards one of the founders of the
city of Melbourne, Victoria. Batman had taken several
Australian aborigines to Van Diemen’s Land and was
engaged by the Government to track and capture bush-
rangers. He caught Hopkins and several others. A man
named Broughton, who had been captured a short time
before, was convicted of murder and cannibalism shortly
before Jefferies and Hopkins were brought to trial.
It is quite a relief to turn from these monsters in human
form to Mathew Brady, the central figure among the bush-
rangers of this epoch. Brady was a gentleman convict:
that is, he was an educated man. He was transported to
“ Botany Bay ” for forgery, the capital sentence having been
commuted. In Sydney he soon “got into trouble” for
insubordination and was retransported to Van Diemen’s
Land. He was one of a gang of fourteen who effected
their escape from Macquarie Harbour. His companions
in this enterprise were James Bryant, John Burns, James
Crawford, James McCabe, Patrick Connolly, John Griffiths,
George Lacey, Charles Rider, Jeremiah Ryan, John
Thompson, Isaac Walker, and John Downes. Ihey
stole a whale boat on June 7th, 1824, and pulled round
the coast until they came to a favourable place for
landing, from whence they walked to the settled districts.
Here they were joined by James Tierney, and for some
two years they defied the authorities. In company with
the- “ notorious Dunne,” Brady stuck up Mr. Robert
Bethune’s house near Hobart Town when the males of
the family were away. In the evening Mr. Walter Bethune
and Captain Bannister returned from the city on horseback,
and Brady went out to meet them. He told the two
gentlemen that they were prisoners and that resistance was
useless. They were taken by surprise, and unarmed, and
surrendered at once. Brady called one of his men to
“ take the gentlemen’s horses to the stables and see that
they were cared for,” and then conducted the gentlemen
into the parlour as if he were the host and they merely
visitors. The ladies of the family and the servants, except
the cook, were already gathered there, and Brady ordered
dinner and invited those present to take their seats at the


table. He himself sat down, while his companions had
food taken to them at the stations where he had placed
them on guard. When the meal was over Brady made a
collection of watches, rings, money, and other valuables,
and then, after profusely thanking Mr. Bethune for his
hospitable treatment and the kind reception he had given
them, the whole gang mounted and rode away. On
the following evening he rode into the little town
of Sorell. The soldiers stationed there had been out
kangarooing, and were cleaning their muskets. Taken
completely by surprise, they were easily overpowered, and
were locked up in the gaol, the prisoners being released.
Mr. Long, the gaoler, contrived to make his escape, and
ran to the residence of Dr. Garrett. Here he found
Lieutenant Green, who was in command of the military
stationed at the town. The doctor and the lieutenant
walked together to the gaol, and the doctor was seized by
Brady’s orders and placed in a cell. Green refused to
surrender, and was shot in the arm by one of the bush-
rangers and overcome. The bushrangers made a good
haul from the houses in the town, and then left quietly.
The only personal injury inflicted was the wound received
by Lieutenant Green, who was forced to have his arm
amputated.
On August 27th, 1824, Governor Arthur issued a
proclamation offering rewards for the capture of Brady,
McCabe, Dunne, Murphy, and other bushrangers, and
calling upon all Crown servants and respectable citizens
to aid the soldiers in their capture.
By way of reply, Brady and his gang paid a visit to Mr.
Young’s house at Lake River. It was late at night, but the
bushrangers soon roused the inmates up. After having
secured the men, Brady enquired whether there were any
ladies inside, and on being told that there were he issued
an order to them to get up and dress at once, and to go
into any room they pleased, pledging his word that they
should not be interfered with. While this was being done
Brady sat on the verandah chatting with Mr. Young.
Among other things he spoke of the Governor’s proclama-
tion, and asked whether Mr. Young had seen it. He
laughed heartily at the idea of the soldiers capturing him.


While the chief was thus employed the other members of
the gang searched every room of the house, and collected
everything they thought worth taking. The ladies had all
gone into one room, and when the rest of the house had
been searched they were requested to leave that room and
go into another.
One day Brady walked alone into a house close to the
town and “ made a sw T ag ” of all that was valuable. He
then called two of the convict servants and ordered them to
take up the bundles and carry them for him into the bush.
He was obeyed because it was believed that his gang was
not far off, and the owner of the property saw it carried
away without making an effort to preserve it. On another
occasion Brady ordered an assigned servant to leave his
master’s house and join the band. The man refused.
Brady walked to the sideboard, filled a glass with rum, and
asked the man whether he could drink that ? The man
said he never took strong liquor. “Well, you will this
time,” exclaimed Brady, pointing his pistol at the servant’s
head. “Now choose.” The man took the glass and
swallowed the rum. Brady laughed heartily as he staggered
away. However, the next morning, the unfortunate man
was found lying in the bush some distance from the house.
His dog was lying beside him licking his face. He was
still drunk. His employer, who found him, tried to rouse
him up, and after he had shaken and called for some
minutes the man opened his eyes, called out “Water, for
God’s sake, water ! ” and rolled over dead. When Brady
was informed some time after of the man’s death, he said he
was very sorry. He had made him drink the rum as a joke
and without any thought or desire to injure him.
Brady stuck up the Duke of York Inn, and finding
Captain Smith there, knocked him down, having mistaken
him for Colonel Balfour. On discovering his mistake the
bushranger apologised. He then threatened to shoot
Captain White, but on Captain Smith saying that White had
a wife and family Brady told the two officers to go away.
He “ hated soldiers ” and did not know what he might do
if they stayed.
Colonel Balfour, of the 49th regiment, with a strong
party of soldiers, had been beating the bush for some time


in hopes of capturing Brady and his gang. A report spread
abroad that the gang intended to break open the Laun-
ceston gaol and torture and shoot Mr. Jefferies. The threat
was treated with derision, but about xo a.m. a man came
into the town and said that the bushrangers had taken
possession of Mr. Dry’s place, just outside the town.
Colonel Balfour, with ten soldiers and some volunteers,
started out and a fierce fight took place. Ultimately the
bushrangers were driven off, but not before they had secured
Mr. Dry’s horses. The soldiers followed, and the bush-
rangers fired from behind the trees. Suddenly a report
spread that the attack on Dry’s place was a ruse to
draw the soldiers from the town, and that a party of bush-
rangers under Bird and Dunne had gone to attack the gaol.
Colonel Balfour sent half his force back to protect the
town. The report was found to be partly true. The bush-
rangers had entered the town and had robbed Mr. Wedge’s
house, but had not gone to the gaol. At Dr. Priest’s house
some shots were exchanged, and the doctor was wounded
in the knee, but the soldiers coming up at the time the
bushrangers made off.
The following day the gang made an attack on the
farms of the Messrs. Walker. They burned the wheat-
stacks and barns belonging to Mr. Abraham Walker and
also those of Mr. Commissary Walker. They had Mr.
Dry’s two carriage horses, which they had stolen the day
before. Brady was wearing Colonel Balfour’s cap, which
had fallen off in the fight at Launceston. On the next day
they burned down the house of Mr. Massey at South
Esk, having sent him a letter a day or two before informing
him of their intention.
Two of the gang called on Thomas Renton, and shouted
for him to come out. On his doing so, they charged him
with having attempted to betray them. Renton denied the
charge. A wrangle took place, during which one of the
bushrangers shot Renton dead. It is highly improbable
that Brady was aware of this outrage. He boasted loudly
on every available occasion that he never killed a man
intentionally, and he is known to have quarrelled with mem-
bers of his gang who were too ready with their firearms.
Thus he drove McCabe out of the gang on account of his


brutality, and McCabe was captured and hung shortly
afterwards.
The gang held almost complete control over the roads,
and resistance was very rarely offered when they ordered a
man to “bail up.”* One of the customs established by the
gang was to order their witnesses to remain where they were
for half an hour, and the order was rarely disobeyed. Any
person who declined to promise to remain was simply tied
to a tree and left for any chance passer-by to unloose. In
by-roads, or in those cases where the prisoners were marched
some distance off the high road into the bush before being
plundered, being tied up was a very serious matter. Cases
are known to have occurred in which men have remained
bound to a tree until they have died of starvation. From
this time forward tying up the victims was a common
practice with bushrangers, though some like Brady accepted
the promise of the victims to remain where they were left
for a certain time to allow the bushrangers time to get away.
At length about the middle of 1825 a convict named
Cowan or Cohen was permitted to escape from an iron gang
with broken fetters on his legs. He was found by some of
the gang and was taken to a friendly blacksmith who
knocked his irons off for him. He joined the gang and more
than once led them into conflicts with the soldiers out of
which only the skill and bravery of Brady delivered them.
Cowan was no doubt a clever man in his way; he completely
hoodwinked Brady and his mates; he fought bravely in their
skirmishes with the troops and was always eager in looting
houses or other places attacked. He professed to rob “on
principle.” He is said to have murdered the bushrangers
Murphy and Williams while they slept, but there is no proof
of this. He betrayed the camp to Lieutenant Williams of
* The first supply of horned cattle for Australia was obtained from
Capetown, South Africa, big-boned, slab-sided animals, with enormous
horns. These animals are much more active than the fine-boned, heavy-
bodied, short-horned, or other line breeds, but they can never be properly
tamed. It is always unsafe to milk one of these cows unless her head is
fastened in "a bail," and her leg tied. When driving the cows into the
bail it was the custom to order them to “bail up. ’ It was also usual for
bullock drivers when yoking their teams to call out ‘' bail up to the
bullocks, although no bail was used for this purpose. The words were in
constant use all over Australia, and were adopted by the early bushrangers
in the sense of “ stand.”


the 40th regiment, who was out with a party of soldiers in
search of bushrangers. A terrific fight took place in which
several were killed on each side; some of the bushrangers
were captured while others escaped, but the gang was broken
up. Cowan is said to have received a free pardon, several
hundreds of pounds reward, and a free passage home for his
services.*
Brady made his escape in the bush and was followed by
Batman and his black trackers. The bushranger had been
wounded in the fight and could not travel fast. Batman
came up to him in the mountains and called on him to
surrender. “ Are you an officer ? ” asked Brady, coolly
cocking his gun. “ I’m not a soldier,” replied Batman,
“I’m John Batman. If you raise that gun I’ll shoot.
There’s no chance for you.” “You’re right,” replied Brady,
“my time’s come. You’re a brave man and I yield ; but,
I’d never give in to a soldier.” Brady was taken to the
nearest lock-up, where, as it happened, Jefferies, the
cannibal, had been lodged some days before, and much to
Brady’s disgust the two men were conveyed to Hobart Town
in the same cart. Brady, however, refused to sit on the same
side of the cart as Jefferies, and kept as far from him as
possible during the journey. 1
The trial of Mathew Brady excited great interest. He
and his gang had kept the country in a ferment for twenty-
two months. Many of his companions had been shot or
captured, but the leader had escaped. One of his mates,
James Crawford, who had escaped with him from Macquarie
Harbour, but who had been shot by the soldiers some time
before the break up of the gang, was said to have been a
lieutenant in the army.J Numerous stories were told to
illustrate his reckless bravery, his skill in strategy, or some
other trait of his character. On the day of his trial a
number of ladies were in the court, and when the verdict of
guilty was returned, and the judge put on the black cap,
they showed their sympathy by weeping so loudly that the
judge had to pause until order was restored, and sentence
* History of Van Diemen’s Land in the Launceston Advertiser , 1840.
+ Hobart Town Gazette, 1826.
J Launceston Advertiser, 1840.


of death was pronounced amid signs of sorrow by all
present.*
At the same sessions Jefferies, Hopkins, Bryant, Tilly,
McKenny, Brown, Gregory, Hodgetts, and Perry were
sentenced to death for bushranging, cattle, horse, and sheep
stealing, and for murder. Some of these had been “in the
bush ” with Brady. The last of the batch was hung on
April 29th, 1826, the prisoners being hung two or three at
a time at intervals of a few days.
The remnant of the gang under the command of Dunne
continued for a time to commit depredations. In one of
their journeys they saw a tribe of blacks camped on the
other side of the river. Dunne swam across and attacked
them. He fought them for some time driving them
back until he seized one of the women, when he turned
back forcing her to accompany him across the river.
He had this black girl with him when an attack was
made on Mr. Thomson’s house, but she escaped. On
the following day two men were quietly driving in a
cart along the road when the blacks attacked and speared
them, killing one and wounding the other. The blacks
went on and burned the hut of Mr. Nicholas. They
attacked Mr. Thomson’s place, and speared a man named
Scott. The woman who had been stolen by Dunne was
present urging the blacks on when Scott was killed. The
troops were sent out to drive the blacks back, and while so
engaged came across the bushrangers and shot Dunne.
One or two were captured and hung as related.
The Hobart Town Gazette , of the 29th of April, 1826,
said that for some months the roads had been safe,
and with the executions to take place that day, the colony
might be congratulated on having at length stamped out the
crime of bushranging. As a fact, it was only the close of
the first epoch; the first act in the great bushranging
tragedy which was to close so sensationally more than fifty
years later.
* Hobart Town Gazette.


CHAPTER IV.
Bushranging in New South Wales ; Manufacturing Bushrangers ;
Employing Bushrangers ; The First Bank Robbery in Australia ;
Major Mudie and his Assigned Servants; Terrible Hollow ;
Murder of Dr. Wardell; The Story of Jack the Rammer; Hall
Mayne and Others.
Bushranging of the more serious character with which
we are concerned, appears to have begun in New South
Wales in about 1822. In that year thirty-four bushrangers
were hung in Sydney. The crimes for which these men
were executed were generally of a petty description.
Robberies of articles from the farms had become so
prevalent that it was deemed expedient to adopt severe
measures, but beyond removing so many evil-doers and
preventing them from continuing their depredations, this
severity of the judicial authorities does not appear to have
had much effect. Bushranging not only continued, but the
bushrangers became bolder and operated over a wider area.
On March 16th, 1826, a desperate fight took place between
a party of mounted troopers and seven bushrangers near
Bathurst. The Blue Mountains had only been crossed
thirteen years before, and the settlement was a very small
one. The leader of the gang, Morris Connell, was shot
dead by Corporal Brown, and the other bushrangers ran
away into the bush.
The Sydney Monitor of September 22nd reports that a
shepherd on Mr. H. Macarthur’s run at Argyle ran away
into the bush. He was captured, and taken to Goulburn
to be tried for absconding. He complained that he had
not received his proper allowance of rations, and had gone
to seek for food. He was of course found guilty, and,
when sentenced to be flogged, he sulkily said, “ It’s in the
power of the likes of me to have revenge when lambing


time comes round.” For this threat he was sent to
Liverpool for trial. He was convicted, and as a warning to
other shepherds he was sentenced to receive five hundred
lashes and to be transported to a penal settlement for life.
The Monitor denounced this sentence as being “ unduly
harsh,” and spoke of the heavy sentences given whenever
the Rev. Samuel Marsden, Principal Chaplain of New
South Wales, took his seat on the Bench. The chaplains
were at that time all ex officio magistrates, and the Rev.
Samuel Marsden was said to be very active in the discharge
of this portion of his duties. It is of Mr. Marsden that Mr.
J. T. Bigge says “ His sentences are not only more severe
than those of other magistrates, but the general opinion
of the colony is that his character, as displayed in the
administrations of the penal law of New South Wales, is
stamped with severity.”* Judging from the sentence under
notice, it does not appear that the reverend gentleman
had become any more merciful since Commissioner Bigge
compiled his report some years before. The Monitor
charged him with “ helping to manufacture bushrangers.”
In this connection I may mention that the opinion
expressed by the “ old hands ” was that the clerical
magistrates were generally far more cruel and brutal than
the lay magistrates, and this opinion was crystallised into a
cant phrase which was current among the old hands many
years later. It was “ The Lord have mercy on you, for his
reverence will have none.” This phrase was used on all
occasions, whether it was appropriate or not to the subject
under discussion or the circumstances of the time.
In the Windsor Court on February 10th, 1827, Mr.
McCarthy was fined 10s., including costs, for having
employed a returned bushranger instead of handing him
over to the police for punishment. About the same time a
bushranger was charged in Sydney with having bailed up a
settler’s house and compelled him to hand over some money
and a bottle of wine. Taking the wine was an aggravation
of the offence which was more than the worthy magistrate
could stand. “ What right,” he demanded of the delinquent,
“ have you to drink wine ? Do you not know, you rascal,
E
* Commission of Enquiry into the state of New South Wales, 1822.


that when you were convicted you forfeited all rights ? ”
“ Yes, your honour,” replied the culprit, “ But, I didn’t
forfeit my appetite.”
The robbery of the Bank of Australia does not properly,
perhaps, come under the head of bushranging, but as the
later bushrangers made bank robbery a feature of their
depredations the record would not be complete if this, the
first and in some respects the most remarkable of the bank
robberies which have taken place in Australia, was
omitted. The Bank of Australia was established in
1826 and was spoken of as the “new bank” to distin-
guish it from the older Bank of New South Wales. It
was also sometimes called “ the squatters’ bank.” Its
president was Mr. John Macarthur, the first of the
squatters. It was situated in George Street, Sydney.
The strong room was constructed under ground,
and had walls nine feet thick. Near the foundation of the
bank was a large drain or shore, one of the openings of
which was on an unoccupied plot of ground on the opposite
side of the street to that in which the bank stood. The
other end of the drain terminated on the shore of the
harbour. Into this drain the thieves must have entered,
and judging from the amount of work done and the quantity
of the remains of provisions found afterwards they must
have been at work for a week or more. As they were too
deep underground for the strokes of their picks or hammers
to be heard, they may have worked night and day. How-
ever that may be, they took the bricks out of the side of the
drain facing the bank and then dug a tunnel until they
reached the foundations of the bank. How they disposed
of the earth dug out is not known, but it was surmised that
they carried it away in bags. With great labour they
dislodged a stone at the corner of the foundations, and then
gradually enlarged the hole until there was sufficient room
for a man to get through. Having effected an entrance in this
way into the strong room, they found there forty boxes each
containing £ 100 worth of British silver coins; a smaller box
containing two thousand sovereigns; a box containing
one thousand dollars, and another containing five hundred
dollars. But the robbers took only the two boxes con-
taining dollars and seven of the forty boxes containing


British silver; leaving thirty-three boxes of silver and the
box of sovereigns. They took also some bundles of bank
notes, amounting to between ten and twelve thousand
pounds worth. The forty boxes of silver weighed a ton, and
it was believed that the thieves had been disturbed by some
noise before they had time to remove so great a quantity.
The locks on the boxes left in the vault were found to have
been so rusted by damp as to be useless. No arrests were
made and no traces of the robbers could be found. Notifica-
tions were issued denying that the loss, heavy as it was, would
affect the stability of the bank, but it appears that it never
recovered. In 1833 it was re-organised. In 1845 the
Government passed a Lottery Bill to enable the bank to
raise money, but to no purpose. The bank failed in 1848
and caused a great many other failures and much distress.
The robbery was discovered on September 15th, 1828, and
was reported in the Monitor of the 20th.
There has been much speculation in Sydney from time
to time as to what became of the money stolen, and it has
been reported that the thieves buried it somewhere on the
shores of Snail’s, or White Bay, or some other place on the
opposite side of the Harbour to Sydney, but although several
persons have searched for the hidden treasure, it has not
yet been found. There is a somewhat similar legend of
buried treasure at North Sydney. The story is, that a sum
of money variously stated at one thousand and two thousand
guineas, sent out in early times from England to pay the
troops, was stolen from the ship while she lay at her anchor
and was buried either near Mosman’s Bay or Great Sirius
Cove. This also has been searched for at various times but
hitherto without success. What truth there is in these
legends it is now impossible to say.
John Poole, James Ryan, and James Riley, assigned
servants of Mr. John Larnack, son-in-law of Major James
Mudie, of Castle Forbes estate, Patrick’s Plains, Hunter
River district, took to the bush on November 4th, 1833.
Three other assigned servants, Anthony Hitchcock, alias
Hath, Samuel Parrott or Powell, and David Jones, were sent
away the following morning, in charge of constable
Samuel Cook, to Maitland, under sentence of twelve months,
in a chain gang for insubordination About half-a-mile


from Castle Forbes, Poole, Ryan, and Riley, and another
man named John Perry, who had been in the bush for some
time previously, met the constable and called on him to
stand or they would shoot him. Cook only had a pistol
with him and he snapped it at the robbers and then
surrendered. The robbers took the pistol from him, led him
some distance off the road and tied him to a tree. Parrott
refused to go with the bushrangers and was tied to a tree
near Cook. The robbers went back to Mr. Larnack’s
house which they reached about noon. They called upon
Mrs. Larnack to stand, but she and one of the female
servants jumped through a window and ran. Perry
followed them and brought them back, threatening to blow
Mrs. Larnack’s brains out if she refused to do as she was
told. The robbers took a double-barrelled gun which was
always kept loaded in Mr. Larnack’s room, and some guns
and fowling pieces from the dining-room. Hitchcock
brought the shearers from the shed, walking behind them
and threatening to shoot any man who resisted. The
robbers broke open the door of the store and put the
shearers inside. They emptied a chest of tea into a bag,
took bags of flour, sugar, and other provisions from the
store, and fastened up the door leaving Perry on guard.
They took a quantity of pork from the kitchen, a bucket of
milk from the dairy, and the silver-plate and other valuables
from the house. Then, having made the shearers secure in
the store and locked Mrs. Larnack and the female servants
in the kitchen, they went away after having told Mrs.
Larnack that they were sorry “ the old ,” the Major,
was not at home, as they wanted to settle him. One of
them also expressed sorrow at the absence of Mr. Larnack,
and added that when they could catch him they would
“ stick his head on the chimney for an ornament.” As
soon as the news of the robbery became known, a party was
organised to follow the bushrangers. Mr. Robert Scott,
mounted trooper* Daniel Craddige, and a party of five came
up with the robbers at Mr. Reid’s station, Lamb’s Valley.
Some shots were exchanged and then Jones and Perry
ran away. Constable Craddige followed them and called
on them to stand, and they did so. He took them back
and by that time Mr. Scott and the rest of the pursuing


party had captured Hitchcock, Poole and Riley. The
boy Ryan got away in the scrub but was discovered and
caught next day. Alexander Flood, overseer to Messrs.
Robert and Helenes Scott, with two constables, took charge
of the prisoners, and conducted them safely to Maitland
for trial. Mr. John Larnack then said that on the morn-
ing of the sth of November before the attack was made
on the house, he was at the sheep-wash. The prisoners
came up and said to the washers, “ Come out of the water,
every one of you, or we’ll blow your brains out.
Larnack jumped into the water among the washers. Hitch-
cock fired at him shouting, “ You’ll never take me to court
again, you .” He called on the washers to get out of
the way and let him shoot the . Poole also said, “ I’ll
take care you never get another man flogged.” Larnack
scrambled out of the wash-pool on the opposite side to
where the robbers were, and ran to the timber. He went
on to Mr. Danger’s farm, and remained there till next day.
He was only ten yards distant when Hitchcock fired at him.
Shots from the other bushrangers struck the water within
twelve and eighteen inches of him, but none of them hit
him. The robbers had four double-barrelled guns, two
single-barrelled fowling pieces, a musket, and two pistols,
when they were captured. When asked what they had to
say in defence, Hitchcock called Ensign Zouch and other
gentlemen to speak as to his character. It appears that
until he was assigned to Major Mudie and Mr. Larnack, he
had always been well behaved. The prisoners complained
that they were given short rations, that the flour was mouldy
and the meat bad, and that they were repeatedly flogged.
Some of them had been flogged for refusing to work on
Sunday. Hitchcock had been sentenced to work in an iron
gang, for an offence of which he knew nothing. Whatever
punishment was threatened by the master was sure to be
inflicted by the Bench. Jones was acquitted of the capital
offence, but was sent to Norfolk Island forjife. The other
five prisoners were sentenced to death, Hitchcock and
Poole being hung at Maitland, and Ryan, Perry and Riley
at Sydney. An enquiry was held as to the alleged illusage
of their assigned servants, by Major Mudie and Mr. Larnack,
and they were acquitted by Governor Bourke of the charges


of tyranny and ill-treatment, but Major Mudie’s name was
removed from the Commission of the Peace. On his return
to the station after the result of the enquiry had become
known, he was greeted with cries of “ No more fifties now
you bloody old tyrant.”*
. The beautiful valley of Burragorang is enclosed on all
sides by precipitous mountains, there being only one prac-
ticable entrance, which, in early times, before a government
load was cut into it for the convenience of the farmers who
now occupy the valley, was easily blocked with a few
saplings, so that sheep, cattle, or horses turned into the
valley could not escape. Precisely how the entrance to this
extensive enclosure was first found is not known. It is
believed, however, that it was discovered by a party of
bushrangers, who endeavoured to discover a road over the
Blue Mountains, in order to reach a settlement of white
men, which was popularly supposed to lie somewhere in
that direction. Whether this supposed settlement was a
Dutch or an English settlement does not appear, but as I
have already said, there was a wide-spread belief that some
of these settlements at no very great distance from
Sydney, and could be reached overland. The valley is
situated only about fifty-four miles from Sydney, and for
many years was an absolutely secure hiding-place for bush-
rangers and their plunder. Later on the valley came to be
known, from the horrible tales told of the convicts who made
use of it, as Terrible Hollow,” and under this name it is
introduced by Rolf Boldrewood in his “Robbery under
Arms.” Among the old hands themselves it was knowm as
“ The Camp,” “ The Shelter,” or “ The Pound.” Bark huts
were erected in this valley by the bushrangers, and here
they retired when hard pressed or when wounded. When
the secret of the entrance was betrayed to the soldiers, who
were out in search of a party of bushrangers, it evident
that the valley had been long in use by the bushrangers.
Cattle and sheep were running wild there, numbers of
broken shackles, handcuffs, and other relics were found,
and, besides these, evidences that several murders
* Select Committee of the House of Commons on Transportation
July, 1837. Major Mudie’s evidence. H


had been committed there; but there are no records
of these events, and only the recollections of the
legends which have been handed down among the old
hands remain to explain why this beautiful valley should
have been called “Terrible Hollow.” One of these
legends may be told somewhat as follows : A settler was
reported to have received a large sum of money._ This
became known to the bushrangers and they determined to
rob him of it. They bailed up his place, tied his assigned
servants, and searched everywhere for the money but could
not find it. The settler declared that he had not received
the money, but was not believed. He was threatened with
death if he refused to disclose its hiding place. He per-
sisted in his assertion that he had no money, and a
consultation was held by the bushrangers to decide what
should be done with him. Some were for shooting him
there and then ; but, this was so evidently not the way to
extort money, if he had any, that it was resolved to take
him to “ the camp,” and there force him to say where the
money was hidden. When they got him there they tied
him to a sapling, built a circle of bushwood round him at
some distance away, set fire to it, and slowly roasted him to
death. His screams are said to have been fearful, but no
one heard them in that solitude except the fiends who were
torturing him, and they had been rendered too callous, y
treatment little less fiendish by the authorities, to heed his
agonised cries. Whether this story is literally true or not it
is impossible to say, but certainly charred remains of human
bones were discovered in the valley when it was searched,
though v,Tether the bodies had been burned before 01 after
death could not, of course, be determined.
It was to this valley that Will Underwood and his gang
were said to retire when hard pressed or when they required
a rest. Underwood operated on the roads about Camp-
belltown, Liverpool, Penrith, and Windsor, sometimes
sticking-up people, and robbing farms on Liberty Plains
and other places between Parramatta and Sydney. The
gang was a large one and continued to operate in the more
populous districts for some two years. Among the mem ers
of this gang were Johnny Donohoe, Webber, and Walmsley.
Donohoe was shot by a trooper named Maggleton, near


Raby, in September, ,830. Webber was shot a month
later, and Walrasley was captured in another skirmish
between the troopers and the bushrangers. Walmsley was
sentenced to death, but was reprieved for disclosing the
names of ‘fences ” or receivers of stolen property, and his
revelations caused quite a sensation, a number of hitherto
highly respected persons being implicated. Underwood
was shot in 1832, and shortly afterwards a “traitor” is said
to have led a party of soldiers into Terrible Hollow There
was a fight between the troops and the bushrangers found
there at the time, and several of the bushrangers were
captured and the gang was broken up. The evil reputation
which the valley had acquired, at first prevented settlement
there, but when the bushrangers and their doings had been
forgotten, the Government threw the valley open for
selection, and a number of farms were taken up or
purchased. More recently, a line has been surveyed for a
railway to the valley, but this line has not yet been
constructed. In the meantime, a good road has been
opened into the valley through the one practicable entrance
and those who visit the valley now for the first time can
scarcely credit the horrible stories which have been told in
connection with it.
One Sunday in September, 1834, Dr. Robert Warded, a
practising barrister in Sydney, and editor of The Australian
was riding across his park, which stretched from the Parra-
matta road, where the municipality of Petersham now
stands, to Cook s river, to look after his herd of fallow deer
of which he was very proud. He jumped his horse over a
and found himself confronted by three armed men
I funking they were poachers after his deer, he reined his
horse in and cried, “ What are you doing here, you rascals ? ”
e reply was a shot from one of the guns, and the doctor
ell. His horse galloped to the house and alarmed the
family. Men were despatched in all directions to seek for
the doctor, who it was believed had somehow been thrown
and injured. The search was continued all day and niaht
but with no result. The next day his body was found
covered over with boughs, apparently to prevent the dingoes
from tearing it rather than to hide it. John Jenkins, Thomas
lattersdale and Emanuel Brace were arrested on suspicion


and charged with the murder. Evidence was produced that
they had been seen in the neighbourhood, and they were
committed for trial. Brace was a lad who had only recently
been sent to the colony, and before the day of trial he con-
sented to turn King’s evidence. From his testimony it
appeared that Jenkins was the man who had fired the gun.
But both he and Tattersdale were hung for the crime, and it
was said that they had been guilty of various acts of bush-
ranging. After the doctor’s death the herd of fallow deer
was neglected. Some were sold, and their descendants
may still be seen in the park at Parramatta, and elsewhere.
A large number, however, escaped, and the late Mr. Charles
Hearn, for many years landlord of the Stag’s Head Inn,
on the Parramatta road, about five miles from the Sydney
Town Hall, used to boast that he shot the last of Dr.
Wardell’s deer about where the Callan Park Lunatic Asylum
now stands.
The story of Jack the Rammer illustrates the relation-
ship which sometimes existed between the bushrangers and
the assigned servants, and indicates the difficulties with
which law-abiding citizens had to cope. Jack had been living
by robbery in the Manaro district for some time. One day
Mr. Charles Fisher Shepherd, the overseer of the Michelago
sheep station, said something about all bushrangers being
cowards. One of the assigned servants on the station,
named Bull, replied, “ They’ll be here next.” “If they
come here,” exclaimed Shepherd, “ I’ll give them a benefit.”
A few nights afterwards Shepherd was asleep in his hut.
He was awakened by someone calling on him to come
out. After a time he did so, and saw Jack the Rammer
and a man named Boyd standing at the door. Jack cried
out to him, “ Keep your hands down.” They stood for a
second or two regarding him, and then Jack said, “What a
benefit you’re giving us.” The two bushrangers then
walked away. Although he felt convinced that Bull was in
league with the bushrangers and had reported his speech to
them and that he probably could not expect any assistance
from the other assigned servants on the station, Shepherd
loaded his gun with No. 4 shot, the largest he had, and
started off after the bushrangers. It was about daybreak on
a beautiful December morning in 1834, probably between


three and four o’clock, and the air was soft and balmy as he
made his way through the bush in the direction in which
the bushrangers had gone. After travelling some distance
he came on a sort of a camp, and saw Boyd through the
trees. He kneeled down and fired, but missed. He was
about to fire the other barrel when Bull stepped from
behind a tree close by, and said “ Don’t shoot him, sir.”
“By G , I will,” exclaimed Shepherd. “If you fire, by
G > I’ll shoot you,” returned Bull. Before Shepherd
could reply another bushranger named Keys fired at him
from behind a tree, and wounded him. Shepherd rushed
forward, and was about to close with Keys when Boyd ran
up and fired, wounding Shepherd in the head. Keys
seized him, but Shepherd shook himself free, and ran back
to the station. He went to the house, roused up the
owner, and said to him, “ Good God, Catterall, I’m shot
all to pieces, and you never help me.” “What’s the
good?” returned Catterall. “What can I do?” Just
then the bushrangers came up, and Catterall went in and
shut the door. Shepherd rushed across to his own
hut, and tried to shut himself in, but Boyd thrust
the barrel of his gun in in time to prevent
him. Shepherd seized the gun and tried to wrench it out of
Boyd’s hands, but Keys pushed the door open and struck
Shepherd on the head. Shepherd fell, and Boyd put the
muzzle of his gun close against his chest and pulled the
trigger. The bushrangers, including Bull, then went away.
It was some hours later when Shepherd regained conscious-
ness, and yelled out as loud as he could. He continued
calling for some minutes, and at last Catterall came out of
the house and went to the hut. “Why,” he said, as he
looked at Shepherd, “ I thought you were dead.” He went
away, but soon returned with several of the station hands,
and had Shepherd carried into the house and put to bed!
He sent for a doctor and the police. When the doctor
arrived he took fourteen slugs and bullets out of various
parts of Shepherd’s body. He recovered, and lived for
many years afterwards. In the meantime the police
followed the bushrangers, and shot Boyd as he was trying
to escape by swimming across the Snowy River. Keys and
Bull were captured, and were subsequently hung. Jack


the Rammer escaped for a time, but was shot a few months
later.
On September 24th, 1838, the bushrangers Hall and
Mayne stuck up Mr. Joseph Roger’s station at Currawang,
near Yass. As they approached the kitchen door the men
inside rushed out, and the bushrangers fired among them.
A lad named Patrick Fitzpatrick was struck in the mouth,
the bullet coming out at the crown of his head. Three of
the men were wounded. The bushrangers appear to have
regretted their act as soon as it was done. They made no
attempt to get away, but assisted to carry the wounded men
into the kitchen. Hall had been captured previously, but
had succeeded in escaping from the Goulburn Gaol
shortly before this attack on Mr. Roger’s station. When
sentenced to death, he said, “ I’ve been all over the
country in my time without taking the life of any one.
I’ve been baited like a bull dog and I’m only sorry now
that I didn’t shoot every tyrant in New South Wales.”
When taken from the court-house to the gaol, he said to
the crowd assembled there, “ I’ve never had anything to say
against the prisoners, but I’ve a grudge against every
swell in the country. I’ll go to the gallows and die as
comfortably as a biddy and be glad of the chance.” The
trial took place on May 15th, 1839, and between then and
the date fixed for the execution, Hall made a desperate
attempt to escape from Darlinghurst Gaol. He failed and
was hung on June 7th, with Michael Welsh, Donald
Maynard, and his mate, Mayne.
In January, 1839, Mr. Bailley was returning to his home
on the Parramatta Road, Sydney, when he was knocked
down and beaten by three men near his own door. They
took a roll of bank notes from his pocket, but a vehicle
driving rapidly approached and frightened them so that they
dropped the notes and ran. Mr. Bailley picked them up
and went indoors.


CHAPTER V.
John Lynch ; Murder of Kearns Landregan ; Lynch’s Trial and
Sentence ; His Terrible Confession ; Murder of the Frazers,
Father and Son; Murder and Cremation of the Mulligans; His
Appeals to Almighty God.
John Lynch is usually regarded as the most callous and
brutal of the bushrangers of New South Wales. He was
transported from Cavan, Ireland, in October, 1831, For
some months after his arrival in the colony he worked in a
road gang in the neighbourhood of Sydney and was then
assigned to Mr. Barton as a farm servant. Soon after his
arrival at the farm, near Berrima, he appears to have
exercised his ingenuity in stealing any articles which he
could find and of selling them to any person who would buy
them. In 1835 he was arrested and tried at Berrima on a
charge of having stolen a saddle from his employer but was
acquitted. He “bolted” into the bush and a few days
afterwards a man named Thomas Smith, who had been
witness in a case of highway robbery, was found dead in the
scrub. Several bushrangers were arrested, Lynch being
among them, on suspicion of having decoyed Smith from his
hut and beaten his brains out with clubs as “ a warning to
traitors,” as all those were called who gave evidence against
bushrangers. Lynch was again acquitted, but two others
were hung for the murder. During the following two or
three years he was sentenced to twelve months’ imprisonment
for having harboured bushrangers, and on February 21st,
1841, he was arrested at “Mulligan’s Farm’’and charged
with the murder of Kearns Landregan. On the 19th, Mr.
Hugh Tinney was travelling to Sydney with his bullock dray
and camped for the night at Ironstone Bridge. The


next morning his driver walked along the creek bank
to look for the bullocks. He noticed some freshly
cut scrub piled up, and, being curious to know what it
had been placed there for, he pulled some branches
away and discovered the newly-murdered body of a man.
On examining further, he found that the head had been
fearfully cut and battered. Round the neck was a piece of
string, and to this were attached an Agnus Dei and a
temperance medal. Mr. Tinney sent Sturges, the bullock-
driver, to Berrima to give information, and he returned with
Chief Constable Noel, Mr. James Harper, the police
magistrate, and Dr. McDonald. On search being made,
signs of a camp were found not far away. A small fire had
been lighted as if to boil a quart pot of tea, and some
remains of hay were found, showing that a horse had been
fed there. It was noticed that grey hairs were scattered
about where the horse had rolled, and therefore it was
evident that the horse was of that colour. During the day
investigations were made by the police, and the following
morning Chief Constable Chapman, Sergeant Fieer, and
Mr. John Chalker, landlord of the Woolpack Inn, Nattai,
went to Mulligan’s Farm, Wombat Brush, and identified
John Dunleavy, as John Lynch, a prisoner illegally at large.
When arrested on the charge of having murdered Kearns
Landregan, Lynch exclaimed; “I am innocent, I leave it
to God and man. I don’t blame you, Chapman, but
Chalker is interfering too much in what doesn’t concern
him.”
A grey horse was found at the farm, and Chalker
identified this as the horse which Lynch had been driving
when he stopped at the Woolpack for dinner. Lynch had
“ shouted ” for Landregan and the landlord before leaving,
and Chalker gave him a bundle of hay for the horse. The
hay was rye grass, similar to that found at the camp.
Lynch was tried at Berrima on March 21st, 1842, before
the Chief Justice, Sir James Dowling. Mary Landregan
said that the body found was that of her husband. The
temperance medal had been given to him by father Mathew
before they left Ireland. They were both teetotallers, and
had come to Australia as free immigrants. Her husband
had about when he left his last place and started to


look for another job. She had not seen him since, but he
had sent word, by Susan Beale, servant at Mr. Chalker’s
hotel, that he had engaged to put up fencing and do other
work for Mr. Dunleavy for
A leather belt on which the words “ Jewish Harp ” had
been scratched, apparently with the point of a knife, was
found at the farm, and was identified as the property of
Kearns Landregan by his brother, who said that Kearns had
promised to meet him at a public-house of that name in the
neighbourhood, and had scratched the name on his belt so
that he might remember it.
Further evidence showed that Lynch had purchased, at
the Post Office Stores, Berrima, on the 20th February, a
merino dress, some women’s caps, a pair of child’s shoes,
and some tobacco. He was served by Mrs. Mary Higgins
and gave her a note in payment. From the store he
went to Michael Doyle’s, White Horse Hotel, and bought
two gallons of rum, four gallons of wine, half a chest of tea,
and a bag of sugar. He gave his name as John Dunleavy,
Wombat, and said he had taken Mulligan’s farm. He gave
s^x notes and a note of hand for 2s. in payment.
The goods were placed in a cart drawn by a grey horse.
Some of the Bank notes were identified as having been
among those carried by Landregan,
There were a number of witnesses, and the case against
the prisoner with regard to the murder of Landregan was
very clear. It was also stated that Mr. and Mrs. Mulligan
and their two children had disappeared suddenly, and that
there was a suspicion that they had been murdered.
Lynch produced a letter dated from Wollongong purporting
to have been signed by Mulligan, but the writing was said
to be unlike that of Mulligan. Several other mysterious
disappearances were also spoken of. When asked what he
had to say Lynch replied that he had met Landregan on
the road, and Landregan asked him to carry his swag for
him. Landregan said he had been gambling at McMahon’s
public-house, and must have left his money there. Lynch
told him to get up and ride as far as he was going his way.
When they reached Bolland’s, Lynch asked Landregan to
have a drink, but Landregan refused, saying that his wife
was there, and that he did not want her to see him. When


they got a little further along the road Landregan got down,
took his swag, and walked away into the bush, and he had
not seen him since. Lynch complained that he had been
treated very unfairly. He had, he said, been sent out for
seven years, but had been treated as a “ lifer.” He had
served his time fairly, but he could not get his rights.
When his father died in Ireland he had left him between
£6OO and That was how he bought Mulligan’s
farm.
Lynch was found guilty, and, in passing sentence, his
Honour said : “John Lynch, the trade in blood which has
so long marked your career is at last terminated, not by
any sense of remorse, or the sating of any appetite for
slaughter on your part, but by the energy of a few zealous
spirits, roused into activity by the frightful picture
of atrocity which the last tragic passage of your
worthless life exhibits. It is now credibly believed, if not
actually ascertained, that no less than nine other individuals
have fallen by your hands. How many more have been
violently ushered into another world remains undiscovered,
save in the dark pages of your own memory. By your own
confession it is admitted that as late as 1835 justice was
invoked on your head for a frightful murder committed in
this immediate neighbourhood. Your unlucky escape on
that occasion has, it would seem, whetted your tigrine
relish for human gore —but at length you have fallen into
toils from which you cannot escape.” His Honour quoted
from the evidence at length, and said that the prisoner had
“ spared neither age nor youth in gratifying his sordid lust
for gain.” The disappearance of the Mulligans had not
been accounted for, but there could be little doubt that the
prisoner knew what their fate was. He concluded his
exordium by saying that too much praise could not be
bestowed, “ not merely on the police, but upon the
inhabitants of the neighbourhood, in unravelling the dark
mystery of Landregan’s death, and bringing his blood home
to your door.” He then pronounced sentence in the usual
form.
The prisoner listened throughout with an unmoved
countenance, and when the Judge had finished he said he
hoped his Honour would order that the small amount due


as wages to the Barnetts should be paid. They were
innocent of any complicity in the offence with which he had
been charged, and he hoped they w r ould soon be released
from gaol. There was also due to a boy who had
been working*on the farm, and he hoped this would also be
paid. Whatever had happened at the farm it had happened
before either the Barnetts or the boy w r ent there, and they
knew nothing about it. For some days after his sentence
John Lynch continued to assert that he was innocent, but
finding, as is supposed, that there was no hope of a
reprieve, he asked to see the Rev. Mr. Sumner on the day
before that fixed for his execution, and in the presence of
the police magistrates and the minister, made a very
extraordinary confession, of which the following is a brief
summary;—
He arrived in the colony in 1832 in the Dunvegan
Castle. The entry on his indent was : —“ False pretences;
sentence, life.” This was wrong. He had only been
sentenced to seven years’ penal servitude. He had applied
to the authorities at the Hyde Park Barracks for his free
papers, but had been kept waiting a fortnight without getting
any satisfaction. So he returned to the Berrima district,
wdiere he had been assigned. He went to John Mulligan
for advice and assistance. Mulligan had a lot of goods and
valuables, which Lynch is supposed to have stolen and left
at the farm. He wanted to sell them, but Mulligan refused
to give a fair price for them. Lynch had made up his mind
to live honestly, but this treatment disgusted him. He
complained bitterly of the dishonesty of men who were in
a good position and who “ought to have known better.”
He left Mulligan’s and went to T. B, Humphrey’s farm at
Oldbury and stole eight bullocks, which he had himself
broken in, and started with them for Sydney, with the
intention of selling them, so that he might “start honest.”
At Mount Razorback he fell in with a man named Ireland,
who was in charge of a loaded team belonging to Mr.
Thomas Cowper. The load was a valuable one, consisting
of wheat, bacon, and other farm produce. Lynch thought
it would pay him better to kill Ireland and take possession of
the dray and its load than to sell Mr. Humphrey’s bullocks.
He therefore camped with Ireland that night, and “ they


were very friendly.” In the morning a black boy who
accompanied Ireland went to look for the bullocks, and
Lynch followed and killed him. He returned to the camp
without his absence having been noticed by Ireland, and
watched for a chance, Ireland had no suspicion of foul
play, and Lynch soon got near enough to him to strike him
a blow with his tomahawk. Lynch hid the bodies in a cleft
between two rocks, and piled stones over them. He
remained at the camp two days. On the second day two
other teams arrived at the camp in charge of men named
Lee and Lagge, and they all agreed to travel together for
company. When near Liverpool Mr. Cowper rode up and
was surprised to find a stranger in charge of his dray.
Lynch told him a plausible story to the effect that Ireland
had been taken suddenly ill, and had asked him to take the
team on. The black boy had stayed behind to nurse
Ireland, and they were to follow as soon as Ireland got well
enough. Mr. Cowper believed him and was satisfied, and
after making enquiries as to where Ireland was stopping,
arranged with Lynch where they should meet in Sydney.
The time and place having been agreed on, Mr. Cowper
rode away. Lee and Lagge were bound for Parramatta,
and therefore, when they reached the junction of the Dog
Trap Road with the Liverpool Road, they parted company
with Lynch, who kept straight on. Left by himself, Lynch
drove on night and day, reaching Sydney two days before
the time appointed for him to meet Mr. Cowper. He hired
a man who was half drunk to sell the loading, and as soon as
he had received the money for the loading he started away
with the team on the Illawarra Road. When near George’s
river he met Chief Constable McAlister, of Campbelltown,
and fearing that he might have been recognised, he turned
off the road on to a cross track leading towards the Berrima
road. He knew there would soon be a hue and cry after
him and feared that McAlister would report having met him
on the Illawarra road. He travelled on until he came back
to Razorback, near where the murder had been committed.
Here he met the Frazers, father and son, driving a horse
team owned by Mr. Bawten. He kept company with them
and they camped together at Bargo Brush. Another horse
team with which there were two men and their wives also
F


camped there. After their supper Lynch was lying under
his dray when a mounted trooper rode up and asked Frazer
some questions about a dray which had been stolen, and
which belonged to Mr. Cowper. The Frazers were unable
to give him any information and the trooper rode away
without noticing Lynch, who was lying under the very dray
he was enquiring about. This narrow escape gave Lynch a
terrible shock. He lay awake all night thinking of the
danger he was running by keeping this dray. He “ prayed
to Almighty God to assist and enlighten” him in this
emergency, and feeling much strengthened he resolved to.
kill the Frazers and take their dray. Having arrived at this
decision he became calmer and thought out the details of
his plan carefully. In the morning Lynch left the camp
under the pretence that he was going to look for his
bullocks, but in reality to drive them away. On his return
he reported that he could not find them and spoke of the
trouble bullocks gave by their wandering habits. He
asked the Frazers to help him to pull his dray into
the bush where he could leave it safely until he could
return with another team of bullocks and take it home.
There was nothing surprising in this, as bullocks frequently
stray away home as soon as they are unyoked and
will travel astonishing distances, even when hobbled,
before morning. The Frazers, therefore, helped Lynch
to drag the dray away from the road to where there
was a clump of trees, and then yoked up their horses.
Lynch put such few things as he had in the dray into
Frazer’s cart, and they all started together. That night they
camped at Cordeaux Flat. In the morning young Frazer
started to find the horses, and Lynch accompanied him.
Lynch wore a coat because, he said, it was rather cold. As
a fact, it was to hide his tomahawk. When they were in
the bush, out of sight of the camp, Lynch found “no
difficulty in settling him.” He struck one blow, and “the
young fellow fell like a log of wood.” Lynch returned to
the camp leading one horse, and said the lad was looking
for the other. This made Frazer very uneasy, not on
account of his son, but because he had never known the
horses to part company before, and feared that some one
must have stolen the other horse. He “ fidgeted about ”


until Lynch, who had been watching for an opportunity,
got behind him and “ struck him one blow and killed him
dead.” Lynch buried the two bodies a little way off the
road and remained at the camp all day. The next morning
he drove through Berrima to Mulligan’s farm. He told
Mrs. Mulligan that the dray and horses belonged to a gentle-
man in Sydney. He asked her for the £so which he said
her husband owed him for the articles which he had left at
the farm, and which he had obtained by burglary and high-
way robbery. Mrs. Mulligan assured him on oath that all
-she had in the house was £g. Lynch felt sure she w r as
only “putting him off,” and felt very much discouraged.
He walked to Mr. Gray’s, Black Horse Inn, about three
miles down the road, and bought two bottles of rum. On his
return he gave some to Mr. and Mrs. Mulligan, but “ took
very little ” himself. He sat down on a log near the fence,
and thought, “ This man passed me by as if he didn’t know
me when I was in the iron gang in Berrima. He never
offered me a shilling though he has made pounds out of
me, and I risked my life to obtain it. It would be a
judgment on him to take all he’s got for the way he’s
treated a poor prisoner. Oh, Almighty God, assist me and
direct me what to do.” After praying he felt strengthened
and returned to the hut. Mrs. Mulligan told him that she
had dreamed that she had a baby and that he had taken
it away and killed it. “It was all covered with blood and
looked horrible.” Lynch joked with her about this dream ;
but, at the same time, he “felt very frightened.” He
believed that “ she could foretell things,” and he knew that
“ she could toss balls and turn cups.” He went away again
and prayed to God to enlighten him, and at last made up
his mind to “ kill the lot.” He returned to the hut and
“ talked pleasantly.” Then he asked young Mulligan, who
was about sixteen years of age, to “come and cut some
wood ” for the fire. The boy went with him, and as they
walked along Lynch spoke to the lad of the fine property he
would have “when the old man died;” adding, “Ah, Johnny,
you don’t know what’s in store for you.” They chopped up
several sticks and then, when the boy was stooping, Lynch
swung the axe round and “ hit him on the head.” He
threw a few branches over the body, and then, picking up


an armful of the wood they had cut walked back to
the house. Mrs. Mulligan asked him where her boy
was, and Lynch replied that he’d “gone to the pad-
dock with the horses.” Mrs. Mulligan was very uneasy
and asked Lynch to fire his gun off, as a signal
to the boy to return. Lynch said this might bring
the police round and he didn’t want them “to see
that dray.” Mulligan also objected to the gun being fired.
Both Mulligan and his wife were greatly excited. The old
man paced up and down in front of the house, while the
old woman, after asking Lynch several times what he had
done with her boy, started up the path to look for him.
Then said Lynch, “ I knew it was time for something to be
done,” He got his tomahawk without being seen, walked
up to the old man and cried “ Look ! ” Mulligan turned
round and looked up the road where Lynch pointed,
Lynch struck him “one tap” and he “fell like a log.”
Lynch then followed Mrs. Mulligan, tripped her up and
killed her. He walked back to the hut and saw the
daughter, a girl of fourteen, standing behind the table with
a large butcher’s knife in her hand. She was trembling
violently. He said to her “ Put down that knife.” She
hesitated to obey him, and he cried louder, “ Put down that
knife.” Then she put it down. He walked round the table
and took her hand. He said he did not wish to hurt her,
but if he let her live she would “ only put him away.” He
told her to “ pray for her soul,” as she had “only ten minutes
to live.” She sobbed bitterly and he tried to comfort her,
talking very seriously, and telling her that life was full of
trouble, and that she would be better dead. Then he took
her into the inner room, and after having violated her,
brought her out again and killed her with the tomahawk.
He dragged the four bodies together, heaped firewood over
them and set fire to the heap. “ I never seen nothing like
it,” he said. “They burned as if they was bags of fat.”
He threw the greater part of their clothing on to the
fire and burned it. He stayed at the farm all next
day, and then, when he had “made things right,” he
went to Sydney. Here he inserted an advertisement
in the Sydney Gazette to the effect that Mrs. Mulligan
having left her home without his consent he would not be


responsible for any debts she might contract. This was
signed “John Mulligan.” He returned to the farm and
wrote letters to those people to whom he knew Mulligan
owed money, informing them that he had sold the farm to
John Dunleavy, who would pay their accounts. These
letters he also signed “John Mulligan.” Lynch then engaged
Terence Barnett and his wdfe to work on the farm, and
stayed there quietly for six months. The stories he told in
the neighbourhood induced the belief that Mulligan had
taken him in with regard to the farm, and that he had paid
more for it than it was worth. At the end of six months
Lynch paid another visit to Sydney, and on his return
journey met with Kearns Landregan, who said he was looking
for work. Lynch engaged him to put up some fencing.
Landregan agreed and got into the cart. Lynch drove on
until they were passing Crisp’s Inn. Here Landregan
crouched down as if to hide himself. Lynch asked him
what he did that for. Landregan replied that he had
summoned Crisp for stealing a bundle of clothes from
him and didn’t want a row about it then. Lynch felt sorry
that he had engaged Landregan and determined to get
rid of him. He decided to camp at Ironstone Bridge and,
when Landregan was sitting on a log near the camp fire,
Lynch crept up behind him and struck him with the
tomahawk. In his confession Lynch was very particular in
pointing out that in all his previous murders he had not
struck any one of his victims more than one blow with the
tomahawk or axe, Landregan, however, was a big powerful
man, w r ho boasted that he had never met his match in
wrestling, and Lynch felt afraid of him. He therefore
departed from his rule and struck Landregan twice. He
attributed his “ ill-luck ” in being caught and convicted to
this breach of the rule he had laid down for himself.
Lynch seems to have persuaded himself that he was acting
under Divine inspiration in committing his murders. He
was very emphatic in his assertions that he never committed
a murder, without having first prayed to Almighty God to
assist and direct him, until he felt sufficiently strengthened
to carry out his intentions. He appeared to believe that he
was justified in taking life. Whatever may be thought of
his confessions, however, there can be no doubt that the


main facts were correct. After his death a search was made
at the places where he said he had hidden or buried his
victims, and in all cases the remains were found as he had
stated they would be. With regard to the Mulligans, a large
heap of ashes was searched and found to contain human
remains. The confession only included his more serious
crimes. He said nothing about the numerous robberies he
had committed at various times, nor of his relations with
other bushrangers, with whom it was known he was on
cordials terms during at least a portion of his career.
Lynch was hanged at Berrima on April 22nd, 1842. At
that time he was only twenty-nine years of age. He was
about five feet three and a half inches in height, of fair
complexion, with brown hair and hazel eyes. There was
nothing ferocious in his appearance.


CHAPTER VI.
Jackey Jackey, the Gentleman Bushranger; His Dispute with Paddy
Curran ; Some Legends About Him ; Jackey Jackey Always Well-
dressed and Mounted ; His Capture at Bungendore ; His Escape
at Bargo Brush ; Jackey Jackey Visits Sydney ; His Capture by
Miss Gray ; Paddy Curran’s Fight with the Police ; Re-captured
and Hung ; John Wright Threatens to Make a Clean Sweep.
William Westwood, better known as Jackey Jackey, was
the darling of the old hands. He was only an errand
boy in England, and was transported for some small
peccadillo when he was sixteen years of age. He landed
in Sydney in 1837, and was assigned to Mr. Phillip Gidley
King, at Gidley, in the Goulburn district. He stayed at the
station for nearly three years, and then, in company with a
notorious scoundrel named Paddy Curran, stuck up and
robbed his employer’s house. The partnership between
Jackey Jackey and Curran, however, did not last very long.
Curran disgusted Jackey Jackey by his brutality to women.
In one of their mutual enterprises Curran criminally
assaulted a woman, the wife of the farmer whose place they
had stuck up. Jackey Jackey was furious. He declared
that even if a man was a bushranger he might be a
gentleman, and added that he would never see a woman
insulted. He threatened to shoot Curran unless he left at
once, and stripped him of his horse, arms and ammunition.
This story furnishes the key-note to Jackey Jackey’s
character. To the old hands he was always the gentleman
bushranger. The stories told by them about the Jewboy
and other bushrangers, and even about Mathew Brady,
were generally coarse and sometimes brutal, but Jackey
Jackey was always polite and well-behaved. More legends


have collected round the name of Jackey Jackey than
round that of any other of the bushrangers, and many
of them are obviously variants of the stories told of
the historical highwaymen of England. For instance,
Jackey Jackey is said to have bailed up the carriage
of the Commissary. When he discovered that the
Commissary’s wife was inside he dismounted, opened the
door and, sweeping the ground with his cabbage tree hat, as
he bowed low before her, he invited her to favour him with
a step on the green. He rode incredible distances in
incredibly short periods of time. He is represented as
bailing up a man near Goulburn and telling him to note the
time by his watch and then racing away and bailing up
another man at Braidwood or some other place a hundred
or a hundred and fifty miles away in a few hours and asking
that person to note the time. Many of the popular stories
told about him are so evidently apocryphal that little
notice can be taken of them. But one thing is certain
and that is that he was always well mounted. He
scorned to steal an inferior horse and would travel miles
to secure a racer. He stole racehorses from Mr. Murray,
Mr. Julian, and many other gentlemen in the districts
over -which he ranged.
Although he appears to have been of humble origin he
is credited with having been highly educated. This point
was especially insisted upon by his eulogists among the old
hands. By them he w r as always represented as being “ able
to hold his own,” in conversation, with “ the best of ’em.”
I remember one old fellow telling me that when Jackey
Jackey met Governor Gipps (of which meeting, however, I
can find no record) the governor and the bushranger had a
long conversation and parted mutually pleased with each
other. “ You and me,” said the old chap, “ couldn’t have
understood what they said though it was all English; but,
they talked grammar.” What his precise meaning was I had
no idea, but I have always thought that he intended to suggest
that their conversation was all carried on in what he might
have called “ dictionary w r ordsthat is, words not used by
the uneducated. But everything said of Jackey Jackey
redounds to his credit from the old hand point of view.
He was emphatically “ a good man.” The meaning attached


to words is purely conventional, and is therefore liable to
vary with the conventionalities. The point of view of the
convict being entirely different to that of the law-abiding
citizen, the terms “good” and “bad” changed places in
their vocabulary. Thus the clergy, the magistrates, the free
men, were generally “ bad men,” while those who resisted
authority, who fought against law and order, were “ good
men.” Even the cannibal Pierce was a good man from
their point of view, however strongly they might condemn
his methods. But Jackey Jackey, although he continued
the fight to the bitter end, and ended his life on the
gallows when he was only twenty-six, never did anything
mean or brutal or unworthy of a gentleman bushranger,
until he was almost goaded to madness by the cruel
discipline of Norfolk Island.
Paddy Curran was “out in the bush” several months
before Jackey Jackey joined him, and he was not the only
bushranger at work in the district. On December 31st,
1839, the station of the Rev. Mr. Cartwright was stuck up
and robbed. On the same day a skirmish between the
police and seven mounted bushrangers took place near Yass.
One of the police horses was killed, and the police were
compelled to retreat. On the same day, Mr. Heffernan’s
house, not far from Goulburn, was stuck up and robbed of
in money, a case of duelling pistols, a valuable mare,
and other property, Mr. Israel Shepherd also lost a
valuable horse, besides some money, and Mr. Charles
Campbell was reported to have been shot dead. This is a
heavy record for one day, and as the robberies took place
so far distant from each other, there must have been at
least three separate parties concerned in them. About the
same time it was reported that Scotchy and Whitton were
plundering the stations on the Lachlan River in all
directions, and that Mr. Arthur Rankin had left his station
and retired to Sydney in consequence of the insecurity in
the country districts. The robberies continued all through
the year 1840, and a great part of 1841.
On January 13th of the last-mentioned year a man ran
into the township of Bungendore, and said that Jackey
Jackey had followed and fired at him. A few minutes’
later Jackey Jackey himself, mounted on a splendid mare,


which he had stolen from the Messrs. Macarthur, hove in
sight on the plains. He was dressed in a fine suit of
clothes which he had obtained when he stuck up and
robbed the store at Boro a few days before. He stopped to
speak to a man near Eccleton’s. In the meantime Mr.
Powell, the resident magistrate, and his brother, Mr. Frank
Powell, promptly mounted and went towards the bush-
ranger, and were joined by Richard Rutledge, who,
however, had no arms. As they approached Jackey Jackey
wheeled round and fired at them, but failed to hit any one.
Mr. Balcombe and the Rev. Mr. McGrath drove up in a
gig, and Mr. McGrath jumped down and presented his gun.
Jackey Jackey seeing himself surrounded, surrendered. He
explained that his mare had come a long journey and was
unfit to travel, and that his musket was out of order and
would not go off. He was conducted to the inn and placed
in a room, two ticket-of-leave men being placed there to
guard him. Jackey Jackey sat very quiet for some time.
Then he jumped up suddenly, knocked down one of his
guards, snatched his musket, jumped through the
window, and ran across the plain. Frank Powell, who was
close at hand, followed him, and with the assistance of Dr.
Wilson’s postman, recaptured him. Among other exploits
previous to this capture Jackey Jackey had robbed the
Queanbeyan, Tarago, and other mails, stuck up Mr. Julian,
Mr. Edinburgh, and a number of other people on the roads
at various times and places, stolen horses from all the
principal owners and breeders in the district, fired at the
driver of the Bungendore mail, who escaped, and had
robbed the Boro Creek store of clothing, money, provisions,
and other articles, on the Tuesday before his capture. For
several months Lieutenant Christie and the whole of the
mounted police of the district had been trying to capture
him, and he had more than once escaped only by the
superior fleetness of his horses. As soon as possible after
his capture he was handed over to Lieutenant Christie, who
conducted him to Goulburn, where he was lodged in the
lockup. The following day he was being taken to Bargo
Brush, on the road to Sydney, when he made a desperate
attempt to escape on foot, running for a mile before he was
recaptured. He was then tied on the horse and the journey


was resumed, but at night he broke out of the Bargo lock-up,
taking with him the watch-house keeper’s arms and
ammunition. He soon procured a horse, and on the
following day stuck up Mr. Francis Macarthur on the Goul-
burn Plains. He robbed Mr. Macarthur of his watch,
money, and other valuables, and took one of his carriage
horses because it was better than the animal he was
riding.
In the meantime the other bushrangers in the district
had not been idle. In September, 1840, a fight took place
between the police and the bushrangers near Wellington.
One of the bushrangers was shot dead, and a mounted
trooper was wounded in the shoulder. A few days later
another encounter occurred, when a constable was shot
dead within two miles of the township.
On October 3rd, Mr. Robert Smith’s station, Newria,
was attacked by four armed bushrangers and plundered of
everything worth carrying away. Mr. Aarons had recently
arrived from Sydney, with the intention of opening a store
in Wellington. The bushrangers threatened to throw him
into the fire unless he handed over his money. They got
upwards of from him. Mr. McPhillamy rode up at
the time, and was invited by one of the bushrangers to
dismount and come in. He dismounted, and then,
discovering the class of men he had to deal with, quickly
jumped on his horse again and started. The bushrangers
fired at him, and one of the bullets so severely injured his
hand that it had to be amputated. A reward of was
offered for the capture of these men.
On Tuesday, May 18th, 1841, a gentleman, mounted on
a spirited horse, pulled up at the tollbar on the Parramatta
Road, Sydney, and asked the tollkeeper if he could oblige
him with a pipe of tobacco. The tollkeeper gave him a
piece, and the gentleman dismounted and filled his pipe.
As he stood at the door of the tollhouse he remarked a
firelock hanging over the mantelpiece, and asked what it
was for. “ For bushrangers,” replied the toll man. “ But
there are none now. I’ve never seen it taken down since
I’ve been here.” “Did you ever hear of Jackey Jackey?”
enquired the gentleman. “ Oh, yes,” replied the toll man,
“ but he’s a long way away. He never comes to Sydney.


If he did he’d soon be caught.” “ Not at all,” replied the
gentleman laughing. “They don’t know how to catch him, nor
to keep him when they do catch him. I’m Jackey Jackey.”
He raised the lappels of his coat as he spoke and showed a
brace of pistols stuck in his belt on each side. The tollman
looked very much alarmed, but the bushranger said to him,
“ Don’t be frightened, I am not going to hurt you, I’ve been
in Sydney for three days and I’m going back to Manaro.”
He informed the tollman that he had taken a horse in
Sydney, but that he was too old and stiff, so he had taken
the liberty of exchanging him for the one he had with him
at Grose’s Farm. “ Ain’t you afraid of being took ? ” asked
the tollman. Jackey laughed. “I’d like to see who’ll stop
me while I’ve these little bull-dogs about me,” he said,
tapping his pistols. He stood chatting while he smoked
regardless of the fact that Grose’s Farm, now the grounds of
the Sydney University, was within a stone’s-throw of the toll-
bar. He offered the tollman some money and asked him to
go to the public-house for some rum. The tollman replied,
“I can’t leave the bar.” “All right,” returned Jackey, “then
I’ll get it myself.” He went away to Toogood’s Inn and
returned in a few minutes with half-a-pint of rum. He gave
some to the tollkeeper and took a stiff glass himself. Then
he shook hands with the tollman, mounted his horse, and
rode on towards Parramatta,
On the Bth of July a great commotion was caused in
George Street, Sydney, by a soldier arresting a well-dressed
man and asserting that he recognised him as Jackey Jackey.
A large number of people assembled and there were plenty
of them quite ready to assist in the capture of the noted
bushranger. On the prisoner being taken to the police court
proof was soon forthcoming to show that he was a free man.
He was discharged and the soldier was censured for being
too officious. Since the visit of the bushranger in May had
become known a constant look-out had been kept in case he
should repeat his visit.
Jackey Jackey did not long maintain his freedom,
however. He one day went into Gray’s Black Horse Inn on
the Berrima road, called for some refreshments, went into a
sitting room, and threw himself on the sofa. He was
served by Miss Gray, and while he was drinking she pounced


on him and screamed. Her father and mother came to her
assistance, but Jackey Jackey fought with so much deter-
mination that he would no doubt have got away. A
carpenter named Waters was working near, however, and
hearing the noise he rushed in and struck Jackey Jackey on
the head with his shingling hammer. Knocked senseless,
the noted bushranger was easily secured. It will be
remembered that Gray’s Black Horse Inn was about three
miles from Mulligan’s farm, and was the place where Lynch
had bought the rum to treat Mr. and Mrs. Mulligan just
before he murdered them. The capture of Jackey Jackey
was effected for the purpose of securing the reward of
offered for him dead or alive. He was tried for the robbery
of the Boro store, and was sentenced to penal servitude for
life. He was first confined in Darlinghurst Gaol, Sydney,
but being detected in an attempt to escape, he was trans-
ferred to Cockatoo Island at the mouth of the Parramatta
River. While here he organised a band of twenty-five
prisoners, and made a desperate attempt to escape. The
gang overcame and tied a warder, and then jumped into the
harbour with the intention of swimming to Balmain. The
water police, however, were apprised of the mutiny and
captured the whole gang. It has been asserted that no
prisoner has escaped from Cockatoo Island. The distance
from the island to the shore is not very great, certainly less
than half-a-mile to the nearest point, but all who have tried
to swim it have either been retaken by the police or eaten
by sharks.
The gang was tried for this attempt at escape and were
sentenced to be sent to Port Arthur, Van Diemen’s Land.
Being such a desperate lot of scoundrels they were chained
down in the hold of the brig, in which they were forwarded,
for safety ; but, in spite of this precaution, they contrived to
get loose and were only prevented from capturing the brig
by the hatches being put on and battened down. They
reached Port Arthur in an almost suffocated condition, and
were nearly starved, as they had had no food for several
days ; the captain of the brig not daring to remove the
hatches, either to let in air, or to pass food to the
prisoners.
Jackey Jackey succeeded in escaping from Port Arthur


and immediately resumed his bushranging career. He was
captured, however, after a very short run and was sent to
Glenorchy Probation Station for milder treatment. Probably
this attempt at reformation came too late, but however this
may have been, it had little beneficial effect. Jackey
Jackey made his escape and again began bushranging. He
was captured in a house in Hobart Town and was sentenced
to death. The sentence, however, was commuted to penal
servitude for life and he was sent to Norfolk Island, where
we shall hear of him again later on.
In the meantime, Jackey Jackey’s old mate, Paddy
Curran, continued to rob as before. He went to Major
Lockyer’s station and entered the men’s hut while they
were having their Christmas dinner, in 1840. He had a
pair of handcuffs hanging at his belt, and was therefore
thought to be a constable out on the spree. He helped
himself freely to the good things on the table, and behaved
generally so as to induce the idea that he had been drinking.
One of the men, however, said he did not believe that the
visitor was “a drunken trap,” and Curran immediately
knocked him down with the butt of his gun. The man
jumped up at once and rushed at Curran. There was a
struggle for a time, and the man got Curran down. He
was, however, too much exhausted to hold him, and Curran
got up. The other men, who were all assigned servants on
the estate, looked on and applauded the wrestlers, but not
one of them made any motion to assist his mate, otherwise
Curran might easily have been captured. After his wrestling
match Curran walked out of the hut, mounted his horse, and
rode away. On the following day Curran again went to the
station, and found Mr. North, son-in-law to Major Lockyer,
and another man in the store. He called on them to bail
up, and both men held their hands up. Curran was about
to enter the store-door when he was pinioned from behind.
Mr. North and his store-keeper rushed forward, and after a
severe struggle, during which the bushranger tried hard to
get his gun free, he was captured and tied. The man who
had pinioned him was the man with whom he had had the
wrestling match the day before. Curran was taken to
Goulburn for examination, and was remanded to Berrima to
take his trial, “where,” said the Port Phillip Herald , “it


is to be hoped he will be more securely confined, and
not allowed to escape, as he did before.”
Paddy Curran and James Berry, another bushranger,
were sent to Berrima for trial in charge of Constables
McGuire and Wilsmore. They stopped at a hut on the
road for a rest and food. After they had finished their meal
Constable Wilsmore left the hut, and stayed away for some
time. At length Constable McGuire went to the door of
the hut to call him, and Berry and Curran, taking advantage
of his action, immediately rushed upon him. They were
handcuffed together, and this no doubt hampered their
movements. McGuire fought hard. The bushrangers had
seized the guns, and each held one. McGuire endeavoured
to wrest the gun from Curran with one hand, while he held
Berry’s gun off with the other hand. He yelled for
Wilsmore, but Wilsmore did not come. At length Berry
got his gun loose and shot McGuire in the back of the
head and in the shoulder. At this moment Constable
Wilsmore returned, and seeing his mate dead and the
prisoners in possession of the guns, ran away again. Curran
and Berry beat McGuire about the head until he was dead,
and a “fearful spectacle to look upon.” Then they searched
his body, and finding the key of the handcuffs, released
themselves and made off. The two bushrangers continued
their depredations for only a few months, however, as they
were tracked down by the police and captured. Curran
was tried on September 15th, 1841, for the murder of Mr.
Fuller. He afterwards confessed to this murder. He said
he was in company with two other bushrangers on the road
near Bungendore when he heard two men quarrelling.
Curran and his mates went towards the road and hid behind
trees. Presently two men, riding on one horse, came in
sight and appeared to be having a dispute about something.
They were talking loud and swearing at each other. Curran
stepped out from behind the tree and called on them to
stop. Instead of doing so they wheeled the horse and
began to gallop away. Curran fired and both men fell,
while the horse bolted along the road and soon got out of
sight. One of the men jumped up as soon as he fell and
ran into the bush and they did not see him again. The
other man was Mr. Fuller, and he was either dead or at the


point of death. “I turned him over and took about £ll
in money and a pocket knife out of his pockets,” said the
bushranger.
Curran was also tried for having committed a rape on
Mary Wilsmore. He went to the hut occupied by Wilsmore
on the Bth of February. It was near Bungendore. He
ordered Mrs. Wilsmore to get him some tea. A bushranger,
named White, was with him. Mrs. Wilsmore went outside
to get some wood to make up the fire and Curran follow r ed
her, knocked her down, and dragged her away to some
scrub where he committed the offence. He was found
guilty of both crimes and was sentenced to be hung. There
were another case of rape, several cases of murder, and
numbers of robberies and burglaries charged against him,
but none of these were heard.
James Berry was tried for the murder of Constable
McGuire, and was sentenced to death.
At the same sessions John Wright, another bushranger,
was also sentenced to death. The case against him was as
follows: —On May 17th, 1840, Mrs. Margaret Foley, living
at Long Swamp, about thirty miles from Bathurst, was going
from her house into the detached kitchen at the rear, when
three armed men appeared. She shouted “ Here’s the
bushrangers ” and ran into the kitchen. Mr. Cunningham,
Mr. Foley’s partner in the farm, came out of the house and
fired both barrels of his gun at the intruders, but failed to
hit any of them. The leader of the gang followed Mr.
Cunningham, who went back into the house; and saying,
“ It’ll be a long time before you and Steel (son of Captain
Steel) hunt us again,” shot him dead. Wright then went to
the kitchen, pushed the door open, and asked where Foley
was ? On being informed that he had gone to Bathurst, he
replied “ I’m sorry for it. I’d ’a served him the same as
Cunningham if I’d ’a caught him.” He swung his gun
about in such a reckless manner that one of the assigned
servants in the kitchen requested him to be careful, adding
“ Recollect that there are women and children here.” Wright
told him to mind his “ own business and be ” to
him. He continued to swear about Foley’s absence and
declared that he’d a “good mind to make a clean sweep.”
He became cooler afterwards, and having collected all the


jewellery and other valuables, went away. In passing
sentence the Chief Justice commented on the great number
of robberies which had been committed by Wright and his
gang and said there was no hope of mercy. Wright thanked
his Honour and then coolly asked whether he might have a
candle in his cell, as it was very dark.


CHAPTER VII.
The Jewboy Gang ; “ Come and Shoot the Bushrangers ; ” Constable
Refuses to Leave His Work to Hunt Bushrangers ; Saved by his
Wife; Robberies in Maitland ; Bushrangers in High Hats; The
Bullock-driver Captures the Bushrangers; An Attempt to Reach
the Dutch Settlements ; Mr. E. D. Day Captures the Gang;
Assigned Servants’ Attempt at Bushranging; Some other Gangs.
One of the most notorious of the early bushrangers of
Australia was Edward Davis, commonly known as The
Jewboy. Next to Jackey Jackey and, perhaps, Mathew
Brady, more yarns have been told about this hero of the
roads than of any other bushranger in the pre-gold digging
era. The Jewboy gang varied in numbers from time to
time, no doubt from the cause already noted in the
cases of Mike Howe and Mathew Brady. Numbers of
runaways joined the gang for a time and then returned to
what was called civilisation, gave themselves up as ordinary
runaways, and “ took their fifties like men.” Others were
shot or captured, and either hung or sent to a penal
settlement to continue their careers there. The Jewboy
appears to have commenced his depredations in 1839 in
what w r ere then the northern districts of the colony of New
South Wales. His range extended from about Maitland
to the New England ranges, he having taken possession of
the Great Northern Road, but he was not particular and,
therefore, either he or other members of his gang, or,
perhaps, independent bushrangers who were only supposed
to belong to the Jewboy gang, travelled considerable
distances from the road. On January 12th, 1839, Mr.
Biddington’s servant was stuck up and rofcbed near Mr.
Wight man’s station on the Namoi River, some distance


lower down than Tam worth. The servant sent an invitation
to Mr. Wightman to “ come and have a shot at the bush-
rangers.” The Sydney Gazette , of April 3rd, said: “The
country between Patrick’s Plains and Maitland has lately
been the scene of numerous outrages by bushrangers. A
party of runaway convicts, armed and mounted, have been
scouring the roads in all directions. In one week they
robbed no less than seven teams on the Wollombi Road,
taking away everything portable. They also went to Mr.
Nicholas’s house, and carried away a great quantity of
property after destroying a great many articles which they
did not want. Mr. Macdougall, late Chief Constable of
Maitland, and a party of volunteers set out in pursuit. The
Wollombi district constable is a tailor by trade, and he
refused to leave his work to accompany the party on the
plea that it would not pay him.” This reminds us that the
ordinary police force of the present day did not exist in
Australia at that time. In the larger towns there were paid
constables and watchmen who devoted their whole time to
guarding the citizens and their property ; but, in country
districts, a tradesman was paid a small sum per annum for
acting as constable. There was, however, a mounted patrol
force which is frequently spoken of as a police force. The
police duties in Sydney, Parramatta, and other large towns
were discharged by soldiers.
Major Sutton was stopped on the road by armed men,
and robbed on his return from attending the Maitland
police sessions, and a hut belonging to Mr. Windeyer, near
Stroud, was broken into and robbed. Robberies were very
frequent about Maitland, and in the Upper Hunter and
Patterson River districts, and these were all credited to the
Jewboy gang, which was just coming into notoriety. On
June 17th, 1839, four bushrangers were captured near
Murrurundi. They had a black gin and a black boy
with them. These were supposed to be part of the
gang which had bailed up Lieutenant Caswell’s place on
the 9th. When challenged Lieutenant Caswell refused
to stand. One of the bushrangers fired at him, but
his wife rushed forward and struck up the barrel
of the gun in time to save her husband’s life. For doing
this another of the gang knocked her down. They searched


the place and took away about worth in money,
jewellery, and other property. They held the road for a
day between Green Hills and Maitland, and robbed every
person who passed. The next day they went to Mr. Simp-
son’s house in West Maitland. A man employed there,
however, fired at them, and they made off. On the following
day Mr. Michael Henderson was knocked down and robbed
near Wallis’ Creek, on the road between East and West
Maitland. Mr. Gotham came up at the time and was
seized, thrown down, and robbed. As soon as news of these
robberies were reported, Lieutenant Christie with a party of
mounted troopers started in pursuit. From Maitland the
gang is supposed to have travelled northwards, and on the
15th Mr. Fleming received a note requesting him to get up
his horses early on the following morning. Instead of
complying with this insolent order, Mr. Fleming sounded
his men, and believing that he could trust them distributed
arms among them and stationed them at various advantageous
points. When the bushrangers arrived the men fired at
them. The robbers returned the fire and ran to a hut,
which they took possession of. A regular siege ensued, and
he black gin proved herself to be an expert in loading guns.
She was said to have acted as guard over men bailed up,
while the bushrangers were waiting to stop other travellers.
The bushrangers were dressed as gentlemen in clothes
which they had stolen from some of their victims. They
were well armed and had plenty of money. One of them,
Thomas Maguire, was said to be a free man.
During the year 1840, the Jewboy gang committed
numberless depredations. They robbed Mr. Deake’s house
at Wollombi, stole his horses, took horses from several
other stations, and held the roads at various places for a day
at a time, and robbed every one who passed along. The
head-quarters of the gang were at Doughboy Hollow in the
Liverpool Ranges, and it was said that any man riding along
the road near Murrurundi or Quirindi, or between these
places and Tamworth, was “ almost certain to lose his horse
and whatever property he might have about him, and be
compelled to walk to the next stage and perhaps further,
while the bushrangers were riding his horse to death
harrying other honest people.”


One of the stories told of the Jewboy was that he
“ rounded up ” the chief constable of the district with a
party of constables and volunteers who had gone out to
seek for him, and after having “ yarded them like a mob of
cattle,” took their horses, arms, and whatever money they
had, and rode away laughing. However, sometimes the
tables were turned on the bushranger. A bullock driver
named Budge was bailed up by two of the gang. Budge
had a little boy with him, and one of the bushrangers stood
over Budge and the child while the other was ransacking
the dray. Budge kept his eye on the sentry and, noticing
him look round to see how his mate was getting on, sprang
on him, snatched the pistol from his hand, and knocked
him down. Then he ordered the other bushranger to get
off his dray, and made the two stand side by side. He
kept them standing thus for about two hours in hopes that
some travellers would pass along and assist him to take
them to the nearest lock-up, but unfortunately no one came,
and he was forced at length to let them go. He, however,
kept their arms and saddles, and these he delivered to the
Commissary on arriving at his destination. There were
two guns and four pistols, all loaded. One of the saddles
was owned by Mr. Joliffe and was returned to him.
In connection with this it is said that Budge,
when he was an assigned servant on Mr. Potter’s
Marquesas Estate, some years before, had bolted with six
or seven other servants on the estate, and started to walk
northward with “ the hope of reaching the Dutch settle-
ments at Timour.” They travelled for three days, during
the last forty-eight hours of which they had nothing to eat.
Budge therefore left them and returned towards the Hunter
River. He was so exhausted, however, for want of food,
that he fell. He was discovered by a stockman who was
out rounding up the cattle on the station. Budge was
taken into the station in a deplorable condition, and for a
time was not expected to live. He recovered, however, and
continued to w r ork in the district. Of his companions
nothing was heard for some years, but later, when the
country northward was explored, remains were found which
were believed to be theirs. From these it was conjectured
that, after Budge left, one man had been killed “ to save


the lives of the others.” There was evidence that one man
had been cut up, it was supposed for food; but this had not
saved the others. That at least is what the evidence
pointed to. The remains had been so torn about by
dingoes, crows, and hawks, as to make it impossible to
identify them. The bodies were scattered over a wide
area, some of them being several miles away from the
others; and it is not even certain whether the whole
number were ever found.
Nine men were arrested in Sydney and charged with
being runaways. Eight of them proved that they were free
men, and the constable who arrested them was censured.
The case was cited as an instance of the arbitrary character
of the Bushranging Act, One of the men, however, proved
to be James Jackson, who had absconded from the estate of
Mr. Turner, of Maitland. He was sent back to Maitland
and convicted of bushranging, and was sent to penal
servitude for life. He was said to have taken part in some
of the robberies committed by the Jewboy gang, having
been at large since the middle of 1840.
On Sunday, September 26th, some of the gang bailed
up the mail man between Muswellbrook and Patrick’s Plains,
and are supposed to have taken some from the
letters. After this robbery one of them bolted from his
mates, taking the greater part of the proceeds of their
industry with him. He made his way to Sydney, where he
passed himself off for a time as a free immigrant. He was
arrested under the Bushrangers’ Act and charged with being
illegally at large. Then news of the mail robbery reached
Sydney, and the fellow was sent to Muswellbrook, where he
was identified by the mail man, and was sentenced to penal
servitude.
The gang afterwards went to Scone and stuck up
Mr. Danger’s store and Mr. Chiver’s Inn, The storeman in
charge, named Graham, fired at the bushrangers and then
ran for the soldiers, but one of the bushrangers followed
him, and before he reached the watchhouse, shot him dead.
They hastily made a bundle of such articles as took their
fancy, and left the town. They went to Captain Pike’s
station and seized the overseer, taking him with them.
When they were far enough in the bush they formed them


selves into “ a court,” and tried him “ for want of feeling.”
He was found guilty and sentenced to receive three dozen
lashes, “ which he got in good style.”
On Sunday, December 21st, 1840, Captain Horsley, of
Woodbury, Hexham, on the Hunter River, about five miles
from Maitland, was awakened and alarmed by the violent
barking of his dogs. He rose twice during the night and
went out on to the verandah of the house, but could see
nothing. As the noise continued he went out for the third
time, when three men rushed at him. They threatened him
with their guns and compelled him to surrender. They
then took him back to his bedroom, made him get into bed,
lie down, and cover his face with a pillow. The captain
and Mrs. Horsley were told that if either of them moved,
they would both be shot instantly. The robbers demanded
the keys, and on being told where to find them they
opened the drawers, cabinets, and cupboards, and made
bundles of the clothes, jewellery, plate, and money. _ They
collected all the guns and pistols in the house, using the
most violent and profane language during their search for
plunder. It is supposed that they were disturbed in their
work, as they left very suddenly and dropped two gold rings
and two silver candlesticks in their flight; as these articles
were picked up the following day outside the house. On
hearing of this outrage, Mr. Edward Denny Day headed the
soldiers and followed the bushrangers. They received tidings
of them at several points on the Great Northern Road, the
robbers bailing up people as they went along. They crossed
the Page River at Murrurundi and came up to the bush-
rangers near Doughboy Hollow. Here the Jewboy made a
stand. The fight was a desperate one, but ultimately the
bushrangers were beaten and Edward Davis (the Jewboy),
John Everett, John Shea, Robert Chitty, James Bryant, and
John Marshall were captured. Richard Glanvill, the
remaining member of the gang, made his escape, but was so
closely pursued that he was captured in the scrub on the
following day, the 24th December. They were tried and
convicted and were hung on March x6th, 1841.
In January, 1841, a public meeting was held in
Maitland, and a vote of thanks was passed to_ Mr. E. E).
Day for the service he had rendered the district in ridding it


of such a desperate lot of villains as those which constituted
t r! e ,j W r° y ? ang ’ It: . was also resolv ed that a subscription
should be taken up with the object of presenting Mr. Day
with a handsome testimonial, and this was duly carried out.
But the capture of the chief members of this formidable
gang by no means rid the northern district of bushrangers,
although no doubt it paved the way towards that desirable
6 u ’ i i t k° se who remained it is impossible to say
whether they were members of this gang or not. Some of
them had no doubt acted with it occasionally, while others
may have always operated independently, though many of
their depredations were credited to the gang by the public.
Charles Vaut and Henry Steele, two of the assigned
servants of Mr. George Furber, worked in the field all day
on Saturday, April 24th, 1841, and were seen in the kitchen
at eight o’clock at night. On the following Sunday evening
the Rev. John Hill Garvan, residing at Hull Hill, four miles
irom Maitland, was sitting at tea just after sunset, when two
men came to the door, presented their guns at him
and said, “ Don’t stir.” Mrs. Garvan was so much
a armed that she nearly fainted, and Mr. Garvan asked
that she might be allowed to retire to the bedroom.
Sit still, cried the robber, “or I’ll blow your brains
out and put your wife on the fire.” Mr. Garvan then
S^r j C ’I C sma^er _ man J Vaut, who was nearest to him,
and he snapped his gun at the minister, but it missed
fire. The bigger man then ordered Mrs. Garvan to “go and
sit on the fire.” “Oh, don’t, pray don’t, make me sit on
the fire, ’ cried the poor woman, but the ruffian took her by
the shoulders and forced her back on to the burning loo's.
At that moment a dray was heard coming along the road,
and Steele let her go. She was more frightened than hurt,
but her stockings were scorched. The two men then ran
away, and went back to their beds at Mr. Furber’s. They
were arrested on the following day by Chief Constable
George Wood, of Maitland. A pistol was found under the
sheet of bark which served them for a bedstead. When
brought up for trial, Judge Stephen (afterwards Sir Alfred
Stephen), said the law of England on burglary made no
provision for such an outrage as this, committed in a dwell-
ing before nine o’clock. If they were convicted they could


not be sentenced to more than fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The jury found them guilty, and they were sentenced to the
term mentioned. They were afterwards charged with shoot-
ing at Mr. Garvan with intent to do grievous bodily harm,
and were found guilty and sentenced to transportation to a
penal settlement for life. It is more than probable that
these men, and many others like them, assisted the bush-
rangers whenever an opportunity occurred —that is, when the
bushrangers operated in the neighbourhood in which they
were assigned servants, but without actually becoming mem-
bers of the gang. There was a sort of freemasonry among
the convicts which impelled them to assist each other in
their war against society, and even in cases where it was
obviously to their interests to stand by and assist their
masters, their sympathies with the bushrangers and their
hatred of all forms of authority impelled them irresistibly
to take the opposite side, to their own individual detriment.
But the principal gang having been broken up in this district,
robberies of the kind described gradually ceased, and it was
some years before this district was again disturbed as it had
been. In other districts, however, the bushrangers were
still active.
Mr. Michel, of Kurraducbidgee, was travelling to Port
Phillip in February, 1840. He went into an inn near Yass
for food and refreshment and found the place in the hands
of the bushrangers. Fourteen men were bailed up and
Michel was compelled to take his place in line against the
wall of the bar. The bushrangers handed him a pannikin
full of tea before they took his money. Knowing what was
coming, he held the pannikin as if the tea was too hot to
drink and, when the bushranger in charge was looking away,
dropped his roll of bank notes into it. He stood very quietly
and when the bushranger came to feel his pockets there were
only a few shillings in them. They appeared to be quite
satisfied and, on his saying that he had important business
to attend to, he was allowed to go. He carried the pannikin
out with him, took the money out and put it in his pocket
without being observed, and threw the tea away. Then he
mounted his horse, rode to the nearest police station and
gave information. The police started for the hotel imme-
diately, but the robbers had decamped and no information


could be obtained as to the direction in which they had
gone.
William Hutchinson, who had run away from the
prisoners’ barracks at Hyde Park, Sydney, in July, 1836,
was captured on June 28th, 1840, at the corner of Market
and George Streets. He had been out with a gang in the
Windsor district and a reward of £2s had been offered for
him.
In January, 1841, six armed men called at the lock-up
at Appin, and asked Constable Laragy who was in charge
to put them on the right road for Campbelltown. They said
that they had come from Kings Falls. The constable stepped
back for his gun, when one of them presented his gun at
Laragy and told him not to be a fool. They didn’t want to
hurt him. As there was no one there to assist him he
answered “All right,” and showed them the road, which they
probably knew as well as he did. It was said that this was
merely a ruse de guerre to let the police know that they were
out.
On Sunday, October 24th, 1841, a man entered the
house of a soldier in Parramatta and offered to pay half-a-
crown for a night’s lodging. The offer was accepted, but
the host afterwards, noticing that his lodger carried pistols,
became suspicious and went to the police station. A
constable accompanied him back and identified the lodger
as a bushranger who “was wanted.” It was said that he
had stuck up Mr. Frazer and several other persons just
outside the town. The constable made an attempt to seize
him and was promptly knocked down. The bushranger ran
towards the river, and was followed and caught after a
severe struggle. He walked quietly back towards the
lock-up until he came to the corner of Macquarie Street,
when suddenly wrenching himself free from the two men
who were holding his arms, he exclaimed “This is my
road,” and “bolted.” He was seen two days later at
Longbottom, about halfway between Parramatta and
Sydney, and was chased, but succeeded in eluding capture
in the scrub at Five Dock.
In February, 1842, the house of Mr. Gray in Balmain
was stuck up. The bushrangers collected the watches,
rings, money, and other valuables, and then compelled Mr.


and Mrs. Gray and the servants to drink tumblers full of
sherry wine to their success. They were very merry, and
drank Mr. and Mrs. Gray’s healths. When they departed
they took a dozen and a half of sherry and a dozen of
bottled ale with them to “ have a spree in the bush.”
In the same month Colonel and Mrs. Gwynne, Major
Woore, and Mr. Thomas Woore, J.P., with the Chief
Constable of Goulburn, and another constable, were driving
near Bargo Brush. The party was in two carriages, with the
constable on horseback. They were stopped by a gang
which it was said had just robbed the Goulburn mail. The
constable on horseback was the only one of the party who
carried a gun, and he bolted as soon as the bushrangers
appeared, dropping his musket. The robbers took
;£ii 14s. and the gun, but after holding a consultation
among themselves they returned three one-pound notes and
the fourteen shillings so that “ the gentlemen might drink
their healths.” Then, wishing the party good-day, they
departed.
In January, William Gunn and John South were arrested
as runaways from the station at Port Macquarie. It was said
that they had been at large for more than a year and had
been with the Jewboy. They robbed the northern mail
near Scone and were followed and captured. They wore
black coats and vests, beaver hats and clean white shirts,
“as if they had just come from an inn or a gentleman’s
residence.”
In March, 1842, John Wilkinson alias Wilton escaped
from Towrang stockade, carrying away with him Captain
Christy’s double-barrelled gun and a fowling piece. He was
joined by another runaway named John Morgan, and on
March 10th they took possession of the Sydney Road near
Berrima and bailed up every person who passed. They
plundered several drays and stopped the mail-man. They
searched the mail bags, but finding no money in the letters,
they permitted the mail-man to gather them up and proceed
on his journey. They took seven pounds from a passenger
named Jones, but on his saying that he would have no
money to pay for his board and lodging while in Sydney,
they returned him two pounds. At Red Bank they stole
a horse belonging to Mr. Post to carry their plunder.


Further along the road towards Sydney, they met a trooper
and a constable, and told them that they were in pursuit of
a woman who had run away from her husband and had
taken his spring cart and horse and some of his property.
They pretended that they expected to overtake her before
she reached Liverpool. At Crisp’s Inn they had some
champagne. Not far from there, still going towards Sydney,
they tried to bail up Dr. McDonald, but he rode away.
They fired at him but failed to overtake him. They slept
that night in the little church at Camden. The following
day they rode straight into Sydney, put up at a first-class
hotel and remained there for several days, “living like
gentlemen.” By some means, however, they excited
the suspicions of the police and became alarmed at
the enquiries made about them. They therefore left suddenly
and returned towards Berrima. Mr. Post, who had been
away from home when his horse was stolen, started out in
company with his son-in-law, Tom Howarth, to follow the
bushrangers. The rapidity of their motions, however, threw
him off the scent. On their return to the district in which
he lived he met them and tried to bail them up, but the
bushrangers rode away. The following day Chief-Constable
Hildebrand, of Stone Quarry, and Tom Howarth saw the
bushrangers near Bargo Brush. Hildebrand pretended to
be drunk, and rolled about on his horse as if he was going
to fall and Howarth started singing to heighten the
illusion. This put the bushrangers off their guard and
they allowed the constable to come close up. As soon as
he was near enough Hildebrand pulled out his pistol and
called upon them to surrender. They were taken by surprise
and yielded at once. Howarth boasted that these two made
eighteen bushrangers whom he had helped to capture. The
two men were tried at Berrima, and sentenced to penal
servitude for life. They narrowly escaped being charged
with murder, as one of the bullock drivers stuck up on the
10th had been severely wounded for forcibly resisting the
ransacking of his dray. He recovered, however.
Mr. Harrison, a jeweller and watchmaker, of Sydney,
went to den Rock, and walked from thence to Berrima, to
call on the settlers along the road to solicit orders. He was
bailed up by three men, who threatened to cut his throat


with a razor. They tied his handkerchief over his eyes,
took three £1 notes, a cheque for jQi, and an order for
from his pockets. They returned the order saying it
was “no good to them.” A bullock driver and another
traveller were bailed up, and then the bushrangers went into
the road to stop a gig, and Mr. Harrison bolted into the
bush.
Mr. Campbell was travelling along the Dog Trap Road
when he was bailed up by three men and robbed. He
returned to Parramatta and gave information to Chief
Constable Ryan, who dressed in private clothes and with
another constable similarly disguised started to drive along
the road in Mr. Campbell’s gig. Between Anlezack’s Inn
and Liverpool three men came out from behind trees and
called on the constables to stand. Ryan immediately pulled
up, and presenting his pistol at the men called on them to
surrender in the Queen’s name. The other -constable
jumped out of the gig and also presented his pistol, and the
robbers capitulated. They were identified as John McCann
and William Lynch, escapees from Norfolk Island, who had
landed from a whale boat some months previously, and
James O’Donnell, alias William McDonald, who had
absconded from the Hyde Park Barracks a short time
before, in September, 1842. A considerable amount of
property was recovered when their camp was searched.
Mr. F. E. Bigge, a settler in the northern district, started
to take a drove of horses across the country to Moreton Bay.
He was assisted by Alexander McDonald and two assigned
servants. When between Schofield’s and Brennan’s stations,
near Tamworth, they were called upon to halt by three
armed men, known as Wilson, Long Tom or Coxen’s Tom,
and Long Ned. The order was obeyed, and then Mr. Bigge
was ordered to strip. He refused, and one of the bush-
rangers called to another of them to knock him down with
the butt of his gun; but, observing that Mr. Bigge was
trying to get his pistol out of his belt, he fired. The first shot
was said to have been fired by Long Tom, but Wilson fired
immediately afterwards and wounded Bigge in the shoulder.
McDonald, having no arms, rode away to Schofield’s for
assistance. In the meantime Bigge succeeded in getting his
pistol out of his belt and fired at the nearest bushranger,


who fired in return, the other two also firing. Bigge
drew his second pistol and fired, and the bushrangers
having expended their ammunition ran away. Bigge
then mounted and rode to Brennan’s. Finding no one
there he went on, and his horse bolted and threw him. He
then walked to Nillenga, where he found Dr. Jay, who
dressed his wounds, which were not considered dangerous.
In the meantime, McDonald, when he started to go to
Schofield’s, met Mr. Kayes and another gentleman, but
they refused to go with him to assist Bigge. McDonald
w r ent on to the station, but not being able to obtain any
arms or assistance there, he rode back again, and found the
bushrangers’ horses and some baggage, which they had left
behind when Mr. Bigge put them to flight. McDonald
collected the horses, \vhich had been scattered, and drove
them to Tam worth, where Mr. Allman soon organised a
large party to go in pursuit of the bushrangers. Wilson
had been captured by Mr. Robertson only a few weeks
before and had been sent to the chain gang at Maitland,
from whence he had effected his escape. They were all
three caught and were sent to penal servitude.


CHAPTER VIII.
Bushranging in South Australia ; The Robbers Captured in Melbourne ;
A Remarkable Raid in Port Phillip ; Going Out for a Fight with
Bushrangers; A Bloody Battle; Cashan and Mclntyre; The
Fight with the Mail Passengers; Cashan Escapes from the
Lock-up ; Is Re-captured ; Mclntyre Caught at Gammon Plains.
Three bushrangers named Wilson, Green, and another,
robbed the settlers in the vicinity of Lyndoch Valley, South
Australia, and extorted heavy contributions from their
victims in the latter part of the year 1839 and the beginning
of 1840. These robberies had been going on for some
months before news of them reached Adelaide. The
colony had been only founded a little more than three
years before, and communication was difficult and very
irregular. There were no roads and the police provisions
were not yet of a character to enable the authorities to cope
effectually with such an outbreak as this.
The robbers called at Mr. Read’s station and knocked
at the door of the house. The woman opened the door
and was immediately knocked down by one of the robbers
without any notice being given or question asked. Another
robber fired his musket at her at so close range that the
wadding of the gun bruised her cheek, but the slugs with
which it was loaded did not injure her. Immediately on
hearing of this outrage, Mr. Inman, superintendent of the
police, left Adelaide with a party of mounted troopers, and
as he proceeded on his way, news of other robberies were
spread about. The movements of the police, however,
appear to have been known to the bushrangers, as they
were fired at when passing through some scrub. Not
knowing how many men there might be in the gang, Mr.
Inman intrenched himself, and sent to Adelaide for more


men, and in a few days parties of mounted police arrived
from Gawler and Mount Barker. The district was
thoroughly searched, but without success. About the
middle of February, three men on horseback arrived in
Melbourne, Port Phillip, Their principal place of resort
was the Royal Highlander Inn, in Queen Street, where they
spent money freely and drank heavily. One of the men
was recognised by the police as a convict from Van
Diemen’s Land, free by service. He was arrested on
suspicion of having stolen the horse he rode, from Mr. Cox,
but as Mr. Cox’s superintendent could not swear to the
animal, although he bore the station brand, the man was
discharged and immediately left Melbourne. On Sunday,
February 23rd, Wilson was arrested for drunkenness and
rowdyism, and was fined ss. next morning at the police
court. While there he was seen and recognised by two
South Australian policemen who had been to Sydney with
some prisoners, and were on their way home. Wilson and
Green were both arrested that evening and charged with the
robbery at Mr. Read’s station, South Australia. They were
detained until warrants could be obtained from Adelaide,
when they were sent there and convicted. The robbers had
travelled from South Australia to Melbourne, via Portland
Bay, and had probably stolen the horses and perhaps some
other property on the road. The third man, whose name is
not given, was searched for, but was not found, and it was
supposed he had crossed the Murray into New South Wales.
What is generally said to be the first highway robbery in
the Port Phillip district took place in April, 1842. A gang,
composed of John Ellis, alias Yanky Jack, Jack Williams,
Young Fogarty, and a “Van Demonian” named Jepps,
bailed up Mr. Darling and a friend as they were riding to
an out-station on the Dandenong run to brand cattle. The
robbers took j£ 2 and a silver watch from Mr. Darling, and
one shilling and sixpence from his friend. Mr. Darling
was riding a thorough-bred horse, and Jack Williams
remarked that he was a fine beast, and ordered Mr. Darling
to show off his paces. This was a blunder on the part of
the bushranger, who should have tried the horse himself,
and Mr. Darling was not slow in taking advantage of it.
He did not wish to lose his horse, and therefore jerked the


bit, rolled about in the saddle, and pretended that he had
as much as he could do to keep his seat while the horse
was cantering. Williams watched as the horse went past
him a couple of times, and then said, “That’ll do. He
seems to be a rough ’un.” He contented himself with
the horse the friend was riding, giving him his knocked-up
horse in exchange. The bushrangers handed Mr. Darling
his watch, asked for it again, and returned it a second time
after passing it round for each to look at. Then as the gang
was going away Williams turned back, asked Mr. Darling
to let him see what the time was, and when that gentleman
again showed him the watch he took it and put it into his
pocket. He then produced a bottle of rum, and after having
taken a swig himself passed it to Mr. Darling and his friend
with the remark that “ a drop of grog was good on a cold
day.” Then he took five shillings from his pocket, gave
this also to Darling to “ drink their healths with at the next
public-house,” said “good day,” and rode on after his mates.
The gang went along the main road up the Plenty River
robbing the stations on either side of the road as they came
to them. They stuck up Messrs. Serjeantson, Peet, Bond,
Langor, Marsh, Fleming, Rider, Bear, and Captain Harrison,
collecting a goodly assortment of watches and chains, mostly
silver, and some money. It was after dark when they
finished at Mr. Bear’s house, and they camped by the creek
within sight of the house for the night.
Early next morning the gang took to the road again and
robbed Messrs. Sherwin, Roland, and Wills. At about nine
o’clock they reached Mr. Campbell Hunter’s station as the
family was sitting down to a breakfast of roast duck,
kippered herrings, and coffee. Williams walked into the
room pistol in hand and cried, “ Put up your hands.” He
was immediately obeyed. Then looking round he said
“ Gentlemen, you must make room for your betters.” Those
present were Messrs. Campbell Hunter, Alexander Hunter,
Streatham, Rumbold, Boswell, and Dr. Grimes. They were
made to stand up against the wall while the roast ducks and
other good things were removed to a slab hut used as a
store room. The bushrangers had, however, only just
begun their breakfast when a large party of armed men
galloped up.
H


News of the robberies of the previous day had reached
Melbourne in the evening, and Messrs. P. Snodgrass and
H. Fowler, of the Melbourne Club, had resolved to “go
out for a hunt.” They got their arms and horses, and
started, and were joined by several other gentlemen, among
whom were Mr. Sergeantson, and others who had been
robbed, to the number of about thirty. The bushrangers
hastily made the Messrs. Hunter and their other prisoners
promise not to take part in the coming fight, and then took
up positions behind the fence. Undeterred by this show of
resistance, Mr. Gourlay jumped his horse over the fence,
alighting close to Jack Williams, so close, in fact, that the
flash from the bushranger’s pistol, which was fired
immediately, singed his whiskers and burned his cheek.
The bushranger dashed his pistol down on the ground with
an oath, and drew another, but Mr. Snodgrass, leaning over
the fence, shot him in the head before he could make use
of it. Thinking he had killed his man, Snodgrass turned
to Yanky Bill, when Williams jumped up and fired point
blank at Gourlay, who shouted, “Tell my friends I died
game,” and fell. Mr. Chamberlain shot Williams through
the head and killed him. Much to the surprise of those
near, Mr. Gourlay jumped up again almost as quickly as he
had fallen, and it was soon discovered that the pistol bullet
had smashed his powder flask and glanced off, inflicting
only a severe bruise.
On the death of their leader the bushrangers rushed to
the hut, and took shelter there, pointing their pistols
through the openings between the slabs, and a fierce
fusilade took place, during which Mr. Fowler was severely
wounded. Then there was a pause. It was believed that
the ammunition of the robbers had been expended, and a
horse dealer residing in the neighbourhood, named John
Ewart, but usually known as Hoppy Jack, volunteered
to go in and speak to the bushrangers. At first this
was objected to as being too dangerous, but Hoppy
Jack insisted, and said it would be “ all right.” He
advanced towards the hut waving a white handkerchief, and
after a few words at the door was admitted. The result of
this embassy was that the bushrangers agreed surrender
provided that their captors would sign a petition to the


judge to deal leniently with them. This was readily agreed
to, and the men came out and gave themselves up just as a
party of mounted police appeared on the scene, and the
prisoners were handed over to them.
This raid w'as principally remarkable for the boldness
and rapidity with which it was executed. The bushrangers
travelled directly from one station to the next, taking the
shortest route, which w'as generally along the main road.
The robberies were effected in very short time at each
station, the bushrangers contenting themselves with money,
watches, rings, and other property carried on the person.
There was no time wasted in breaking open boxes or
drawers, and there was no necessity to spare their horses, as
a knocked-up horse could be exchanged for a fresh one
almost whenever the robbers pleased. Mr. Gourlay was
little the worse for his bruises and burns, although the
powder marks on his face remained, but Mr. Fowler died a
few days after the fight. The prisoners were tried and con-
victed, and in spite of the recommendation to mercy duly
signed by their captors and forwarded to the judge,
were sentenced to death for the murder of Mr. Fowler.
Jepps confessed that it was he who had fired the fatal shot,
but he also said that he had refused to join in an attempt
to murder Judge Willis, the resident judge in Port Phillip.
They were all hung in Melbourne, in May, 1842.
During the following two years there was little bush-
ranging in any part of New South Wales, but in 1844
Mclntyre and Cashan, alias Nowlan, held the roads between
Hartley, Bathurst, and Mudgee for several days, robbing all
who passed. On December 2, 1845, they stopped the
mail at Bowenfels, on the main Sydney road at the foot
of the Blue Mountains, on the western side. They called
on the passengers to hand over their money and valuables,
but two of them resisted and drew their pistols. A fight
- took place, and the bushrangers were worsted, Cashan being
captured, while Mclntyre ran away into the bush. Cashan
was taken to Bathurst, tried, convicted, and sentenced to be
transported for life. He was being taken to Sydney, in
April, to be sent to Cockatoo Island, when the escort
stopped at Weatherboard Hut for the night, Cashan being
lodged in the lock-up. He broke out during the night, and


could nowhere be found. He travelled to Gundagai,
where he stuck up Mr. Nicholson’s station, taking clothes,
provisions, horse, saddle, and bridle. Mr. Andrews, who was
in charge of the station, and who was absent when Cashan
called, on hearing of the robbery followed the bushranger. He
rode to Charles Simpson’s station, but was told by Messrs.
Edwin and Alfred Tompson, who resided there, that no
bushranger had been seen. While they were talking a man
on horseback came in sight, and Andrews recognised him
as the robber from the description that had been given of
him and the horse he was riding. Andrews retreated into
the house out of sight, and Cashan rode up, dismounted, and
asked for refreshments, but he was immediately seized by
the Tompsons and told that he was a prisoner. He asked,
“ How dared they insult a gentleman in that manner,” and
struggled hard to escape; but, finding that this was no use,
he became quiet, and said he was ready to go wherever
they wished him to. They took him towards the house,
which was only a few steps distant, when suddenly he broke
away with a laugh, ran down the bank, and plunged into
the Murrumbidgee River. The river was in flood at the
time, and was therefore twice its ordinary width, and running
strongly. Cashan, encumbered with a great coat, and
perhaps with other stolen property, could make no headway
against the current. He sank at once, rose some distance
lower down, and succeeded in grasping the pendulous
branches of a swamp oak ( Casuarina) hanging over the
water. After a severe struggle he contrived to haul himself
out of the water, and took a seat in the fork of the tree.
He was still on the same side of the river as Simpson’s
station, and at no great distance from the bank, although
the flood waters prevented Alfred and Edwin Tompson
from getting close to him. However, Edwin Tompson
covered him with his pistol, and threatened to shoot him if
he moved. They talked for some time, and the bush-
ranger, seeing no chance of escape, agreed to give himself
up. He dropped into the water, swam to the bank,
and walked quietly to the house, where he was tied and
made secure for the night. The next day he was taken to
Yass by the Tompsons and Andrews, and in spite of his
frequent attempts to break the handcuffs and make his


escape, he was safely lodged in the lock-up. He was
identified as one of the men who had burned Dr. Bell’s
house at Braidwood, and robbed the Braidwood mail.
When robbing the Braidwood mail in company with
Mclntyre, he nearly committed murder, one of the pas-
sengers having been dangerously wounded. He was
convicted and sentenced to be hung.
In the meantime, his former partner had not been idle.
On the 21 st April, 1846, the two brothers Cutts were
travelling towards Sydney with a number of horses, when
they were stopped at Meadow Flat, less than a quarter of
a-mile from Howard’s Inn. They were compelled to
dismount, place their money on the ground, and retire.
They deposited 18s. in notes and silver and a watch on
the ground, and then stepped back several paces as they
had been ordered to do. William Cutts begged that a seal
attached to his watch might be returned to him, as it was a
present from his dead wife, and he valued it accordingly.
The bushranger, who was supposed to be Mclntyre, told
him that “ if there was any more palaver ” he would get his
brains blown out. The robber took up the money and
watch, mounted his horse, and rode away. As soon as
information of the robbery was received in Bathurst the
mounted troopers started in pursuit of the bushranger.
On Monday, August nth, two men went to the Golden
Fleece Inn, Gammon Plains, and remained drinking till
Friday. On that day the landlord, Mr. Perfrement, received
his copy of the Maitland Mercury , and saw in it a list of
the numbers of the bank notes recently stolen from
the Singleton mail. He compared the numbers with those
of the notes he had received from his two guests, and
finding that some of them corresponded, he went to the
police station and gave information. The inn was not a
large building, but there were several out-houses and the
bushrangers were in some of these. Perfrement and the
police went to one of these huts at the rear of the inn and
found Mclntyre there. Perfrement put his hand on the
bushranger’s shoulder and said “You’re a prisoner.” “Am I,”
exclaimed Mclntyre jumping backwards, “ Come on.” Con-
stable Barker rushed in and a fierce wrestling match begun
and lasted for some minutes. Then Mclntyre got on top


and tried to get his pistol out from his belt. Mr. Perfrement,
who had snatched the other pistol from him when the
wrestling first began, now threatened to shoot him if he did
not surrender, but as the bushranger took no notice Perfre-
ment endeavoured to twist the other pistol out of his hand.
While this struggle was going on Barker wriggled from under
the bushranger, got up, and struck him so heavily with his
fist as to stun him. Mclntyre lay still for several minutes
before he regained consciousness, and by that time his hands
were tied. His companion was found fast asleep in another
hut and was easily captured. They were tried in Maitland,
and Mclntyre was subsequently hung, while his companion
was sent to penal servitude.


CHAPTER IX.
Bushrangers and Pirates ; Capture of H.M. Brig Cyprus by Bush-
rangers ; A Piratical Voyage ; Stealing the Schooners Edward and
Waterwitch ; Mutiny of Prisoners on H.M. Brig Governor Phillip
at Norfolk Island ; The Trial of the Mutineers at Sydney ; How
Captain Boyle Recaptured the Vessel.
The connection between bushranging and piracy may not
at first seem very apparent, but the bushrangers stole more
than one vessel, and started a career of crime on the high
seas instead of on the high roads, and our story of the bush-
rangers would be incomplete were no reference made to
thefts of vessels and boats, and their use as vehicles for
robbery. It is not very surprising that so many convicts
made their escapes from Macquarie Harbour, Port Arthur,
and Norfolk Island, in whale boats which they stole, long as
the voyages made were. The whale boat has played a
conspicuous part in Australian exploration. Lieutenant
Bass made his memorable voyage from Sydney, when he
discovered the straits which bear his name, in a whale boat
in which he started to explore the coast. Flinders and
many others also made long voyages and many discoveries
in whale boats ; for the Pacific, the largest of the oceans of
the world, however stormy it may be at times, fully deserves
the name bestowed upon it by early navigators, for several
months in the year. Hence a voyage in a whale boat from
Norfolk Island or from Van Diemen’s Land is not so
dangerous as the distance to be travelled might suggest.
We know that even now it is no very uncommon
occurrence for convicts to steal boats and sail or
row from New Caledonia to some part of the coast of
Australia, and we know also that the Australians have at times
entertained no very friendly feelings towards France for


persisting in maintaining a penal settlement so near their
shores. It is not with the capture of whale or ships’ boats
that we now have to deal, but with the seizure of larger
vessels. In August, 1829, the Government brig Cyprus ,
commanded by Captain Harris, left Hobart Town for
Macquarie Harbour with thirty-three convicts on board,
the crew consisting of twelve, including the Commander,
and there were also some soldiers under the command of
Lieutenant Carew, and some women and children, number-
ing eleven altogether. The brig put into Research Bay
on the south coast ot the island, and anchored, but a gale
arose and the brig was driven from her moorings, and lost
her anchor and cable. She put back to Hobart Town,
obtained a fresh anchor, and started again. On reaching
Research Bay she was again anchored, and the anchor and
cable lost a few days before were recovered. At about six
in the evening, while the men on board were having supper,
Lieutenant Carew, Dr. Williams, a soldier, and Popjoy (the
coxswain), with two or three convicts, started in the long
boat to catch some fish. They had not rowed very far
when they heard shouting and some shots on board the
brig, and Lieutenant Carew exclaimed: “ Oh, my God!
The convicts have taken the ship.” They pulled back as
rapidly as possible, and Carew tried to climb on board, but
was threatened with a musket by one of the prisoners.
When the trigger was pulled the gun flashed in the pan and
Carew again tried to get on board, but was pushed back into
the boat. He then asked the convicts who were clustered
round to give him his wife and children, and these
were passed into the boat. Mrs. Williams, her servant,
and the wives of a couple of the soldiers were also
put into the boat. It appears that when the long boat
left there were only Captain Harris and two soldiers
on deck, the rest of the crew and passengers being
below at supper. Suddenly five heavily ironed prisoners
made a rush, and knocked down the captain and two
sentinels. Others rushed to the hatchway, and began to
put the hatches on, when the soldiers and crew, fearing that
they would be suffocated, agreed to surrender. They gave
up their arms, and as they came on deck they were
conducted to one of the boats, in which several prisoners


who had had their irons taken off seated themselves at the
oars. Popjoy was compelled to go on board, as it was said
his services would be required for navigating the vessel.
Then the captain, the lieutenant, and doctor, with the
women, the soldiers, and the crew, were rowed to an island
in the bay and landed. Seventeen of the prisoners were
also landed, the mutineers only numbering sixteen of those
on board. The boats were hoisted in, the sails lowered,
and the ship got under way. But as she started Popjoy
jumped overboard and swam ashore. As the brig went
down the bay the men on board shouted “Hooray! the
ship’s our own, hooray ! ” The captain and others landed
on the little island in the bay, with no means of reaching
the mainland, suffered great hardships, for several days
they had nothing but a few mussels and other shellfish
which they picked up on the beach to eat. Popjoy, how-
ever, came to the rescue. He made a sort of canoe of bark
and sticks, and sailed out into the open sea. Here he saw
the barque Zebra , and made signals. He was taken on
board, and a couple of boats with provisions were sent in
to feed and bring off the fugitives. For these services
Popjoy, who was a convict with a ticket-of-leave, received
a free pardon. What became of the brig and its crew
of mutineers was for some time a matter of conjecture.
It was reported in Australia that she had been seen
at Valparaiso. Then it was said that she had foundered
at sea owing to the ignorance of navigation of the
men on board. However, in the beginning of March,
1830, _ the Committee of Supercargoes at Canton
were informed that four persons with a ship’s boat had
landed. They represented themselves as part of the crew
of an English merchant vessel which had been wrecked on
the China coast. Ihe story was not believed, as no such
wreck had been reported, but enquiries were made and a
man calling himself William Waldon, of Sunderland, was
examined. He represented himself as having been the
commander of the brig Edward , which left the London
Docks in December, 1828, bound for Rio de Janeiro. On
his return voyage he had called at Valparaiso and the
Sandwich Islands. At Japan his ship had been fired at
from a battery and much damaged. He sailed for Manilla,


but had to abandon the brig near Formosa, as she leaked
heavily. He and the fifteen men of the crew had taken to
the boats and all had been lost except himself and the three
men with him. The boat bore the name :—“ The Edward,
of London—William Waldon.” Although some doubt was
still entertained the Committee arranged for the four men
to be taken to England in the Charles Grant. A few days
after their departure another boat with three men on board
arrived at Whampoa. The leader, Huntley, represented
himself as having been wrecked in the brig Edward, but
said the captain’s name was James Wilson and that she had
left London in June, 1828, and gone straight to the Cape.
When near the Ladrones he had quarrelled with Wilson and
run away. As the two accounts differed so materially the
former suspicions were revived and Huntley was sent
home under arrest in the Kilhe Castle, and on the
arrival of the Charles Grant in London the three
men on board, John Anderson, Alexander Telford,
and Charles Williams, were arrested. Waldon had landed
at Margate, and thus escaped for the time, but was arrested
in London a week or two later. The four men were
brought up at the Thames Police Court on September 22 nd,
1830, for examination, and were charged with piracy. The
principal witness was Popjoy, who had returned to England
on receiving his pardon. He identified Huntley as George
James Davis, a convict who had been sentenced to death at
Hobart Town for highway robbery, but whose sentence had
been commuted to penal servitude at Macquarie Harbour.
Davis was one of the leaders of the mutiny when the brig
Cyprus had been seized. Alexander Stevenson, sometimes
called Stevie, who now appeared as 1 elford, had been
convicted in Glasgow in 1824, and had been reconvicted
for bushranging in Australia. John Beveridge, alias
Anderson, was sentenced in Perth in 1821, and was further
sentenced in Hobart Town to seven years’ penal servitude
for having robbed Mr. Peachey. William Watts, alias
George Williams, was known in Van Diemen’s Land as
Wattle. He ran away from a chain gang and took to the
bush. He had stabbed one man and had attempted to
shoot another. Of Swallow, Popjoy knew nothing, but had
seen him on board the Cyprus before the mutiny. The


boat which had been sent from China to England was
identified by Popjoy as one belonging to the Cyprus , the
names Edward and Wa/don, having been painted on it
since the mutiny. The prisoners were tried at the
Admiralty Court, on November 4th. Popjoy, finder cross-
examination, admitted that he had been transported to New
South Wales for horsestealing. He had been assigned to a
master, and had run away. He had received two hundred
lashes at Botany Bay, but this was “only a few.”
He had been sent to Van Diemen’s Land, and had
been charged with highway robbery near Hobart Town,
but had “proved his innocence.” He had “buried in
oblivion all the charges” made against him in the colony.
He went to Macquarie Harbour in the Cyprus as a volunteer.
Dr. Williams, surgeon, said that he was on board the Cyprus
when she was seized by convicts in Research Bay, in
August, 1829. He had gone in the long boat with
Lieutenant Carew to fish, and when the boat was some
distance from the brig they had heard a clashing of arms.
They put back, and Lieutenant Carew tried to get on
board but was repulsed, and a pistol was snapped at him.
He then asked for his sword, but a convict named Ferguson,
who had it, refused to give it up. When Mrs. Carew and
Mrs. Williams were put into the boat, Swallow came to the
side of the vessel and said, “Gentlemen, you see I’m a pressed
man. lam unarmed, and surrounded by armed men.” In
consequence of this testimony, Swallow, alias Waldon, was
acquitted, but was subsequently sent to the colony to serve
his original sentence. Davis, alias Huntley, Watts, alias
Williams, Stevenson, alias Telford, and Beveridge, alias
Anderson, were sentenced to death.
On January 13, 1840, six bushrangers were captured
at Woolnorth, near Circular Head, and were charged with
having attempted to seize the schooner Edward, the
property of the Circular Head Shipping Company of Laun-
ceston, Van Diemen’s Land. The object with which this
vessel was seized was to enable the bushrangers to escape to
one of the South Sea Islands, where they intended to settle.
The schooner Waterwitch was seized at the Forth River
by three bushrangers on January 27 th. The robbers told
the captain that they did not wish to do him or his vessel


any harm, but that they were determined to go to Sealers’
Cove. If he liked to take them, well and good; if not,
they would take the vessel there themselves and turn her
adrift. The captain agreed. He took the bushrangers to
where they wished to go, and parted with them very
amicably.
From time to time several small vessels disappeared, and
it was supposed that their captors had succeeded in naviga-
ting them to some of the Islands, but as nothing further was
ever heard of them, it is supposed that they either foundered
at sea, or that if the bushrangers reached the islands, their
predatory habits or brutal violence embroiled them with the
natives, and they were killed in the fights which took place,
but it is impossible to do more than conjecture their fate,
and to speculate as to whether their acts of aggression were
the cause of some of the apparently unprovoked attacks of
the savages on the crews or passengers of other vessels.
This subject has never been adequately investigated, and
there is too little evidence available to enable us at present
to do more than refer to the subject as one worthy of
enquiry.
The case which attracted the most notice in Australia,
perhaps, was the capture of H.M, Brig, the Governor
Phillip. On October 15th, 1842, John Jones, Thomas
Whelan, George Beavors, Henry Sears, Nicholas Lewis, and
James Woolf, alias Mordecai, were charged in the Criminal
Court, Sydney, with that they did on the 21st June, 1842,
on board the brig Governor Phillip , the property of Our
Sovereign Lady the Queen, assault one Charles Whitehead,
with intent to murder. There was a second count charging
the prisoners with piracy. The brig was lying out in the
roads, at Norfolk Island, discharging cargo and taking in
ballast. The prisoners were sent from the shore with a
boat load of ballast and slept on board the vessel. Two
of them were called up at about four a.m. to bale the
boat out, and Jones asked William Harper, one of the
sailors, if he could navigate? Harper replied “Yes,
if I had a slate and pencil.” No notice was taken
of this incident at the time, but afterwards it was
deemed to have been an indication that a conspiracy to seize
the vessel had been formed among the prisoners. At seven


o’clock the remainder of the boat’s crew was called up to
begin work, when Bartley Kelly rushed at one of the sentries
and knocked him down with a belaying pin, while Lewis
knocked down another. Then there were cries of “Jump
overboard, you ” and “ Throw the overboard and
they’ll tell no tales.” Charles Whitehead was sergeant of
the guard in charge at the time. Henry Sears struck him.
It was not known whether the soldiers jumped or were
thrown overboard, but one sentry who was missing had
been thrown over by two of the mutineers. The noise
roused the soldiers who were below and they attempted to
gain the deck, but were driven back by the prisoners, who
shouted “Keep down, you ,or we’ll kill you.” They also
called for “ Hot water to scald the soldiers.” Captain
Boyle, who was in command of the vessel, was in his cabin
at the time when the mutiny occurred; Christopher Lucas,
the second mate, being in charge of the deck. Lucas had
been knocked down in the first charge, but he contrived to
slip away and went to the captain’s cabin and reported the
mutiny. He also went to the soldiers’ quarters and roused
them up, but by that time the prisoners had control of the
deck and prevented the soldiers from ascending the hatch
gangway. Lucas had received several very severe blows on
the head with belaying pins and had been left for dead. The
captain also tried to mount the gangway but did not succeed.
He then went to the men’s quarters and ordered the
carpenter to cut away the fore and aft piece of the hatchway
which the mutineers had closed. By this means he was
enabled to raise the hatch slightly and shot a prisoner
named Moore. Bartley Kelly had also been severely
wounded by one of the sentries and was unable to
rise. Another prisoner named McLean came to the hatch-
way and told Captain Boyle that if he would consent to
leave the brig with the soldiers they would all be put on
shore. The captain refused. McLean then told him to
give up his arms. The captain fired at him by way of reply
and McLean fell dead. The death of the leaders seemed to
have a depressing effect on the other mutineers. Beavors
asked the captain “ for God’s sake ” not to fire any more.
Encouraged by this appeal for mercy, Captain Boyle forced
the hatchway open and went on deck, followed by the


soldiers, and the mutineers, having lost their leaders,
surrendered. The vessel was under the control of the
mutineers for about a quarter of an hour. Beavors, alias
Berry, and Jones, alias Jack the Lagger, were the least
active of the mutineers. It was Sears who had struck
Whitehead, the sergeant of the guard, immediately after
Whitehead had shot Kelly. Kelly died from his wound the
following day, but Whitehead recovered, although, at one
time, his life was despaired of. The brig was 180 tons
burden, and there were on board eighteen men, including an
officer and eleven men of the 96th regiment. The Chief
Justice, Sir James Dowling, before whom the case was tried,
said that had Sergeant Whitehead died he could have held
out no hopes for the prisoners. The jury which had found
them guilty had recommended them to mercy, and he
agreed in that recommendation for all except Henry Sears.
It was his duty to pronounce the death sentence, but with
the exception named he would not deprive them of hope.
As a result Sears was hung, while the sentences on the other
prisoners were commuted to penal servitude for life.


CHAPTER X.
Van Diemen’s Land Again; A Hunt for Bushrangers in the Mountains;
Some Brutal Attacks; “ Stand !” “ No, thanks, I’m very Com-
fortable Sitting ; ” A Degrading Exhibition ; A Determined Judge ;
Cash, Kavanagh, and Jones, an Enterprising Firm ; The Art of
Politeness as Exhibited by Bushrangers ; A Bushranger Hunt in
the Streets of Hobart Town ; The Capture of Cash ; Break Up of
the Gang ; A Doubtful Mercy.
For some years the roads in Van Diemen’s Land had
been comparatively safe, very few highway robberies
being recorded, and the newspapers generally asserted
that bushranging, in its worst form, had been stamped
out. This assertion, however, is not altogether borne out
by the evidence, and the most that can be said is that
bushranging was not nearly so prevalent as in former times,
and no bushranger had exercised his calling for a
sufficiently long time to earn notoriety, but even this
comparatively happy condition did not last very long.
The bushrangers James Regan, William Davis, James
Atterill, alias Thompson, and Anthony Bankes having
committed a number of depredations on the settlers, the
Government resolved to make a decisive effort to capture
them. Consequently, on February 21st, 1838, Captain
Mackenzie, with three privates of the 21st Fusiliers, two
constables of the Field Police, and two prisoner volunteers,
went to Jerusalem, where he was informed by the Police
Magistrate of Richmond that another house had been
robbed by the bushrangers, who had retired to the Brown
Mountain. A guide, well acquainted with the Tiers, was
found, and the party started the following morning. They
struck into the bush a short distance beyond Mr.
Tomley’s, and at two o’clock came to a hut where the


stockman, an intelligent lad, informed them that the
bushrangers had robbed his master’s house on the
previous night at ten o’clock, taking a horse to carry the
robber Bankes, who had been wounded. The lad was
taken as a guide, and led them up a ravine, which soon
became too steep for the horses. They reached the summit
of the Brown Mountain about dusk, but without seeing any
fire or other indication of a camp. They reached Mr. Ree’s
house, on the Richmond side, about midnight, and returned
to Jerusalem at six on Friday morning, having been march-
ing for twenty-three hours over very rough country. After
six hours’ rest Captain Mackenzie took Wesley, one of Mr.
Johnson’s shepherds, as guide, and resumed the search.
They reached Mr. Stokell’s house at dusk, and approached
it with great caution. Finding no one there, Captain
Mackenzie left two sentries, and pushed on to Romney’s,
where they arrived at about half-past one. The moon was
shining brightly. The hut was surrounded, and Captain
Mackenzie called for three volunteers, telling the men that
it was a forlorn hope, as the robbers would probably shoot
two out of the three, the moonlight being so bright. The
captain called on Regan by name to surrender, but received
no answer. He then walked up to the window, and said to
the occupant of the hut, “Tucker, you old blockhead!
why don’t you open the door?” There was a rattle of
musketry, and the captain stepped back into the shadow of
the hut. Captain Mackenzie called out to his men not to
fire unless the bushrangers did, or unless they rushed out
and tried to escape. Then Constable Peacock advanced
to the window and looked in. Captain Mackenzie said if
the door was not opened he would fire, and after waiting a
minute or so told Private Cockburn to shoot, but not too
low. Cockburn fired into the window when the door was
opened, and a man came out. The captain cried “ Lie
down, or you die.” “Pm Tucker,” said the man, “don’t
shoot,” and threw himself on his face. The captain went
to the door and looked in, when Private Cockburn cried,
“ Take care, captain, the fellow is going to fire. They are
all armed.” This raised a cheer among the soldiers, who
now knew that their men were there. Regan it appears
had tried to bring his musket to bear on the captain, but


could not do so without exposing himself. The captain
gave the word to fire, and a volley was poured into the hut.
I hen the captain asked Regan to surrender, promising not
to hurt him. Regan endeavoured to induce the captain to
promise not to prosecute them, but he refused, saying it
was more than he could do. Finally, they consented to
surrender, and Atterill crawled out naked. He was tied.
Regan was then called, and he refused to come out on his
hands and knees, saying that he would sooner be shot than
be treated like a dog. The captain told him he might walk
out if he came without arms and held his hands up. He
did so, and the police then went in and brought out the
other two. The prisoners were handcuffed and placed in a
cart. About £l4, found in their clothes, and their guns
and pistols, were carried in another cart. Tucker was
employed by Mr. Romney and was considered the best
guide in the district. The robbers had taken possession of
his hut and intended to make him show them the way
across the mountains on the following day. The party
reached Richmond on Saturday night, and early next day
the bushrangers were lodged in the gaol at Hobart Town.
The prisoners were tried and convicted of several acts of
bushranging, ranging from highway robbery to burglary.
They were all sentenced to death, but only Regan was
hung. # The Cornwall Chronicle said “ His inquisitors
were conscious that, had he been permitted to give his
dying attestation to the treatment he had received from his
master, it would have been so appalling and horrible as to
leave the guilt of his crimes, in the estimation of an
impartial public, not on his own head, but on theirs.”
“ The Government,” said the paper, “ is afraid to hear the
dying statements of the condemned.”
On September Bth, 1840, two armed men entered
the Post Office at Ross, and bailed up the post-mistress,
who was also a store-keeper. They took from her about
in cash and a quantity of wearing apparel. A
large sum of money which was enclosed in a letter ready for
despatch was missed by the robbers. The police were
informed and at once followed on the track of the bush-
I
* The Colonial Times.


rangers, but failed to arrest them. On the following evening
the bushrangers went to a hut on the station of Mr. Joseph
Penny, of Ashby Cottage, and tied the shepherd, telling
him that if he w r as quiet and did as he was ordered they
would not hurt him; but that if he refused to obey they
would shoot him. They went to the gardener’s lodge and
compelled the gardener to give them some food. While
they were engaged in eating a man who had previously
agreed to go out opossum hunting with the shepherd called
at the hut and shouted. He received no answer, the
shepherd believing that the bushrangers were “ trying ” him.
The friend knocked again and shouted, but receiving no
reply went in. He was surprised to see the shepherd lying
down tied and quickly untied him. The two men then
went to the house and informed Mr. Penny of what was
going on. Quickly arming himself and the two men Mr.
Penny went to the gardener’s lodge and surprised the
bushrangers before they could get their pistols and guns
ready. They were tied and conducted into the town, and
were subsequently convicted and sent to penal servitude.
James Leverett, while driving a cart belonging to Mr.
James Cox, of Clarendon, was attacked by a bushranger
and brutally beaten. The bushranger struck him on the
head from behind and stunned him. He stopped the horse
and battered Leverett about the head. Then he searched
his pockets and decamped. The constable stationed at
Morven happened to pass along the road, and seeing the
horse and cart standing went over to ascertain what was
the matter. Finding Leverett lying in the cart insensible
the constable took him to the police station and sent
for a doctor. He then followed the tracks of the
bushranger, but failed to find him. Another man, a
servant of Mr. Stephenson, of Curramore, was > beaten
and robbed in a similar manner. It was said that
these assaults were committed by ticket-of-leaye men,
who were throwm out of employment by the arrival of a
large number of free immigrants.
On the 15th April, 1841, James Broomfield and Jonas
Hopkins bailed up and robbed Henry Atkins, Bonney,
taking seven five pound notes from him. In company w r ith
James McCallum the same two bushrangers went to the


house of Thomas Bates, at Norfolk Plains, about midnight,
and woke him up, demanding something to drink. Bates
told them that there was plenty of water in the cask.
1 his, however, did not satisfy them, and they broke into
the kitchen. They took some flour and grain from the
cask and made a damper. While this was baking they
took a watch, some money, and a quantity of clothes out of
bedroom. When they had had a meal, they left with
their plunder, but were followed and captured. They were
convicted of robbery with firearms and were sentenced
to death , their sentences were, however, commuted to
imprisonment for life.
John Gunn, George Griffiths, William Lambeth, Samuel
Harrison, and Thomas Hum stuck up and robbed Daniel
Dowme on the sth September, 1842, of clothing and money.
They were followed by Constables Patrick Flynn and George
Marsden, and a volunteer named Joseph Masson. The bush-
rangers were armed with a fowling-piece and a musket.
They went next morning to the hut of James Thompson!
and told him not to be frightened as they did not intend to
hurt him. They took his money and were walking away,
wffen the constables came up and called on them to stand!
They surrendered and were taken to gaol. When they were
convicted, sentence of death was recorded against each of
them, but they were not hung.
On May 4th, 1843, Mr. Thomas Massey, of Ellerslie,
South Esk River, was sitting on his verandah when John
Conway came up, presented a gun at his head, and cried
“ Stand.” “No, thank you,” replied Mr. Massey, “Pm very
comfortable sitting down. What do you want ? ” Conway
then asked where the man was. Mr. Massey replied, “ Out
in the kitchen.” A man named Riley Jeffs was standing
a short distance away with Henry Blunt and a man
named Pockett, both of whom had their hands tied
behind them. Jeffs left the two tied men and went round
to the kitchen, while Conway demanded money and fire-
arms. Jeffs returned with the manservant and tied his
hands. The robbers then took two double-barrelled guns,
a single-barrelled fowling-piece, with a shot belt and powder
flask, some tea, sugar, flour, and a gallon of rum. After
they had gone Constable Thomas Connell, of Campbelltown,


with Joseph Masson, Matthew Perry, Edward Quin, Aaron
Dunn, and Stephen Wright followed the bushrangers to
Blunt’s hut, when two men ran away. One of them was
lame and was soon caught. It was Jeffs, who said he had
accidentally wounded himself the day before, after he left
Mr. Massey’s. The other man, Conway, was captured after
a brisk run. At their trial, Mary Bryan, servant at Mr.
Massey’s, said she recognised Conway by his big nose.
“How many inches? Did you measure it?” asked Jeffs,
but the question was ruled out of order by Judge Montagu.
The prisoners were then tried for the murder of Constable
William Ward. They went to Mr. James Gilligan’s house,
Clifton Lodge, Break-o’-day Road, and asked Sarah Vasco,
the servant, whether any one was at home. She replied,
“ Only master and mistress and a gentleman.” They had
four men with their hands tied behind them. Jeffs stopped
with these at the kitchen door, while Conway walked into
the passage. When he reached the parlour door he pre-
sented his gun and cried, “ Stand, or I’ll blow the
contents of this through you.” Ward, who was sitting near
the door, jumped up and grappled with the bushranger.
They struggled together into the passage. Mrs. Gilligan
pushed her husband to prevent him from going out, and
slammed the parlour door. Mr. Gilligan heard the struggle
along the passage, and then a gun went off. He got the
door open at last and went out. He saw Ward lying on the
floor of the kitchen. Jeffs and Conway and the four men
whose hands were tied were-looking at him. Conway said
to Gilligan, “ You go back into your room, old man, or I’ll
mark you.” In the fight in the passage both of the men
had endeavoured to obtain possession of the gun, but
between them they let it fall and it exploded without injuring
any one. Conway then broke away and ran into the kitchen.
Ward followed him and was grappled by Jeffs. While they
were wrestling Conway drew a pistol and watched for a
chance, and when Ward was on top holding Jeffs down
Conway deliberately put the pistol to his shoulder and fired.
Ward rolled over dead, and Jeffs got up. T.he robbers then
demanded money, and Mrs. Gilligan went to the bedroom
upstairs to fetch some. Conway accompanied her. Mrs.
Gilligan said, “ It’s a great pity, Mr. Ward had a large


family.” “ Well,” replied Conway, “ why didn’t he keep out
of our road ? We tried to shoot him before.” The prisoners
were convicted of wilful murder. In his summing up the
Judge said that the four men who were present appeared to
be accomplices, although they were tied. They had
prevaricated so much in their evidence that it was worthless
or worse. He would consider whether it was advisable to
prosecute them for perjury. Conway was very violent while
in gaol. He threw a loaf of bread at the gaoler, and
threatened that if he got out he’d “do for him.” Jeffs and
Conway were hung at Launceston in July. The census of
the town had been taken a short time before, and showed
that the population was 4458 souls. The Launceston
Advertiser said that there were more than a thousand men,
women, and boys present to see Jeffs and Conway hung.
Numbers of people took their blankets with them and slept
in the square all night. They were singing songs and
making a great noise. The paper says the scene was a
disgraceful one, and doubts whether such exhibitions can
have any beneficial effect.
John Price and Thomas Roberts were tried for highway
robbery. Judge Montagu said that if the robbery had been
committed at night, or if any undue violence had been
used, he would have cast them for death without hope of
mercy. It appeared, however, that they had been followed
and captured at once, and therefore, although the death
sentence would be recorded against them, they would be
sent to a penal settlement, and he hoped they would reform.
John Fletcher and Henry Lee stuck up and robbed
Daniel Griffin at Cocked Hat Hill, on November 6th, 1844.
In passing sentence of death, Judge Montagu said that he
was determined to put down robbery on the high road
between Hobart Town and Launceston, and especially
about Cocked Hat Hill. It was a horrid place. No man
was safe there. The residents were fortunate in having so
active and energetic an officer stationed there as Constable
Harvey. He would sentence the prisoners to transportation
for life. When they were being removed from court, Lee
said, as he was passing Constable Harvey: “I’ll rip your ——
guts out, you , if ever I get out.”
On the 10th July, 1841, Hogan and Armytage visited


the Travellers’ Rest Inn, within four miles of Launceston.
There were eight men in the bar and they took all the
money they could get, some grog, and provisions. Hogan
said he was tired of the bush, and wished “it was all over.”
Armytage looked ill and miserable. The police followed
them as soon as news of the robbery was conveyed to
Launceston, but without success, as the bushrangers were
too well acquainted with the country round there.
On January 8, 1841, a bushranger went to a shepherd’s
hut on Mr. Frank’s station, Lake Crescent, and tied the
shepherd, telling him that he would shoot him if he got
loose. The robber only got a few shillings. The robber
went away, but soon returned, and seeing the shepherd still
tied, cautioned him again and went away. The man
remained tied for several hours before he attempted to
untie the rope. It was said that this was the man who had
robbed Mr. McCrae’s station, and murdered a shepherd on
Mr. Brodribb’s station.
On the following day, Hogan the bushranger walked
into a public-house kept by Mrs. Bonny at Deloraine, and
asked for two case bottles of rum. On these being given to
him, he took a ham and a pudding and walked away, saying
that he wanted them for his mate, who was ill. Although
there were five or six men in the bar at the time, no attempt
was made to detain him. Nothing further is known about
Armytage, who is supposed to have died in the bush; but
Hogan was captured and sentenced to penal servitude on
Norfolk Island.
On April 2, 1842, it was reported that Martin Cash,
the notorious bushranger who had for so long a time defied
the police, had been captured in a house in Harrington
Street, Hobart Town, by Constables Kirby and Williams.
He was lodged in the lock-up, but during the night suc-
ceeded in making his escape.
On March 25, 1843, the bushrangers Martin Cash,
Lawrence Kavanagh, and Thomas Jones, armed to the
teeth, bailed up Mr. Panton at Broad Marsh, and fired
at Dr, Macdonald. The police started in pursuit. On
April 18th, the gang visited Mr. Hay, who was in his barn
overlooking five shearers who were at work. They were
ordered to stand up and put down their shears. Then


the men were forced to tie each other. While the
bushrangers were plundering the house, Mr. Ward came
up. He was ordered to stand, but instead of obeying
he ran away. Cash followed and fired his pistol, the
shot grazing Ward’s ear. Ward, however, kept on and
got behind a tree, and the bushrangers decamped, taking
very little plunder with them. On the 19th they captured
Mr. John Clarke and his overseer, Mr. Denholme, and
compelled them to accompany the bushrangers to the late
Mr. Allardyce’s house on the Clyde River. They went into
the parlour, and after arranging the chairs, invited the
gentlemen to sit down. Then they called for brandy and
glasses. The servant brought in a bottle of brandy and a
tin pannikin. Cash was in a great rage. He swore at the
servant, and asked him in an indignant tone, “Is that a
proper thing for gentlemen to drink out of? Take it away
and bring glasses.” When they had had some refreshments,
Cash sat talking to Messrs. Clarke and Denholme, while
Kavanagh and Jones collected the plunder. The bush-
rangers were said to be very haggard in appearance and not
well dressed.
On May the 18 th they invited themselves to visit
Captain McKay, on the Dee River, and dined with him in
the most amicable manner. After dinner they loaded two
horses with clothing, provisions, and other articles from the
store. Then, taking Captain McKay with them, they went
to Mr. Gellibrand’s, where they loaded a third horse. With
this the bushrangers appear to have been satisfied, as they
went away.
“Messrs. Cash & C 0.,” as some of the Van Diemen’s Land
papers called the gang, visited Mr. Christopher Gatenby, of
the Isis, on July Ist, and politely apologised for their intrusion.
They as politely asked for a supply of provisions, which they
said were necessary owing to the police having recently
captured their camp and taken away all that they could find
there. Mr. Gatenby opened the store and gave them what
they required, and then Cash said he should feel extremely
obliged if Mr. Gatenby and four of his servants would carry
the provisions to their new camp. He politely explained
that this was necessary, as the police had taken their horses.
The invitation was so pressing that Mr. Gatenby could not


refuse. He therefore took up a portion of the swag, while
his servants shouldered the rest, and escorted by the three
bushrangers they started into the bush. After walking for
about two miles Cash said he would not trouble Mr. Gatenby
to go any further, as he thought that they could manage
without him. The load he was carrying was distributed
among the bushrangers, and Mr. Gatenby returned home,
after having been profusely thanked for his generosity in
giving them the provisions and his kindness in carrying
them so far. The servants were taken two or three miles
further into the bush, and were then allowed to deposit
their loads under a gum tree and return home. Cash
denied that the gang had had an encounter with the
Campbelltown constables. He said that the constables
found their hiding place when he and his mates were
absent.
On August 22nd two men dressed as sailors were seen
by the constables in Hobart Town enquiring for the
residence of a well-known suspicious character. One of the
constables stepped forward, and gave them the address they
required. Then one of the sailors walked away, while the
other remained standing near the constables as if in
bravado. The constables held a consultation, and decided
to arrest the sailor as a suspicious character. Two of them
went towards him, when the sailor drew a pistol, fired, and
then ran. The shot took no effect, and the constables gave
chase. Charles Cunlifife, a carpenter, was standing at the
door of his house as the sailor passed, and hearing the
constables chasing him and crying “ Stop, thief! ” he joined
in the chase. As they went down Brisbane Street Constable
Winstanley came out of the Commodore Inn on hearing the
hullabaloo, and attempted to seize the sailor, but the sailor
drew a pistol from his belt and fired. The ball passed
through Constable Winstanley’s chest, but nevertheless he
grappled with the - sailor and held him until Cunliffe came
up, when Winstanley fell. Cunliffe and the sailor had a
terrific struggle for a few minutes, Cunliffe being much
bruised, but he held on until the other constables arrived
and secured their man. The sailor was taken to the
Penitentiary, where he was identified as Martin Cash. It
was believed that the other sailor was Lawrence Kavanagh,


but although search was made for him, he could not be
found. Constable Winstanley died from the effects of his
wound two days later.
Martin Cash was tried for the murder of Peter Win-
stanley on September 15th, and was found guilty. He said
he had been standing quietly in the street when a constable
came up and cried out, “ It’s Cash, blow his brains out.”
He had then fired and run. The constables were all
cowards. They thronged round him when he was down,
but they would never have caught him if it had not been for
Cunliffe. Judge Montagu said in reply that he could see
no proof of cowardice in the action of the police. They
were not such fast runners as the prisoner. Charles Cunliffe
was the more active, and consequently he had caught the
prisoner first. For this he deserved credit, but the police
had arrived at the spot without delay and were also to be
complimented for their share in the capture of so dangerous
a character as the prisoner. He then sentenced the prisoner
to be hung on Monday, the 18th instant.
Cash, however, was not hung, but was sent to Norfolk
Island for life. Rewards of one hundred acres of land
or one hundred sovereigns, in addition to the rewards
previously offered of fifty sovereigns, with a free pardon for
convicts and a free passage to any post in Her Majesty’s
dominions, were offered for the capture of Kavanagh and
Jones, dead or alive.
Thomas Jones, in company with John Liddell and James
Dalton, stuck up Catherine Smith’s house on December 6th,
at Effingham Banks. They tied the servants and went into
Mrs. Smith’s bedroom. The lady requested them to
go out while she dressed, and they complied. When
Mrs. Smith got up the bushrangers ordered the servants
to get them some supper, telling them that they need
not be afraid, as nobody would hurt them. They
made the servants sit down while they ate. After their
meal they opened the drawers and took out clothes
and other articles which suited them, and went away. On
December nth they stuck up a hawker named John
McCall. They drove his cart half a mile into the bush off
the road, and tied McCall to a tree. Then they made a
bundle of the articles they wanted in the cart, and went


away. On December 30th Thomas Jones, “ late with
Messrs. Cash & C 0.,” with another man named Moore,
dressed as sporting gentlemen, went to Mr. William
Field’s, and enquired if he was in? They were answered
in the negative, and they then went to the men’s hut and
bailed up the two men there. As the others came in they
were compelled to stand in a row against the wall. When
Mr. Shanklin, the overseer, came in, Moore told him to
kneel down and say his prayers, as he intended to shoot
him. The men interceded for the overseer, saying that he
always had treated them well. Moore asserted that
Shanklin had “got him an extension of time,” and he
meant to have revenge. He was very violent in his
language. Jones had been looking on very quietly, but
he now said, “ Oh, let the go, and let him beware how
he behaves in future.” Moore at first objected, but gave
way, and Shanklin was made to stand up with the assigned
servants. The robbers broke open Mr. Field’s escritoire,
and took out of it. They also took tea, sugar, flour,
and other things from the store.
In the meantime the police had not been idle. They
had had several brushes with the bushrangers, and had
captured Kavanagh, Liddell, and Dalton. After this last
robbery Jones and Moore were followed, and Jones was
captured. They were all convicted and sentenced to death,
but were told that probably their sentences would be
commuted to penal servitude. On hearing this Liddell
exclaimed, “ I don’t want mercy from you or any
one else. I’ve been eleven years at Port Arthur
and I don’t want to go there again. I’d rather die than
live.” Judge Montagu said that this statement showed
a deplorable frame of mind and exhorted Liddell to think
of the future. Dalton complained that he had been
knocked down by Thompson, the gaoler. Mr. Thompson
said that the prisoner was a very desperate man. “ But
you’d no right to put irons on my neck,” cried Dalton.
The Judge said it was the duty of the gaoler to prevent
escape. If he deemed it necessary he had a perfect right
to put irons on the neck of a prisoner as well as on his
hands and feet. He should report the behaviour of the
prisoners in the proper quarter and he could not recom


mend either Liddell or Dalton to mercy. “ I don’t care
a what you do,” exclaimed Dalton. George Cumsden,
who had also been associated with Jones in some of his
robberies since the capture of Cash and Kavanagh, was
also sentenced to death, “without the hope of mercy.” He
had threatened to “ blow a hole through ” any witness who
appeared against him.
There was again a lull in bushranging in Van Diemen’s
Land, and again the papers asserted that the crime had
been stamped out. The majority of those convicted had
been sent to Norfolk Island, and this, it was said, would
act as a deterrent to other evil doers. Norfolk Island
was feared more than death.


CHAPTER XI
Norfolk Island : Its Founding as a Penal Station ; The Terrible
Discipline in Norfolk Island ; An Attempt to Ameliorate it; Its
Failure; The Rigorous Treatment Restored ; The Consequent
Riot ; Jackey Jackey’s Revenge ; An Unparalleled Tale of
Ferocity; The Soldiers Overawe the Rioters ; Thirteen Con-
demned to the Gallows; Jackey Jackey’s Remarkable Letter ;
The End of Several Notorious Bushrangers.
Norfolk Island, lying some seven hundred miles from the
coast of New South Wales, was first utilised as a penal
settlement in 1788, when it was decided that convicts who
committed crimes in New South Wales should be transported
there for more severe treatment. Early in the nineteenth
century a rumour spread in Australia that Napoleon the First
intended to fit out a fleet to search for Admiral La Perouse,
and to found colonies in the south seas. The truth of this
rumour seemed to be affirmed by the activity of the naval
authorities in New South Wales. Settlements were made at
Port Essington in the north, King George’s Sound in the
west, and the Derwent River in Van Diemen’s Land. Shortly
afterwards, in 1805, the prisoners were removed from
Norfolk Island to Hobart Town, apparently for the purpose
of strengthening the settlement in Van Diemen’s Land.
When Van Diemen’s Land was made independent of New
South Wales, in 1825, Norfolk Island was again made a
penal settlement of the mother colony, and it so continued
until transportation to New South Wales ceased in 1842,
when Norfolk Island was transferred from the jurisdiction of
the Governor of New South Wales to that of the Governor
of Van Diemen’s Land. The treatment of the prisoners in
the island was rigorous in the extreme, and may aptly be
described as savage. When the enquiry of the House of
Commons, by Select Committee, was made in 1837 and 1838,


as to the condition of the convicts in the penal settlements,
the few particulars published about the evidence in the
English newspapers had some effect on public opinion, and in
1841, Captain Maconochie, one of the witnesses examined
who said that the prisoners might be governed with less
harshness, was appointed Commandant of Norfolk Island,
with instructions to try the mild reformatory treatment he
advocated. Captain Maconochie and his supporters in
England do not seem to have realised that human beings
who have been under demoralising influences until they have
reached the adult age, and their characters have become set,
are not amenable to civilising influences. These should
have been applied during the impressionable years, and the
younger they are applied the more successful they are likely
to be. This fact, however, does not yet seem to be known
sufficiently in England, and therefore small blame attaches
to Captain Maconochie, if he was not aware of it sixty years
ago. The new Commandant abolished Sunday labour as a
punishment, shortened the hours of labour on week-days,
and granted holidays for good behaviour. He allowed the
men to build huts and to cultivate small patches of ground,
and thus to provide themselves with vegetables. He also
gave them tins to cook in, and served out rations individually,
instead of giving the rations out in messes. It does not
appear that the prisoners became unduly riotous under this
treatment, and no such murders as were mentioned by Judge
Forbes and other witnesses before the Select Committee, in
which men had killed their mates for the purpose of being
hung “out of their misery,” took place. One of these
murders which occurred only a short time before Captain
Maconochie took charge may be mentioned here. Stephen
Brennan was sent to the island for bushranging. He
was tried there and found guilty of the murder of
another convict. There had been no quarrel between the
two men, who were as friendly as circumstances permitted
under the rigid discipline, nevertheless Brennan suddenly
struck Patrick Lynch a blow with a stone-breaker’s hammer,
and then stabbed him with a knife. The murder was
committed avowedly so that the perpetrator might be hung,
and thus escape the harsh treatment he was subjected to,
and it is not improbable that it was committed with the


consent of the victim, for although there is no evidence of
this in this case, it is well known that men had actually
drawn lots in Norfolk Island, to decide which should
murder the other and get hung for the crime. In place of
crimes like this, there were quarrels and some rowdyism,
but this was sufficient for the opponents of the new
experiment. Paragraphs appeared in the Van Diemen’s
Land papers jeering at the “plum pudding policy” of
Captain Maconochie, and asserting that Queen’s birthday
rejoicings only led to increased disturbances in Norfolk
Island. Whether these paragraphs were inspired by the
prison officials, who feared that if Captain Maconochie was
successful there would be an end of “ the system ” which
they had organised, it is impossible to say, but after a three
years’ trial, the mild treatment was pronounced a failure, and
Major Joseph Childs was appointed to supersede Captain
Maconochie, as Commandant of Norfolk Island, and reached
the island on February Bth, 1844. Major Childs landed
with orders to revert to the old rigid discipline, and he
appears to have endeavoured to carry these orders out to
the best of his ability. The hours of work were increased,
holidays abolished, and all the old punishments re-estab-
lished, These alterations were made very" gradually.
As I have already said, the prisoners had been supplied
with rations individually, and were allowed their own
pots and pans to cook them with. In July, 1846, new
regulations were issued that rations were to be issued in
bulk and to be cooked in the general mess house. The
rations on the island had always been notoriously bad, and
consisted generally of salt beef and maize. Captain
Maconochie had allowed them to grow potatoes. The
privilege was abolished on January Ist, 1846, when the
garden plots were taken from the prisoners and laid waste.
The prisoners refused in a body to go to work unless some
equivalent was given them for their potatoes, and half a pint
of peas daily was promised them. After three days the
peas in stock gave out, and another mutiny took place.
Numbers of the prisoners were flogged, but this did not
quieten them, and Commandant Childs promised them that
eight ounces of flour should be served out in place of the
peas. In a few days, however, the stock of flour was


exhausted, and then, “ incredible as it may appear, an old
order, issued in May, 1846, after the gardens were taken
away from the prisoners, stating that two pounds of sweet
potatoes should form part of the daily rations, was posted
up; although it must have been known to the superin-
tendent that it would be utterly impossible to serve out a
single ounce of sweet potatoes a man daily for a week.”*
The sweet potatoes in the island had been grown by the
men, and had been most unjustly taken away from them
when their gardens were laid waste. It was well-known
that there were no sweet potatoes in the island, and
the reposting of this old and obsolete regulation
was an outrage on truth. The prisoners were not
slow in showing their indignation, nor very particular
as to the words they used in expressing it. And
it was during the dissatisfaction consequent on the
posting of this old order, that the new regulation calling in
the kettles on July the Ist was posted. When the order
was first posted, the majority of the prisoners were in their
cells. A few were attending school, and among these was
Jackey Jackey, who was doing a sum when the soldiers
came round to collect the kettles. Hearing the rattling of
the tins, he raised himself up, pencil in hand, and listened
intently. Then he pushed the slate away, folded his arms,
and sat as if in deep thought. The other prisoners present
were whispering together, trying to conjecture what was
being done with their tins. On the following morning, July
2nd, the prisoners were all mustered for prayers, a practice
only recently introduced along with the repressive measures
of the new superintendent. During the service the men
kept whispering and paid but little attention. Several times
order was called for, but this only produced a lull for a
time. When the prayers were over the men marched to the
Lumber Yard and read the new regulation. Then they
found that their tins had already been removed. There
was silence for a moment, followed by fierce and eager
whisperings, then the whole body marched to the Barrack
Yard, broke open the store, and took out all the tins they
could find. They marched back to the Lumber Yard, and
* Launceston Chronicle,


then Jackey Jackey made the following speech:—“Now,
men, I’ve made up my mind to bear this oppression no
longer; but, remember, I’m going to the gallows. If any
man funks let him stand out. Those who wish to follow
me, come on.”
A policeman named Morris was standing in the archway
or entrance to the yard, Jackey Jackey rushed forward,
struck him a fearful blow with an enormous bludgeon, and
knocked him down. A large mob of the prisoners snatched
up such weapons as came to their hands and followed him.
Many of the prisoners only had sticks, some large, some
small. One had a reaping hook and another a pitchfork.
As soon as the sentry fell under the blow from Jackey Jackey,
the other prisoners were upon him, beating, stabbing, and
cutting until the man was a fearful sight to look upon.
Jackey Jackey then led the way to the cook-house, where
Stephen Smith, the police overseer, was in charge. Smith
was something of a favourite among the prisoners, but this
good feeling availed him nothing at this time. When Jackey
Jackey came rushing towards him, Smith cried out in a
piteous tone, “For God’s sake don’t hurt me, Jackey?
Remember my wife and children ! ” “ Damn your wife and
children,” shrieked Jackey Jackey, as he crashed in one side
of Smith’s head with his bludgeon. Jackey Jackey passed
on, leaving those who followed him to finish his bloody work
if necessary. Near the gate of the Barrack-yard John Price,
overseer of work, and a man named Ingram were standing
together. Jackey Jackey rushed towards them and aimed a
blow at Price, but he dodged back and the club struck
Ingram, nearly killing him. Jackey Jackey raised his club
for another blow at Price, when the surging crowd behind
pushed him forward, and Price escaped and ran for the
soldiers. The prisoners behind Jackey Jackey now raised
the cry of “ Barrow ! Barrow ! ” and from this it is con-
jectured that their main object was the murder of the
Stipendiary Magistrate of the Island, Mr. Barrow, who was
believed by the prisoners to be the cause of much of their
misery. Jackey Jackey turned from the Barrack-yard and
led the way towards Government House. On their road they
came to the limekilns, and Jackey Jackey, who had by this
time exchanged his club for an axe, opened the door of the


hut there. Two policemen were stationed there and thev
had not yet risen from their beds. One named Dkonwas
skulUsTe’ by Smashed the aXG throu S h his
to the floor y ’bnt I 6 ° th - er ’ S ™ on ’ s P ran g from his bed on
to me floor, but was immediately knocked down bv a
ferocious bbw aimed at him by the bushranger his brains
and blood spattering the walls of the hut. lackey Tackev
immediately left the hut, and while his followerscrowded Z
to strike at or jeer at, their dead enemies as their humom
prompted them, he coolly stood aside and lighted his pipe
After drawing a few whiffs he said in a loud calm yoke
Now boys, for the Christ killer,” and the crowd responded
with shouts of “ Hooray! Now for ‘‘ To
gone° to-' wIXhXTj” ° ff ’ but had not
LyoneS Sad. W ‘ th mUSke ‘ S “ d
At this time there were about eighteen hundred prisoners
rioters The theSe ’ K ixteen hundred were among the
i , te yf; . T Jj e .soldiers numbered only about three hundred
but their discipline enabled them to overawethe vastlv
superior numeHcafly, opposed to them. Perhaps the
habits of obedience and submission, so long enforced on the
prisoners may have had some influence* Perhaps even
among this herd of desperate and reckless men, the^iglTof
the soldiers standing firmly with their guns presented ready
to fire may have instilled some fear. However this mav
have been, there was no fight. The rebels retired slowly and
unwillingly to the Lumber Yard, where they permitted the
soldiers to arrest them one after the other without making
° d6fenC f Until ° ne thousand one hundred and
\ e V )f then } ere P laced “on the chain.” Perhaps Jackey
Jackey ark the more violent of his followers may have
thought that they had done sufficient to ensure them that
death on the gallows which was the avowed object of their
rising while the majority had been so demoralised by official
oPthem t 0 be Utt6rly lndiffe rent as to what might become
Among those arrested were Jackey Jackey, the bush-
ranger with a continental notoriety, and Lawrence Kavanagh
the Van Diemen’s Land highwayman. John Gardner, John
Jackson, Wilham Duncan, Abraham Farrer, and John
K


Booth, some of them convicted bushrangers, were also
conspicuous for their support of Jackey Jackey in the
murder of officials. Another New South Wales bush-
ranger engaged in this riot was Michael Houlihan, who
had been captured by Commissioner Brigham on September
10, 1842, in the Lachlan district, and transported to Van
Diemen’s Land for highway robbery and horse-stealing, and
had been sent from thence to Norfolk Island for similar
offences committed near Hobart Town. Besides these
there were John Price, and many others named in
Chapter X., who were among the insurgents and who more
or less actively supported the leaders. On the other hand,
Martin Cash, the companion of Kavanagh, refused to take
part in the rising. He retired from the Lumber Yard when
Jackey Jackey announced his intention, and remained in his
cell during the whole time of the riot. Some speculation
has been indulged in as to his reason for so acting. It
is certain that he was not deterred by fear Possibly,
having been for so long the leader of a gang of bushrangers,
he objected to serve under another and a younger man.
He however, was almost the only well-known bushranger
confined in the island at the time who did not follow
Jackey Jackey. . , ,
As soon as news of the riot and its suppression reached
Van Diemen’s Land, Judge Brown was sent to Norfolk
Island by the Lieutenant-Governor, Sir W. T. Hemson,
to try the prisoners, and Jackey Jackey, Henry Whiting,
William Pickthorne, William Scrimshaw, Kavanagh, Gardner,
Jackson, Duncan, Farrer, Booth, and three others, making
thirteen in all, were arraigned on the charge of murdering
John Morris. They were convicted and sentenced to death.
They were all executed on October 13, 1846.
The following letter was written by Jackey Jackey to a
former chaplain at Port Arthur, and was published in the
Cornwall Chronicle. “ The spelling of many of the words
has been corrected, but the style has not been interfered
with”: — H.M. Gaol, Norfolk Island.
Condemned Cells, 1846, October the Bth.
Reverend Sir,—As in duty bound to you for the kindness you have
shown to me, and the interest I have always seen you take m those that
have ever been under your spiritual care, whatever may be their fate, I


l been nd T d tO . wnte to hoping this may find you in croo
health, and in the enjoyment of all God’s choicest blessings 7 I have
nform you that long before this letter reaches your hands the han
that wrote this will be cold in death. Ido not grieve that the hour
i°ooZ e z l r
ESiißn v
started m life with a good feeling for my fellowman. Before I wel
knew the of my station in life, I had forfeited my birth
right I became a slave, and was sent far from my dear nativ
country, my parents, my brother, and sisters—torn from all that wa
treater? m6 ’ a r ( J that ** a triflin S offence. Since then I have been
morl d I" 016 n 6 a beaSt than a man> until nature could bear no
more. I was, like many others, driven to despair by the oppressive
and tyrannical conduct of whose whose duty it was to prevents fron
being treated in this way. Yet these men are courted by Sety • Z
the British Government, deceived by the interested representations o
these men, continues to carry on a system that has and P still continues
to ruin the prospects of the souls and bodies of thousands of British
subjects. I have not the ability to represent what I feel on this subject
offhAt°V ?° m '“T °, wn _ f eelings that it will never carry out the wishes
of the British people! The spirit of the British law is reformation
iefomiinZtl Sa should have told them, that instead of
g the wretched man, under the present system led bv
example on the one hand, and driven by despair and tyranny on the
s ° FvW ° m , bad , t 0 u V ° rSe ’ tiU at ,en S th h e is ruined body and
xpenence, dear bought experience, has taught me this. In all
y career, I never was cruel— l always felt keenly for the miseries of
rny fellow-creatures, and was ever ready to do all in my power to
Steritv* branded 6 ?? y6t my name will be handed down to
bestow Z m ° St °PP robrious epithet that man can
, But . tls httie matter now. I have thus given vent to my
fedmgs knowmg that you will bear with me, and" I know that yol
have and will exert yourself for the welfare of wretched men. It is
this account that I have strove, though in but a feeble manner to
Reve,?„7slr ngS ' T .lf c r'/° r which lam to s “ fc « »*“
Keverend Sir, you will shudder at my cruelty, but I only took
rnomem° Se *s* 1 de P rived , of ]ife > though they did not in a
aPw ■ u fu m r an t 0 hls last account > inflicted on many
we £ fU g - ? ea 1 h ~ for , ] >' c : ars the y have tortured men’s minds Zs
well as their bodies, and after years of mental and bodily torture sent
them to a premature grave. This is what I call refined cruelty, and it
is rarned on, an d ! blush to own it, by Englishmen, and under the
enlightened English Government. Will it be believed hereafter, that
this was allowed to be carried on in the nineteenth century ? I will
I have taken P the libmy oYc»rSii,gT t . obVio ' IS,y “ W*« ra l> llical * a t


now proceed to inform you what has happened since I left Port Arthur.
I was sent to Glenorchy Probation Station. I was then determined, if
possible, to regain my freedom, and visit my dear native country, and
see my parents and friends again. I took to the bush, with two men ; one
of them said that he knew the bush well, but he M me and
himself too. Our intention was to take a craft from Brown s River ,
we were disappointed—there was no craft there. We then turned to
go to Launceston, thinking to get one there, and to cross to the Sydney
main. But after leaving New Norfolk, I lost one of my mates, and
the same night the other left me at the Green Ponds. I was soon after
taken and sent to Hobart Town. I was tried and sent to Norfolk
Island, and this place is now worse than I can describe. Every species
of petty tyranny that long experience has taught some of these tyrants
£Si L forceV the authorities. The men are half-starved, hard
worked, and cruelly flogged. These things brought on the affarr of the
first of July, of which you have, no doubt, heard. I would send you the
whole account, but that I know you will have it from better
hands than mine. I am sorry that this will give you great pain,
as there are several of the men that have been under your charge at
Port Arthur concerned in this affair. Sir, on the 21st of September,
tBa6 Mr. Brown arrived in the Island with a commission to form a
Court, and try the men. On the 23rd of September he opened the Court
Fourteen men were then arraigned for the murder of John Morns, that
was formerly gate-keeper at Port Arthur. This trial occupied the Court
nine days. The Jury retired, and returned a verdict, and found twelve
out of fourteen guilty of murder. On the sth of October the sentence
of death was then passed on us, and to be carried into effect on_t
13th of October, 1846. Sir, the strong ties of earth will soon be
wrenched and the burning fever of this life will soon be quenched, and
my grave will be a haven—a resting-place for me, William Westwood.
Sir out of the bitter cup of misery I have drunk from my sixteenth year
—ten long years—and the sweetest draught is that which takes away
the misery of living death; it is the friend that deceives no man; all will
then be quiet—no tyrant will there disturb my repose, I hope, William
Westwood. , „ .
Sir, I now bid the world adieu, and all it contains.
William Westwood, his writing.
Beneath the letter is printed as follows :
The. Dying Declaration of William Westwood,
alias “ Jackey Jockey T
“ I William Westwood, wish to die in the Communion of Christ’s
Holy Church, seeking mercy of God through Jesus Christ our Lord an
I wish to say, as a dying man, that I believe four men now going
to suffer are innocent of the crime laid to their charge, viz. Lawrence
Kavanagh, Henry Whiting, William Pickthorne, and W ilham Scrimshaw.
I declare that I never spoke to Kavanagh on the morning, of theJ not
and these other three men had no part in the killing of John Morris as


far as I know of. I have never spoke a disrespectful word of any man
since my confinement. I die in charity with all men, and now I ask
your prayers for my soul !
William Westwood, aged twenty-six years.
Jackey Jackey, at the time of his death, was twenty-six
years of age. He was 5 feet 9 inches in height, with fair
hair, blue eyes, and a ruddy complexion.
Shortly after the death of these men, Mr. John Price,
superintendent of Port Arthur, was sent to Norfolk Island
with instructions to break up the settlement and remove the
prisoners to Van Diemen’s Land, and this was gradually
effected. Two or three years later the Government of the
Island was again transferred to the Governor of New South
Wales, and in 18575 about two hundred of the Pitcairn
Islanders—the descendants of the Mutineers of the Bounty
were landed there and have remained unmolested to the
present time, and the later history of this beautiful island
may be summed up in the one word “ peace.”


CHAPTER XII.
The Third Epoch of Bushranging ; the Gold Digging Era ; Influx of
Convicts from Van Diemen’s Land ; Passing of the Criminals’
Influx Prevention Act ; Attitude of the Diggers Towards the
Bushrangers, and Other Thieves ; The Nelson Gold Robbery ;
Some Pitiful Stories; A Rapid Raid ; Insecurity of the Melbourne
Streets.
Before entering upon the next stage in the story of the
bushrangers, it may be advisable to say something of the
vast change which suddenly took place in the conditions
in Australia about this time. In 1842-3 the colony of New
South Wales was plunged into a financial crisis, about
which it is unnecessary to say much here, but from which
the colony was only beginning to recover in 1851. Wages
were still very low, and numbers of men were out of work.
In April, 1851, the news that gold had been discovered at
Summerhill Creek, in the Bathurst district, roused some-
thing like a ferment in the colony. Men employed in
Sydney threw down their tools to “go to the diggings.”
There was a general exodus from the coast cities and towns
to the ranges, then considered far away in the interior.
Wages jumped from about one shilling per day for labour to
ten or more, meat rose from one penny per pound, for the
best cuts, to sixpence. The roads leading to Orange, the
Turon, and other early goldfields in New South Wales, were
thronged by men, either going to the diggings to seek their
fortune, or returning disappointed. In July, 1851, the
Port Phillip district of New South Wales was erected into
the independent colony of Victoria, and in August the news
that gold had been struck in the Ballarat district of the
newly-established colony turned the tide of gold-seekers in
that direction. The police establishment, with which the


new colony started, was merely that of an outlying district
of a huge sparsely-populated colony, and was wholly
inadequate to the requirements.
There were two gaols in the colony ; one at Melbourne,
the other at Geelong; neither of them very large. The
Geelong gaol, in fact, was little more than a lock-up, and it
was only within the past two years that the gaol had been
enclosed within a high wall. In 1850 it stood out on the
hill, a short distance from the banks of the Barwon River,
an ordinary-looking brick building, with the Governor’s
House and other offices grouped near it, and all opening out
directly on the level flat which stretched from the top of the
banks of the Barwon River to the hill on which the main
portion of the town of Geelong was situated. On the top of
this hill, the last building in that direction, in “ old
Geelong ” —as it was called, although it had only been
founded about twelve years before—was the court house,
and there was no other building along Yarra Street, on
the southern side of the hill and across the little flat (a
distance altogether of about half-a-mile) until the gaol was
reached. The Melbourne gaol stood on what was then the
boundary of the city of Melbourne. It was a larger and
more imposing building than the Geelong gaol, but still
wholly inadequate for the requirements ; and therefore one
of the first duties of the Legislative Council of the new
colony was to provide accommodation for evil doers, who
could no longer be sent to the gaols of Sydney to serve out
their terms of punishment. This was done by the establish-
ment of “ stockades ” at Collingwood and Pentridge, both
near Melbourne, and the purchase of two old trading vessels,
the President and the Success , in September, 1852, to be
converted into convict hulks for the safe keeping of the
more desperate of the malefactors. Subsequently three
other hulks were added to the list, and these were in use for
many years after large prisons had been erected at Melbourne,
Geelong, Ballarat, Bendigo, and other centres of population.
Looking back from the present time it appears to me that
the Colonial Office was guilty of a serious tactical blunder
in appointing Mr. Charles Joseph Latrobe, as the first
Governor of Victoria. He had been appointed Resident
Magistrate, or Superintendent, of the Port Phillip District in


1839; and, during the agitation for the separation of that
district from the huge colony of which it was a part, Mr.
Latrobe, very naturally perhaps, did all that he could to
prevent the inhabitants from gaining their end. As a con-
sequence, he was perhaps the best hated man that has ever
lived in Australia. He was usually called “ the Governor’s
poodle,” and was denounced in no measured terms by the
advocates of separation. When that was carried, and Mr.
Latrobe became Lieutenant Governor, his harsh treatment
of the diggers nearly drove them into rebellion. This is not
the place to give the history of the Ballarat riot, but some
reference to it is necessary. A most exorbitant licence fee
was imposed on all residents on proclaimed gold-fields, and
this tax was collected in a most arbitrary and brutal manner.
There were no gaols nor lock-ups on the diggings at the time,
and men arrested for all sorts of offences —murder, bush-
ranging, stealing, or the non-payment of licence fees —were
simply fastened with hand-cuffs to a bullock chain attached
to a tree stump by a huge staple. Later some boxes, made
of corrugated iron, were put up as cells and these were
known as “the Dutch ovens,” or “the sardine boxes,” and
prisoners confined in them on hot summer nights suffered
tortures, and begged to be put “on the chain ” as a relief.
Mr. Latrobe, therefore, soon came to be as cordially hated by
the new comers as he had been by the older inhabitants of
the district. But whatever may be said as to the harshness
of his treatment of the gold diggers, the efforts he made to
check the lawlessness rampant in the colony cannot be too
highly commended. He and the Legislative Council organ-
ised a fine body of police in a very short time. The horse
police were as well-disciplined and mounted as any similar
body in any part of the world, but allowing for their
efficiency, it would have been impossible for them to repress
lawlessness so rapidly and completely as they did, had they
not been assisted by the attitude of the general public. I
may be wrong perhaps, but it has always appeared to me
that the antagonism between the free and the convict
elements in the population of which I have already spoken
was continued long after the abolition of the convict system,
and even passed on to those who landed in the country
during the rush to the diggings. There was a general


tendency at the time to credit all sorts of misdeeds to the
convicts. No doubt, among the enormous crowds which
landed in Victoria in the early years of the rush to the
diggings, there was a fair admixture of rough and reckless
characters who were not convicts, but it was the custom to
assume that all crimes were committed by the “old hands,”
and that any man arrested for any criminal offence had
been “sent out.” Thus, when Mr. Lachlan M’Lachlan was
appointed police magistrate of Bendigo, he merely expressed
openly the opinion held by other magistrates, and the
public generally, when he declared that nearly all thefts
were perpetrated by “old hands.” He asserted that he
could distinguish a convict from a free man at a glance.
He would order the police to make the prisoner walk down
the court, and would exclaim: “Turn him round again,
sergeant. Ah ! I thought so ! I can see the marks of the
irons on his legs.”* By which he meant that the man had
acquired a sort of limp through wearing irons, and that he
could detect it. All such men were sent to gaol for six or
twelve months, not so much for the crime or offence with
which they stood charged, as because they were ex-convicts.
And generally the public endorsed this apparent injustice.
“It’s a pity we ain’t got more magistrates like
Bendigo Mac,” was an expression frequently heard in
all parts of the colony. It is not impossible that the
fashion of crediting all crimes and offences to convicts,
however unjust it may have been, tended to prevent
others from committing crimes. Whether this was so or
not, it is certain that the diggers, rough and careless as the
majority of them were, steadily set their faces, as a class,
against crime, and never hesitated, even during the height
* "Mr. Lachlan McLachlan, or ‘Bendigo Mac,’ as he was more
familiarly styled, administered the law with a vigour and severity which
brought upon him censure from many quarters . . . but ' desperate
evils require desperate remedies.’ . . . When an old hand happened
to be among the prisoners, he would be terrified by the fierce reprobation of
* Bendigo Mac,’ or by the glare which shot from that inevitable eyeglass.
. . . At other times he would say to a prisoner, ' This district is not
big enough for both you and me. One of us must leave—which shall it
be ? ’ The prisoner would feel, of course, that there was very little doubt
about the matter, and would promise to make himself scarce, requesting
probably a couple of days’ grace to wash up a bit of washdirt." " History
of Bendigo,” by George Mackay, chap. 111,


of their dispute with the authorities, to hand over to the
police any person detected in stealing. Probably they were
forced into this attitude in self-defence. The diggings were
merely huge camps, everybody living in tents or “ houses ”
made of wooden rafters and uprights, covered with calico or
canvas. Even the big hotels and theatres were calico
structures. It was so easy for an evil-disposed person to rip
open a tent and thrust his hand under the pillow or into
any other place where he thought gold might be concealed.
But such thefts, although numerous, constituted only a
minority of the crimes committed on the goldfields. All
round were holes twenty or thirty feet deep, and the paths
from one part of the field to another wound in and out
between these holes, so that it was dangerous for a stranger
in the locality to travel about after dark. In such a place it
was so easy to stab a man and throw his body down a hole
that the very facilities offered operated as a temptation to
murder. Scarcely a day passed without a body being found
murdered and rifled, and thus a peculiar sort of morality
was developed on the diggings, and the diggers, while
resisting the police, jeering at them and showing their
hatred of them in every possible way, still assisted them in
capturing thieves and other criminals. It was the custom
to call public meetings for political and other purposes,
by sending men to all the various camps each carrying a
tin dish. These heralds would beat their tin dishes and yell,
“Roll up! roll up!” Frequently a “roll up’’was called
for the purpose of organising a party to hunt down thieves
or other evil-doers, and very soon the “ roll up ” carried
terror through the ranks of tent thieves and other robbers.
Sometimes the delinquent when caught was cuffed and
beaten and ordered off the diggings on pain of death, but,
as a rule, he was marched to the police camp, popularly
known as “ The Camp,” and handed over for trial. It was
perhaps because of this attitude of the diggers, that “ Lynch
law ” did not become an institution in Victoria, as it had in
California. On more than one occasion, it was proposed
that thieves, robbers, and murderers should be summarily
dealt with by their captors, but such resolutions were not
endorsed at the “ rolls up ”; although, on more than one
occasion, it was said that if the Government could not


protect the diggers from bushrangers, the diggers would
have to protect themselves. Some of the old names, now
rapidly disappearing, record the character which the neigh-
bourhood once bore. Thus “ Murderer’s Flat,” the old
name of a portion of the Mount Alexander Goldfield, is
almost forgotten. The flat is now a portion of the pretty
little mining and agricultural town of Castlemaine. It was
the custom here in the “ roaring fifties,” for the diggers to
fire off their guns and pistols every night after sundown, and
ostentatiously reload them, as a caution that any person
seen prowling round the tents during the night would be
shot without further notice. In many of the outlying gullies
on the Bendigo and Ballarat Goldfields the same ceremony
was performed nightly. Beyond the limits of the goldfields the
roads were infested by footpads and bushrangers, who hated
the diggers for their antagonism to their class. To these the
digger was fair game. It was popularly supposed that these
bushrangers were all convicts from “ Van Diemen’s Land,”
hence they were known as “Van Demonians,” “Uerwenters”
from the River Derwent, and “T'other siders.” The
newspapers were full of references to their doings. The
Geelong Advertiser of June 2nd, 1851, warned the public
that “large numbers of men—half bushranger, half gold-
seeker are travelling along the roads, especially the
Sydney road, robbing all who are unprotected.” These
were said to be Van Demonians who had landed in
Geelong or Melbourne, and who were making their way
to the goldfields of New South Wales. In the same month
the Melbourne Herald published several articles calling the
attention of the authorities to the large “ influx of Van
Diemen’s Land expirees who are thronging into Port
Phillip.” These “ villains,” it was said, were travelling
along all the roads which led to the diggings on the Sydney
side, and lived by plundering honest travellers. On June
23rd the mail coach was bailed up at Bruce’s Creek,
between Portland and Geelong. The coach, with three
passengers on board, was going down the hill to the
crossing-place, when two men stepped from behind gum
trees, presented their pistols, and cried “ Bail up.” The
driver, William Freere, instead of complying, began to flog
his horses, but before they could respond their heads were


seized by one of the bushrangers, while the other put his
pistol to Freere’s head, and threatened to blow his brains
out. The coach was taken some distance off the road, and
its occupants were tied to trees. The robbers went very
leisurely through the letters, and when all that was of value
had been abstracted one of the bushrangers took a saddle
and bridle belonging to one of the passengers (Mr. Thomas
Gibson) and set it aside with the remark, “ Ah, this is
just what I wanted.” This bushranger was dressed “in
a black suit of fashionable cut, and wore black kid
gloves.” He was afterwards identified as Owen
Suffolk, while his companion was Christopher Farrell.
Suffolk took one of the coach-horses, put the saddle and
bridle on, and mounted. Farrell jumped on the other
horse barebacked. The tied men begged hard to be let
loose, offering to swear that they would not give information
to the police, or move from the spot until their captors were
away, but their supplications were only laughed at. The
road was at that time but little frequented, and the next
mail, which might possibly be the first vehicle to pass, would
not come for a week. Moreover, they were out of sight
of the road. The struggle to get free therefore a
struggle for life, and it was a severe one. Mr. Gibson was
the first to get one hand loose. After this the rest was
comparatively easy. In less than an hour they were all
free, and they walked straight to the township at Bruce’s
Creek to tell the police. The robbers were caught in
Geelong a day or two later. Suffolk was strolling along the
beach near the wharf, and Farrell was found in a boarding-
house not far away. They were sentenced to ten years’
penal servitude, the first three in irons.
James Mason and John Brown, two diggers, were sitting
at their camp at Bendigo having supper, when a man
named William Scott passed along, going towards the
“township.” They invited him to “sit down and have
a feed,” as he looked tired, and he did so. But while
eating he slipped his hand under the edge of the tent and
lookout a bag containing no ounces of gold. The gold
was missed before he was out of sight, and he was followed
immediately and captured. He was taken to “the camp,”
and subsequently sent to gaol for five years.


On January 28, 1852, the Melbourne Herald reported
that “a gang of Vandemonians have kept the road between
Bendigo and Eaglehawk Gully for three days, robbing
all who passed.” The police were sent out and the
gang was broken up. One was shot and three others
traced to Halliday s Inn at Ryneton, where they were
captured. They had thirty-three pounds weight of gold
in their possession, and were taken on to Melbourne
for trial.
Such reports were so frequent that the Legislative
Council was compelled to take action, and as a consequence
the Act known as the Criminals’ Influx Prevention Act (18
Vic., No. 3) was passed in November. This Act was
specially designed to keep ex-convicts out of the colony.
It was impossible to prevent those from New South Wales
from crossing the Murray River, but it no doubt checked the
influx of the more desperate criminals from Van Diemen’s
Land, where transportation was continued for many years
after it had ceased to New South Wales. But although the
Act prevented ex-convicts from landing at Victorian ports
it could not prevent them landing at Sydney or Adelaide
and walking overland to the Victorian diggings. In spite
of this, however, the Act was undoubtedly very efficacious
in checking the landing of criminally-minded persons. There
were, however, so many in the colony previously to the
passing of the Act that the police had plenty of employ-
ment in hunting them down.
On February 6th, Corporal Harvey, of the mounted
police, was searching some boxes at the Police Barracks,
Buninyong, to ascertain whether they contained gold. A
man named Goldman threatened to shoot him if he touched
his box. The trooper simply replied “ I must do my duty,”
and opened the box. Goldman shot him at once. This
crime was a purposeless one. The trooper had been ordered
to remove gold from all boxes left at the station so that it
might be sent down to Geelong by escort. The only excuse
which can be made for Goldman is that the diggers were
very sensitive where their gold was concerned and were also
very ready to protect it even at the risk of murder. But the
boxes were left there in charge of the police, and any man
who objected to his box being searched had no right to take


it there. However, Goldman was convicted of murder and
hung.
On February 23rd, Elliott Aitchison, a squatter, was
robbed near Buninyong, The robber took horse, saddle,
bridle, saddle-bags, watch, a bill of exchange for and
some money. The bushranger was identified as a man
named Edward Melville, who had been working for a
neighbouring squatter, Mr. Winter, of Winter’s Flat, and was
well known in the district. A reward of was offered
for his apprehension.
The ship Nelson arrived at Geelong from London in
March, 1852, where she landed her passengers and cargo
and took on board some cargo for her return voyage. She
was then taken round to Hobson’s Bay to fill up. On the
night of April Ist she was lying off Liardet’s Beach, near
where the South Melbourne pier now stands. There were
on board Mr. Draper, the mate in charge, Mr. Davis, second
officer of the Royal George lying at anchor near, three
seamen, three passengers, and the cook. At about two a.m.
they were roused by loud calls, and as each one came out of
his cabin to ascertain what the row was about he was seized
and lashed to the bulwarks. When all had been secured
the robber who appeared to be leader untied Mr. Draper
and ordered him to show where the gold was. The mate
refused. The robber fired and wounded him in the side.
He then threatened to shoot him dead next time he refused.
Another of the gang prodded Mr, Draper behind with a
sword, and, realising that resistance was useless, he led the
way to the lazarette. The door was soon broken down, and
twenty-three boxes containing 8183 oz. of gold, valued at
about were taken out and carried on deck. “ I
say, mates,” exclaimed the leader, “ this is the best
diggings we’ve seen yet.” The boxes were lowered over
the vessel’s side into boats, and then the men tied to
the bulwarks were unloosed, their hands tied behind them,
and they were marched into the lazarette. The entrance
was closed up with the broken boards nailed across. When
the stevedore and his men arrived some hours later to go
on with their work the prisoners in the lazarette were
released, and information was given to the police. The
robbers were said to have numbered about twenty. A


search proved that two of Mr. Liardet’s boats had been
removed from their moorings. They were found far away
along the beach, and it was conjectured that these boats
had been used by the robbers. A reward was offered by
the Government of for the capture and conviction of
the robbers, and this was supplemented by a further reward
°f offered by Messrs. Jackson, Rae & Co., the
consigners of the gold. Within a few days John James,
alias Johnston, was arrested in Melbourne, and shortly
afterwards James Morgan and James Duncan were found at
the Ocean Child Inn, Williamstown. They were in bed,
and when the police entered the room Morgan exclaimed ;
“ If we’d known you was traps we’d a’ blown your
brains out.” When taken to the lock-up he said :
“We may be sentenced, but we’ll live to dance on your
grave, and have 2000 a nob to ride in our carriages.”
At the trial it was said that they had been concerned in
several highway robberies on the Keilor Plains and in the
Black Forest, but these cases were not gone into. They
were convicted of having stolen the gold from the Nelson ,
and sentenced to fifteen years’ hard labour, the first three in
irons.
Ihe winter of 1852 was an exceptionally severe one, and
snow fell heavily in the ranges. A bullock driver who was
looking for his bullocks near Buninyong was bailed up by
three armed men. Although it was snowing at the time
they stripped him and tied him to a tree while they searched
his clothes. Finding only about five shillings in his pockets
they cast him loose, gave him his clothes and money, with
the remark that they thought he “ was a digger from
Ballarat.” A few miles further along the road they met a
party of real diggers and took from them 8 oz. of gold
and an escort receipt for 84 oz. more.
Such robberies as these were reported daily on the roads
round Ballarat, Bendigo, and Mount Alexander. Perhaps
the worst places were the Stoney Rises, on the road from
Geelong to Ballarat, and the Black Forest, between Mel-
bourne and Mount Alexander. But the conditions even in
Melbourne were not much better than elsewhere. On
August 6,185 2, a digger who had just returned from Bendigo
was knocked down in Little Collins Street, Melbourne, and


the pocket of his trousers cut out. He, however, lost only
a few shillings, while the robbers missed 31b. weight of gold
which he held clutched in his hand.
Judge Barry and Mr. Wrixon, the barrister, left the
Supreme Court House together on August n, at about half-
past eight p.m. When they were near St. Francis’ R. C.
Church, Lonsdale Street, they heard a shout for help.
Ploughing through the deep mud they stampeded three
robbers who had got a man down in the gutter. At that
time the streets of Melbourne were not paved as they are
now and the judge and the barrister nearly got bogged while
pulling the digger out of the mud hole in which he was
nearly smothered. The robbers escaped, but the digger
found his gold safe.
Mr. John Scraggs was going home to his house in
Richmond one evening. When passing a corner near his
own residence he received a blow on the head and fell
stunned. When he recovered consciousness his watch,
chain, ring, and purse had disappeared. The next day he
purchased a revolver, loaded it carefully, and carried it in
his hand ready for use as he went home. He was specially
vigilant when he approached the corner where he had been
knocked down before. Probably he was rather too vigilant
on one side. However that may be, he received a blow on
the other side which “ stretched ” him again. That time
the robbers only got a revolver, and Mr. Scraggs swore that
they should get no more firearms from him.
It was about this time that the Melbourne Herald
reported a case of a captain of a vessel lying in Hobson’s
Bay. The captain had been to the theatre and was
walking to Liardet’s Beach to get a boat to take him
on board his ship, when he was knocked down in
Flinders Street and dragged into a right-of-way. Here he
was stripped stark naked and left insensible. It was early
morning when he regained his senses. After some hesitation
he walked towards an hotel, hoping to be able to borrow
some clothes there, but he was pounced on by a vigilant
policeman and taken off to the lock-up. His story was not
believed and he was taken into court and charged with
“ indecent behaviour,” which was adding insult to injury,
and the magistrate remanded him till next morning, to


allow enquiries to be made, bail being refused. Later
on when it was ascertained that he really was the captain
of a vessel, he was discharged. The Herald cited this
a f an of the vagaries of police magistrates, and
charged the police with being unable to protect the public
against robbers. F
But to return to the knights of the road. A pitiful story
■ aA-T ° f an ° d man and his son who ha d left their work
m Melbourne, and gone to the diggings to “make their pile ”
u ™ u ?°es s fu\, like a good many more, and
started to walk back to Melbourne, to return to their
ordinary work. They were bailed up on the edge of the
Black * orest. Ihe bushrangers refused to believe that they
had no gold. It was a stale trick, they said, to throw a bag
of gold behind a log and swear they hadn’t got any, and
then go back and pick it up, when the bushrangers had gone
away. It was in vain that the old man swore that he had
had no gold to throw away. One of the bushrangers com-
pelled him to hold out his hand and fired a bullet through
the palm. As he continued to declare he had no gold the
bushranger was about to shoot through the palm of the
other hand, when the boy made a rush at him and
was shot dead by the other bushranger. The old
man was then allowed to go on his sorrowful way.
Bushranging was the common subject of conversation.
Little else was talked of, and even the children played
bushranger. Two young lads, who were old enough to
know better, thought it would be good fun to “ stick up ”
their father. _He was a farmer living on the Barrabool
Hills, about eight or nine miles from Geelong. He went
into town with some produce and was returning at nightfall
when, at about half a-mile from his own gateway, he was
ordered to “ bail up ”by two persons on horseback. With-
out hesitation he snatched up a gun from the bottom of the
dray and fired. One of the bushrangers fell and the
other cried out “ Oh, father, you’ve shot Johnny ' We
were only in fun.” It was too late. The father’s aim
had been too sure and the boy was taken home to his
mother dead.
r On October 24th, 1852, Henry Johnston, John Finegan,
John Donovan, Charles Bowe, and John Baylie, known as
L


the Eureka gang, were tried for highway robbery in
Melbourne. William Cook said he was riding from
Melbourne to Bendigo, on August 4tb> when near
Aitken’s Gap he was bailed up by Finegan and Donovan.
Three other men sat on their horses some distance away
along the road, but did not interfere. One of the bush-
rangers held a pistol to his head, while the other stripped
him naked and searched his clothes. He also felt him all
over, under the armpits and elsewhere. They took £2 14s.
and a pistol from him. Finegan wanted to take everything,
but Donovan would not agree to that, but gave him back
his clothes. Then he returned one of the £1 notes and
the fourteen shillings in silver. Wesley Anderson identified
Baylie and Donovan as the two men who had robbed him
on a Sunday in August, near Buninyong. The proceedings
were very similar to those in the first case. All the
other prisoners were identified in a similar way by other
witnesses. The robberies were effected over a wide range
of country, and were all of a similar character. When
asked what they had to say in defence, one of the prisoners
asked the Judge whether he thought they were crows?
“ Here’s one man,” he continued, “ says we stuck him up
at Aitken’s Gap, another at the Porcupine, another near
Mount Egerton, and others at other places, and the police
says they caught us in the Crown Hotel, Buninyong.
Why, your Honour, horses couldn’t get over the ground in
the time.” The jury, however, seemed to have formed a
better opinion of the power of the bushrangers’ horses than
the bushranger himself. Perhaps this was due to the fact
that some of them at least had exchanged horses with their
victims. However that may be, they were all found guilty.
Finegan and Donovan, who appeared to have _ been the
leaders, and to have taken part in the majority of the
robberies, were sent to gaol for twelve years, and the others
for six years each. .
The Geelong mail was stuck up in December 1852,
between the old Burial Ground and the Flagstaff Hill, now
in the very heart of Melbourne. The robbers took watches,
rings, and money from the passengers, but did not dismount
from their horses nor interfere with the mail bags. Probably
it was too close to the city.


° n ku eC j mber T 26t - h two di Sg ers returning to Melbourne
were robbed near Keilor by three armed men on horseback,
who took a large parcel of gold dust and an escort receipt
or more. On the same day a man was brutally beaten on
ku S j dn rl road ’ about fifteen miles from Melbourne, and
robbed of his watch, some gold specimens and nuggets, and


CHAPTER XIII.
Captain Melville Takes to the Road ; He Ties and Robs Eighteen
P Men; He Goes to Geelong for a Spree, and Boasts of His
Exploits; His Sensational Capture ; Sent to the Hulks ; Murder
of Corporal Owens ; Melville Removed from the Hulk Success
to the Gaol; Murder of Mr. John Price and Mutiny of the
Convicts; Melville Attacks Mr. Wintle ; Death of the bioted
Bushranger.
Of all the bushrangers of the “roaring fifties” none was
more talked of than Frank McCallum, alias Captain
Melville. Every now and then, during the latter halt ot
the year 1852, stories were told of daring robberies com-
mitted by Captain Melville, and rewards were offered for
the capture of the captain, dead or alive, or any person
who aided and abetted him. On December 18th, 1852,
he rode up to a sheep station near Wardy Yallock and
asked Mr. Wilson, the overseer, who was the owner ? “ Mr.
Aitcheson,” was the reply. “Ishe at home. asked
Melville ; and on being answered in the affirmative he
expressed a wish to see him. Mr. Wilson having no
suspicion as to who the civilly spoken visitor was went
into the house and returned with Mr. Aitcheson Melville
drew out a pistol, pointed it towards them, and ordered them
to “ put up ” their hands. The two gentlemen complied at
once and were marched to the wool shed. Here they found
the sixteen shearers and other workmen sitting in a row
down the middle of the shearing floor and William Roberts,
Melville’s mate, standing sentry over them pistol in hand.
Aitcheson and Wilson were conducted to the head of the
row and ordered to seat themselves which they did.
Melville then searched about until he found a rope. This
he cut into lengths and then mounted guard while Roberts
called the prisoners out one by one and tied them to t e


fence. Mr. Aitcheson asked Melville what he wanted?
and the bushranger replied, “ Gold and horses, and we’re
going to get them. W hen all the men were securely tied
the bushrangers cautioned them not to attempt to get loose
until permission was given, and then walked to the house.
Melville told Mrs. Aitcheson not to be afraid, as he never
interfered with ladies any more than was necessary. He
told all the women and girls to go into one room. One of
the women was told to get some food ready, and part of this
was taken, with two bottles of brandy, to the men at the
shed. Melville and Roberts both "ate heartily. They
searched the house thoroughly, and took all the money and
jewellery they could find. They picked out two fine horses
with saddles and bridles, and when mounted they stopped
at the wool-shed to bid good-bye to Mr. Aitcheson and their
“ other friends,” and to inform them that Mrs. Aitcheson
would come and untie them as soon as he and his mate
were out of sight along the road.
The boldness with which this robbery was conceived
and carried out caused quite an excitement throughout the
colony. The idea of eighteen men permitting two to
tie and rob them without a struggle caused as much amuse-
ment perhaps as wonder. People talked of little else for
days, and everywhere the question was asked, “What
next ? ” This, however, was not all. After leaving the
station the bushrangers only travelled a few miles and
camped in the bush. The following morning they stuck up
two diggers, Thomas Wearne and William Madden, on the
Ballarat Road, and robbed them of After taking the
money, Melville asked them where they were going. “To
Geelong to see our friends, and spend Christmas. But now
we shall have to go back to the diggings,” was the reply.
Melville drew Roberts apart, and after a brief conversation he
came back, handed the diggers a note, and hoped that
would be sufficient to enable them to enjoy their holidays.
During the next few days the bushrangers stuck up and
robbed a large number of travellers on the Ballarat Road,
travelling themselves towards Geelong at the time. On the
morning of the 24th, they stuck up and robbed a man near
Fyan’s hord, about five miles from the town, and then rode
straight into Geelong. They put up at an hotel in Corio


Street, where they had dinner and saw that their horses were
fed. Then they went to a house of ill-fame, a little off the
street, and not far from the Corio Street lock-up. One of
the women was sent to a public-house in Moorabool Street
for some bottles of brandy, and the spree began. The
liquor opened Melville’s mouth, and he informed one of the
women who he was, and boasted of his exploits. 1 his
woman told the others, and as there was a hundred pounds
reward offered for “ such information as would lead to his
apprehension,” the chance of making money was too good
to be missed. One of the women put her arms round his
neck and talked to him, while another slipped out by the
back door and went to the police station to inform the
police as to the character of their visitors. Somehow
Melville became suspicious. He suddenly pushed the
woman away, and called to Roberts to go and fetch the
horses, swearing that he would leave the town at once.
Roberts, however, was too drunk to heed him. He was asleep
with his head resting on the table. Melville jumped up and
shook him, but finding that he could not rouse him,
resolved to go alone. He opened the front door and saw
a woman with two policemen just entering the gate.
Slamming the door to hurriedly, he rushed across
the room, and seizing a chair, dashed it through
the back window. Then, jumping clear through the
opening thus made, he raced down the yard to the back
fence and climbed over in time to meet another constable,
who was hurrying up towards the back of the house. With-
out a moment’s hesitation Melville knocked the policeman
down, and ran across a piece of vacant land. His first
intention had, of course, been to go for his horse, but on
reaching Corio Street after this enforced detour, he knew he
would have to pass the lock-up to reach the stable where
his horse was. This was too dangerous, and he took the
opposite direction.
On its western side Geelong proper —that is, the older
part of the town—is separated from its western portion by a
deep gulley, which in early times was closed up by a dam.
The water thus penned back spread over a flat, and served
to supply the first settlers with water. In 1852 the dam
was still there, and formed the roadway which connected


Geelong with Ashby, Kildare, and other suburbs. It was
across this dam that all the traffic on that side of the town
passed. At short distances away the Melbourne and
Ballarat roads branched off, the one along the banks of the
bay, and the other towards the Bellpost Hill. A few years
later the dam was cut away, and a handsome iron bridge
erected across the deep gulley, while the space formerly
covered with water was converted into a park or garden.
The dam was in a line with Malop Street, and Melville
raced away across the vacant lots to that street, followed by
several policemen. It was near sundown, and as Melville
came to the dam Mr. Guy was returning from his afternoon
ride. Mr. Guy was a young gentleman who had not been
long in the colony. He was lodging at the Black Bull Inn,
Malop Street, where the most extensive stables in the
district were. The Black Bull w r as a great sporting house
and there were always some race horses there, either in
training or waiting for engagements; and, as Mr. Guy was
an excellent horseman, he frequently took one or other of
these horses out for an airing. On this occasion he had
been for a gallop across the plains to Cowey’s Creek, and
w r as walking his horse quietly back to allow him to get cool.
When crossing the dam a man suddenly rushed up and
seized him by the leg. He was lifted out of the saddle, and
half fell, half jumped to the ground. He landed on his feet
and rushed round the horse in time to collar the man who
was trying to mount. The horse was a spirited animal and
objected strongly to this summary change of riders, otherwise,
perhaps, the bushranger would have got away. He reared
and plunged and prevented the bushranger from mounting.
Guy seized the bushranger, and received a heavy blow for
his trouble, but he held on gamely, and in the struggle the
horse broke away and galloped off to his stable. A moment
later the police came up, and Melville was captured. Mr.
Guy was highly complimented for his plucky fight with so
redoubtable an opponent, but he usually replied that he
wasn’t going “to lose a horse in that manner if he could
help it.” Of course, he was intensely surprised when he was
informed that he had captured the notorious bushranger,
Captain Melville. Melville and Roberts were lodged in
the “old gaol” in “South Geelong,” and I remember going


to see “ the bushrangers ” conveyed across the flat and up
the hill to the court-house to stand their trial. They were
seated in a dray, heavily ironed—there was no “black
Maria” in Geelong in those days—and drawn by two
horses. There were several armed policemen on the dray,
and others marched before and behind. The court-
house, of course, was crowded, and, as boys were not
admitted, I was not present.
It may perhaps be of interest to notice that at that time
there were stocks outside the Geelong Court-house. They
were converted into firewood about two years later when the
foundations for the new and larger court-house were laid.
I believe these were the last stocks seen in Victoria, the
Melbourne ones having been destroyed some time before,
when the court-house there was enlarged.
Melville was convicted on three charges of highway
robbery, and was sentenced to twelve years’ penal servitude
on one and to ten years each on two other charges, making
in all thirty-two years. A number of other charges were
withdrawn. Similar sentences were passed on Roberts, but
they were made concurrent. Melville was taken by boat from
Geelong to the hulk President in Hobson’s Bay, “ until the
devilish spirit he had for so long a time exhibited appeared
to be broken,” to quote the Melbourne Herald. Rather
more than a year later he was removed to the hulk Success
“ for milder treatment,” and was permitted to go ashore to
work in the Government stone quarry at Point Gellibrand.
At that time Melville was engaged in translating the Bible
into the language of the Australian aborigines, “ in which he
could converse fluently,” For more than two years the
public heard nothing of Captain Melville. On October 22nd,
1856, a launch with fifty or sixty convicts on board
was being towed from the hulks Success and Lysander
to the landing-place near the quarry, when Mr. Jackson,
the officer in charge, observed that the prisoners were
crowding towards the bow of the launch. He shouted
to them to go back and trim the launch. Some
obeyed, but those nearest the bow seized the tow-rope and
rapidly pulled the launch up to the stern of the boat which
was towing it. Then the prisoners began jumping into the
boat. Mr, Jackson was hurled into the water. Corporal


Owen Owens’ head was smashed, and he and John Turner,
one of the rowers, were thrown overboard. The other
rowers jumped, some on to the wharf, the others into
the water. The convicts seized the oars and pulled rapidly
down the bay, Captain Melville standing up in the boat,
waving the hammer with which it was said Owens had been
killed, and shouting “Adieu to Victoria!” The des-
peradoes, however, were not to be allowed to escape so
easily as they imagined. The guard on the hulk Lysander
fired at them as they passed, and the water-police from
M illiamstown soon followed and overtook them. Being
thieatened with muskets at close range, and having no arms
themselves, they surrendered and were towed back quietly
to the Success. Nine of the conspirators were tried for
mutiny, Melville at his own request being placed first at the
bar alone. In the charge sheet he was described as Thomas
Smith, alias Frank McCallum, alias Captain Melville, and
was said to have been transported to Van Diemen’s Land in
1838. This contradicts the many rumours which gained
currency about him during his bushranging career. That
most generally received was that he had come to the colony
m charge of an emigrant ship from England, and that he
and his crew had deserted her and gone to the diggings,
where, being unlucky, he had taken to bushranging. This
report was frequently denied, but still it was extensively
believed, especially in the Geelong district. After hearing
the evidence, the jury were unable to agree on a verdict of
murder in the first degree, as there was a doubt as to who
struck the blow which killed Corporal Owens. The Judge
ruled, however, that if, in an attempt to escape from lawful
custody, any person is killed, all of those attempting to
escape are guilty of murder. In consequence of this ruling
Melville was found guilty and was sentenced to death. The
other prisoners were acquitted. The sentence was after-
wards commuted to imprisonment for life, and when
Melville was informed of the “mercy” which had been
extended to him, he remarked quietly, “Well, you’ll be
sorry for it,”
On March 26, 1857, Mr. John Price, Inspector General
of Convicts in the Colony of Victoria, attended at the quarry
near Williamstown to hear any petitions or complaints which


the convicts might have to present. Convict James Kelly
was the first called and he asked for a ticket-of-leave. Mr.
Price replied that he was unable to accede to this request.
As he walked away Kelly was heard by Captain Blatchford
to mutter “ Bloody tyrant, your race is nearly run.” He
appeared to be in a furious passion, but very little notice
was taken of him at the time. Several of the prisoners
pressed forward and began to crowd round Mr. Price, loudly
complaining that they had not received the due amount of
rations. Some exclaimed that they were being cheated.
Mr. Price stepped back and said in a loud voice, so as to be
heard above the din, that these complaints must be given in
proper form, when full enquiries should be made. If the
charges were true the abuses should be rectified, but if they
were false or unfounded, those making them would be
punished. Suddenly a rush was made. Kelly threw a heavy
stone, shouting at the time, “ Down with the bloody tyrant.”
The stone struck Mr. Price and he reeled. The convicts
pressed forward shouting “Give it him, give it him,”
and a volley of stones was sent flying through the
air. Captain Blatchford was struck several times and
rushed off to summon the guard, which was stationed
on the other side of the quarry tramway, behind a large heap
of stones. A convict named Bryant was said to have struck
Price with a heavy navvy’s shovel. He then shouted
“ Come on. He’s cooked. He wants no more.” When
Captain Blatchford returned with the guard the convicts had
placed Price’s body on a hand barrow, which they held up
in their hands. The remainder stood round as if waiting
for orders. The face of the murdered man was calm, even
pleasant to look at, but the back of his head was terribly
battered, and the heap of stones was covered with his blood
and brains. The guards surrounded the convicts, who
offered no resistance, and they were marched away to the
wharf and taken on board the Success. Soon afterwards
shouts of “ The bloody tyrant’s done for, hooray,” and much
cheering were heard on board of this vessel and on the
Lysander. Fearing that a general mutiny of convicts might
take place, the harbour defence vessel Victoria , with her
guns shotted and the crew at their quarters, was laid along-
side the Success ready to sink her if necessary. The


convicts, however, were very quiet and allowed themselves
to be conducted to their cells without opposition. Fifteen
convicts were placed on trial for this murder, but each one
exercised his full right of challenge, so that the panel was
exhausted without a jury being secured. On the next day
the Crown Prosecutor withdrew three prisoners and the
jurors to whom they had objected were recalled. This
manoeuvre was repeated until at length a jury was
obtained to try three prisoners, Thomas Malony, Thomas
Williams, and Henry Smith. They were found guilty
and sentenced to death. On the day following Richard
Jones, William Jones, John Williams, and James Kelly
were placed at the bar, and after a lengthy consultation the
jury returned a verdict of “ Not guilty.” This verdict was
condemned in the strongest terms by the judge, the press,
and the general public. The acquittal of Kelly, who was
said to have led the assault and struck the first blow, caused
general indignation. The remainder of the prisoners were
charged in two batches, and they were all found guilty and
sentenced to death. Their names were Francis Brannagan,
Richard Bryant, William Brown, John Young, alias Lowe,
James Anderson, Henry Smith, alias Brennan, Daniel
Donovan, and John Chesley. The majority of them had
been condemned to penal servitude for bushranging and
robbery, and the last on the list was Chesley, who was
executed on April 30th, 1857.
Melville had been removed from the hulks to the
Melbourne gaol a short time before because it was believed
that he had been planning a general mutiny, and now it
was said that the murder of Mr. Price had been included in
his scheme. During the first two or three months of his
residence at “ Wintle’s Hotel,” as the Melbourne gaol was
facetiously called, Melville behaved very quietly, and was
treated as an ordinary prisoner. On July 28th, 1857, he
made a savage attack on Mr, Wintle, the Governor of the
gaol, and was afterwards confined to his cell. Later it was
reported that for weeks he would behave in the most
exemplary manner, but would suddenly and unexpectedly
break out into a paroxysm of fury, during which he would
destroy everything destructible. At these times the warders
and officers were ordered to keep away from his cell, and


leave him to himself. He was placed under medical
surveillance, with a view to ascertain whether he was sane
or not, great care being taken, it was said, not to excite him.
On August 10th he was locked up as usual, and appeared
to be in his normal condition as regards health and spirits,
but, on his cell being opened next morning, he was found
lying dead on the ground. A blue handkerchief with red
spots, which he had brought with him from the hulks, was
tied round his neck with a slip knot and twisted up tightly.
Dr. McCrae was called in immediately, and said that death
was due to strangulation. Life had been extinct some three
or four hours. He was of the opinion that the prisoner had
tied the knot himself. A verdict of felo de se was returned
by the coroner’s jury which heard the case. A variety of
opinions were expressed as to this verdict. So far as is
known, there is no evidence to prove that Melville came to
his death in any other way than that stated at the inquest,
but there were numbers of people who asserted their belief
that the bushranger was strangled by the gaolers. As a rule
these people did not blame the gaolers for this act. The
opinion generally expressed was that Melville was little
better than a wild beast, and was better dead than alive.
They also asserted that it would have been more satisfac-
tory if the bushranger had been hung openly instead of
being murdered secretly, and they blamed the Governor and
the Judge for having been so “ soft-hearted ” as to commute
his sentence when he was condemned to the gallows. There
appears, however, to be no evidence in support of this view.
The records of the inquest are brief, but they seem clearly
enough to prove that the most noted bushranger of the gold-
digging era took his own life in one of the paroxysms to which
he was liable. Whether these paroxysms were due to his harsh
treatment on the hulks is another matter, but we are not in
the “ Fifties” now. The hulks have been destroyed or sold,
and the prisoners are treated as humanely now in Australia
as they are in any other civilised country. The treatment
of the bushrangers all through the later developments of
that crime tend to prove that the Australians considered
bushranging as a sort of exotic introduced into the country
with the convicts sent from England, and only to be wiped
out by the suppression of the convict element in the


population. We see the influence of this view in New
South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and elsewhere, as well as
in Victoria. In this colony the appointment of Mr. John
Price as Inspector General of convicts was an expression of
the popular belief. Mr. Price had had a long experience
among convicts, and the very fact that his treatment of
them was harsh was a recommendation in his favour. He
had been superintendent of the convict station of Port
Arthur, where he was known to the convicts placed under
his charge as “Bloody Tyrant Price.” When that estab-
lishment, of the character of which the late Marcus Clarke
gives us an idea, but an idea only, in his story, “ For the
Term of his Natural Life,” was broken up, in consequence
of the cessation of transportations to Van Diemen’s Land,
in 1853, Mr. Price was specially chosen for the position he
held in Victoria because of his knowledge, not merely of
convict character, but of the personal appearance of a large
number of the criminals who were disturbing the peace of
the colony, because the majority of them had already been
under his charge in Van Diemen’s Land. The Victorians
desired above all things to keep the convicts out of their
colony, and as a means to this end they endeavoured to make
their prisons a “ holy terror ” to this class of immigrant.
When that object had been achieved, or the convict element
in the population had died out by the effluxion of
time, they modified their prison discipline in accord-
ance with the growth of humanitarian ideas. Whether
they have done all that is possible in this direction may
be doubted, but this is not the place to- discuss this
question. The evidence so far as it has been collected
and considered tends to show that the chief remedy for
crime is education. It is impossible to believe that even
the worst of the bushrangers would have grown up to be
such scourges to society had they been properly cared for
during the impressionable period of their lives, and many
of them amid all their savagery show traces of qualities
which might, under happier circumstances, have fitted them
for useful positions in the world. It may be added here
that Mr. John Price is popularly supposed to have been the
prototype of “ Maurice Freere” in Marcus Clarke’s novel,
which should be read by every student of Australian history.


CHAPTER XIV.
Murder of a Bullock-driver; Sticking Up in the Melbourne Streets
Stealing £ 100,000 in Bank Notes; Want of Efficient Police
Protection ; Murders and Robberies at Ballarat, Bendigo, Mount
Alexander, and other Diggings ; The Robbery of the Mclvor
Gold Escort; A Bushranger Intimidated by a Bottle of Brandy ;
Robbery of the Bank of Victoria at Ballarat ; Capture of Garrett in
London; Prevalence of Horse-stealing ; The Doctor’s Creamy.
The arrest of Captain Melville, although it removed the
central figure in this the third bushranging epoch in
Australia, by no means put a stop to the crime. Melville
had been a specialist, a true highwayman, while the others
were merely general practitioners who were not very particular
what crimes they committed so long as they secured booty.
On January 24th, 1853, the driver of the mail coach from
Colac to Geelong was ordered to bail up near Mr. Bennie’s
station. The driver kept on. One of the bushrangers
reached out to grasp the reins, while the other fired at the
driver. The report frightened the horse of the man who
was trying to seize the reins, and it bolted, throwing the
rider. The mail-man whipped his horses into a gallop and
got safely away.
Richard Bryant and William Mack walked into Mr. J.
Jackson’s store at Fryer’s Creek, Mount Alexander, and
ordered the storeman to bail up. They took all the money
that was in the till, a quantity of gold dust, and a bundle of
the most valuable articles they could find. They were
arrested by Constable Bloomfield in a house in Melbourne
and sentenced to twelve years’ imprisonment.
On May 7 th, a carrier named William Morgan left
Melbourne with several passengers, each of whom had
agreed to pay him to carry his “ swag ” to the Mount


Alexander diggings. Besides these swags Morgan had
some goods for the conveyance of which to the diggings he
was to receive jQ 29. The first day’s journey was a short
one, the party camping near the Lady of the Lake Inn.
The passengers, who, it may be as well to explain, had to
walk, had a tent with them which they took off the dray.
They were erecting this when Morgan and the driver of
another dray camped there, named Pilcock, walked to a
blacksmith’s shop near the hotel to get some small jobs
done. Pilcock returned alone and informed the company
that Morgan had walked on to “ Tulip ” Wright’s to try and
purchase an extra pair of bullocks to strengthen his team.
The following morning Pilcock yoked up Morgan’s team as
well as his own, and asked one of the passengers to drive
it, adding that Morgan would join them somewhere along
the road. They were about to start when a little boy,
travelling with his parents by another dray, ran up crying
out that there was “ a man’s head sticking out of the
ground.” A rush to the place was made and the child’s
statement proved to be true. The body was dug up and
identified as Morgan’s. From the appearance of the
ground about half-way between the camp and the black-
smith’s shop it was apparent that a fierce struggle had taken
place. The ground was trampled and torn up as if with
a wrestling match. A pool of blood was discovered with a
track leading from it to where the body was found, showing
that it had been dragged there. Some wonder was
expressed that so severe a contest should have taken place
without any sound having been heard at the camp,
which was not more than a quarter of a mile away.
But there were some fifty or sixty people at the camp, and
some of these had been amusing themselves by singing,
while others had been playing concertinas and other
musical instruments. The noise thus made had no doubt
drowned the noise of the deadly contest which was
taking place so close at hand. Pilcock was arrested at
once, and was subsequently convicted and hung. Had his
project succeeded, he would have made quite a nice little
haul with the money for the loading on the two drays.
So prevalent was crime at this time, that even the streets
of Melbourne were not safe. One afternoon, David Clegg


and Henry Jones were driving home in a spring cart from
Melbourne, to the huge encampment on Emerald Hill,
known as Canvas Town. They had just crossed Prince’s
Bridge, over the Yarra Yarra, when they were ordered
to bail up, Clegg caught up a double-barrelled gun from
the bottom of the cart, but before he could make any use of
it, it was snatched from his hands by one of the robbers, who
cried out: “ Stand aside till I blow his brains out.” A
second robber said : “ Oh, let him go.” While these two
were disputing as to whether Clegg should be shot or not, a
third robber struck the horse and started him off. During
the next few days the Canvas Town mob, as it was called,
committed several robberies in the neighbourhood of
Prince’s Bridge, and at length the police made an effort to
protect travellers between Melbourne and Canvas Town
(now known as South Melbourne). One day, Chief
Constable Bloomfield and Mr. Farrell were walking together
near the bridge, when Bloomfield exclaimed : “ Hulloa !
there’s a man I want for uttering a note.” He crossed
the street and said : “ Well Hammond.” “ What the
do you want ? ” asked Hammond. “ Oh, you needn’t be
afraid, I won’t hurt you,” replied Bloomfield. “ I don’t care
whether you do or not,” cried Hammond, walking beside
the policeman in bravado. Bloomfield delayed making the
arrest in hopes that another constable would appear, until
Hammond turned away, when he grabbed him. Farrell
shouted, “ Look out, Bloomfield,” and the constable turned,
but not quickly enough to avoid a blow aimed at him by
another man. Bloomfield fell, but did not relax his grip on
Hammond, and two other constables appearing at the time,
both Hammond and Edwards were secured. James
Hammond and William Edwards were identified as the men
who wished to shoot Clegg, and were sent to gaol for ten
years, the first three in irons. Another man, named Smith,
who had prevented Hammond from firing at Clegg, was let
off with six years.
Another batch of this gang of scoundrels which infested
the river side at Melbourne was secured in connection with
the stealing of a consignment of bank notes with the face
value of 100, 000. These notes were brought to Mel-
bourne in the ship Strathedon , consigned to Messrs. Willis,


Merry & Co. as agents for the Union Bank of Australia.
The notes were for 5) £ loi £ Sf and £ lm They were
unsigned and were therefore non-negotiable. They appear
to have been taken from the ship and dumped down on the
wharf, pending the arrival of a dray to take the case to the
warehouse of Messrs. Willis, Merry & Co. When the dray
arnved, however, the box could not be found. The loss
caused great excitement and the police were notified of the
robbery. Some days later an unsigned £lO note was passed
on Messrs. Brasch & Sommerfeld, Collins Street, in ex-
change for clothing, and this led to the arrest of William
w°n ng> o Durm g the following week William Lay worth
William Simpson, William Rogers, and Thomas Stroud were
detected in attempts to pass unsigned notes on various hotel
and boarding-house keepers, store-keepers, and others, and
were arrested. Stroud’s residence was searched and a number
of the unsigned notes were found there. His wife was
arrested, but was acquitted. Layworth turned Queen’s
evidence and escaped punishment, but Young, Simpson,
Rogers, and Stroud were sentenced to long terms of im-
prisonment. The jury commented on the carelessness shown
by the bank and its agents in leaving the box unwatched
on the wharf. The manager of the bank expressed his
regrets and promised that more care should be taken in
future.
John Atkins went into the Cross Keys Hotel in
Melbourne and called for a drink. George Ellison, who
was in the bar, asked him what he had done with the gold
he had brought from the diggings. Atkins replied that he
had none. Ellison called him a liar r and said that if he
had not come from the diggings his trousers would not be
the colour they were. Everybody knew a digger, because
his moleskin trousers were always coloured by the clay he
worked in. A row started, and the landlord interfered and
told Atkins to leave. He did so, but was followed by
Ellison and another man, who knocked him down and
robbed him of his gold. Ellison was arrested next day and
was sent to gaol.
The Geelong Advertiser of March sth says ;—“ The
shameful want of adequate protection along the main roads
leading to the diggings has repeatedly been exemplified in
M


the robberies, assaults, and murders committed by bush-
rangers upon a number of luckless wayfarers, with the
grossest and most notorious impunity. These unavenged
offences against society and the public peace have been
excused by some, on account of the difficulty of keeping
afoot such an extended line of patrol as would effectually
intimidate marauders. . . . When we are in possession
of the fact that the Sydney Executive could and did accom-
plish such protective arrangements over a hundred and titty
miles of country, we may be allowed to doubt the alleged
inability of the Victorian Government to render equally
efficient aid out of a revenue probably ten times as great as
that derived by the sister colony from the same source ; at
least we might reasonably suppose that townships between
Melbourne and Mount Alexander, Geelong and Ballarat,
would be supplied with police, mounted or otherwise, to act
in a radius of ten miles or so when called upon. ...
A gentleman well known to the public, from his long con-
nection with the newspaper press, has been the victim ° a
murderous assault. His story is that while at Ballan a
township about twenty miles this side of Ballarat, on the
Melbourne road, a man attacked him with an iron poker.
The gentleman raised his arm to protect his head and it
was broken. But for this the blow might have fallen on
his head and proved fatal. • • • • J wo da X®. we J®
wasted at Ballan and four at Bacchus Marsh waiting to
find a magistrate to issue a writ for the arrest of his
assailant .... The gentleman having been robbed
of his money had to make his way to town for medical
aid by the charity of persons along the road. Fortunately
some kind friends supplied him with means to obtain food
and carriage.” . ,
At the time the police were too busy harrying the
diggers for the exorbitant licence to attend to the roads,
but later in the year, when the Melbourne papers backed up
the demand for better police protection, police stations
were established at the larger camping places where villages
or as they are called in Australia, townships had grown up
In the meantime numbers of murders were committed
without the perpetrators of the crimes being discovered.
Thus Mr. and Mrs. Skinner were travelling from Bendigo


to the new rush at Mclvor and camped for the night
on the banks of Eve Creek. In the morning Skinner
went to look for his horse while his wife prepared
breakfast. When she went to the lagoon to fill the billy
to make the tea, she saw the half-immersed body of a man
When her husband returned he drew the body out of the
■water, and saw that the head had been fearfully battered.
A pocket-knife, pipe, tobacco, and a silk handkerchief were
found in the pockets, but no gold or money. An enquiry
was held in this case, and a verdict of murder was pro-
nounced against some person or persons unknown, and that
was all; but there were hundreds of such cases in which no
enquiry was held.
John Shannon was travelling from Ballarat to Geelong,
and stopped for the night at an inn at Batesford. He called
on Mr. White, a butcher, and had tea and was about to
return to his inn, when three men stopped him at the door.
One of these men asked, “ Is this the butcher’s shop ? ”
“Yes,” replied Shannon. “Ah! you’re just the bloke we
want,” exclaimed the man. The three men then hustled
Shannon back into the shop and compelled him to stand
with his back to the wall and his arms stretched out.
White was placed in a similar position, and made to stand
while the robbers emptied the till. They then searched
Shannon’s pockets, and took out a parcel of gold and some
money. He objected, and one of the men who had been
standing on guard at the door drew a pistol, put the muzzle
close to Shannon’s breast, and pulled the trigger. Shannon
fell. The man who had been searching him turned the
body over, and then said, “ Barry, it’s finished; we’ll be off.”
The three men then left, no attempt being made to detain
them. An inquest was held on the body, and a verdict of
wilful murder was returned against three men whose names
were unknown. The jury added: “We cannot separate
without expressing a strong feeling with regard to the
unprotected state of the road between Geelong and Ballarat,
which is overrun with bad characters. We would respect-
fully but firmly urge on the Executive the immediate
necessity of erecting intermediate police stations between
the two places, with patrols to traverse the road from station
to station, and we would also point out the necessity for


strenuously enforcing the Vagrant Act. ’ Three men were
arrested and charged with this cold-blooded murder, but
were acquitted.
The great bushranging event of the year was the sticking
up and robbing of the Gold Escort from the Mclvor Gold-
field. The escort was a private one travelling from Mclvor
to Kyneton, where it met the Government Escort which
conveyed gold from Bendigo and Mount Alexander to
Melbourne. It started, as usual, on July 28th. At about
fifteen miles from Mclvor and three miles from the Mia-
Mia Hotel, there was a sharp bend in the road round a
point of rocks which jutted out from the range. At the bend
a mia-mia, or shelter such as is made of boughs by the blacks,
had been constructed, and opposite to it a big log was drawn
across the track. This compelled the driver of the escort
cart to pull his horses off the track and drive very close past
the mia-mia. The road was very rough, and the cart swayed
about badly. Just as it was passing the mia-mia a volley
was fired from it, and the three troopers on the cart as well
as the driver fell. The horses on which Mr. Warner,
in charge of the escort, and Sergeant Duins were mounted
were both wounded. Although they were wounded, the
troopers returned the fire as speedily as possible, but could
see nothing to shoot at except the bushes. The bush-
rangers fired again, and the troopers were compelled to tail
back, when about a dozen men rushed from behind the
mia-mia, seized the two boxes which contained the gold,
and rushed back into the scrub. Mr. Warner sent Sergeant
Duins to the nearest police camp for assistance, and then
followed the bushrangers, who fired at him. He replied
with the three shots remaining in his revolver, and then
retired. Then Mr. Warner galloped as fast as his wounded
horse could go to Patterson’s station for help. On his
return with some of the station hands he found a man
putting the wounded troopers into the cart, and arrested
him on suspicion of being one of the robbers. The driver,
T. Flooks, was the most seriously hurt, and he died a few
days later. He and the troopers, S. B. Davis, J. Morton,
and R. Boeswetter, were taken to the hospital at the police
camp on the Mclvor goldfield as quickly as possible, and
the man who had been arrested, having proved that he had


no connection with the _ bushrangers, but had been acting
from purely humanitarian motives, was discharged. A
party was organised to pursue the robbers, and on going to
the place where the attack had been made three horses
with packsaddles were found tied to the trees. It was
conjectured that the robbers had been disturbed before
they could pack the gold on the horses by the approach of
the pursuing party, and had made off on foot into the
ranges. Some time passed away, and then a man named
John Murphy was arrested on board the ship Madagascar ,
lying in Hobson’s Bay. He had taken a passage in her on
the eve of her departure for England. When charged he
admitted that he had been one of the party, and promised
to turn approver. He gave some information, which led to
the anest of others of the gang, but he then seems to have
repented of his decision, as he committed suicide. His
brother, Jeremiah Murphy, however, was arrested in
Queensland, and gave the desired information, thereby
escaping punishment. The gold stolen was valued at about
an d very little of it was recovered. George Wilson,
George Melville, and William Atkins were charged with the
murder of Thomas Flooks, and were found guilty. They
were hung in Melbourne, on October 4th. Atkins died as
soon as the bolt was drawn, but Wilson and Melville
struggled for several minutes. The hangman was com-
pelled to “ draw the legs of Melville down with considerable
force ” before life was extinct.
Alfred Stallard and Christopher Goodison went to a
tent at Bendigo Creek, and entered into conversation with
Mrs. Roberts, who lived there. They offered her a glass of
rum which she drank. It is supposed that the liquor was
drugged, as she became insensible, and the two men “ made
a pack ” of everything valuable in the tent, including five
ounces of gold, and walked away. On his return to his tent,
William Roberts was informed of what had taken place and
gave information to the police. The robbers were followed
and were captured near the Loddon River. When they were
asked at their trial whether they had anything to urge as a
reason for mitigating their punishment, Goodison com-
plained that they had been chained to a tree for three days
at the Loddon. They were forced to walk to Mount


Alexander, and were then chained to a log in the Camp
Reserve for ten days. They were marched to Kyneton,
where they were kept in the lock-up for five days on bread
and water. From thence they were conveyed to Melbourne
by coach. They received little sympathy, however,_ because
it was well known that diggers whose only crime was
inability to pay a heavy licence fee were treated no better.
Occasionally the tragic events of the year were lightened
by a touch of comedy, as when a resident of Ashby was
returning home from his business place in Geelong. It was
dark when he was crossing the dam, when a man presented a
pistol at him and called “ Bail up.” The suburbanite was
taking home with him a bottle of brandy, which, in accord-
ance with the custom of that time, was not wrapped in
paper. Paper was too dear in Australia to be used for
wrapping articles which would keep together without.
When challenged, the suburbanite brought the bottle from
under his coat, presented it at the head of the bushranger,
and cried, “ You bail up.” The would-be robber, taken by
surprise, dropped his pistol and turned to run, but the suburb-
anite cried “Stop, or Til fire,” and the fellow stopped. The
suburbanite thought for a moment whether he should take
the “ bushranger ” to the lock-up or not, and decided that it
would only entail a “ lot of trouble,” so he punched his head
and let him go. He kept the pistol as a trophy, and carried
home his bottle intact. About the same time Edmund
Taylor was found in the bush dead. His body was terribly
mutilated. He had left Eureka, Ballarat, to travel to Burnt
Bridge, and was known to have taken with him a bank
receipt for and a £lO note.
Arthur Burrow and William Garroway called at the hut
of William Henry Mitchell, at Pennyweight Flat, Ballarat,
and asked the way to the township. Mitchell told them
and was then asked to “ shout.” Mitchell refused, when
Garroway struck him with a pick handle, while Burrow drew
out a pistol and presented it. They took what gold they
could find and walked on. They were joined by two other
men, and stuck up and robbed Alexander McLean. They
were followed and arrested.
William Bryan and John Douglass were also convicted
of highway robbery at Muddy Creek and other places


between Geelong and Ballarat, and sent to gaol for five
years. James Nugent and four others stopped Benjamin
Napton on the road near Modewarre. They pretended they
were policemen in search of bushrangers. Nugent was
anxious to take care of Napton’s gold for him, but Napton
refused to entrust it to him. They walked together to
Kildare, where they went into the Sportsman’s Arms and had
drinks. When they came out, Napton missed his gold,
and Nugent was arrested. A knife was found on him, and
this had some soil sticking to it. At the police-court
investigation the magistrate recommended the police to dig
in the yard of the hotel near where Nugent had been
standing. They did so, and found a bag containing 9 oz. of
gold. Two nuggets, which Napton said were also in it,
could not be found.
Roberts, who had been convicted of complicity in the
robbery of gold from the ship Nelson , but who had been
pardoned on a question of identity having been subsequently
raised, was captured, and charged at Buninyong with high-
way robbery. He, with ten other men, was being conveyed
to Geelong to serve the ten years to which he had been
sentenced, and were halted at Ray’s Hotel, on the road, for
refreshments. Roberts begged to be allowed to write a
letter to a magistrate in the neighbourhood, and his request
being granted, his right hand was freed from the handcuffs.
The other prisoner to whom he was chained managed to
slip his hand out of the handcuff, and Roberts being thus
free, jumped through the window and bolted for the bush.
Only one constable had been left in the room in charge of
the prisoners, and he could only shout out an alarm. How-
ever, Roberts ran almost into the arms of the foot policeman,
who had recently been stationed at this point, and he held
the bushranger until the other constables came up.
On December 14th, 1854, Thomas Quinn, a stonemason,
started from his home in Geelong and rode to Ballarat.
He left his pony at Mrs. Smith’s, about three miles from
the diggings, and walked in. He stopped at the tent of
John Boulton, and played cards with Boulton and his mate,
Henry Marriott. Later on the three men went to the tent
owned by Henry Beresford Garrett at the Big Gravel Pits.
They took their revolvers, but no powder and shot, and


walked across Main Street to the Bank of Victoria on
Bakery Hill. They had formulated a plan to rob the bank,
and Quinn had been induced to join on the understanding
that no violence was to be used. Hence the unloaded
pistols. They put new caps on to the revolvers and some
paper in the muzzles to “ make them look as if they were
loaded.” Garrett and Boulton entered the bank, Marriott
stopped at the door inside, while Quinn remained outside
on watch in the street. They ordered the cashier and teller,
Messrs. Buckley and Marshall, to “ bail up.” Then they
tied the hands of the two bank officials, and collected the
spoil. As soon as they were outside they separated, one
going down Bakery Hill, another along the Melbourne
Road, and the others by different routes across the Eureka
Plateau, having previously agreed to meet at Garrett’s tent.
They had taken with them notes, sovereigns, and silver to
the amount of besides about 350 ounces of gold.
When they had divided the loot Marriott returned to his
lodgings in “ the township,” now known as the City of
Ballarat. He lodged at a boarding-house in Lydiard Street.
Garrett disposed of his tent and tools, and went by
coach to Melbourne, from whence he shipped direct
for London. Quinn and Boulton went to Geelong.
They stayed one night at Quinn’s house in Chilwell,
and went by boat next day to Melbourne, where they
sold their share of the gold at the London Chartered
Bank in Collins Street. They returned next day
to Geelong, and again stopped at Quinn’s house for a
night, and then went back to Boulton’s tent on the diggings.
They took good care not to mention the robbery before
Mrs. Boulton, because “ she was a good woman.” On the
following day Boulton went to the bank from which the
money had been stolen and asked for a draft on London for
With an infatuation difficult to account for he
tendered in payment for this draft some of the stolen bank
notes, among those which he had received for the gold
in Melbourne. This was almost like asking plainly to be
arrested. Of course the notes were recognised at once.
He was kept waiting on some frivolous pretext while the
police were sent for, and was then arrested. One of the
stolen £lO notes was produced at the trial and identified


as part of the money advanced by Boulton in payment of
the draft. Quinn and Marriott were speedily arrested,
and Quinn turned approver. The other two were sentenced
to ten years’ penal servitude. Detective Webb followed
Garrett to London and found him in fashionable lodgings
near Oxford Street. The detective watched him for some
days before he made up his mind that the fashionably-
dressed man was the bank robber he was after. One day
he saw Garrett come out of his lodgings and followed him
into Oxford Street. Suddenly Webb shouted “ Garrett,”
and Garrett, taken by surprise, stopped and half-turned
round. That was enough to convince the detective that he
was right. He walked up to the robber, slapped him on
the shoulder, and said “ How do you do, Mr. Garrett ? ”
“ 1 don’t kn ow you,” replied Garrett. “ Perhaps not,”
returned the detective, “but I know you. You’ve just
arrived from Melbourne in the Dawstone, I’ve a warrant
here to arrest you for robbing the Bank of Victoria at
Ballarat. Will you come quietly?” Garrett saw that the
game was up and surrendered. He reached Melbourne in
August, 1855, and was speedily sentenced to keep his
former mates company for ten years.
Sufficient has, I think, been said to indicate the state
of the country and the character of the crimes committed
during this epoch. How many men were shot while
prowling about the tents on Ballarat, Bendigo, Mount
Alexander, and other diggings it is impossible to say. Many
of the bushrangers, after having made a haul on the roads or
on the diggings, went to Melbourne or Geelong and spent
their ill-gotten gains in riot and debauchery, and then
committed crimes in these towns for which they were
captured and punished. Others returned to New South
Wales or to Van Diemen’s Land and ended their careers
there. It was rarely known how many crimes even those
who were captured had committed. They were placed
on trial for their last offence. In some cases it was said
that the prisoner had been guilty of other crimes, but
the difficulty of finding witnesses in a population which
was continuously shifting from one end of the country to
the other, as new goldfields were opened, made it impossible
to prosecute for crimes committed a few months before. It


was the custom therefore to inflict long terms of imprison-
ment to keep the evil-disposed out of mischief for a time.
When a prisoner was tried and convicted for more than
one crime the sentences were usually made concurrent, so
that there was no encouragement for the police to pile up a
record of crimes against a prisoner. Captain Melville was
the one exception to this rule.
The sole motive for the robberies of this epoch
was a sordid lust for gold, which seems to have seized
many men who but for the gold discoveries might have
lived out honourable lives. The case of George
Hanslip may be cited as an instance of this. He
was a confidential clerk employed by Mr. Spence, drapei,
of Collins Street, Melbourne. He was sent by his employer
to pay some accounts and purchase goods in Sydney, at that
time the emporium of Australia, hor convenience of carriage,
in days when communication was difficult and bank drafts
rare, he was entrusted with 1400 ounces of gold and some
jewellery, and was instructed to offer the gold to Messrs. C.
Newton & Co., of Pitt Street, on his arrival at Sydney. He
reached Sydney by boat at nine a.m., but did not call at
Messrs. Newton’s store until three p.m., when he reported
that he had been robbed of the gold. He seemed very
excited, saying to Mr. Newton “Oh, what shall Ido . He
asked Mr. Newton to go with him to Malcolms Adelphi
Hotel and Mr. McKeon, one of the partners in the firm,
did so, and saw a carpet bag which had been ripped open.
Hanslip said he felt certain that the gold had been
taken to Hobart Town, and asked Mr. Newton for the
loan of to enable him to go there to seek
for it, but whether Hanslip overdid his part or not,
Mr Newton began to be suspicious of him, and refused to
lend the money. One thing that tended to make him doubt
that the money had been stolen as Hanslip was that
Hanslip was spending money very freely. Enquiries were
made, and it transpired that Hanslip had called on a Mi.
Marks and offered to sell him the gold before he called on
Mr. Newton. Marks had agreed, and sent a man with
Hanslip to the Adelphi to fetch the gold, so that it might be
weighed. On their arrival Hanslip had fumbled about with
his key for several minutes and could not open the door 01


his room. He said he believed the door must have been
nailed up. He got it open at last, and when they went in
the first thing they saw was the ripped bag and a few grains of
gold scattered about on the hearthrug. Another carpet bag
had been turned out, and the clothes scattered about the
room. It was after this that Hanslip went to Mr. Newton’s,
who advised him to give notice to Mr. McLerie, the Police
Superintendent. Hanslip went to Mr. McLerie’s office, and
afterwards had a handbill printed offering reward
for the recovery of the gold. Information was to be
addressed to “ George Hanslip, Esq.” The result of the
police enquiries was that Hanslip was himself arrested and
charged with having stolen the gold. On enquiries being
made, it was discovered that he had left the jewellery
entrusted to him at his lodgings in Melbourne. He was
convicted, but in consequence of his previous good character
he was let off with a comparatively light sentence.
But for the unfortunate dispute between the Govern-
ment and the diggers over the licence fee, it is probable that
the bushrangers might have been disposed of in less time
than they were. That dispute culminated at the end of
rSsq, in a fight between the more violent section of the
diggers and the military. Although the military won in the
conflict on the Eureka, the diggers were the actual victors,
and during the year 1855 they were granted all that the
moderate party had previously asked for. With the settlement
of this vexed question the police were relieved from their
task of harrying the diggers, and devoted their time to the
suppression of bushranging so successfully, that in the
latter half of 1855 the Government proposed to make
a considerable reduction in the police force. The
Ballarat Times , the Bendigo Advertiser , and the various
newspapers in Melbourne and Geelong protested strongly
against this proposed reduction. The gold digging organs
predicted an immediate increase in bushranging and
other forms of lawlessness, but when the reduction
was made in 1856, these predictions were not fulfilled.
No doubt many of the bushrangers were captured and
punished as horse-stealers. The two crimes have always
been intimately related in Australia. Horses were a
necessity to bushrangers, and a man who would steal


a horse would not be likely to hesitate to stick up an
unarmed man if money or gold might be obtained by that
means, and they were quite as liable to be arrested while
stealing a horse as when robbing a man. For two or three
years it was almost impossible for any honest man to keep a
horse. Perhaps one of the most daring and impudent of this
class of offence, was the stealing of Dr. Bailey’s “ Creamy,”
in 1855. Dr. Bailey was perhaps the best known man in
Geelong. He was elected the first mayor of the town when
it was incorporated in 1849, and was re-elected for several
consecutive years. He was very wealthy, rather pompous,
and highly respected. He had given up general practice,
but had an office, where he received a few patients and
friends, at the rear of Mr. Poulton’s chemist’s shop in the
Market Square. One morning he rode to his office as
usual, hitched Creamy, which was as well known in
Geelong as his master, to a post in Moorabool Street, the
busiest portion of the town, and went into his office.
Almost as soon as the doctor disappeared, a man in shirt
sleeves unhitched the horse, threw himself carelessly into
the saddle and rode slowly away. He nodded familiarly
to the policeman at the corner, who, like the numerous
persons about at the time, thought the fellow was the doctor’s
groom sent to take Creamy back to the stable. The man
rode very slowly up Moorabool Street until he turned into
Ryrie Street, but once out of sight of those who saw him
mount he must have travelled much faster. He had barely
turned the corner when the real groom rode up, and he was
much surprised to find that Creamy was already gone. Of
course, the excitement was intense. The idea that anybody
would dare to steal the doctor’s horse had never entered the
head of the most imaginative person in Geelong. Why,
even a burglary at Buckingham Palace would not have been
more astonishing. Crowds collected to stare at the hitching
post on the kerb opposite the doctor’s office. Parties of
mounted police and civilians started to hunt for the robber
in all directions, but no traces of the missing Creamy could
be discovered, and it was not until some months later that
he was discovered in Ballarat. The daring scoundrel had
ridden him straight to the diggings, and had sold him in
Mr. O’Farrell’s newly-opened “ Horse Bazaar.”


CHAPTER XV.
An Escape from Norfolk Island ; Stealing a Government Boat; The
Convicts of New South Wales ; A Terrible Indictment ; Thomas
Willmore ; Murder of Philip Alger ; Murder of Malachi Daly ;
Fight between two Bushrangers ; Hunting down Willmore ; His
Capture while Asleep ; The Last of the Van Diemen’s Land Bush-
rangers ; Wilson and Dido; Some Minor Offenders; An
Unfounded Charge ; Change of Name to Rid the Island of Evil
Associations.
The rush of men of all sorts from all parts of the world to
the great goldfields of Victoria, although it no doubt attracted
the majority of the desperate characters from the neighbouring
colonies, did not entirely free them from bushrangers. It is
necessary, therefore, to devote our attention to these, and
Norfolk Island claims first place. On March 15th, 1853, a
few months before the penal settlement on the island was
finally broken up, a number of convicts were employed in
loading the store ship Lord Auckland. The ship lay off in
the roads, and the goods were taken out to her in boats
rowed by convicts, under the charge of soldiers. One boat,
manned by the convicts Dennis Griffiths, James Clegg,
Thomas Clayton, Robert Mitchell, Joseph Davis, Patrick
Cooper, Jeremiah O’Sullivan, John Naisk, and “ Ginger,”
was on its way to the ship with a load. When it was at
about a quarter of a mile from the shore the convicts
suddenly rose up, rushed the soldiers, and threw them over-
board. No other boat was near, and this gave the convicts the
opportunity they had been looking for. One constable was
left on board, and Bordmore, the coxswain, seized the gunwale
of the boat and held on. The convicts resumed their oars and
pulled as hard as they could, but as Bordmore refused to let
go, and stopped the way of the boat, he was taken on board


again and set to his old work of steering. He was, however,
ordered on pain of death to steer for the main land. On
April nth they reached Stradbroke Island, off Moreton
Bay, but in taking the boat through the surf she stranded.
The men on board, however, all got safely on shore. The
constable and coxswain, with convict Mitchell, were left
near the landing-place while the other eight walked along
the coast to seek for food, of which they were much in need.
They found the hut of Ferdinand Gonzales, a fisherman,
and tried to induce him to lend them his boat to take them
to the mainland. They represented themselves as having
been shipwrecked, but Gonzales did not believe them, and
refused to trust them with his boat. They went away, and
Gonzales walked to where they had said their boat had been
capsized to ascertain whether their story was true or not,
and during his absence they returned, stripped his hut of all
that was eatable or of value, and stole his boat. They
pulled round the coast out of sight, and then sent Clegg
and Griffiths to fetch the constable and the others, but the
two officers had in the meantime secured Mitchell, and now
arrested Clegg and Griffiths. The other six runaways
waited for a time, and then started for the mainland. On
the Monday following a fisherman named Thomas Duffy
went from the mainland to the island, and he consented to
land the constable, the coxswain, and their three prisoners
at Moreton Bay, from whence they marched to Brisbane,
where the prisoners were lodged in gaol. In a few days
complaints of robberies having been committed along the
coast were received, and the Customs boat, with
six armed constables on board, was despatched to
capture the runaways. They were told to call at
Cleveland Point to pick up the Chief Constable, who had
gone to the coast by land. When near the mouth of the
Brisbane River, on passing a patch of scrub, the constables
suddenly became aware that another boat was alongside, and
that they were threatened by six men armed with pistols.
This completely turned the tables. The constables were
compelled to hold up their hands, and were towed into the
scrub, where they were forced to land and strip. The
convicts took the constables’ clothes and gave them their
own rags in exchange, and then, having made them get into


Gonzales’ old boat, ordered them to “be off.” There was
nothing else to be done, and the would-be captors returned
to Brisbane as rapidly as they could, only to be arrested as
the runaways. However, they soon established their identity,
and were released. In the meantime the runaways, being
decently dressed and having a first-class boat, pulled to the
barque Acacia , which was lying at the mouth of the river
waiting for the mails, before beginning her voyage to Sydney.
They told their old story about being shipwrecked mariners,
and were believed and invited on board, where they were
hospitably feasted. The constables were blamed for not
having given notice to the vessels lying at the mouth of the
river, of the fact that these convicts were at large, but they
had not yet reached that part of the river when they were
captured themselves, and if they had gone to these vessels
in Gonzales’ battered boat and in the tattered raiment of the
runaways, they would not only not have been believed, but
might have been detained or sent to Brisbane as the
runaways they resembled. It was a very trying and difficult
position in which they were placed. When the convicts
left the Acacia where they had been so well entertained, they
pulled to the house of Mr. Watson, the chief pilot, and robbed
him of provisions, a gold watch and chain, and about in
money. They stove in his boat to prevent him from going
to the mainland to report, but left him a bottle of rum out
of his store to “keep his spirits up a bit.” Mr. Watson,
however, managed, when they had gone away, to patch up his
boat so as to enable him to cross the narrow strait which
separated Pilot Island from the mainland, and very soon
several boats, manned by constables and volunteers, were
searching the scrubs and islands near the mouth of the river
in hopes of being able to capture the runaways. On May
12 th, Eugene Lucette was rowing near the mouth of the
river, when he discovered the stolen Customs Officer’s
boat among the mangrove bushes. He towed the boat up
the river and restored it to its proper owners. Mr. W. A.
Duncan, J.P., Mr. Shendon (the customs officer), Mr.
Sneyd (the chief constable), and a party of the water police-
constables started in pursuit. They had some black trackers
with them, and these soon found a camp among the man-
groves where the convicts had recently been staying. The


tracks were patiently followed by the blacks for some
distance, and at length the party was found near the
Cleveland Road, about eight miles from Brisbane. They
were in a very weak condition, having had no food, they
said, for four days, and were easily captured. They had
tried to make a living by bushranging along the coast,
having landed at several points and robbed the few settlers
there were there then. At Wide Bay they had come on a
large camp of natives who appeared so hostile that the
convicts had been afraid to land, and had therefore worked
their way back to Moreton Bay with the intention of going
up the country to look for work, as they were tired of living
by robbery. They had a number of watches and other
articles of value, two guns and two pistols, all loaded.
They were tried on two charges, viz:—stealing the Customs
Officer’s boat, the property of Her Majesty, &c., and stealing
a boat belonging to Ferdinand Gonzales, fisherman, and
were convicted. They were sentenced to fifteen years’ penal
servitude.
These men had been sent to Norfolk Island for bush-
ranging and other crimes committed in Van Diemen’s
Land, and therefore had nothing to do with New South
Wales until they landed at Moreton Bay as escapees.
Griffiths, Clegg, and Mitchell were sent back to the island
in charge of the constable and coxswain who had captured
them, and who were officials under Mr. John Price, Com-
mandant of the island. The six convicted of stealing the
Government boat at Brisbane were not retransported to the
island, but were accommodated in the gaol at Moreton Bay.
It may be as well to state here that transportation to
New South Wales ceased in 1841, and only two vessels con-
veying convicts reached that colony afterwards. These
conveyed some prisoners who were supposed to be reformed
characters, and were known in Australia as “ Pentonvillains,”
from the name of the Reformatory in London through
which they had passed. They were sent out in consequence
of an agitation on the part of the wealthier settlers for the
revival of transportation, but so much indignation was
aroused among the mass of the colonists that no further
attempts of that kind were made. The agitation was sup-
ported by the Governor, Sir Charles A. Fitzroy, who said in


his despatch to Earl Grey, that “out of about 60,000 persons
transported hither, 38,000 are reformed and respectable
members of the community. Of the residue, deaths and
departures from the colony will account for the greater part •
and I am enabled to state that only 372 out of the whole
are now undergoing punishment of any kind.” At the date
of this despatch, January 6, 1850, the colony of New South
V .ales included the whole of the eastern side of Australia
Victoria being then the Port Phillip District, and Queens-
land the Moreton Bay District of this colony. The southern
portion, or Port Phillip District, was erected into an inde-
pendent colony about a year later, and I have dealt with
the bushranging there during the gold digging era. In New
South Wales robberies were also very frequent, although
the condition of the colony was never so desperate as
that of Victoria. In August, 1853, the Bathurst Free Press
said “ For some time past the neighbourhood of King’s
Plains has been adding to a murderous notoriety.
There bloodshed in its most awful shape, murder, appears
to be reduced to a science, and the stereotyped phrase
Murder will out ’ has lost its meaning. An unfortunate
old man, remarkable for nothing so much as his hospitality,
is slaughtered like a sheep and deposited under a heap of
stones. _. . . Some fifteen years have rolled over his
grave, his death is still enveloped in mystery. A woman in
the prime of life is shot dead in her house ; the walls being
bespattered with her blood. A helpless old shepherd
■ . • • who had excited the cupidity or revenge of some
miscreant, is discovered in the bush, so cut, bruised, mangled,
and disfigured that words are wanting to describe the tigrish
bloodthirstiness of the murderer. ... A resident of
Bathurst . . . starts for that bloodstained region one
day in perfect health, . , . and the only evidence of
him, living or dead, are the merest fragments of calcined
bones . . . and a few hairs which have been pro-
nounced to be those of a human being.”
The indictment was a terrible one and was no doubt
true, and the paper was perfectly justified in urging the
Government to make more strenuous efforts to stamp out
bushranging. Nevertheless the murders spoken of here
belong to a bygone age, the perpetrators having probably
N


been attracted, like the majority of their class, to the Vic-
torian goldfields. That was the focus to which all such
enterprising scoundrels were drawn, and there the majority
met the fate they so richly deserved. A few robberies were
committed on the roads in the Bathurst district and in other
parts of the colony, but the greatest number of such crimes
took place in the Manaro district and along the road
leading to Victoria. The only bushranger in New South
Wales who became notorious at this time was I homas
Willmore. He had been under butler to a gentleman in
England, and at the age of fourteen was transported to
“ Botany Bay,” for having stolen a number of silver spoons
and other plate from his employer. He was first sent to
Pentonville and was then sent to the colony as a reformed
character, being among the last of the English convicts sent
to New South Wales, where he and his companions were
known as “ Earl Grey’s pets.” He was granted a ticket-of-
leave soon after landing and was assigned as servant to a
settler in the Wellington district. Soon after reaching the
place he quarrelled with a fellow servant and fired a pistol
at him. The bullet struck a button and glanced off, and the
man escaped, while Willmore, to avoid a trial, took to the
bush. He gained a living by highway robbery for some
months. One day he met Philip Alger, near Tomandra, on
the Big River. Alger was riding a very fine horse and Will-
more claimed it as one which had been stolen from him, and
for which he said he had offered a reward. He demanded
that the horse should be given to him at once. Alger
swore he had purchased the horse honestly, and from a man
whom he knew, and declined to part with it. Willmore
ended the dispute summarily by drawing a pistol and
shooting Alger in the stomach. Willmore was aware that
Alger had a considerable quantity of gold on him, as the
man had foolishly shown it in a hut where both had lodged
during the previous night; but Willmore did not search the
body and the gold was found on it when it was discovered.
He seems to have been satisfied with the horse. He
mounted it and rode towards Wellington. At Montefiore
he bargained with Malachi Daly for a cart, offering foi it a
quantity of gold dust, which he had no doubt stolen from
some other victim, in exchange, d hey could not come to an


agreement, but continued their journey towards Wellington
together the next day. At about nine miles from Wellington
on the road to the Big River the road goes down a very
steep hill, and both men dismounted to lead their horses
down. Daly was just starting when Willmore stepped
before him, pistol in hand, and demanded his money and
gold. Daly protested that he had left it at his hut, and
Willmore called him a “liar.” They disputed for a few
minutes, and then Willmore shot Daly through the head
On searching the body Willmore found only thirty shillings
and a deposit receipt for £ll, which was of no value to
any one except the depositor. Later on Willmore boasted
that he got from Daly ; but, in his last confession, he
said he had only asserted that he had found £4O on Daly’s
body because he did not wish it to be known that he had
killed a man for thirty bob.” Willmore was only just
riding away from where Daly’s body was lying when he was
ordered to bail up by another bushranger. Instead of
complying with this request Willmore drew his pistol and
fired, both men shooting at the same time. Willmore’s
horse bolted, and ran for some considerable distance before
he could pull him up. When he had once more brought
him under control Willmore wheeled his horse round, and
galloped back to the scene of the encounter. He tracked
his late opponent for a mile or more. He felt certain that
he had not missed, and expected to find the body lying
somewhere in the bush. Gradually he became convinced
that he had been mistaken, and that the bushranger had
escaped, and gave up the search, feeling “ very sorry ”
that he had not fired straighten During the following
three or four weeks he stuck up and robbed a number
of people on the roads between Wellington and Mudgee,
until at length it was resolved at a public meeting
to hunt him down. A large party assembled by appoint-
ment, and this was divided into several smaller bands,
each of which was to travel through the district by a
specified route, and all were to meet again at a certain
time and place and report. One party, under the leader-
ship of Mr. Cornish, got on his track and followed it for
two days. On the third day they discovered him asleep
on Ponto Island in the Macquarie River, where he had


made a camp among the scrub. He was conveyed to
Bathurst, tried and convicted of murder and hung. Great
satisfaction was expressed at his capture having been
effected without further loss of life, and Mr. Cornish and
the men under him were highly complimented for the
skill they had shown in tracking him to his lair and their
caution in effecting his capture without waking him, as it
was highly improbable that he would have surrendered
without a fight, and his skill and coolness were such as to
make it almost certain that one man at least would have
been shot. In reporting his trial the Sydney Morning
Herald compared him with “ that monster Lynch,”
and congratulated the colony on having got rid of “ such
a savage.”
In Van Diemen’s Land the interregnum between the
two bushranging eras was shorter than in New South
Wales. In fact, in spite of the assertion that bushranging
had been suppressed with the breaking up of the Cash and
Kavanagh gang, robberies took place occasionally with
only short intervals between them. As a rule, however,
there was nothing very remarkable in them, and only a few
seem worthy of notice here. On February 19th, 1846,
Henry Ford and Henry Smart stuck up and robbed
a small farmer named Robert Stonehouse, on the 1 amar
River. They then compelled Stonehouse, under threats, to
accompany them to the next farm and call out his neighbour,
John Joynes. When Joynes opened the door the bush-
rangers rushed in. They tied Joynes and Stonehouse and
ransacked the house, taking everything of value. When
they left they walked along the road and robbed every one
they met. On March sth they went to Mr. Philip Oakden’s
house and rang the bell. Mr. Oakden went to the door
and was immediately confronted with a gun and ordered to
stand. Mr. Oakden informed the robbers that Mrs. Oakden
was very ill and requested them not to make a noise. He
said he would give them all he had in the house if they
would go quietly and not alarm his sick wife. He gave
them three £ 1 notes and some silver. The robbers insisted
on going in and searching the drawers for jewellery, but
took nothing. They then asked Mr. Oakden for his gold
watch. He gave it to them and they left, taking Mr.


Oakden with them. They stopped at the Rev. Dr. Browne’s
house and made Mr. Oakden enquire whether his friend was
at home. On Dr. Browne coming to the door he was bailed
up, and Ford asked him “How much money have you got?”
“ None,” replied Dr. Browne. “ Take care I don’t find you
out in a lie,” cried Ford ; “ where’s your money ? ” They
went in and began searching the drawers and cupboards,
and while they were thus employed Chief District Constable
Midgeley, who had heard that the bushrangers were in the
town, came in with another constable, and taking the
bushrangers unawares captured them, though not without
trouble. When called on to surrender Ford tried to get out
his pistol, but Midgeley said, “ If you stir you’ll be settled
quick.” Ford and Smart were convicted of highway robbery
and death was recorded against them, but the sentences were
commuted to imprisonment for life.
A carrier was stopped on the Brighton Road by two
armed bushrangers on Sunday, December 6th, 1846. A
carpet bag, containing some dress clothes belonging to
Lieutenant Lloyd, of the 96th Regiment, which were being
sent to Hobart Town for safety, was stolen. The coat and
vest buttons were faced with gold. Several other articles
were taken from the carrier’s cart. For this robbery
Richard Gordon was apprehended by District Constable
Goldsmith and Constable Daley. On the following day
Henry Jenkins, alias “ Billy from the Den,” was also
captured by the police. Billy had broken out of Oatland’s
Gaol about three months previously, and had been living by
highway and other robberies since. The clothes were
offered to Mr. Roberts, a pawnbroker in Hobart Town, and
he, suspecting that they were stolen, communicated with
the police, who also arrested Michael Cogan, a marine store
dealer, as an accomplice.
On December 31st, a party of constables out seeking for
bushrangers found a boat containing provisions, wearing
apparel, &c., on the east bank of the River Tamar, about
eight miles from George Town. Another boat was reported
to have been stolen from Mr. Coulson. The police watched
by the boat all day and night. On the next morning,
Sunday, they saw two men pulling another boat towards the
spot and hid themselves in the scrub. When the men


landed, the constables appeared and the men ran away.
The constables followed, and ran down one man named
Jones, The other bushranger, George Jamieson, was
captured by Mr, Hinton and his crew at the Marine
Station, near the Heads. Jamieson was seen in the scrub,
near the station, and one of the men, in accordance with
Australian custom, invited him into the hut to have some
food. Jamieson accepted the invitation and, while he was
eating, Mr. Hinton came in and recognised him. When
Mr. Hinton said that he should arrest him Jamieson replied,
“ I’ll be if you do,” and took a tomahawk from under
his jumper. He was immediately seized from behind by
one of Mr. Hinton’s men and was handed over to the
police.
The bushrangers Wilson and Dido were the most
notorious about this time. They were watching Mr. James
Clifford’s house, at Piper’s River, on September 16th, 1846,
and when Mr. Clifford came out they rushed upon him, took
him inside, tied him, and took wearing apparel, ammunition,
and other articles out of the drawers and boxes. In January,
Mr. Rees and Mr. Stevenson started from Campbelltown
in a gig for St. Patrick’s Head, On reaching the fourth gate
on the road, knowm as Davidson’s gate, they saw two men
with guns. At first they took these men for constables.
Stevenson got down to open the gate, and while he was
doing so Rees became aware of the character of the two
armed men who were approaching, and called out to
Stevenson, “ Make haste ! Here’s the bushrangers ! ”
Stevenson tried to jump into the gig, but before he could do
so the men were upon him. They presented their guns and
called upon the travellers to surrender. They then ordered
Rees to drive the gig off the road into the timber. Mr. Rees
objected, and the bushrangers told him he need not fear, as
they intended to act honourably. “ But what do you
want ? ” asked Rees. “We want to rob you ;we want your
money,” was the reply. “ Then,” said Mr. Rees, “ why not
take it here and let us go on ? ” The bushrangers made no
reply, but took the horse by the head and led him away.
When the gig was in among the timber the robbers
took a gold watch and chain, and a gold pencil
case, from Mr. Stevenson; and and a silver watch


from Mr. Rees. They also took two dress suits and two
top coats from the gig, and then ordered the gentlemen to
take off their boots. “ What for ? ” asked Mr. Rees.
“ Because we want them,” was the reply. “ But,” cried Mr.
Rees, “ how are we to get home ? ” “ Oh, you’re all right.
You can ride while we have to walk,” said the bushranger.
“ But ” began Mr. Rees, when he was interrupted with,
“ Oh, no more nonsense. If you don’t make haste we’ll
strip you.” Stevenson took off his boots, and Rees thought
it prudent to follow his example. They returned to their
homes in Campbelltown two and a-half hours after they
had left, and deferred their visit to the Heads to another
day. On the 27th the police were informed that Dido, the
bushranger, had been seen in a hut in Prosser’s Forest. A
party of constables started immediately, and reached the
place at one a.m. Everything was quiet, and the constables
walked very cautiously, fearing that if they stepped on a
stick and broke it the noise would waken the bushranger
should he be there. The constables took up positions
round the hut to prevent escape, and then District
Constable Davis, who was in command, suddenly burst in
the door. Dido sprang out of the bed and fell on his knees
on the floor begging for mercy. He was secured without
resistance. In the hut were a double-barrelled gun and a
pistol, both loaded ready for use. Mr. Rees’s watch and
some of Mr. Stevenson’s clothes were found in the hut.
When brought up at the police court Dido said he had
been transported in the name of William Driscoll, but his
proper name was Timothy. Mr. Tarleton,_ the magistrate,
made some remarks on the folly of men taking to the bush.
Dido replied that he should have been happy enough if he
had not been betrayed. He might have lived in luxury
for life. The man who betrayed him had been his best
friend, but he became jealous and gave him up. He had
been sixteen times in Launceston. He had been drinking
about town all day on Christmas Day. He had been
hocussed and had not been well since. Wilson and he had
quarrelled and they had parted. Wilson was all right. He
had a nice little patch of cultivation, with plenty of flour
and some sheep. He was not likely to be taken. In spite
of this assertion, however, Wilson was captured a few days


later while drinking at Pitcher’s Inn on the Westbury Road.
He showed a pistol and this excited suspicion, so Mr.
Pitcher sent a servant to inform the police. Constable
Leake came and found the man asleep in a hut at the
rear of the public-house. He handcuffed him and took
him to Launceston in a cart. He was identified as Dido’s
mate and was committed for trial at the same time.
Robberies of a similar character to these took place from
time to time, but after the discovery of gold in Australia in
1851 the great object of the disaffected in Van Diemen’s
Land was to get to the mainland. No doubt many of these
men made their way across the Straits in stolen boats, but
the majority paid their passages out of the proceeds of their
robberies. Probably it was in consequence of this exodus
that no bushrangers became notorious in Van Diemen’s
Land at this time, and a few examples of the crimes
committed during the later days of the epoch will suffice.
About the beginning of 1853 a desperate attempt was made
by_ nine bushrangers, who had been convicted and were
being taken from Launceston to Hobart Town, to escape
from the two constables who had them in charge. The
prisoners had been very rowdy since leaving Launces-
ton, and when the party was near Bagdad, Convict
John Jones suddenly snatched the musket from Constable
Doran and felled the constable with a blow. Jones then
shouted “Now we’ll fight for it.” Constable Mulrooney
rushed at Jones and endeavoured to wrest the musket from
him, but the other prisoners forced him back. The prisoners
were handcuffed together in threes, and this no doubt
hampered their movements, but they contrived to get Mul-
rooney down and beat him with their handcuffs. Convict
McCarthy presented the musket at Mulrooney and pulled
the trigger, but finding that the gun was not loaded he, in
a rage snapped the stock across his knee. In doing this the
bayonet fell off and both sides struggled to obtain possession
of it. At this moment two men appeared along the road,
and hearing the noise they hastened forward. One of them
was an assigned shepherd of Captain Chalmers and was
armed with a double-barrelled gun. Constable Mulrooney
was shouting “ murder,” and the shepherd came to his
assistance. The convicts then gave up th£ struggle and fell


into rank. They were taken to Bagdad, and from thence a
stronger guard was sent with them until they were safely
confined in the Pentonville gaol.
The bushrangers Dalton and Kelly stuck up and
robbed the Halfway House near Campbelltown in
January, 1853. On the following day they went to Mr.
Simeon Lord’s house, Bona Vista, near the river, and
bailed up about thirty people, including the District
Constable of Avoca, the watchhouse keeper, and another
constable. The watchhouse keeper was shot dead. There
were several ladies in the house, and these were ordered to
go into one room and stay there. The robbers ransacked
the house in their search for jewellery and other portable
property. They collected between £lOO and
besides several gold and a number of silver watches, rings,
&c. When they had obtained all that they could they
compelled Mr. Frank Lord to accompany them to the
stables, where they selected two of the finest horses, with
saddles, bridles, and spurs. Mounting these horses, the
robbers rode away to Mr. Duxbury’s Inn at Stoney Creek,
where they bailed up twelve men, including two mounted
constables. They collected about more and Mr.
Duxbury’s gold watch. On leaving the inn they went along
the road, and met Mr. Sykes, recently returned from
Melbourne, They robbed him of about returning
the odd six shillings to enable him to continue his journey.
They told Mr. Sykes that they intended to rob Captain
Creer’s and other houses along the Esk Valley, and, when
they had collected all they could, to go to the diggings
in Victoria. On the following day they visited Vaucluse,
but Mr. and Mrs. Bayles were away from home
and they got no money. They, however, took some
jewellery from the drawers and some provisions from the
kitchen. During the following week they continued their
depredations and then went to the coal mines on the river
Mersey, and stole a whale boat. They impressed four
men at work there into their service and put to sea, but
the wind was so tempestuous that they were driven
back and landed on the coast near Port Sorell, where
they were captured.
In February, 1853, a man named Robinson, who had


recently returned from the Victorian diggings, shot a shoe-
maker named William Moonan, while he was waxing a
thread. The murderer dragged the body from the hut to
the Swan River and threw it in, and then returned to steal
what little money there was in the place. The bushrangers
Maberley, Hickson, and Poulston committed a number of
daylight burglaries in the neighbourhood of Sandy Bay,
robbing the houses of Messrs. Stacey, Frodsham, Power,
and Dunkley. From Dunkley’s they took more than twenty
pounds’ worth of goods. They had supper at Mr. Winter’s
and then went to camp in the bush not far away.
Moses Birkett and Peter Perry were captured in a cave
about this time. The cave was on the shores of Lake
Crescent, and a large quantity of stolen property was found
hidden there. Besides the guns and pistols, a couple of
sheep shear blades, mounted on long wooden handles were
found, and it was supposed that these had been used in the
murder of George Kelsey, at Lemon Springs.
Thanks to the activity of the police and the assistance
they received from the civilians, such malefactors were
gradually captured and dealt with. Some of the Victorian
papers charged the Government of Van Diemen’s Land with
conniving at the escape of expirees from the island to
Victoria, but there does not appear to be any foundation for
this charge. It is quite possible that neither the authorities
nor the public were sorry to be relieved from their company,
but we have merely to read the accounts published at the
time, to realise that all was done that was possible to suppress
bushranging in Van Diemen’s Land at this time, and that the
escapes of these criminals across the Bass’s Straits could not
very well be prevented. It was in 1853 that transportation to
the island ceased. A few years later, responsible govern-
ment was established, and the name of the island was changed
from Van Diemen’s Land to Tasmania, with the object of
getting rid as much as possible of old associations. Very
shortly afterwards, the papers once more said that bush-
ranging had been stamped out in the island, and this time
they were justified in the assertion. No doubt the larger
settlements on the mainland offered better chances to the
enterprising Tasmanians, whether they were “ old hands ” or
not. Tasmania has, perhaps in consequence of this custom


of young men going to seek their fortunes in Melbourne or
Sydney, progressed less rapidly than some of the other
colonies, but it has progressed, and this progression has been
as peaceful and as innocent as possible under present social
conditions, and the island which was once infamous has for
bany years been remarkably clear from criminal offences.


CHAPTER XVI.
The New Bushranging Era; Fallacy of the Belief that Highwaymen
Rob the Rich to Enrich the Poor; The Cattle Duffers and Horse
Planters; The Riot at the Lambing Flat; Frank Gardiner, the
Butcher; Charged with Obtaining Beasts “on the cross,” he
Abandons his Butcher’s Shop ; Efforts to Establish a Reign of
Terror in the District; A Letter from Gardiner; The Great
Escort Robbery.
Hitherto the bushrangers of Australia had been, as the
records prove, drawn almost exclusively from the ranks of
those who “left their country for their country’s good.”
Those who took the most prominent share in the
next outbreak of the “epidemic” were generally native-
born Australians. The seqiiela. of the old disease were
not yet worked out. As I have already said, there were
numbers of the “old hands” scattered about the bush,
some of them with farms or small cattle or sheep stations
of their own who lived fairly -honest and useful lives,
but even among these, whatever may have been their
station in life, there w r as the old antagonism to “ law
and order,” and their sympathies were all with those who
waged war against society. Their children imbibed these
ideas, and wherever there was a neighbourhood where
this class had collected together, morality was at a low ebb.
But besides these settlers there were numbers of nomads,
men who worked as shepherds, bullock-drivers, splitters and
fencers, shearers, and so on, and as long as the old hands
formed a majority, or even a considerable minority of the
bush-workers, it was the custom for men to work from
shearing to shearing, or from harvest to harvest, and then
“ draw their cheques,” make for the nearest public-house,
and indulge in a wild spree, until they were informed by the


landlord that the money which their cheques represented
had been expended. There were some respectable inns in
the back country where they got fair value for their money
perhaps, but in too many of these “ bush pubs,” as they were
called, the object of the landlord was to “ lamb them down ”
in the shortest possible space of time. Perhaps when the
character of the liquor sold in these places is taken into
consideration, this method of cheating was not altogether an
evil. It prevented the bushmen from swallowing such large
quantities of the deleterious stuff as they might have done if
they had received full value for their money. During the
time when they were working their principal mode of amusing
themselves was telling or listening to tales of the convict
days. Some of these stories told by the old hands were of
too revolting a character for repetition, but no doubt they were
founded on fact. Nothing is too horrible or obscene to have
been true of the convict times. The stories, however, which
appear to have had the greatest influence over the minds of a
certain class of Australian youth were those told of the
bushrangers. In these stories there was of course much
that was apocryphal, to put it mildly. Many of the exploits
of the historic highwaymen of old were told as actual facts
in the careers of some Australian bushrangers, with just
sufficient variation to adapt them to local purposes. One of
the ancient superstitions introduced into Australia by these
story-tellers was that the highwaymen robbed the rich to
give to the poor. I have no desire to raise any doubts as to
the generosity and benevolence of Robin Hood, but I can
find no evidence of any such beneficence on the part of
any of the Australian bushrangers. No doubt they got
their money easily, and spent it recklessly. But they did
not pause to enquire whether the person they robbed was
rich or poor. There was no such class distinction in the
colonies as there is and always has been in England; no
very poor class not worth robbing and ready to bless any-
one who gave them a penny, and no hereditary wealthy
class. Every one had to work somehow for his living,
though some were more successful in piling up wealth than
others. But the poor had opportunities which have never
existed in England, and if they neglected them it was more
or less their own fault if they were poor. The tendency in


Australia, as elsewhere, is to build up a wealthy class, but
this class did not exist in convict times, and is only just
beginning to appear now. The Australian bushranger in
fact had to obtain money or go under. He was compelled
to share his ill-gotten gains with those who supplied him
with food and information. He was a mark for the black-
mailer, and he was compelled to find money to bribe those
who were in a position to lead the troops or the police to
his hiding place. But the convict bushranger was not so
well off as the native-born bushranger. There was a strong
feeling of camaraderie, an esprit de corps , among the
convicts, which tended to prevent numbers of men from
betraying him, even though they received no bribes. But
the new bushranger was more fortunate than the old one.
He had his parents, his brothers and sisters, his cousins and
his aunts and uncles, who sympathised with him for family
and other reasons, and who were bound to help him. It
was from among these relatives and friends that the “ bush
telegraphs,” who informed the bushranger of the where-
abouts of the police, were drawn, and it soon became
apparent that if bushranging was to be abolished these
sympathisers and “ bush telegraphs ” must be dealt with.
There were several localities in New South Wales where
the conditions were favourable for bushranging; places where
the morality was low and where the police, as representatives
of authority, were hated with all the hatred of the “old
hand.” One of these localities was in the spurs of the Great
Dividing Range, in the neighbourhood of Burrowa. All
round this district were a number of small squatters, prin-
cipally cattle breeders, and among these no man’s beast was
safe. These small squatters were the terror of the big sheep
and cattle breeders in the plains, and their principal industry
was “ duffing.” Duffing was not stealing. If a moralist had
remonstrated with a Burrowa man whom he found branding
his neighbour’s beast, the Burrowa man would have replied
“ I’m only trying to get back my own. He’s duffed many a
head of my cattle.” Sheep could be duffed as well as cattle,
but the ranges were generally too steep for sheep. One
sheep breeder of the district, however, adopted, as his dis-
tinguishing mark, the plan of cutting off both ears, and he
was a most successful duffer, because his recognised ear-


mark enabled him to remove the ear-marks in his neighbours’
sheep. It was no uncommon occurrence for a man to find
that a calf sucking his cow had been branded by one of his
neighbours, so that it might be claimed as soon as it was
weaned. In such a case, if he had complained, his neighbour
would probably have accused him of having “ mothered ” the
neighbour’s calf on his cow for the purpose of cheating him
out of it.
In such a neighbourhood it was impossible for any
stranger to travel with horses with any degree of safety.
Horses bred in the district could be duffed like sheep or
cattle, and horses travelling through could be “ planted.”
If a man, who knew anything of the characteristics of the
settlers in this district, camped for the night there, and
failed to find his horses next morning, he did not waste time
in looking for them himself. He realised at once that one
of “ the boys ” had driven them off into some inaccessible
ravine in the ranges, and “ planted ” or hidden them there
until a reward should be offered for their recovery. He
would therefore go to the nearest station and enquire
whether his horses had been seen. The answer would be
“ No.” Then the traveller would say that he was willing to
pay “ a note ” for their recovery. The reply of the native
would probably be that horses always went astray about
there. There was such a get-away for them, and the
warrigals came down and enticed them off. The story of
the warrigals, or wild horses, tempting working horses away
was a common fiction. Hobbled horses could not keep up
with the warrigals across the ridges. But it was sufficiently
plausible to serve. If the working horses broke their
hobbles they might perhaps go with the wild horses, but
even then it is uncertain. However, after a few minutes’
conversation, the native would probably say that if any one
could find the horses it was “Jack the Kid,” or some other
local character, as he knew every gully in the ridges. The
wideawake traveller could understand that “ Jack the Kid ”
was the man who had planted his horses, and would not return
them for less than “a note,” that is p£i, and on this reward for
villainy being promised the traveller might go to his camp
with the certainty that the horses would be brought to him
in about an hour. It would be useless to look for them,


because the planter would be on the watch, and if the
owner was seen approaching the gully where they were
the horses would be driven over the ridge into the next
gully. Cases have happened where a traveller has persisted
in refusing to be blackmailed and has lost his horses. It
would be only necessary to cut the hobbles. Then the
traveller, if he wanted his horses, would have to engage two
or three expert stockmen to run them in. It was useless to
complain to the police. The horses had not been stolen.
They were there. Let the owner come and fetch them.
Nobody would prevent him and some kind settler would
even offer the use of his stock-yard if the owner could drive
them into it.
This was the state of the district when the rush to the
newly-discovered Lambing Flat goldfield took place in
iB6O. Early in the following year there was a great “roll
up ” of the diggers to drive the Chinese off the field, and
the military were sent up from Sydney to restore order. In
this riot the peculiar morality of the diggers, of which I have
already spoken, was illustrated in a remarkable degree. The
leaders of the riots strictly forbade robbery, and any person
found stealing gold or any other property from the Chinese
was to be handed over to the police; but burning the
humpies, tents, and other property of the unfortunate
Chinkies, cutting off their pigtails, beating or otherwise
ill-treating them, as an inducement for them to leave the
field, w T ere justifiable if not meritorious acts. In after years
many of the “ flash diggers ” wore sashes made of China-
men’s pigtails, sometimes with just as much of the scalp
attached as would prevent the hairs from scattering. How-
ever, the riots did not last long and the leader, William
Spicer, was sent to gaol.
There were, of course, many of the young men of the
district in the goldfields and, as far as is known, these
conformed to the rules laid down by the diggers with regard
to property. But this did not affect their own peculiar
notions as to the ownership of cattle, sheep, or horses, and
the attention of the police was early drawn to the district.
Warrants were soon issued for numbers of the youths on
charges of horse or cattle stealing, and several w r ere arrested.
Later it was said that many young fellows, who might have


remained at home, were “ driven on to the roads ” by the
pi ? J ha J: is to . sa y that > because they were interfered
with m their favourite amusements of duffing and planting,
they turned bushrangers. 5
Among the residents on the diggings was Frank Gardiner,
who opened a butcher’s shop on Wombat Flat. Gardiner
was born at Boro Creek, near Tarago, in the heart of the
district m which Jackey Jackey had first won his notoriety
as a bushranger, and the morals of that district were very
similar to those I have described as prevalent in the
. r F° wa Gardiner went to the diggings in Victoria
m the rifties, was arrested near Ballarat, and tried at
Geelong for horse-stealing. He was sent to gaol for five years.
He escaped from the Pentridge stockade and returned home,
biortly afterwards he was convicted of horse-stealing at
Goulburn and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment on
two charges, the sentences being made concurrent. He
served half the term and was granted a ticket-of-leave. His
butcher s shop at Burrangong, to give the diggings its proper
name, was said to be the resort of all the worst characters
among the young natives of the district, and the majority of
the beasts he slaughtered and sold were said to be obtained
“on the cross.” Becoming aware that a warrant had been
issued for his arrest he abandoned his shop and took to the
mountains. Here he organised a band of bushrangers, and
shortly afterwards reports of people being stuck up and
robbed on the roads round the diggings became frequent.
In 1861 the young Australian had not taken to cricket
and football so enthusiastically as he did later, and perhaps
there were few opportunities for him to get rid of his super-
fluous energy. Whether this is so or not, it is certain that
Gardiner’s example had an enormous influence. Not only
were those against whom warrants had been issued for cattle
and horse-stealing ready to join the gang, but numbers of
young men and lads who had hitherto led blameless lives
became so excited that they turned out and tried their
hands at bushranging.
The first robberies were in the immediate neighbourhood
of Burrangong, but very soon the area over which the bush-
rangers operated was enlarged, and finally embraced the
whole colony, and even overflowed into the neighbouring


colonies. At first, however, Gardiner and his gang claim
our attention, but there were many young men who began
as independent bushrangers who made their way to the
Burrangong district to join the gang, and others who in-
tended to do so who were captured on the road. It is a
difficult matter to decide who did and who did not belong
to this gang, as the personnel changed so rapidly. _ Some
actual members of the gang acted independently of it for a
time, and made raids into other districts, while others, after
having a flutter with Gardiner, left the gang to start
elsewhere. The bushrangers did not confine their attentions
to travellers on the roads. They robbed whenever and
wherever an opportunity occurred. Thus on August 19th,
1861, Henry Keene, Michael Lawler, and William Watson
went to Mr. Brennan’s station, on the Billabong, and called
out “All hands in, or we’ll blow your brains out.”
Mr. and Mrs. Brennan and a number of men who
were working at the station were gathered about the
verandah of the house smoking and talking. Mrs.
Brennan cried out in alarm, “They’re going to shoot.
James Laurie, one of the men, replied, “ Let them shoot
away.” However, the men went inside, as told,
and Lawler dismounted and followed them. Keene took
his place as sentry at the door, and Watson remained on
horseback outside. Laurie said to Lawler, “You’re the
man that was looking for a gray mare.” “ What if I was ?
What is it to you ? ” returned Lawler. Laurie picked up a big
stick from the fire and made a blow at Lawler, when a shot
was fired, presumably either by Keene or Watson, and
Laurie fell. He cried out for water, and Mrs. Brennan told
her little daughter to go out and fetch a glassful, but Lawler
would not permit her to leave the room. Lawler was very
violent. He threatened to shoot any one who opposed him,
and to “ put a firestick to the house ” if Mrs. Brennan did
not give him her money. One of the bushrangers went to a
hawker named Isaac Lavendale, camped close by, and made
him go into the house. Lavendale gave the wounded man
some milk and spilt some on his face. He said, jm
dying—don’t let them—don’t let ” and then he died.
Keene fired a ball through the roof of the house and said :
“ 1 quick took the flashness out of that man. He


wont be so flash again.” The robbers collected all the
money they could, and took clothes and other articles from
the hawker s cart The robbers were subsequently captured
by the police and on March 23rd, 1862, were convicted at
Goulburn and sentenced to death. Sir Alfred Stephen told
k T tO -S rep f re tO , meet their God > when Keene and Lawler
both said that they were ready. They were innocent.
Watson said : I dont care if it’s to-morrow; I hope you
won t keep me like you did Johnson.” When taken from
court, Watson shouted, “ Well, good-bye.”
r Ross ’ WilHam Mackie, and John McMahon,
alias McManus, robbed the mail at the Chain of Ponds, on
the Great North Road, on October 17th. They searched
the letters, took a gold and a silver watch, two gold chains
nd 455 notes and coin from Mr. Jonathan Snell, jP 2 \
from Mr. Thomas Lumley, and smaller sums and valuables
from the other two passengers. On the 30th, Constable
Leonard saw Mackie in a public house at Lochinvar, near
Maitland, and challenged him. Mackie attemped to run
but was followed and captured. He threw away a gold
watch, which was picked up and identified as one stolen
from Mr. Snell. Ross and McMahon were discovered not
far away and were arrested. When tried they were con-
victed, but Ross was recommended to mercy on account of
his previous good character. He was sentenced to five
years imprisonment, his companions being sent to gaol for
seven years.
Michael Henry Davis, Aaron von Ehrstein, and Robert
Smith, stopped the mail coach on January 6th, 1862, about
six miles from Burrangong. Ensign Campbell Morris and
Sergeant O’Grady, of the 12th regiment, which had been
m suppressing the riot, were passengers going to
Cowra. Another passenger, a Frenchman, refused to
surrender, and Davis fired at him. After this no further
resistance was made, and Ehrstein, who searched the
passengers, took 13s. from the Ensign and other sums
from the others. The police started in pursuit immediately
on receiving information of the robbery, and the prisoners
were captured without much trouble. They were convicted
and sent to gaol for ten years.
Benjamin Allerton and another man walked one day into


the bar of the Wakool Hotel on the lower Billabong and
called for nobblers like ordinary travellers. They were
served by Mr. Talbot, the landlord. They then went into
the dining room and had supper. As soon as the meal was
over the two men rose, and one of them drew a pistol and
said, “ Excuse us, gentlemen, this is our business.” David
Elliott, who was employed at the hotel, was sitting next the
bushranger, and made a snatch at the pistol. Ihe bush-
ranger, however, was on the alert, and jumped aside. _ Then
he fired and Elliott fell wounded. Mr. Talbot rushed m from
the bar and said that he didn’t want any more damage done.
“Take the money in the till,” he cried, “and go. the
bushrangers took some seven or eight pounds from the till,
a saddle and bridle, a canister of powder, and some clothing,
but they took nothing from the other persons who had been
at supper with them. They said that they were going_ to
join Gardiner and “ make it hot for the traps.” Information
was at once given to the police, and they were followed, but
only Allerton was found and captured. He was tried at
Goulburn on March 27th, and found guilty, the jury
pronouncing the verdict without leaving the box, and the
judge sentenced him to death. Benjamin Allerton and
Henry Keene were hung at Goulburn on May sth. Another
bushranger named Regan was hung there in June, ihe
sentences on Lawler and Watson were commuted to fifteen
years’ imprisonment. . . . , ,
These were outsiders who intended to join the gang, but
in the meantime the gang itself had not been idle. Jo n
Peisley was a well-known settler in the district, and his
house was said to be the resort of the bushrangers, and was
closely watched by the police. On December 27th, 1861,
Peisley and James Wilson were drinking at Benyon s inn,
about a mile from Bigga, when Peisley challenged William
Benyon to run, jump, or fight for £lO. Benyon declined,
and Peisley struck him several light blows on the chest and
called him a coward, until at length Benyon said he would
wrestle They went into the yard, leaving Wilson, who was
drunk, on the seat in the bar. Stephen Benyon, who was
at work in the barn, and several others, collected in the
yard to see the wrestling match. The men stripped,
and grappled, and Peisley threw the publican and then


struck him in the face. Stephen Benyon called Peisley a
coward, rushed forward and threw Peisley. On getting up
Peisley rushed into the house swearing he would “do for
Bill.” He seized a knife, when Mrs. Benyon cried out “My
God ! are you going to kill my husband ?” and grappled with
him. Stephen Benyon picked up a spade and struck Peisley
on the arm. Peisley then threw away the knife and said it
was all right. The row seemed to be all over and Peisley
walked into the bar and asked Wilson where his vest was.
He had taken it off when he went out to wrestle and left it
beside Wilson. Wilson said he had not seen it. Then Mrs.
Benyon announced that she had hidden it because she
found two revolvers rolled up in it. She offered to tell
Peisley where it was if he would promise to go away
quietly. Peisley said all right, and Mrs. Benyon showed
him where she had hidden the vest in the garden. Peisley
walked out, picked the vest up from under a bush, and went
back again. He began to examine the revolvers, when
William Benyon said, “Surely you don’t mean to shoot us?”
“ You never knew me do a mean action in my life,” replied
Peisley, “ and Pm not going to begin now. Shake hands.
We’re all friends.” They shook hands all round and Peisley
put on his vest and went away. As soon as he was out of
sight, William Benyon loaded his gun and took it to the
barn, where his brother Stephen had returned to his work.
William gave the gun to his brother and told him to take
care of it, as Peisley was not to be trusted. About half-an-hour
later, when William Benyon was in the bar, Peisley came
galloping back, hitched his horse to the fence, and went into
the barn. Stephen Benyon picked up the gun and Peisley
said, laughing, “ Why, you’re not going to shoot me, are
you ? ” “I was told you were going to shoot me,” returned
Stephen. “ Nonsense,” cried Peisley, “ I never did a
cowardly action in my life, and Pm not going to now.
Shake hands.” Stephen put the gun down and shook
hands, and Peisley immediately seized the gun and fired,
wounding Stephen in the arm. Stephen ran out of the
barn and towards the house, and Peisley, taking careful aim,
again pulled the trigger, but the cap missed fire. Peisley
ran to the corner of the house, and asked William Benyon’s
son which way his uncle went. The child pointed in the


wrong direction, and Peisley ran to the other corner of the
house. Not seeing Stephen anywhere he returned. He
was in a great rage, and struck a man named George
Hammond with the gun, which exploded without doing any
damage. Peisley threw the gun away, and drew a revolver.
He ordered William Benyon, Wilson, Hammond, and the
servant girl into the barn. Then he said to William,
“ I’ve got a bullet here for you. You’ve had your game,
now it’s my turn.” The servant went between Benyon and
Peisley, and begged the bushranger not to hurt her master.
Peisley told her to go away unless she was tired of her life.
Suddenly Benyon rushed at Peisley, who fired and wounded
him in the neck, and as he fell Peisley rushed out to his
horse, mounted, and galloped away. William Benyon died
a week later, and a warrant was issued for the apprehension
of Peisley, who left his house and joined the gang. On
January 15th Constables Morris, Murphy, and Simpson
were searching for bushrangers in the Abercrombie
Mountains, when they saw Peisley near Bigga. The bush-
ranger was splendidly mounted. He rode up, and coolly
informed the police that he was the man they were looking
for. He added, “Fd like to have a turn up with Morris
if he will get down, and put his gun aside.” Morris
replied, “All right,” and immediately dismounted, and
placed his gun against a tree, expecting his challenger
to do the same. But Peisley laughed, turned his horse
round, and cantered away. Morris drew a revolver from his
belt and fired. The bullet passed just under the neck of
the bushranger’s horse. He turned in his saddle and said
“ That was a good one. Try again.” The police gave
chase, but the superiority of the bushranger’s horse enabled
him to escape easily. About a week later Peisley was
captured by Messrs. Mackenzie and Burridge after a severe
struggle. He was tried at Bathurst, and sentenced to death
for the murder of William Benyon, and was hung on April
25th, 1862. When on the scaffold he said that he had
never used violence during his bushranging career until he
had had that row with Benyon. He had never taken a
shilling from or done violence to a woman. He denied
that he had had anything to do with the attempt to
bribe Constable Hosie to let Gardiner escape. He was


aware that the money offered was He also knew
that there was a cheque for j£ 2 10s. in the collection,
and that that made the amount up to 10s. He
had spent five or six pounds in the spree at Benyon’s.
Wilson wanted him to sing and Benyon to dance, but he
refused. Benyon then asked him to put on the gloves,
but he declined because he knew it would lead to a row.
At this point, said the Bathurst Free Press , one of the
clergymen on the scaffold whispered to Peisley, and he
immediately said that he would say no more on that subject.
He concluded with “ Good-bye, gentlemen. God bless
you.” Peisley did not appear to suffer much, but a black-
fellow, known as Jacky Bullfrog, who was hanged at the
same time for the murder of William Clarke, suffered
terribly, his body being frightfully convulsed for several
minutes. Peisley was twenty-eight years of age, five feet
ten inches in height. He is described as a fine-looking
man at a distance, but when examined closely there was
a shifty, disagreeable look about his eyes.
In April Gardiner, with three companions, stuck up
Pring’s Crowther station and then went on to Crooke’s, and
bailed up all hands there. At Pring’s, one of the bush-
rangers played the piano while the others danced. At
Crooke’s one played the concertina and another sang “ Ever
of thee.”
On March 10th, Mr. Horsington, a store-keeper on the
Wombat, was driving with his wife in a spring cart to
Lambing Flat, and Mr. Robert Hewitt, store-keeper at Little
Wombat, riding beside them. Suddenly, James Downey,
with three other bushrangers, barred the road and ordered
the travellers into the bush. The two store-keepers had a
large quantity of gold with them which they had purchased
in the course of business, and were taking to the bank at
Lambing Flat, the main centre of the Burrangong Gold-
field. Mr. Horsington had a parcel containing forty ounces
in his pockets, and another of two hundred ounces in the
cart. The robbers took some £\\oo worth from Mr.
Horsington in gold and money, and about worth
from Mr. Hewitt. When pocketing the plunder, Downey
said ; “ You’re the best gentlemen I’ve met this month, and
I’ve stuck up twenty already.”


Sergeant Sanderson, with detectives Lyons and Kennedy,
left the Lachlan Goldfield (Forbes), on April nth, in charge
of three bushrangers who had been arrested, and who were
being taken to Burrangong for the police court examinations.
Near Brewers’ Shanty, three horsemen, with two led horses,
were observed, and on seeing the coach these horsemen
turned into the bush. The two detectives followed them on
foot, when the horsemen turned round and fired. The
police returned the fire, and the horses of two of the bush-
rangers bolted. The third bushranger remained and fired
again. The police replied and the bushranger fell. He
was identified as a man named Davis, He had received
four wounds, none of which was very serious. He was
placed in the coach with the other prisoners, and was
subsequently sentenced to death. This sentence was,
however, commuted to imprisonment for life.
It was at this time that the Burrangong and other papers
in the disturbed area accused the Government of neglect in
consequence of the non-arrival in the district of Captain
Battye with his troop of black trackers. It was said that
without this aid the police might ride round for months, but
could not penetrate the ranges. No doubt this outcry had
the effect of stirring up the authorities, because the blacks
speedily arrived and were set to work without delay.
The Lachlan Miner of April 19th, 1862, inserted the
following paragraph :
“ We have received the following letter, purporting to be from the
hand of Frank Gardner (sic), the notorious highwayman, of Lachlan
and Lambing Flat roads. The circumstances under which we became
possessed of the documents can be known, and the original copies, with
the envelopes and seals, seen by the curious, on application at this
office, and they can then use what judgment they choose as to the
genuineness of them. We give it to our readers as we received it;—
‘To the Editor of the Burrangong Miner , Lambing Flat. Sir, —
Having seen a paragraph in one of the papers, wherein it is said that I
took the boots off a man’s feet, and that I also took the last few
shillings that another man had, I wish it to be made known that I did
not do anything of the kind. The man who took the boots was in my
company, and for so doing I discharged him the following day. Silver
I never took from a man yet, and the shot that was fired at the sticking-
up of Messrs. Horsington and Hewitt was by accident, and the man
who did it I also discharged. As for a mean, low, or petty action, I
never committed it in my life. The letter that I last sent to the press,
there had not half of what I said put in it. In all that has been said


there never was any mention made of my taking the sergeant’s horse
and trying him, and that when I found he was no good I went back
and got my own. As for Mr. Torpy, he is a perfect coward. After I
spared his life as he fell out of the window, he fired at me as I rode
away ; but I hope that Mr. Torpy and I have not done just yet, until
we balance our accounts properly. Mr. Greig has accused me of
robbing his teams, but it is false, for I know nothing about the
robbery whatever. In fact I would not rob Mr. Greig or any one
belonging to him, on account of his taking things so easy at
Bogolong. Mr. Torpy was too bounceable or he would not have been
robbed. A word to Sir W. F. Pottinger. He wanted to know how it
was the man who led my horse up to me at the Pinnacle, did not cut
my horse s reins, as he gave me the horse. I should like to know if
Mi-. Pottinger would do so? I shall answer by saying no. It has been
said that it would be advisable to place a trap at each shanty on the
road, to put a stop to the depredations done on the road. I certainly
think it would be a great acquisition to me, for I should then have
increase of revolvers and carbines. When seven or eight men could do
nothing with me at the Pinnacle, one would look well at a shanty.
Three of your troopers were at a house the other night and got
dunking and gambling till all hours. I came there towards morning
when all was silent. The first room that I went into I found revolvers
and carbines to any amount, but seeing none as good as my own, I
left them. I then went out, and in the verandah found the troopers
sound asleep, satisfying myself that neither Battye nor Pottinger were
there, I left them as I found them, in the arms of Morpheus. Fearing
nothing, I remain, Prince of Tobymen, Francis Gardner {sic), the
Highwayman. Insert the foregoing, and rest satisfied you shall be
paid.
The spelling of the name appears to be a typographical
blunder. Mr. Torpy was a well-known resident of the
district. This letter throws some light on the methods
pursued by the bushrangers, and tends to prove that
although Gardiner might not be present on some occasions,
the robberies were committed under his directions. And
some fresh outrage was reported almost every day, until in
June, the report that the Government gold escort from the
Lachlan diggings had been stuck up and robbed, caused a
commotion throughout the colony. The escort started from
Forbes on June 15th with 2067 oz. 18 dwt. gold and
owned by the Oriental Bank; 521 oz. 13 dwt. 6grs., owned
by the Bank of New South Wales, and 129 oz. and
in cash, owned by the Commercial Banking Company,
making about fourteen thousand pounds worth in all.
The report of this robbery caused intense excitement
throughout the colony. Nothing like it had been heard of


since the old gold digging days in Victoria. Large bodies
of police were sent out to scour the country near the scene
of the outrage. One of these parties of police under
Sergeant Saunderson, when in the ranges near Wheogo, saw
a man on horseback who rode away as they approached.
The police followed him up the steep gully, and when he
was near the top four other men joined him from behind
the trees and made off too. The police followed so rapidly
that a packhorse which one of the men was leading broke
away and they had not time to recover him. The police
seized the packhorse, but the men got away. On the
captured horse were found about 1500 oz. of gold, police-
man’s cloak, and two carbines which were identified as
having been among those with which the troopers of the
escort had been armed. It may be remarked en passant
that no more of the property stolen in this robbery was ever
recovered.
Some weeks later the police succeeded in apprehending
Alexander Fordyce, John Bow, Henry Manns, John
McGuire, and Daniel Charters, and these were committed
for trial for having been concerned in the escort robbery.
Charters turned approver, and his evidence given at the
trial may be taken as a substantially true account of the
method by which the robbery was effected; although, of
course, due allowance must be made for the apparent efforts
of the witness to minimise his own share in the crime.
Charters lived with his parents at Humbug Creek and
knew the country well. One day Prank Gardiner met him
near the Pinnacle and compelled him to lead the way across
the ranges to Eugowra. Johnny Gilbert and Alick Fordyce
were driving several spare horses which the gang had
collected. They camped near the Lachlan River and Gilbert
went into the town of Forbes, the centre of the Lachlan
River diggings. It was Sunday, and on his return to the
camp Gilbert reported that he had had great difficulty in
purchasing guns and an axe. There was only one store in
the town in which guns were sold, and that w r as shut. He
had knocked the store-keeper up, however, and persuaded
him to supply him with what he wanted. On the next
morning the gang rode as straight as possible across the
ranges, Gilbert going ahead with Charters to cut the fences


on Mr. Roberts’ sheep run to enable them to pass through.
They camped for the night between the Eugowra Rocks and
Campbell’s station. On the morning of June 15th, 1862,
they tied their horses to saplings near the camp and walked
down to the rocks. Manns was sent to McGuire’s shanty
at the crossing place for a bottle of Old Tom, a loaf of bread,
and some cooked meat. Fordyce took too much gin and
went to sleep, and Gardiner shook him roughly and told him
that if he didn’t wake up he’d “ cut his rations short.”
Later Gardiner sent Charters to see if the horses were all
right, and told him to stop at the camp and mind them,
adding “You’re no good here. You’re too frightened
of your skin.” Soon afterwards he heard firing and about
an hour later the bushrangers came up leading the coach
horses. They had packed the gold on these horses. They
wiped out and reloaded their guns, and in doing so it was
found that Fordyce’s gun had not been discharged. Gardiner
turned on the young man fiercely and said, “ You
coward, you were too much afraid to fire, you. I’ll cut
your rations short for this.” They saddled up their
horses and started across the ranges.
The escort was under the command of Sergeant Condell.
It left Forbes about noon, Constable John Fagan driving.
The other constables were Henry Moran and William Havi-
land. When they came to the Eugowra Rocks, near the
crossing over Mandagery Creek, they found tw r o bullock
teams so placed across the road, which bends sharply as it
approaches the ford, that the escort cart had to be driven
close to the rocks. The teams belonged to tw r o bullock
drivers who had been made prisoners, and had evidently
been there for some time, as the bullocks were lying dow r n
chewing the cud. To pass these teams the coach had to
approach the rocks at an angle, and as it was passing a
volley w r as fired and Constable Moran fell. The horses,
frightened at the noise and flash of the guns, bolted, but the
cart was overturned through the wheels colliding wfith a
spur of the rocks. This threw the other constables out and
prevented them from making any effective resistance. As
the cart capsized, seven armed men, dressed in red shirts and
with their faces blackened, sprang from behind the rocks
shouting, “ Shoot the wretches.” The police fired


their carbines and then surrendered. The robbers having
re-packed their plunder were led by Charters to the place
from whence they had started, near the Pinnacle, where the
gold and money was roughly divided, and the party
separated.
Constable Moran haxl sufficiently recovered from his
wound to be present at the trial and to give his evidence.
The first jury disagreed and was discharged, but at the
second trial on February 23rd, 1863, Fordyce, Bow, and
Manns were convicted and sentenced to death. Charters
was acquitted according to promise, and McGuire was also
acquitted on the charge of being concerned in the robbery,
but was afterwards convicted of aiding and abetting the
bushrangers, and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
Subsequently the capital sentences on Fordyce and Bow
were commuted to imprisonment for life, and only Manns
was hung. The execution was terribly bungled. The rope
was too short for a tall, slim youth like Manns, and he
struggled violently. Seeing no prospect of death within a
reasonable time, Dr. West instructed the hangman to raise
the body and let it drop again, and this proved effectual.
The prolonged sufferings of the criminal must, however,
have been very severe.
From the date of this daring robbery the “ Gardiner
gang of bushrangers” was the principal topic of conversation
in New South Wales. After a lull of several years a new
era of bushranging had started, and it lasted altogether for
about ten years before it was finally suppressed. For some
time the robberies which were reported almost every day
were all attributed to Frank Gardiner, but, as was subse-
quently proved, unjustly. Gardiner had made his coup and
retired, but it was some time before either the police or the
public became aware of this fact.


CHAPTER XVII.
Johnny Gilbert; His First Appearance in Australia; Miscellaneous
Bushranging Exploits ; Mr. Robert Lowe Makes a Stand ; Mr.
Inspector Norton Captured by the Bushrangers; A Plucky
Black Boy ; “ Mine know it, Patsy Daly like it, Brudder ; ” A
Brave Boy; O’Meally Shoots Mr. Barnes ; A Bootless Bush-
ranger ; Capture of John Foley; Something about the Foley
Family ; Ben Hall.
Next to Frank Gardiner, the man most frequently
spoken of in connection with bushranging at this time was
Johnny Gilbert, alias Roberts. He was one of the gang
charged with assisting in the robbery of the gold escort at
Eugowra Rocks, but who had not been captured. Fie was
born in Canada, and emigrated with his uncle, John Davis,
to Victoria, shortly after the discovery of gold there. Davis,
it appears, soon became tired of gold digging, and went to
Sydney, where he opened an hotel at Waverley. On April
6th, 1854, he was found dead in his private room, and his
nephew, then known as Roberts, about seventeen years of
age, was arrested and charged with the murder. He was
acquitted and left Sydney. He was arrested in the
Goulburn district, some time later, charged with horse-
stealing, and sent to gaol. He is supposed to have made
acquaintance with Gardiner during their imprisonment on
Cockatoo Island. Roberts made an attempt to escape from
the island, but was re-captured and was punished by
Captain McLerie, the visiting justice. When liberated,
after having served his sentence, he disappeared for a time,
and was next heard of in connection with the escort robbery.
It soon became evident to all thinking persons, that there
were more bushrangers abroad than those connected with
“the Gardiner gang.” Robberies were reported almost


every day, and over a wider range of country than it was
possible for one gang to travel over. These robberies were
of the most varied character.
One day Henry Stephens, innkeeper, near Caloola, was
in his bar when three men walked in and called for brandy.
He served them. When they had drunk their liquors they
went into the breakfast room and sat down. There were
present at the table Mr. and Mrs. Stephens, Mr. Young,
and the three strangers. While the meal was progressing
one of the strangers went out. He returned almost
immediately, pistol in hand, driving the man servant in
before him. Mr. Stephens jumped up, exclaiming “ Hullo,
what’s up now?” when the bushranger fired and shot
him in the mouth. The other two visitors rose, and
ordered Mrs. Stephens to “hand out the cash.” As she
refused they searched everywhere, breaking open boxes,
smashing the furniture, and even refusing to allow the poor
woman to lift her baby from its overturned cradle, under
which it was in danger of being smothered. They took
away about in cash, and a few small articles. As soon
as they left Mr. Stephens was conveyed to the hospital at
Bathurst for surgical treatment. Of course this outrage was
attributed to “Gardiner’s gang,” but it was subsequently
proved that the robbers had no connection with the
ex-butcher.
On December 10th, 1862, Charles Foley and John
Brownlow robbed Daniel O’Brien’s inn at Laggan.
Another man stood on guard at the door. They tied Mr.
and Mrs. O’Brien, and put a bag over O’Brien’s head to
prevent him from calling out. Foley searched the place,
but only succeeded in finding “ten bob.” Mrs. O’Brien,
hoping to induce them to leave quietly, offered to give them
£4 1 os. which she had in her pocket, but Foley said “We
want more than that.” They ransacked the place, and at
last found a roll of about fifty notes which Mr. O’Brien
had thrown among some empty casks in a back room on
seeing them approaching the place. As they were well-
known in the district they were soon arrested, and on
February 9th, 1863, were sentenced to seven years’ penal
servitude.
At the same Sessions, Alexander and Charles Ross and


William O’Connor were convicted of the attack on Mr.
Stephens. They had also robbed Mr. William Webb’s
store at Fish River, and committed some other outrages.
They were condemned to death and were hung in March,
1863.
George Willison and Frederick Britton stuck up the
Hartley mail near the Woodside Inn, about five miles from
Bathurst, on November 16th, 1862. The driver, Owen
Malone, and a passenger, Arundell Everett, were taken off
the road, their hands tied behind them, and they were
laid on the ground on their faces while the robbers searched
the letters. While thus lying side by side, Everett
whispered to his companion, “ Let’s make a rush.” Malone
however prudently declined, saying, “ What could we do
with our hands tied behind us ? We’d only get shot.”
The robbers took about in notes from the letters
and immediately mounted and rode into Bathurst to
exchange them. They were too late, however. News of
the robbery had reached the town, and they were arrested in
the Union Bank while cashing the notes. They were
sentenced to sixteen years’ penal servitude, the first three
years in irons. A companion who had kept watch while
the mail was being robbed escaped.
The mail coach was stuck up near Mount Victoria by
Charles and James Mackay and George Williams. There
was nothing remarkable about the robbery, but the bush-
rangers were closely followed and were captured in a few
days. The two brothers Mackay were sentenced to fifteen
years’ and Williams to ten years’ imprisonment.
On January 7th, 1863, the Vass Courier announced that
during the week the Binalong mail had been again robbed,
and Woodward, the driver, left bound to a tree. He begged
hard not to be left to perish miserably through thirst, but
the robbers laughed and rode away. He was released by a
shepherd who happened to hear him cooeying. He was
much exhausted. The robbers took xos. and a penny-
weight nugget. On the same day Samuel William Jacobsen,
hawker, was stuck up near the Wedden Mountains by John
Healy, who ordered him to “ bail up and be quick about it
unless you want your brains blown out.” Jacobsen
and his assistant, Henry Clok, were stripped and told to


remain where they were for an hour under penalty of death.
Their clothes were given back to them after having been
searched. They dressed, and when they judged that the
time allowed them had expired—their watches had been
taken away with other property —they walked on. They
followed the track of their waggon and came up to it about
three miles away. The horses had been turned loose and
were feeding near. All the drawers and boxes in the waggon
had been broken open and ransacked, and everything of
value had been stolen.
During the week ending April 22nd, 1863, a large
number of people were stuck up and robbed on the road
between Marengo and Burrangong. One of them, William
Oakes, a store-keeper, was going on his usual round among
the Fish River farms to purchase fowls, eggs, butter, and
other produce for his store. He was successful in hiding
his money, but the robbers emptied his horse feed out on
the ground, ripped open the saddles and collars of his
horses, and broke all the boxes in the cart in their attempts
to find it.
On January 14th a woman was stopped at the Cherry
Tree Hill, and asked for her money. She refused to give it
up. The robbers tried to search her, but, being unable to
find her pocket, they tore the skirt off, and, in spite of her
cries, carried it away, leaving her to get home without it.
They got about in notes and silver. These fellows
stuck up the Mudgee mail about an hour later. There
were two passengers on board, a man and a woman. The
man refused to give up his money, when one of the bush-
rangers said, “ If you don’t hand it out we’ll strip the
woman.” As he hesitated the ruffian began to tear off her
clothes. The man yielded. It is satisfactory to know that
the amount obtained was small.
On April 3rd the Cassilis mail was stuck up at Reedy
Creek, near Mudgee, by two armed men. One of them
remarked, after the letters had been gone through, “ This
mail never has nothing in it.” Mr. Farrell, schoolmaster at
Cassilis, who was riding beside the coach when it was
stopped, was robbed of his gold watch and some money.
He was also forced to exchange his horse, saddle, and
bridle, for a knocked up horse and a very dilapidated


saddle and bridle. On the following day Mr, Robert Lowe
was driving in a buggy from Talbragar to Mudgee in
company with Hugh McKenzie, who was on horseback,
when two armed men ordered them to “ bail up.”
Mr. Lowe snatched his gun from the bottom of the
buggy, and fired. The bushrangers wheeled round and
rode away, but had not gone far when one of them
threw up his arms and fell. Lowe and McKenzie
went over to him with the intention of taking him
to the nearest town for treatment, but he died almost
immediately. The two gentlemen then continued their
journey to Slapdash, where they gave information to the
police and were informed that Messrs. A. Brown, J.P., and
Alexander Dean had just reported that they had been
robbed near the same place by two men, one of whom
was riding Mr. Farrell’s horse. Sergeant Cleary and a
trooper with two black trackers, Tommy and Johnny Bein
Bar, followed the other bushranger for 260 miles and
caught him near Coonamble. He was brought to Mudgee,
tried and convicted, and sent to gaol for ten years. At the
inquest on the man Heather a verdict of justifiable homicide
was returned, and Mr. Lowe was highly complimented for
his prompt action. He was afterwards awarded a gold
medal by the New South Wales Government for his bravery
in resisting bushrangers.
One day Master Willie Cadell was sent by his mother
on a message a short distance away from Mudgee, He
walked his pony up the hill outside the township, and was
about to start in a canter when a mounted man dashed in
front and shouted “Stop.” The pony was frightened by the
shout and bolted for a short distance, the bushranger
galloping alongside threatening the boy with instant death
if he did not pull up. At length the pony was brought
under control, when the robber said, “ I don’t want to hurt
you, but you must come with me.” He led the boy to a
clump of trees where Mr. Smith, of Appletree Flat, and two
other men were lying tied on the ground. The bushranger
told Willie that he would not tie him if he promised not to
run away, adding, “If you break your word I’ll put a
bullet through you.” The boy promised and went and sat
down on a fallen tree. The bushranger took Willie’s pony
p


“to spare” his own horse. As he walked past Mr. Smith,
he gave the tied man a kick, and said roughly, “You
stopped me robbing the mail before, but I’ll keep you quiet
this time,” He mounted the pony and went back to the
road. Presently he returned with two other men whom he
tied and robbed. He fired several shots from his revolver
at a mark on a tree, “for practice” as he told Willie Cadell.
Then he went back to the road again. He soon returned
with two more men, who were treated as the others had
been. There were now seven men and a boy held
prisoners under the clump of trees by one man. The
robber had also stopped Mr. Robinson, with two stock-
riders, and had ordered them to round up the mob of fat
cattle they were driving and remain on the flat until after
the mail passed. Occasionally he would say to his
prisoners ; “ The mail will soon be here now; then you
can all go,” He kept continually riding from the road to
where his prisoners were and back. About half-an-hour
after capturing his last two prisoners the mail coach turned
off the road and came into the clump of timber, the bush-
ranger riding behind and directing the driver where to go.
There were four male and two female passengers. The
women were told to go under a tree, and to sit down and
be quiet.” The men were searched and tied. Then the
bushranger coolly sat down and went through the letters.
When he had finished he mounted the pony, and took the
bridle of his own horse in his hand. “ Youngster,” he said
to Willie Cadell, “you’ll find your pony by the road.” He
then rode away. Young Cadell, who had replied All
right,” began to untie the prisoners as soon as the robber
was 'outside the clump. When all were loosed they
walked out to the road. The pony was hitched _to a
tree and the robber seated on his own horse was waiting a
short distance away. He asked them whether they were all
right and on being answered in the affirmative, raised his
hat politely, said, “ Good evening, ladies and gentle-
men,” and cantered away. The mail-man stopped to gather
up the torn and scattered letters, while Messrs. Smith and
Martin walked to Mudgee to inform the police, and Willie
Cadell cantered away to perform the errand on which his
mother had sent him.


The coolness with which this robber had acted through-
out induced the belief among the public that he was no
common amateur bushranger, but a member of the Gardiner
gang. In fact it was said that he was no other than Johnny
Gilbert himself. The Goulburn Chronicle reported about
tdls tin Jfu' tha J ard ! ner and hi s gang had paid a visit to the
Muswellbrook district, and suggested that one of them had
committed this robbery on the way back to their own
district This, however, was disproved later, and it was then
e ieved that the robber was one of the numerous young
men who “ turned out ” with the intention of joining the
gang and endeavoured to do something on the road to
prove themselves worthy of being accepted as comrades by
the redoubtable bushrangers. It was the custom of the
time to attribute all highway robberies to Gardiner and his
gang, but it is doubtful whether any of those recorded in
this chapter so far were perpetrated by actual members of
the gang. It was a time of intense excitement, and many of
the more or less criminally disposed among the youth of the
colony felt themselves impelled to take to the road and rob
somebody. Some of these were captured; others were
disillusionised and went back to their farms; while others
either did join the gang or continued bushranging as
independent parties. The next story, published a few days
later, was that of the sticking up of the Mudgee mail
on the Bathurst-Sydney Road, near the Big Hill, about
sixteen miles from Bowenfels. Mr. Henry Edward Kater,
manager of the local branch of the Australian Joint
Stock Bank, was a passenger, and he had with him
,£5OOO worth of old notes, which he was taking to
Sydney to be destroyed at the head office of the bank.
1 he bushrangers had received notice from some source that
these notes were on the coach, and asked for them. Mr.
Kater replied that they were valueless, as the numbers had
been cancelled. “ Never mind,” replied the bushranger.
“We can make a bonfire of them as well as you can.” Mr.
Kater declined to give them up, and stooped down. The
bushranger immediately ordered him to “sit up straight
and not try to come Robert Lowe on them,” or he would
be sorry for it. This, of course, was an allusion to the
recent shooting of the man Heather by Mr. Lowe, as


already related. Mrs. Smith, wife of a publican at Ben
Bullen, who was a passenger on the coach, was very much
alarmed. She was seated beside Mr. Kater, and screamed
loudly. She had in her pocket. The robber told
her to get down and stand aside, adding, “We don’t rob
women.” She was only too glad to obey. She sat down
on a log beside the road. The other passengers were then
ordered to dismount, and were eased of their valuables.
When this duty had been discharged the robbers departed,
one of them turning back to request Mr. Kater to ask
Captain Norton whether “his spurs were getting rusty.”
The robbers were well-dressed and splendidly mounted.
No doubt was entertained anywhere that they belonged to
Gardiner’s gang. A reward of was offered by the
Joint Stock Bank for the recovery of the cancelled notes.
In recording the principal robberies committed at this time
by bushrangers who were not known certainly to belong to
the gang, I have necessarily omitted to mention the robberies
effected by the gang itself. It is now, therefore, time to
return to the beginning of the year and take up the history
of the gang itself. On New Year’s Day, 1863, races were
being held at Brisbane Valley on the Fish River, when
Frederick Lowry and John Foley made a daring attempt to
stick up the crowd, numbering more than one hundred
persons. A man named Foran refused to be tied when
called on to come out and was immediately shot by Lowry.
Although he was w r ounded in the lungs Foran rushed
forward and grappled with Lowry. Several other men came
to his assistance, and Lowry was overpowered, while Foley,
who had been engaged in tying the men, jumped on his
horse and got away. Lowry was locked up in a room
behind the bar of the publican’s booth, but the booth was a
mere shell, and he contrived to escape before the police
came. . , 0 /-"i
On February 27th Mr. Cirkel, publican at Stony Creek,
Burrangong, was called out of his house and shot dead,
after having been accused of having given information to
the police. It was said that the men who committed this
crime were Gardiner, Gilbert, O’Meally, and another whose
name was not known. O’Meally was said to have fired the
fatal shot. The party of bushrangers rode on to Mr. Myers


Solomon’s store at the “ Big Wombat.” Mr. Solomon, seeing
them coming, attempted to run away, but was followed and
brought back. A lad in the store vaulted over the counter
and snatched a pistol from the belt of one of the bush-
rangers while the dispute was going on as to whether
Solomon should be shot for attempting to “ betray ” them to
the police. Another of the bushrangers immediately put
his pistol to Mrs. Solomon’s head and said to the boy, “ If
you fire I’ll blow her brains out.” The boy looked
undecided. The bushranger cocked his pistol and swore
that if the boy did not return the weapon he had taken the
woman should die. The boy then stepped forward, laid the
revolver on the counter, and said, “If it wasn’t for Mrs.
Solomon I’d stop your run anyhow.” He was imme-
diately knocked down and kicked.
The Lachlan Observer of March sth reported that Mr.
Inspector Norton, who had recently relieved Sir Frederick
Pottinger as head of the police force in the district, had
been captured by the bushrangers. Captain Norton had
been in pursuit of the robbers, and was returning from a
long ride through the ranges, accompanied only by a black
tracker known as Billy Durgan. On Sunday, Ist instant,
he came suddenly on a camp some three or four miles from
Wheogo. Billy, who was riding behind leading a spare
horse, saw the fire first, and shouted “ Here they are.”
Three of the bushrangers sprang up, mounted their horses,
and came towards the officer. Billy advised him to “bolt,”
but the captain shook his head and replied “No good,
Billy. Horse too much knock up.” “ Mine stop it too,”
said Billy. O’Meally and Patrick Daly fired as they
approached, and Norton returned the fire until his revolver
was empty, when he said “ I surrender.” Daly cried
“Throw down your arms,” and as Norton threw away his
revolver another man galloped up and fired at him. At
that moment Billy, the black boy, seeing the danger Norton
was in, gave a yell, jumped off his horse, and threw his
empty pistol in the bushranger’s face. By this plucky act
Billy no doubt saved Captain Norton’s life, but the bush-
ranger turned and fired at the black, Billy, however,
kicked off his boots, sprang behind a tree, and shouted
“Come on, you “O’Meally replied, “We’ll wallop


you, you young , when we catch you.” At which threat
Billy laughed, and replied “You catchem first.” Daly and
the other bushranger chased him, but Billy dodged about
from tree to tree with all the agility of the black, pelting
sticks at them, and laughingly telling them to “ come on.”
The bushrangers fired at him several times, but with no
effect, and at length gave up the chase and returned to
where O’Meally was still guarding Captain Norton. After a
consultation aside the bushrangers told the captain that
they had mistaken him for Trooper Holliston. They
intended to “do for” the trooper the first time they caught
him. They detained the captain for about three hours,
treating him very civilly, and then released him.
A few days later, Daly was arrested by Sir Frederick
Pottinger. He was a native of the district, under twenty
years of age. When brought up and charged at the police
court, Captain Norton failed to identify him, but Billy
Durgan exclaimed, when called upon for his evidence :
“ Mine know it, Patsy Daly like it brudder.” Daly was
placed on trial for having, in company with others, robbed
Myers Solomon, store-keeper, of property, including money,
horses, guns, revolvers, clothing, food, &c., to a large
amount. George Johnson identified Daly as the man who
had knocked the boy down and kicked him when he placed
the revolver on the counter. Johnson called Daly a coward,
and was told to keep quiet unless he wanted his “
brains blown out.” Johnson replied ; “Pd like to meet you
man to man fairly.” Another of the bushrangers asked :
“ Will you stand up and fight me if I give you a pistol ? ”
Johnson replied, “Yes,” and stepped forward. The third
bushranger, however, ordered him back, and told his mates
to “quit fooling.” Johnson and the other men in the store
were then made to lie on their faces, with a bushranger over
them on guard, while the other bushrangers selected what
they wanted, packed it in bundles, and strapped it on the
pack horses. While thus employed, the bushranger who
had challenged Johnson kicked him in the ribs savagely,
and told him to keep still. The other persons present gave
their versions of the occurrence, but they differed little from
what has been recorded above. Daly was convicted, and
was sentenced to fifteen years’ penal servitude.


On March 30th, two men called at James Brown’s hut
at Wallenbeen and asked for something to eat. Brown told
his wife to give them some breakfast. It may be necessary
to remark that such hospitality is common in Australia.
Having eaten as much as they required, the travellers
demanded Brown’s hat and boots. After some dispute
these were handed over. The boots were too small, and
the man who wanted them took out his pocket-knife to cut
them, when his mate said, “ Oh, come on; we’ll get plenty
at McKay’s.” They left the boots, went out, mounted their
horses, and rode away. They had only gone a few yards
when they met Mr. Barnes, a store-keeper at Cootamundra,
and his assistant, Mr. Hanlow, who was in charge of a
branch store at Murrumburrah. The travellers ordered
Barnes to “ bail up.” Barnes said, “ I know you, O’Meally,”
and O’Meally replied, “ I know you, you . Get off
that horse; I want him.” Barnes wheeled his horse round
and galloped away, and O’Meally followed. They galloped
round the hill, back past the stockyard, and then down the
gully out of sight among the trees. In the meantime,
Hanlow was conducted by the other bushranger off the
road to the stockyard, where they were soon joined by
O’Meally. “ Where’s Mr. Barnes ? ” asked Hanlow, as the
robber rode up. “ Down there,” replied O’Meally non-
chalantly, pointing down the gully. “You haven’t shot
him ? ” inquired Hanlow anxiously. “ Oh, no,” replied
the bushranger coolly, “he hit himself against a tree and
tumbled off.” Mr. Alexander McKay, the squatter who
owned the stockyard, and whose house was not far away,
had heard the galloping and shouting, and went on to the
verandah of his house to ascertain the cause of the noise. It
was then about half-past eleven a.m., and the day was Sunday.
He saw one man chasing another, and thought it was a
trooper after a bushranger. He watched them gallop down
the gully, and saw the one he took to be a trooper shoot the
other, and then wheel his horse round and gallop back
without waiting to see whether the man who had fallen
off his horse was dead or not. As O’Meally came
nearer McKay recognised him, and his suspicions were
aroused. He started to walk down the gully to the
wounded man, when he was stopped by O’Meally, who


ordered him to go back and open the store, adding, “ I
want some boots and clothes for my mate. He lost
his in a brush with the traps.” Mr. McKay went to the
store and gave O’Meally the things he had asked for.
The bushranger then said he wanted fresh horses. McKay
replied that the horses were never brought in on a Sunday
and therefore he could not get them. “ Ah,” said O’Meally,
“ I had Chance from you. He was a good ’un. Well, I’ll
come some other time and get one.” The bushrangers then
went away and McKay and Hanlow walked down the gully
to where Barnes was lying. They found that he was quite
dead, and sent word to the nearest police station. An
inquest was held next day, and a verdict of wilful murder
was returned against O’Meally and another man whose
name was unknown.
A day or two later Mr. Frank was riding from Lambing
Flat (Burrangong) to Yass, when he was stopped by seven
men whose faces were hidden by black crape veils. They
ordered him to “ shell out.” “ I’ve only thirty bob, boys,”
he replied. One of the robbers said “ Oh, keep it. You’ll
want that to take you home again.” Some of the others said
that they knew him and he wasn’t “a bad sort,” so he could
go. They asked him if he had seen any police on the road,
and added that they wished to “ meet the traps.” After
several minutes spent in conversation they rode off and Mr.
Frank continued his journey.
Shortly after this Constables McDonald, Lee, and
Nicholls traced John Foley to Mackay’s Hotel, Campbell’s
River, with the aid of a black tracker. McDonald pushed
the door of the bedroom in which he was told
Foley had been sleeping, but the man inside leaned
heavily against it to prevent it from being opened.
After a struggle McDonald forced his revolver through
the opening and fired round the corner. He did not hit
the man inside, but the shot forced him to give way a little.
The constable said, “ Come along, Foley. We’ve got you.
You can’t get away.” After a moment’s pause Foley replied,
“ All right. Don’t shoot.” He stepped back and the door
swung open. The police rushed in and handcuffed him.
He was taken to Bathurst, where he was charged with having
looted Mrs. Anne Webb’s store at Mutton Falls, and with


having aided and abetted other bushrangers in several
robberies on the highway and elsewhere. During the trial
it was noticed that Mrs. Foley, the prisoner’s mother, was
passing in and out of the court and communicating with the
witnesses who had been ordered out of court. She was
cautioned, but as she persisted in spite of the efforts of the
police, she was ordered to be locked up for contempt of
court. Timothy Foley, a brother of the accused, was also
committed for contempt of court, and was threatened with
prosecution for perjury for his attempts to prove an alibi.
The prisoner was convicted and was sentenced to fifteen
years’ imprisonment, the first three years in irons. Another
brother, Francis Foley, was sentenced at the same sessions
to ten years’ imprisonment for having raided the Chinese
Camp at Campbell’s River. Henry Gibson was also
arraigned for bushranging. He admitted that he had been
overseer on Ben Hall’s station, but denied that he had ever
joined Gardiner’s gang. He was acquitted by the jury, and
the verdict was received with some applause. As soon as
order had been restored, the judge remarked that it would
perhaps add to the general satisfaction if he informed the
court that the prisoner would not go free in spite of his
acquittal. He had before him a document which proved
that the prisoner was an escaped convict from Victoria, and
would therefore be detained until he could be returned to
that colony to finish his sentence.
Hitherto the gang had continued to be known as
“ Gardiner’s Gang,” although it had been repeatedly asserted
in the press that Gardiner had taken no share in the later
robberies, and that in fact he had retired from “ the
profession ” several months ago. It was said that notwith-
standing the vigilance of the police, Gardiner had succeeded
in escaping from New South Wales, taking with him the
wife of a respectable farmer in the Burrangong district
named Brown. The reports, however, were very contradic-
tory. Sometimes it was said that he had gone to New
Zealand. Then that he had made his way to California or
to South America. In the meantime the gang continued to
be as active as ever under the leadership of Johnny Gilbert
and Ben Hall.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Racers as Mounts for the Bushrangers ; The Shooting of Lowry ; The
Bushrangers visit Bathurst; They hold the Town of Canowindra
for Three Days ; Burke Shot by Mr. Keightley ; Female Bush-
rangers ; Death of O’Meally at Goimbla ; A Newspaper Man and
his Wife Stuck Up ; Lively Times During the Christmas Holidays.
The chief necessity for a successful career as a bushranger
was a good supply of race-horses, and hence it was almost
impossible for any person to keep a really valuable saddle
horse during this “ Reign of Terror,” as the newspapers of
the district called it. Special raids were organised by
members of the gang to obtain a supply of horses, and the
bushrangers frequently travelled upwards of two hundred
miles to secure a horse which had made a name on the turf.
Thus on May 18th Harry Wilson, trainer for Mr. Allen
Hancock, was exercising the racer Jacky Morgan, within
sight of the police station in the town of Burrowa, when
Gilbert rode up and said “ I want that horse.” “For
God’s sake don’t ruin me, Johnny,” exclaimed the jockey.
“ Hold your jaw and get off,” was the reply, as the
bushranger brought out his ready revolver. The robber
specially cautioned Wilson not to “sing out” so that the
police could hear, or he’d “ be sorry for it,” and in spite of
his remonstrances the jockey was compelled to dismount
and walk home to inform his employer, Mr. Hancock told
him to saddle another horse. He then took down his gun
carefully, wiped and loaded it, and went away swearing that
he would never return until he had recovered Jacky
Morgan.
Gilbert also took a racer out of Mr. Hammond’s
stables at Junee. He stole the racers Chinaman and
Micky Hunter from the stables of Mr. J. Roberts at


Currawang. When leading Micky Hunter out of his
stall Gilbert patted his neck and said, “ You’re the
cove we want.” Old Comus and several other horses
were taken out of Mr. Iceley’s stables at Coombing.
1 he old horse had had a good career on the course, and
had been set apart for stud purposes, and Mr. Icely offered a
large sum to the bushrangers to leave him alone, but
Gilbert said, “There’s a good gallop in him yet,” and led
him away. But the bushrangers did not devote their whole
time to capturing race horses. Robberies on the highway
continued as frequently as usual. The police, however, were
not idle. In August, Sergeant James Stephenson, Constable
Herbst, and Detectives Camphin and Saunderson traced
Lowry to Thomas Vardy’s, Limerick Races Hotel, at Cook’s
Vale Creek. When asked if there were any lodgers there,
Vardy pointed to the door of one of the bedrooms and
replied, “Yes, one there.” Stephenson knocked at the door,
but there was no reply. The sergeant knocked again and
called out “ Come out Lowry, it’s no use.” As no answer
was returned, the sergeant placed his shoulder against the
door, and tried to burst it open. Immediately some one
inside fired a pistol, the bullet from which passed through
the panel of the door between the two policemen.
Stephenson again called on Lowry to come out or it would
be “ the worse for him,” and the bushranger replied “ I’ll
fight you, you . All of you.” He again fired through
the door, and the bullet wounded one of the police horses
tied to the verandah. Sergeant Stephenson called on
Vardy to take the horses to a safe place, and when
they were out of sight, he and Constable Herbst again tried
to force the door by leaning their combined weight against it.
Suddenly Lowry threw the door open, and the sergeant
almost fell into the room. The bushranger shouted “ Come
on, you I’ll fight you fair,” and fired. The police
returned the fire. Stephenson, who was inside the room,
took steady aim and pulled the trigger. The robber
fell, saying “ I’m done for ! Where’s the priest ? ”
The police arrested Vardy and all his family, as well
as a man named Larry Cummins, who was in the
room with Lowry, but who took no part in the fight.
When this ceremony had been completed, Lowry was


made as comfortable as circumstances permitted while
a messenger was sent off to the nearest town for a doctor.
For more than an hour detective Camphin sat by Lowry’s
side reading prayers from a Catholic prayer-book which
Mrs. Yardy lent him. The robber gradually grew weaker
and died. His last words were, “ Tell ’em I died game.”
The police borrowed a cart from a farmer who lived about
a mile away from the hotel, and the body was placed in it,
covered with a blanket, and started away for Goulburn,
where this extraordinary funeral cortege arrived the next
day, Sunday, just as the people were leaving the churches.
Frederick Lowry was a native of the district, twenty-
seven years of age, and six feet two inches in height.
In the New South Wales Legislative Assembly, on
August 18th, 1863, Mr., afterwards Sir James, Martin moved
that “ the alarming state of insecurity of life and property
which has so long prevailed through the country districts is
in a high degree discreditable to Her Majesty’s Ministers in
this colony.” Mr., afterwards Sir Charles, Cowper, speaking
for the Government, said that the police authorities had full
power to take all the troopers that could be spared from the
more thickly-populated districts to the disturbed area. The
discussion on the motion lasted for a week, when it was
negatived by forty-four to eighteen votes. The Government
was in fact doing all that it could reasonably be expected
to do to preserve order, and this was generally recognised,
although the Press continued to urge that more energetic
measures should be adopted, and bushranging stamped out
at any cost. The success of the bushrangers was largely
due to the nature of the country, with the features
of which they were perfectly familiar. Had there
been double the number of police in the district it is
barely probable that the outbreak could have been put
down much more quickly than it was. The police showed
remarkable bravery, but they were unable to follow the
bushrangers into the ranges, with the intricacies of which they
were unacquainted. It was not the number of bushrangers,
but their activity, boldness, and more than all their intimate
knowledge of the country, which enabled them to keep so
extensive an area of the colony in a ferment for so long a
time,


The Carcour mail was stuck up at about a mile outside
the town of Blaney on September 23rd. A passenger named
Garland refused to “hand out” when ordered. He was told
that if he persisted in his refusal he would “get a good
hiding.” One bushranger stood by his side holding a gun
close to Garland’s head, while another bushranger felt his
pockets. They took out two £1 notes. The coach was
then taken up the ridge to about 300 yards from the road.
Here there was a level spot fairly clear of timber, and in this
little plain were eight men sitting in a ring with a robber
standing on guard over them. The coach-driver and the
two passengers were ordered to take their seats in the ring
while the letters were searched. They obeyed, and were
detained more than an hour. One of the prisoners in the
ring was a trooper. When the mail had been gone through
the bushrangers, one of whom was riding Mr. Daniel Mayne’s
horse Retriever, told them they might go. Garland said
“ It’s no use going without any money,” whereupon a bush-
ranger handed him ten shillings and told him not to growl.
It was about five o’clock p.m. when the bushrangers rode off.
They were said to be Gilbert, O’Meally, Burke, and another.
A few days later Gilbert and O’Meally went to a cattle
station some miles from Burrangong and rounded up the
horses. A stock-rider galloped up and ordered them to
desist. Gilbert told him that they were troopers and had
orders from Her Majesty the Queen to take any horses they
required. The stockman then assisted them to catch two of
the best.
On Saturday, October 23rd, Hall, Gilbert, O’Meally,
Burke, and Vane walked into Mr. Perdrotta’s gunsmith’s
shop in William Street, Bathurst, opposite the School of
Arts, and asked to see some revolvers. They were shown
a number, but said they were common things and no good.
Mr. Perdrotta said he had sold out. There had been a run
on revolvers lately on account of the bushrangers, but he
expected a new stock up from Sydney in a few days. The
robbers laughed heartily, and said that the bushrangers
required to be looked after. They promised to call
again in a few days. They walked up the street to
McMinn’s Hotel, and went in as the family were
sitting down to tea. Miss McMinn recognised them


and screamed. She was ordered to keep quiet, but as this
made her scream louder the bushrangers left. The report
that the bushrangers were in the town spread like wild-fire,
and the streets were crowded with excited people in a few
minutes. It was rumoured that the bushrangers had robbed
Mr. De Clouett, in Piper Street, and that De Clouett had
recognised Johnny Gilbert as a jockey who had ridden for
him some years before. The police hastily armed and
mounted, when suddenly the bushrangers, mounted on their
horses, with revolvers in their hands, dashed through the
crowd in Howick Street, shouting, “ Two of us is good for
forty troopers.” The crowd scattered to let them pass.
The bushrangers rode through the street at a gallop and left
the town in the direction of the timbered country, avoiding
the roads. The police followed close behind, but the
bushrangers had the faster horses and got away.
On October 17th, Mr. Robinson, of Robinson’s Hotel,
Canowindra, was awakened at about 1.30 a.m. by a loud
knocking. He went to the door and asked, “ Who’s
there?” The reply was, “The police.” Robinson opened
the door and was immediately ordered to “ bail up.” The
visitors were Hall, Gilbert, and O’Meally, the bushrangers.
Mr. Robinson gave them which he took from a drawer,
and said that was all the money he had in the house. He
begged them to go away. They refused, and insisted on
every one in the house getting up at once. After some
delay the family and Mr, Kieran Cummings, a lodger, were
collected in the dining-room. The bushrangers took charge
and served out drinks all round. When time for opening
the house came, the bushrangers stationed themselves, one
at each end of the verandah and the third in the bar. They
bailed up fourteen bullock-drivers who were camped near
the township, and compelled them to leave their teams in
the street as they arrived. The robbers took anything they
required or fancied from the drays and marched the drivers
into the dining-room of the hotel. During the morning,
Messrs. Hibberson, Twaddell, and Kirkpatrick drove up to
the hotel in a buggy. They were compelled to alight and
go into the dining-room. Ben Hall, seeing that Mr. Kirk-
patrick carried a revolver, requested him to “oblige by
handing that thing over. Not that we want it, you know;


but it might go off by accident,” Mr. Kirkpatrick laughed,
and gave him the weapon. Hall examined it carefully and
said, “We’ve got better than that. We’ll leave it for you
at Louden’s, at Grubbenbong, so that you may get it when
you pass.” Mrs. Robinson and the cook were released and
ordered to get a “ first-class dinner for the gentlemen, and
we’ll pay for it.” The prisoners were well treated. Food
was brought in at intervals, and bottles of brandy were
placed on the table for all to help themselves as they pleased.
Several boxes of cigars were ordered, and these were opened
and the cigars thrown along the table, Robinson had
promised not to “try any hanky panky,” and was allowed to
go to the bar. Everything ordered was paid for without
delay or dispute. Gilbert walked to the lock-up, called out
the solitary policeman who was stationed in the town, and
made him march down to the hotel.- Here he was given
his musket, and ordered to pace up and down before the
verandah as if on sentry duty. When they grew tired of
showing their contempt for “ the force ” in this manner the
gun was taken away and the policeman conducted into the
dining-room and placed with the other prisoners to “ enjoy
himself like the rest.” The robbers drank very little them-
selves. Occasionally they ordered a bottle of English beer,
and drew the cork themselves after having examined it
carefully to make sure that it had not been tampered with.
On the Wednesday morning Mr. Hibberson begged hard to
be allowed to go. He said that he and his friends had,
enjoyed themselves very much, and would have been willing
to stay longer to oblige, but the river was beginning to rise,
and if it came down as usual at that time of the year they
might not be able to cross for a month. This would
interfere seriously with their business. The bushrangers
listened to this plea, and then withdrew. After a consulta-
tion which lasted several minutes, Hall came back, and said
they thought it was “ a fair thing.” They were very much
obliged to the gentlemen for their contributions towards the
general amusement, and they graciously gave them permis-
sion to fetch their horses from the stable and start. An
hour or so later the other persons in the dining-room
were told that they might go. This spree must have been an
expensive one. The bushrangers only took a few pounds to


start with, while they paid for everything that was consumed
by the crowd between 1.30 a.m. on Monday and noon on
Wednesday. At first there had been a feeling of restraint,
caused, perhaps, by fear or uncertainty, but this soon wore
off, and the party ended by being a very merry one. Several
games were started. Songs were sung, and one of the
bullock-drivers had a concertina and played dance music ;
several of the members of the party danced. The women
and children were allowed to go to bed, but the men had to
sleep with their heads on the table. The bushrangers only
slept for short naps in turn. On leaving Canowindra the
bushrangers rode straight to Mr. Grant’s place, at Balubula,
called him out, and accused him of having given information
to the police as to their movements. As a punishment they
burned his house, stacks, and standing crop.
A week later, on October 24th, Hall, Gilbert, O’Meally,
Vane, and Burke rode up to Assistant Gold Commissioner
Keightley’s house, at Dunn’s Plains, near Rockley, and
called on him to come out. Mr. Keightley had been
standing on the verandah, and on seeing them coming had
rushed in and slammed the door. As he did not obey, the
bushrangers fired some shots at the windows. Keightley
returned the fire, and Burke fell, crying out “ I’m done for.”
There was very little ammunition in the house and when this
was expended Keightley surrendered. He asked only that
the women should not be molested. Vane swore he would
avenge Burke by shooting Keightley. Mrs. Baldock, wife
of the camp-keeper, who was acting as general servant at the
time, rushed between the men and pushed Vane back, crying
at the time, “Oh ! don’t shoot him ! Recollect his wife and
her little baby.” Dr. Peechy, who was present, also
interfered, but was knocked down with the butt of a
revolver. Mrs. Baldock again pushed V ane away, saying,
“ Don’t hurt the doctor. He never did you any harm.”
Vane was much excited and swore a great deal, but
he did not even push the woman away. Presently Hall,
who had been some distance away, came up and told Vane
to keep cool. He added that it was impossible to say in
the m'elee who shot Burke. “ Why,” he exclaimed, “ I might
have done it myself.” After a short time order was restored,
and the doctor then said that Burke was not dead. He


offered to go to Rockley for his instruments and to return
immediately. Hall said “ What’s the good ? Better shoot
him and put him out of his misery.” A discussion followed,
and at length permission was given to the doctor to go to
his house for his instruments, after he had solemnly promised
“ not to bring the traps ” on them. After the doctor’s
departure O’Meally declared his intention of taking
Keightley down the paddock and shooting him. He told
the Gold Commissioner “ to come on,” but Mrs. Keightley
rushed between them and said he should shoot her before
he took her husband away. Hall again interfered and order
was restored. When the doctor returned he found that
Burke was dead. A lengthy discussion took place as to
what should be done with Keightley. O’Meally and Vane
wished to shoot him. Hall and Gilbert were in favour of
holding him to ransom, and Mrs. Keightley undertook to
pay them if they would spare his life. Finally an
agreement was arrived at. Mrs. Keightley was to ride to
Bathurst and bring back the money by two p.m. the next day
(Sunday). If she failed to return at that time, or brought
any one back with her, her husband and Doctor Peechy
were to be shot. The distance from Rockley to Bathurst
was twenty-five miles, but Mrs. Keightley started without
misgiving. The bushrangers refused to stop in the house
during the night in case of surprise. They took their
prisoners and camped with them on a knoll, some
distance away, from the top of which they had a good
view of the Bathurst Road for several miles. This
they declared would give them time to shoot their hostages
and ride away if treachery was attempted. Mrs. Keightley
obtained the necessary amount of money from her father,
Mr. Rolton, M.L.A., and returned home an hour before the
stipulated time. She handed the money to Ben Hall, who
complimented her on her endurance and pluck. Then
Mr. Keightley and Dr. Peechy were told that they were free,
and the bushrangers mounted and rode off. When this
outrage wap reported, the rewards offered for the capture,
dead or alive, of Hall, Gilbert, O’Meally, and Vane, were
increased to ,£lOOO, while £lOO was offered for the capture
of any other of their accomplices.
A bullock-driver left Burrangong, after having disposed
Q


of his load of produce, and camped near the Burrangong
Creek, a few miles from the diggings, when three men
with blackened faces, and further disguised with spectacles,
called on him. They demanded the which he had
received in payment for his load, proving that they had
somehow established a very effective system of espionage m
the diggings. He admitted that that was the sum for vhich
he had sold his load, but denied having the money, asserting
that he had paid it away. They disbelieved him, and
searched him and his dray, shaking out his blankets and
tarpaulin. They found about notes and silver, and
went off with it. The bullock-driver had been too wide
awake for them. He had heard them coming along the
road, and knowing how the district was infested with robbers,
had hastily thrust his roll of notes under a log near his
camp fire.
Peter Toohey was driving the mail coach on the road
between Burrangong and Cowra, when he was ordered to
bail up by three armed men. Instead of obeying he lashed
his horses into a gallop, and did not pull up until he reached
Mr. Allen’s station at Wattamundera. The bushrangers
followed for a mile or more and snapped their revolvers at
him, but they were either not loaded or missed fire. In
recording this event the Burrcingotig Courier remarked that
this was & probably the fastest three miles on record for a
“Cobb’s coach.” This, however, is very doubtful. The
Courier does not give the time, but some very tall tales
of coach-racing have been given in the Victorian newspapers
of the races run by opposition coaches on the roads from
Melbourne to Bendigo and from Geelong to Ballarat in
early diggings days.
The same paper reported that Constable Clark chased
and captured two supposed bushrangers near Marengo on
August 30th. When they reached the lock-up they were
identified as Kate Meally and Elizabeth Mayhew. They
were detained, but the next morning Sergeant Monaghan
asked the magistrate to discharge the prisoners, as he had
ascertained from enquiries that the girls only went out “ for
a bit of a spree in their brothers’ clothes.”
Mr. David Henry Campbell was sitting in his house on
the Goimbla sheep station on the evening of November


19th when he heard footsteps on the verandah. Being
suspicious as to the character of the visitors, he seized his
f™. and repeated to an inner room, while his brother
AVdham retired by another door. Mrs. Campbell was in
the bedroom. The bushrangers came to the front door,
and fired into the room. Mr. Campbell returned the fire
and the bushrangers retreated. They went to the stack-
yard, and fired the barn and haystack. They then returned
to the house, which was illuminated by the blazing of the
barn and stack. Mrs. Campbell came out of the bedroom,
and spoke a few words to her husband. Then she
crossed the front pailour in full view of the bushrangers,
took a second gun and a powder flask from the
corner, and returned to her husband. The bushrangers
fired at her, but missed, and they then retreated along
the verandah to where the shadow cast by the blazing
stack concealed them. After waiting a few minutes
Mrs. Campbell, thinking, as she could hear no sound
except the roaring of the flames, that the bushrangers
had gone away, stealthily crossed the front room and peeped
out of the window. She saw three men standing near the
stackyard, and went back to inform her husband. Mr.
Campbell immediately left the house by the back doorj
crept gently along the fence, taking care to keep in the
shadow, and approached the men as closely as possible
without giving them the alarm. He recognised the man
nearest to him as O’Meally, and fired. O’Meally fell.
Almost at the same moment the police, having seen the
reflection of the fire miles aw'ay, and had ridden over to
ascertain its cause, came galloping up. Hall and Gilbert,
the two other bushrangers, hastily mounted their horses
and went off under cover of the darkness. O’Meally’s body
was conveyed to Bathurst, where an inquest w r as held, and a
verdict of justifiable homicide was returned. The Bathurst
Times reported that locks of O’Meally’s hair were being
showm about and sold in the town, and protested against it.
1 he paper said that the authorities had no right to allow this
desecration of the body, even of a bushranger and murderer.
“T. he police,” it added, “w r ould not have dared to touch
his hair had he been alive. Probably Pottinger and the
army of troopers that sw r armed round Goimbla w r hen the


danger was passed each took a lock of his hair in memoriam
when their enemy lay prostrate and dead.” A public
meeting was held in Sydney on March to consider vhat
means should be adopted to recognise the bravery of Mr.
Campbell in daring to resist the bushrangers and shooting
O’Meally. A number of prominent men gave addresses,
and it was resolved that a public subscription should be
taken up to recoup him for the loss of his barn and stacks.
The amount collected at the meeting and during a few days
after totalled Mr. Campbell was also awarded a
gold medal by the Government,
The violent deaths of Lowry, Burke, and O’Meally, in so
short a time, seemed to have very little effect on the
gang, which continued its depredations. Neither did these
deaths prevent other young men from adopting the
“ profession of bushranger.” In fact the deaths of a few
bushrangers appear to have had less effect in deteinng the
criminally disposed from taking to the roads than the
immunity enjoyed by the leaders offered encouragement.
Bushranging was increasing instead of diminishing, although
for a few months very little was heard of the Hall and
Gilbert Gang. There was also some comedy mingled with
the prevailing tragedy. For instance, a blackfellow met
Alexander Sinclair, near Killoshiel, and enquired how far it
was to Bathurst ? Sinclair told him, and was immediately
ordered to “get off that horse.” The rider hesitated,
but the darkey pushed him off the saddle, sprang
into it himself, and galloped away threatening to shoot
Sinclair if he followed, although it is very doubtful whether
he had any arms on him. The same blackfellow took
possession of another horse in a similar manner a few hours
later some miles along the road. He rode both horses
until they knocked up, and then abandoned them. They
were afterwards found feeding in the bush with their saddles
and bridles still on. It was supposed that the blackfellow
was just pining for a gallop and adopted this means of
gratifying himself. He was not traced.
Sergeant Donohoe captured William Dunne after an
exciting chase through the ranges, and as the sergeant did
not know his way back to the high road, he compelled his
prisoner to lie down and waited patiently until some other


policemen went out in search of him. Neither the sergeant
nor his prisoner had any food for forty-eight hours. The
police also captured George Bermingham. This man was a
printer, born in Sydney, and was twenty-one years of age.
When taken he was full of braggadocio, boasted loudly of the
number of people he had stuck up, and talked familiarly of
Vane and Johnny Gilbert. He laughed at the idea of Ben
Hall having been shot as had been rumoured, and said,
“ Wait till he’s spent the five hundred quid he got from
Keightley, and you’ll soon hear of him again.” Sergeant
Uonohoe said he had followed Dunne because he recognised
the magnificent chestnut horse he was riding as one ridden
by the robbers of the Cooma mail. Dunne and Bermingham
were sent to gaol for ten years for having been concerned in
this robbery.
In the last week of November, Hall and Gilbert stuck up
the Burrowa mail. Hall expressed his disgust at the number
of cheques found in the letters, and requested some of the
passengers to cash them. As no one volunteered to oblige
him he continued—" If I thought it would injure them (the
people who posted cheques presumably) I’d burn the
lot.” The two bushrangers sat down to open the letters,
leaving the passengers perfectly free. Gilbert took up one
letter which had a black border and laid it aside unopened,
with the remark “We must respect death.” In one of the
letters a piece of wedding cake was found, and Gilbert pro-
posed that they should eat it, but Hall objected, saying “ It
may be a trap.” This caution was common to all the bush-
rangers. They were in constant drea»d of being poisoned, and
were therefore very cautious as to what they ate or drank.
One of the passengers, Mr. Robert Handley, described the
two bushrangers as being well-dressed, healthy looking, and
very civil.
The following morning Hall and Gilbert went to Coffey’s
Inn, near Burrowa, and ordered breakfast. When they had
finished their meal they walked out on to the road and
stopped every one who passed, compelling them to go into
the bar after handing over their money. Mr. Campbell,
however, refused to stand when challenged. He struck
spurs to his horse and galloped away. Hall fired at him and
then rushed to the verandah and mounted his horse. He


galloped only a short distance and then returned, Campbell
having too good a start. The bushrangers “ shouted ” for
their prisoners in the bar several times “ for the good of the
house,” and paid for what they ordered. It was said that
they spent nearly as much as they had obtained from the
persons robbed.
On December 16th Mr. Henry Morgan, one of the
proprietors of the Burrangong Star , was driving, with his
newly-married wife, between Bowning and Binalong, when
he was ordered to bail up by Hall and Gilbert. Gilbert was
in high spirits. He exchanged hats with Morgan, and put
his poncho on Mrs. Morgan, declaring that she would make
“ a first-rate bushranger.” The newspaper man and his wife
were taken into the bush, and detained from eight a.m. till
six p.m. During this time Mr. George Franklin and his
wife and four bullock drays were stuck up. One of the
bullock-drivers named Sheedy had four bottles of gin on his
dray, and these were opened and the liquor served round.
The robbers asked Mrs. Franklin to cook breakfast “ for the
crowd,” taking the necessary provisions from the loading
on the drays. During the afternoon a number of other
persons were brought into “ the camp.” All except one
man were allowed to move about freely. This one man
was tied, and was spoken to very roughly and uncivilly.
The man was supposed to be “ a telegram,” and this
show of harshness “ a stall.” At six o’clock the camp
was broken up, and the prisoners permitted to resume
their journeys.
This performance was repeated the next and the two
following days, near the same spot, and although the
individual losses were generally small, the aggregate amount
of money collected must have been considerable. Only in
one instance was any violence used. A bullock-driver
named Lake refused to turn out his pockets. Gilbert
pressed the muzzle of his revolver against Lake’s face and
said : “If you don’t do what you’re told I’ll shove this down
your mouth.” Flail felt Lake’s pockets and took out
in notes and some silver. At night, when released,
Lake asked for some of his money back to pay expenses
along the road. Gilbert replied ; “If you’re a carrier
your name’s good for what you want. If you hadn’t been so


jolly you’d have got something. We always divide with
them that behave themselves.”
In the week ending December 23rd, the Molong, the
Cooma, the Tuena, and the Hartley mails were stuck up
and robbed, proving that either the gang was divided or
that more than one party was at work in the district.
- A party including Messrs. Sheedy, Bass, Hutchinson, and
other residents of the district, with several ladies, when
returning home from one of the numerous race parties held
during the Christmas holidays, were ordered to “ bail up.”
A lad was leading the racer Black Diamond, owned by Mr.
Sheedy, and let him go. Ben Hall was furious. He
galloped after the racer, swearing, and tried to head him,
but failed. He came back and threatened the boy and Mr.
Sheedy, but soon grew cool. The ladies were treated very
civilly, but the robbers took watches and other valuables
and all the money they could find from the gentlemen.
Black Diamond was found safe in his stable when Mr.
Sheedy reached home.


CHAPTER XIX.
A Heavy Sessions at Goulburn ; Ben Hall Hard Pushed ; An Amateur
Mail Robber; Discovery of Frank Gardiner; His Trial and
Sentence; The Old Man; A Brush with the Police; The
Chinkies show Fight; Messrs. Hall & Co. Take a Lease of the
Main Southern Road ; Capture of Mount and Dunleavy ; Johnny
Dunn; A Desperate Duel and Death of Sergeant Parry; A
Country Ball and its Sequel.
Bushranging by no means died out with the close of 1863.
During the holidays the activity of the robbers continued,
and the disease spread to other districts. It will, however,
perhaps be better to continue the history of this gang, and
return later on to the actions of other gangs elsewhere.
On February 7th, 1864, Inspector Brennan and Constables
Lovett and Roche went to a sly-grog shanty, as the places
where strong drinks w r ere sold without a licence were called,
and captured George Lynam and Michael Seary. The
horses of the two bushrangers were so exhausted with hard
riding that although they mounted and rode away when the
police came, they were soon caught, in spite of their long
start. They were charged and convicted of having robbed a
number of persons at William Sidwell’s, Governor’s Arms
Hotel, Towrang, two miles from Goulburn, in company
with James Crook well and Daniel Matthews. Lynam
also, in company with John Southgate, stuck up and
robbed Thomas Cummins, Robert Sherwood, and others
at Mr. Cornelius O’Brien’s Station, near Binalong. They
also stuck up Mr. Dwyer’s place at Pudman’s Creek,
and after having made a bundle of all that was worth
taking away, compelled Mrs. Ann Dwyer to cook
thirty-four eggs and a quantity of bacon for them.
They tied Dwyer, struck Mrs. Dwyer, and threatened


to burn the place down unless they were told where
the money was hidden. Jane Dwyer, daughter of Ann
Dwyer, said that when they went in to search the bed-
room, Lynam exclaimed, pointing to the crucifix, “There’s
Jesus Christ. He ought to be burned, and I’ve a good
mind to do it.” They smashed the furniture and broke
open boxes and cupboards in their search for money.
Lynam was sent to gaol for fifteen years, while Seary,
Matthews, Crookwell, and Southgate were sentenced to ten
years each for some offences, and to fifteen years for
others, but as the sentences were all made concurrent all
the prisoners were practically sentenced to fifteen years’
imprisonment. At the same sessions Charles Jones, alias
William Herbert, and Frank Stanley, alias Wright, were
sentenced to twelve years for various acts of highway
robbery. Some of these young men were said to have
assisted in some of the robberies effected by the Hall and
Gilbert gang, and were suspected of being on their way to
join that gang. James Hill and James Jones went to
William Duguid’s house at Mils, Twofold Bay, on March
13th, and stuck up all hands. It was early in the morning
when they arrived, and they sent everybody about the place
into the kitchen and then searched the house. Jones
remained on guard while Hill went with the stockman to
fetch up the horses. Mr. Duguid warned Jones that he
expected the police and advised him to go before they came
to avoid bloodshed. Jones laughed, and ostentatiously
loaded the double-barrelled gun which he had just taken
from Duguid’s bedroom. Hill returned with the horses,
and while the bushrangers were selecting the ones they
liked the police arrived. Sub-Inspector John Garder Hussey
challenged the bushrangers and called on them to surrender.
For a minute or two the shooting was very brisk, but it did
not last long. Jones and Hussey fell wounded almost
simultaneously, and Hill ran away. He was followed by
Constable Zollner and captured, while Sergeant Chandler
secured Jones. The wounds were not very serious, but the
bushrangers were sent to gaol for fifteen years. Ah Ling
and ten other Chinese were living together in a hut on the
Abercrombie Goldfield. On May 2nd John Taylor and
Thomas Webb drove the Chinamen into the kitchen and


called them up one by one to be robbed. The first victim
was Ah Wee. When asked for his gold he replied “No
savee.” He afterwards said he had none. Webb got a
rope, tied it round the Chinaman’s neck, and hauled him up
to a sapling beam which ran across the building. After
hanging for several minutes Ah Wee was let down and
asked whether he “ saveed now ? ” He handed out his gold
and explained at the trial that it made him “ welly sick.”
Ah Yong, Ah See, and two or three others were served in the
same way, and the others gave up their gold without further
compulsion. The prisoners were sent to gaol for two years.
The session was a remarkably heavy one, and the majority
of the cases tried were for robbery under arms.
While the police had been very successful in bringing a
number of outsiders to justice, the better known members
of the gang continued to keep the district alive. The Yass
Courier reported that nearly every one in the district had
turned out to hunt Ben Hall, who was reported to have paid
them a visit. The bushranger had been so hard pressed
that he was forced to abandon Willy the Weasel, owned by
Mr. Garry. The horse was completely knocked up, other-
wise the bushranger would not have let him go, as he was a
favourite. The stock-riders of the district had expressed
great contempt for the police, their opinions being summed
up as follows: “They can’t catch him. They don’t know
how to ride down a hill.” Many of the “hills” in the
district would be elsewhere considered almost as precipices.
The Young (Burrangong) Daily Tribune the same week
reported that a day or two ago Ben Hall walked alone into
the stables at Groggan station, Bland Plains, said “ Good
morning, boys,” and then proceeded coolly to tie up the
three men and a boy. Having secured these to his entire
satisfaction, he walked to the house and asked to see Mr.
Chisholm. On that gentleman coming to the door Hall
said, “ Good morning, Mr. Chisholm. I’ve come for
Troubadour.” “You’ve left him so long you might do
without him now,” returned Mr. Chisholm. “ Oh,”
exclaimed Hall, “you’re getting too flash. If you
consort with traps you’ll have to be taught manners. ’ They
walked to the stables, where Hall put saddles and bridles on
Troubadour and Union Jack. The last-named had won


the Champion Plate at the Wagga Wagga races on New
Year’s Day, and had only been brought home under police
escort a day or two before. Hall also selected two other
horses, which he said he “liked the look of,” and put bridles
on them. He then made Mr. Chisholm fill two three-bushel
bags with clothing from the store, and these he packed
on the spare horses. Then he mounted Troubadour, and
leading the others started away. He had scarcely moved,
however, before he pulled up again, and said to Mr.
Chisholm, “ That’s a good looking watch of yours. I want
it. Hand it over.” Mr. Chisholm did so, and the bush-
ranger then rode off. It may be explained that the reason
why no opposition was attempted was because it was
believed that Hall had plenty of support if he had required
it. He never walked unless he was compelled, and it was
thought that his mates with the horses were not far off. It
was also suggested that Hall had a bad mount after he lost
Willy the Weasel and that he did not wish to let Mr.
Chisholm see him riding an inferior horse.
The mail coach from Wagga Wagga having failed to
arrive at Cootamundra at the usual time, on May 12th, the
contractor, Mr. Burke, supposed that it had been stuck up
somewhere along the road and rode out to make enquiries.
At about three miles from Cootamundra he found a number
of letters lying scattered about the road. He gathered them
up and continued his search. At length he found the
mail-man drunk in a public-house near Murrumburrah. The
fellow had robbed the mail himself, no doubt with the
intention of laying the blame on the bushrangers. He was
convicted and sentenced to seven years’ penal servitude.
The mail was stuck up at Mumble Flat, between Orange
and Wellington, on March Ist. A portion of the loading
consisted of carbines and revolvers for the police, “ all of
which,” said the Orange Guardian , “were borne off to be
used against them.”
The Bathurst-Sydney coach was stuck up at Lapstone
Hill by three armed men. The passengers were Michael
Duffy, Constable McKay, in charge of a female lunatic,
and three Chinamen. After having collected the money
from the passengers and searched the letters, the robbers
extinguished the coach lamps, took the horses out, and drove


them up the hill. The driver waited for half an hour, as he
had been ordered to do, and then started to catch his horses.
This he managed to do with some difficulty, and on his
return he drove on to Penrith. From thence the passengers
and the broken mail-bags were taken to Sydney by train.
John Forster was arrested in a house at Strawberry Hills,
Sydney, and charged with having, with others, stuck up and
robbed the mail coach between Penrith and Hartley at
two a.m. Ah Lung, one of the passengers on the coach,
recognised a sash which the prisoner wore round his waist
as his property, and said he carried his money in it. Forster
was sent to gaol for ten years.
About this time great excitement was caused throughout
New South Wales by the report that Frank Gardiner had
been discovered and arrested by Detective McGlone on
March 3rd, at Apis Creek, on the road from Rockhampton
to the Peak Downs diggings, Queensland. Gardiner was
keeping a shanty, or roadside store, with Mrs. Brown, who
passed as his wife. Gardiner was brought to Sydney and
duly committed for trial. In connection with this case Mr.
(afterwards Sir) E. Deas Thompson laid a return on the table of
the Legislative Assembly showing that the amount stolen by
Gardiner previous to his disappearance was about £21,000.
Of this total, ,£13,694 had been stolen in the robbery of
the Lachlan Escort, and ,£5335 had been recovered by the
police under Sir Frederick Pottinger. No murders were
charged against Gardiner, but he was convicted on three
counts for highway robbery. On each of these counts he
was sentenced, on the first to twelve years and on the
other two to ten years each. The first three years in
irons in each case. The sentences were made cumulative,
and aggregated thirty-two years. It will be remembered
that Captain Melville, the bushranger, was sentenced
to a similar term of imprisonment in Victoria about
twelve years before, and there were many people in New
South Wales who thought that Gardiner had been too
harshly dealt with. Such a sentence, they said, deprived a
man of all hope, and rendered him desperate, and they
would not be surprised if Gardiner rebelled against it as
Melville had done. Those who held this view were, how-
ever, in the minority. The majority said bushranging must


be stamped out at any cost, and until this was effected the
sentences could not be too severe.
On the 20th of May Ben Hall, Gilbert, and a new
recruit known as “ the Old Man,” rode up to McGregor’s Inn
at Bong Bong, where a number of men were on the
verandah. The bushrangers ordered these men to “ throw
your arms up,” enforcing the order with revolvers. There
were some twenty visitors on the verandah and in the bar,
and these were ranged along the wall in the dining room,
with Hall on guard. Gilbert and “the Old Man” walked down
the yard to the stables, where several racehorses were in the
stalls under the charge of Constables Scott and Macnamara,
who were escorting them to Burrangong for the races on
Queen’s birthday. Gilbert called to the constables to
“ leave those horses.” The constables drew their revolvers,
and fired by way of reply. The bushrangers fired, and Hall
left the dining-room to take part in the scrimmage. For
some minutes the shooting was very brisk, but no one
appeared to be hurt. The police were on foot and under
cover of the stables, but the bushrangers were mounted and
in the open yard. Suddenly the firing ceased as if by
mutual consent, and Gilbert shouted that they would be
back presently. The bushrangers then rode away. As
Hall went out of the gate his cabbage tree hat fell off, and
a cry was raised that he had been hit. He rode off, how-
ever, without showing any symptoms of injury. Believing
that the bushrangers had gone for reinforcements the two
constables barricaded the stables, and sent a messenger to
the nearest police depot for assistance. About midnight
Sir Frederick Pottinger arrived with four troopers, but the
bushrangers did not return.
On the following afternoon the mail coach was stuck up
at Emu Flat, between Burrangong and Yass. A passenger
named Michael Curran saved his gold watch and chain by
dropping them among the straw in the bottom of the coach,
but a valuable gold ring and in notes were taken
from him. Ben Hall also exchanged an old poncho for a
valuable rug, and an old clay pipe for a very fine meer-
schaum. Some distance away Mr. Barnes met the coach,
and the driver, J. Roberts, who knew him, warned Barnes
that the bushrangers were on the road. Barnes laughed


and went on. He was stopped and robbed, and as he did
not hand out his money very readily when ordered to do so,
he was very roughly treated and was threatened with death.
Several teams were also robbed. The bushrangers were
riding the racers Teddington, Harkaway, and Troubadour.
During this “reign of terror,” the Press, especially of the
country districts, continued to urge the necessity for
suppressing the “bush telegraphs” and other sympathisers of
the bushrangers, and said that while so many who aided
them either by giving them information of the movements
of the police or providing them with hiding places when
they were hard pressed were at large the police had little
chance of making headway against the evil doers. The
Yass Courier , for instance, spoke of “ the wealthy relations
—of the bushrangers—with whom the police are afraid to
interfere, but whose places never have and never will be
stuck up.’ The paper “perforce refrains from publishing
the names of these people on account of the state of the
libel law,” but it charges them with “ comforting and assisting
the bushrangers.” It seems difficult to understand what
the police were expected to do, or to see what action could
be taken against a settler because his place was not raided,
and who had some more or less distant relative “on the
roads.” But this serves to show how closely the Press
enquired into the antecedents and relationships of the
bushrangers.
A man, believed to be Johnny Gilbert, accompanied by
a lad named Ryan, stopped to dinner at the Korowatha Inn.
They talked freely of bushranging, and laughed at the report
that Hall had been hit at McGregor’s, as the newspapers had
reported. They affirmed that “ the traps could not fire
straight enough to hit a haystack.”
On the 22nd of June, the Bathurst Times said : “After an
immunity from bushranging crimes in this district for some
months, the gang has appeared once more and commenced
operations. On the 18th, the mail coach for Orange and
the Lachlan started an hour late from this town in con-
sequence of the heavy mail. There were on board James
Nairne and seven passengers. About eighteen miles out,
near the turn-off road to Guyong, three men jumped out of
the bush and ordered the mail-man to ‘ bail up.’ The coach


was taken off the road, where the passengers were robbed
and the letters torn open. The driver and passengers were
then told that they would be detained until the down mail
came. While they were waiting, a little boy was stopped and
one pound of tea and is. 6d. in money were taken from him.
The boy’s father, a farmer living near, came out to look for
his son, and was run in among the crowd. After some
dispute the tea and the is. 6d. were given back, but the
father and son were compelled to remain until the other
coach came by. The down mail, driven by John Fagan,
arrived about midnight and was stopped. Fagan was asked
what made him so late, and replied that the roads were bad
with the rains. The letters were opened, except those in the
registered bag, which the robbers missed. About two a.m.
the robbers told their prisoners that they might go, and
walked away.” It was said that this was not the Gilbert and
Hall gang, as the robbers had no horses. The police
started in pursuit from Bathurst and Orange as soon as news
of the robbery reached these towns.
Ben Hall and his gang stuck up and robbed Pearce and
Hillier’s store at Canowindra, and held the town for the day
as on a previous occasion. The following afternoon,
June 23rd, they called at Mr. Rothsay’s station, took four
horses from the stables, and set fire to a stack containing
about 14 tons of hay as a “caution to traitors.”
Ben Hall, Johnny Gilbert, John Dunleavy, and James
Mount (hitherto known as “the Old Man”) stuck up the Car-
cour and Cowra coaches. They then rode on to the Half-Way
House Hotel and compelled the landlord to hand over
They held the road for several hours, robbing all who passed,
and bringing them to the hotel, where they “ shouted for all
hands” several times. This time the bushrangers drank port
wine. They took several well-bred horses from the stables.
One of these got loose and galloped along the road. He
was followed by Dunleavy, who failed to head him. The
horse was caught next day and sent to Bathurst for safety.
Two armed men endeavoured to stick up the Chinese
Camp at Gilmandyke Creek, near Rockley. The Chinese
fought bravely, returning the bushrangers’ fire in a spirited
manner with shot guns. A bushranger named Clayton was
wounded and captured, when the other man rode away.


The Chinese were highly commended for their pluck, and
several of the newspapers said that they had set a good
example for white men to follow.
Hall and Mount went to Mr. Jamieson’s station on the
Bland River, and informed the proprietor that they intended
to stop for the night. They called the men up, asked their
names and how much money each one had. Having
obtained this information they announced that they did
not intend to take anything from any one. Possibly this
decision may have been due to the fact that the total
amount acknowledged to be in the possession of those
present was small. Whether this was so or not, however,
matters little. They ordered supper to be served, and made
all present sit down to the table in the dining-room. When
the meal was over and the table cleared, Mr. Jamieson was
asked to bring out some rum from the store. A pint pot,
filled with hot water with plenty of salt in it, was placed on
the table, and Hall announced that if any one present
refused to sing or to contribute in some other way to the
general amusement, he would be compelled to swallow the
contents of this pannikin. Then they made a night of it.
In the morning half the men were lying on the ground in a
drunken sleep, but the bushrangers were quite sober, having
drunk very little. They spent half-an-hour in the stable
cleaning their horses, had breakfast, and rode away,
declaring that they had enjoyed themselves immensely, and
thanking Mr. Jamieson for the entertainment he had
afforded them.
They called at the next station and took the racehorse
“ Plover ” out of the stable. Mount ordered the stock-man
to fetch the horses out of the paddock, as he wanted to
select one or two of the best stock-horses. While they were
talking, the stock-man moved round from Mount’s right
hand side to the left. The bushranger immediately shifted
his revolver from the right hand to the left, remarking
quietly: “I can shoot just as straight left-handed as
right.” Hall said he had enjoyed many a good laugh
at the newspaper yarns about himself. He added that
Brown’s men were “jolly good fellows.” In the evening
they stuck up the Gundagai mail near Jugiong. When
opening the letters Hall found a bulky roll of bank notes.


“Ah! ” he said, “ This is what I like.” He took a number
of newspapers away with him, “just to see what they say
about me. From thence they rode straight to the Chinese
camp at \\ ombat, “to give the Chinkies a lesson.” The
Chinese were very slow in producing their gold, and the
bushrangers fired in among them, killing one and wounding
another. Ihe next day, Sunday, they stuck up a number of
Chinamen on the road and took their gold, but did not
ill-treat them. In the afternoon they went to Mr. McCarthy’s
store in Jugiong and compelled him to open the door
1 hey selected a quantity of clothing and drapery, which
they placed on a spare pack horse they had with them. In
the evening they stuck up the Gundagai mail within a mile
ot the p ace where they had stuck it up a few days before.
Hall took out a roll of half notes from one packet. “ This
is a green trick, this is,” he said, holding them up. “ It’s
little trouble to us to match half notes.” This series of
outrages, following so closely one on the other, naturally
stirred the police up to increased activity, and the bush-
rangers were so closely followed that a brush took place
between them and the police in the last week of October.
In this fight, which lasted only a very short time, Dunleavy
was severely wounded and surrendered, while Mount was
captured.
James Mount was an escaped convict, out on a ticket-of-
He was forty-five years of age, but had been called
Ihe Old Man before his name was known, to distinguish
him from the young men and boys who formed the body of
this gang. Mount was tried and convicted of highway
robbery in Bathurst, and was sentenced to ten years’
imprisonment.
In commenting upon the capture of Mount and
Dunleavy the Goulburn Herald announced that their loss to
the ga,ng had been to some extent compensated for by the
accession of Johnny Dunn, who was born in Murrum-
burrah. Earlier in the year 1864 Dunn had won the
principal prize at the Yass race meeting with the Binalong
horse, Ringleader. He was an excellent rider, and would
no doubt give the police some trouble.
“ Messrs. Hall, Gilbert, and Dunn seem to have
obtained a lease of the Main Southern road,” said the Yass
R


Courier of November 19th. They robbed the up and down
mails from Gundagai two consecutive weeks. On the last
of these four robberies the coach was bailed up at Deep
Creek, near Jugiong, at about four p.m. Messrs. Bradley
and Sheahan, passengers, had alighted to walk up the steep
hill, and were some hundred yards or so ahead of the coach,
when three men suddenly appeared from behind the scrub
and ordered them to “ bail up.” “ All right,” replied Mr.
Sheahan, holding his hands above his head. Hall said,
“That’ll do. We’ve got a little township of our own up
there. Come on.” He pointed up the hill as he spoke.
They followed him until they came to a small, clear spot,
surrounded with high trees and scrub. Here they saw
twelve bullock drays and a number of men. Several horses
were hitched to the trees round the clearing, and the men
who owned them, as well as the bullock-drivers and some
footmen, were seated on the ground. When asked for his
money Sheahan replied, “ Got none. Search if you like.
“ Oh, you’re not a bad sort,” said Hall, “ wee’ll take your
word’for it.” Bradley took out a cheque for £l, saying,
“ That’s all I’ve got. I brought it to pay my way on the
trip.” Hall put his hand into Bradley’s pocket, and finding
nothing there told him to keep the cheque. A cask of port
wine, which was found on one of the bullock drays, was
tapped, and the wine was handed round to all present in a
quart pot in which tea had been made, as was evident by its
colour. When the letters had been searched, the bush-
rangers told the company that they might go.
Expecting that the return mail would be robbed again
next day Mr. Ross, police magistrate, and Constable Roche
in private clothes went as passengers, while Inspector O Neil
and Sergeant Edmund Parry rode beside the coach on
horseback. At Black Springs, near Jugiong, the bushrangers
appeared as had been anticipated, and on emerging from
the bush one of them shouted out, “Hullo, heres the
bobbies.” Hall said, “ There’s only two. Rush the ——.
The three bushrangers then rode forward shouting Come
onj y ou , fight like men.” Sergeant Parry rode forward
and encountered Gilbert, and a desperate duel on horsback
with revolvers took place until Parry fell. In the meantime
Inspector O’Neil had kept under cover of the coach and


managed to keep the other two bushrangers at bay until
Parry fell, when he surrendered. Mr. Ross fired several
shots, but what became of Constable Roche is not
known. He was not captured or wounded. He simply
disappeared in the scrub. When all was quiet Gilbert
dismounted, turned over Parry’s body, and remarked
y T ,“ He S ot it: . in the cobbera. It’s all over with him.
*' ell, I m sorry for it. He’s the bravest trap I’ve met yet ”
The coach was taken off the road to where several bullock
teams, two horse carts with their Chinese owners, a buggy
with Mr. and Mrs. Hayes, and several footmen and horse-
men—among whom was Constable McLaughlin, who had
fired away his ammunition before he surrendered—were
collected together. The robbers searched the letters as
usual, took all the police horses and arms, collected the
money, watches, and other valuables from the crowd
and rode away saying “We’ll rob the mail to-morrow
if all the traps in the colony are here.” Whether
this threat was mere braggadocio, or whether the
bushrangers intended to draw the police here so that they
might operate in safety elsewhere, has been frequently
argued without any definite result. The police were on the
road, and the bushrangers did not put in an appearance.
1 hat is what is known. Ihe day following, however, the
gang stuck up the Binalong mail, and after searching the
letters, burned letters and papers to “put a stop to the
English correspondence.”
A day or two later, “ Messrs. Hall & Co.” took pos-
session of the road between the Fourteen Mile and the
Fifeen Mile rushes at Burrangong and bailed up about
thirty men, women, and boys. A bridle took the fancy of
one of the gang, and he insisted on taking it and giving
his own in return. With this exception, and the taking
of a quantity of bread and butter found on the drays
bailed up, nothing was stolen. The bushrangers explained
that they expected some gold buyers along the road, and
when they came the camp would be broken up. In the
meantime they wanted every one to enjoy the picnic. The
women were set to work to cut up and serve out the bread
and butter, h ires were lighted and tea made. Then races
and other sports were organised for the boys. One of the


bailed-up men was a newsvendor, and the bushrangers
“borrowed” his papers and took it in turn to lie down and
“read the news.” At last one of the boys contrived to
sneak away unseen, and as soon as his escape was discovered
the camp was broken up and the robbers rode away.
On December 19th, the Hon. William Macleay, M.L.C.,
was driving in a buggy from Towrang to Shelly's Flat, when
he noticed a large crowd a little way ahead. He sent his
coachman on with the buggy and got down to make inquiries.
As he drew near he saw that a number of people were
standing round two bullock drays, while one 01 two men
were breaking open the boxes on the drays. Mr. Macleay
asked a man what was the matter, and the man motioned to
him to keep quiet. Mr. Macleay conjectured that it was
the bushrangers robbing the drays, and withdrew as quietly
as he had joined the crowd. He walked on to Plums Inn,
where he found a wedding party enjoying themselves. He
told the landlord what he had seen and his suspicions, and
advised those present to take precautions to avoid being
robbed. Some time later the bushrangers came up, and
seeing a number of men on the verandah with guns and
revolvers in their hands, fired. Mr. Macleay immediately
returned the fire. The bushrangers drew together some
distance away, and held a consultation. They apparently
decided that the risk was too great, as they went off along
the road. For beating off the bushrangers, and proving that
a show of resistance might prevent robberies, Mr. Macleay
was awarded a gold medal by the New South Wales Govern-
ment. As a per contra, the fact that the bushrangers robbed
the drays openly in the main road in this instance, instead
of taking them into the bush, was cited as evidence that they
were growing bolder and more careless ot the police.
Hall, Gilbert, and Dunn rode up to a store at Bmda,
owned by an ex-policeman named Morris, on December 21st,
and took about ;£ioo from his cashbox. They informed
Morris that a ball was being held at the Flag Hotel, and
insisted on himself and Mrs. Morris dressing themselves, and
accompanying the bushrangers to the ball. Morris at first
objected, but finally gave way. M hen they reached the Mag
Hotel the bushrangers mixed freely with the crowd, dancing
and otherwise enjoying themselves. Presently some “ bush


telegraph ” informed the bushrangers that Morris had been
sounding several of the men present as to the probability of
effecting a capture. Gilbert and Dunn drew their revolvers
and started to look for Morris, who, having been informed
of what had transpired, jumped through an open window,
and ran towards where the bushrangers’ horses were tied to
trees. His intention was to take one and ride for the
police. _ The bushrangers, however, caught sight of him,
and divining his intention ran and fired at Morris. This
compelled him to turn aside and take refuge behind a tree.
The bushrangers made no attempt to follow him. They
removed their horses to a safer place, then walked to the
store, piled a quantity of brushwood on the verandah, and
set fire to it. 1 hen they mounted their horses, and sat and
watched the blaze until the house was w r ell alight, when
they rode off. 1 here were more than a hundred persons at
the ball, but no attempt was made to prevent the bush-
i angers from burning down the store. In connection wdth
this “act ol vengeance” Christina McKinnon and Ellen and
Margaret Monks were arrested and charged with having
aided and abetted in burning down Morris’s store. The
girls had been dancing with the bushrangers, and had
accompanied them when they went to the store. The
police said that they were well known as “ bush telegraphs,”
and cited instances in which it was supposed that they
had given notice to the bushrangers of the approach of the
police. Margaret Monks was discharged, but the other two
were sent to gaol, the evidence showing that they had
assisted the bushrangers in piling wood on the verandah of
the store.
Mr. D. Davis, auctioneer, of Yass, had been conducting
a sale at Murrumburrah, and was returning home on
December 30th when he was stuck up. He "had on him
A* 101 ) is. 5d., the proceeds of the sale, principally in
cheques. When these were handed out Ben Hall was in a
furious rage, and threatened to burn them. Gilbert pro-
posed that he should gallop on and “ change them before
they're stopped.” There was £1 ss. 6d. in cash, and of this
they kept returning the silver. They then rode rapidly
away. Nothing more was heard of the cheques, the only
thing known ot them being that they were never cashed.


CHAPTER XX.
Meeting the Gold Escort; Murder of Constable Nelson; A Brush with
the Police ; Attempt to Stick Up the Araluen Gold Escort ; Death
of Constable Kelly and Pluck of Constable Burns; Sir Frederick
Pottinger Resigns ; Death of Ben Hall; Sketch of his Life ; Death
of Johnny Gilbert; Record of John Dunn and the Gang ; Capture
and Trial of Johnny Dunn; His Execution; Fate of the Chief
Members of the Gardiner Gang.
Like many other young men I spent a few years on the
diggings in hopes of making “my pile,” and early in 1865
I, in company with two mates, left the King’s Plains, where
we had just finished working out a hole, and started for
Apple Tree Flat, near Mudgee, where a rush had recently
taken place. We were well mounted, and had a pack-horse
which “ belonged to the firm.” One of my mates was a
keen sportsman, and his horse had won several prizes at
those country meetings known as “ Publican’s Races,” from
the fact that they were organised by a publican and held
near his house for obvious business reasons. We were
travelling steadily along the road leading from Blaney to
Bathurst, near Back Creek, when we saw the Government
Gold Escort in the distance. The police authorities of New
South Wales had learned a lesson from the Great Escort
Robbery of 1862, and no longer mounted all the police on
the coach or drag in which the gold was conveyed to Sydney.
At the place we had arrived at the road, a chain and a half
wide (99 feet), had been cleared through a stretch of heavy
forest timber. It ran as straight as possible as far as the eye
could reach, and was bordered on either side by a dense
growth of timber and scrub rising to a height of from 200 to
300 feet like a wall of greenery. In the centre of the roadway
was a metalled or gravelled road about fifteen feet wide.


The remainder on either side was graded to near the timber
line, where a small cutting to carry off surface water was made.
We rode on the soft grassy side slopes and left the metalled
or gravelled road for vehicles. It was in the centre of this
gorge in the forest that we first sighted the escort. First
rode a single trooper; at fifty yards distance came two
more; then, at about the same distance, came the escort
cart, drawn by four horses, the driver and another policeman
sitting on the front seat, while a third trooper sat behind.
A mounted trooper also rode one on each side of the cart.
Fifty yards further back were two more troopers, while the
rear was brought up by another single trooper. The
troopers had their carbines ready in their hands, the butts
resting on their thighs. When the leading trooper came
within hail of us, he cried “ Halt,” and raised his rifle. We
halted. The two troopers behind him came forward at a
rapid pace until they were near enough to support him,
if necessary. The cart stopped, and the other troopers
gathered round it ready to defend it. The sergeant in
charge inquired what our names were, where we were going,
and what was our business. We told him. He said our
horses were superior to those usually ridden by diggers. We
replied that we didn’t care about riding old screws. He
asked whether the two guns we carried were loaded.
We informed him that one was loaded with shot in case
we came across a duck or a pigeon. He told us to sit up
straight and follow him. Then he motioned to the two
troopers just behind him. He led the way while the troopers
followed behind us. We all kept to the side of the road;
the cart having been drawn up on the other side. The
other troopers sat on their horses, carbine in hand, as we
passed. It was a most impressive show of force out there
in the bush. The sergeant and two troopers conducted us
for about a hundred yards past the cart and then pulled up.
The sergeant said it was difficult to tell what men were
by their appearance. He advised us to be very careful,
and asked if we had any gold or money with us. We
told him that we had been at Lambing Flat, and knew
what the state of the country was. We did not feel
disposed to carry gold or very much money with us
while there were banks in every town. He said we were


right and wished us good day after telling us to ride straight
on and not attempt to turn back. We laughed and said we
were travelling in the opposite direction and had no desire
to turn back. In talking the matter over in our camp that
night we decided that great as the improvement in the
escort service had been it would not be impossible to rob
the escort again. If, for instance, we had been part of a
gang of bushrangers, sent to draw the attention of the police
to us, while another portion of the gang had been hidden in
the scrub, opposite where the cart stood, the troopers might
have been shot down almost without a chance of defending
themselves. However, the escort protection seems to have
been sufficient, as it was not robbed again, although one or
two attempts were made in other districts.
During the first week or two of 1865 very little was
heard of Messrs. Hall & Co,, but on January 26th the three
principal members of the firm (Hall, Gilbert, and Dunn),
stuck up Mr. Kimberley’s store in Main Street, Collector.
Dunn was stationed on guard on the verandah while Hall
and Gilbert went inside to select such articles as they
required or fancied. Constable Nelson, the only policeman
stationed in the little town, was at the lock-up, and on being
informed of what was going on he loaded his carbine and
walked down the street towards the store. Dunn saw him
coming and withdrew out of sight behind the fence at the
corner of the verandah, and when the constable was only a
few yards distant the robber fired at him. The constable
fell, and Dunn, coming out of his hiding-place, walked to
where he was lying, put his revolver close to the constable’s
head, and fired again. Hearing the shots, Hall and Gilbert
came out, and on seeing what had been done, held a
whispered consultation, and then mounted their horses and
rode away. They went straight to Alfred Cramp’s farm at
Binda, and ordered dinner. While they were still at table
a party of police galloped up, dismounted, and rushed into
the front door of the house as the bushrangers went out
of the back door. A few shots were fired, but the bush-
rangers mounted and escaped, owing to the superiority of
their horses. The news of Constable Nelson’s death had
been conveyed to the police at once, and they had followed
close on the tracks of the bushrangers.


In February a number of persons were stuck up near
Illalong, on the road between Yass and Burrangong. The
robbers were said to have no connection with the firm of
Hall & Co., as they robbed their victims of their coats
and vests. The Hall gang never did this. If they saw a
man with a coat or vest, or any other article of clothing to
which they took a fancy, they would exchange with him,
but they only stole clothes from the stores. However,
while the police were out in search of these plebeian bush-
rangers, they happened to come across Hall and Gilbert at
Lodge’s Inn, Breadalbane Plains, and captured their horses.
It was supposed that the two robbers had been sleeping in
the barn. They rushed out when the police came, and went
across a cleared paddock, both parties firing their revolvers.
Constable W iles was wounded, and Ben Hall was supposed
to have been wounded, as he fell. He was up again in a
moment, however, and succeeded in reaching the timber,
the ground being too rough and heavily-timbered for the
police horses to make their way through it.
A daring attempt was made by Hall and three others to
stick up the Araluen escort on March 16th. The bush-
rangers fired from behind trees as the escort cart was
going up Major’s Creek Mount, at the same place
where a similar attempt had been made about two
and a half years previously. Constable Kelly fell
wounded, and died a few days later. Constable Burns,
who was driving, jumped off the cart, put a stone
behind the wheel, and then fired, shouting “Come on.”
Mr. Blatchford, J.P., who had been riding beside the driver,
remained on his seat until a voice from behind the trees
cried out, “ Shoot the on the cart.” He then jumped
down quickly, but was wounded in the leg. He fell, but
got up again immediately and ran down the hill to
Noonan’s Hotel for assistance. Constable Stapleton and
his companion forced their horses up the steep cutting
which bordered the road, and disappeared among the trees.
Burns, thus left alone with the cart, sheltered himself behind
it as well as he could, and kept blazing away coolly from his
cover. Suddenly, Constable Stapleton and his companion
attacked the robbers in the rear. Gilbert turned sharply,
and said, “You’re a good shot, take that,” and shot


the constable’s horse. The two policemen, however, kept
up the firing, and the bushrangers mounted their horses
and rode away. Mr. Blatchford presented Constable Burns
with a cheque for as a reward for the pluck he had
shown in defending his charge.
It was at about this time that Sir Frederick Pottinger,
who was in command of the police in this district, was
charged with having neglected his duty. Sir Frederick had
ridden in a gentleman’s race on the Wowingragong course.
It was rumoured that the bushrangers, for whom he was
supposed to be looking, had been on the course too, and
had not been recognised. Sir Frederick was called to
Sydney to attend an inquiry, and resigned his position in
the force. About a month later he died from the effects of
a wound from a pistol, accidently fired by himself.
The gang yarded a mob of horses at a station near
Murrumburrah and picked out several of the finest horses,
which they took away, leaving their own knocked-up horses
in their place. They rode to Wombat, where they stuck up
a mob of Chinamen, one of whom was shot to make the
others “ shell out ” their gold more quickly. Then the
bushrangers travelled to Forbes, and on the following day
robbed Mr. Jones’s store of in cash and a quantity of
clothing and drapery. Information was given to the police
in the town as soon as the robbers left the store, and a party
of police with two black trackers followed them. On the
following evening, May 5 th, they came on two hobbled
horses feeding near the Billabong Creek. These were
recognised as horses which had been ridden by the bush-
rangers, and the police watched them carefully without
allowing themselves to be seen. This was not difficult, as
there were thick patches of scrub about the flat. Half-an-
hour later a man came out of one of these patches of scrub,
unhobbled the horses, and led them away for about two
hundred yards to where there was better grass. It was at
that time too dark to distinguish him. He rehobbled the
horses and retired into the scrub once more. The police
drew up closer to this patch with great caution and watched
till morning. At daybreak the man appeared again and
looked round to ascertain whether the horses were in sight,
and Inspector Davidson immediately recognised him as Ben


Hall and called on him to stand. Hall turned to go back
into the patch of scrub, and the inspector fired at him.
Sergeant Condell and the four policemen also fired, and
Hall stopped and leaned on a sapling for support. Then
Constable Hopkiss took steady aim and fired again, and
Hall let his revolver fall from his hand. The police went
forward and Hall said “I’m hit. Shoot me dead.” He
relaxed his hold on the sapling, staggered forward and fell.
Ihe police rushed up, but he died before any attempt
could be made to staunch the blood. On the body
being examined one rifle and six revolver bullet wounds
were found, any one of which should have proved
fatal. The bushrangers’ horses were soon caught, the body
was strapped on one of them, and the party returned to
Forbes. The police were much surprised to find Hall alone,
but conjectured that Gilbert and Dunn had gone down the
Lachlan River to some of the great stations to procure
horses, all the racehorses about Burrangong having been
pretty well exhausted. The two captured with Hall were in
very poor condition, and had evidently been ridden hard.
It was supposed that they had knocked up, and that Hall
had stayed behind while his companions sought fresh
mounts. He thought he was quite safe in the scrub, so far
away from his usual haunts.
Benjamin Hall was about twenty-eight years of age.
His father had come to the Wedden Mountains district in
about 1840, when little Ben was about three years old. The
elder Hall had worked for Mr. Ranken for some years, and
had always borne a good character. When Ben was old
enough he had engaged as stockman with Mr. Hamilton, of
Tomanbil. He saved money, and took up a small station
for himself at the Pinnacle, about fifteen miles from Forbes.
He married a daughter of another settler. He had no
sympathy with the bushrangers when the outbreak under
Gardiner occurred, and the police frequently stopped for a
night at his house when looking for the bushrangers near his
station. His wife was of a flighty disposition, and was
seduced, it was said, by a police official, and Hall joined the
gang “to meet the man who ruined my happiness.” Such
was the story currently believed in the neighbourhood, and
Ben was the only one of the bushrangers for whom the


general public, apart from those who were related to or
interested in them, felt any sympathy. Before “he took to
the bush,” he w r as known as a steady, industrious, kind-
hearted young man, and numbers could scarcely believe that
it was the same Ben Hall, the noted bushranger, of whom
everybody was talking.
The death of Ben Hall no doubt had a depressing effect
on the bushrangers generally, but it by no means put an
end to their depredations. On the nth May, a horse was
stolen from Murrumburrah, and on the following day the
horses at Mr. Furlonge’s station were rounded up and a race-
horse taken away, the Murrumburrah horse being left
instead of it. Information was immediately sent to the
police, and a party, with the aid of a black tracker, followed
the tracks towards Binalong. The place being near the
house w r here Johnny Dunn’s parents lived, the police camped
near and watched the little township all night, but saw
nothing to excite their suspicions. In the morning a lad
named Thomas Kelly, brother of one or two convicted
bushrangers, w r as asked whether any one w r as staying at
his grandfather’s house, and replied, “No.” Constables
Hales and King, however, walked up to old Kelly’s place,
and pushed the door open. Gilbert and Dunn were in the
front room, and immediately fired at the police, who
retreated. A few minutes passed, during which the police
were looking to their revolvers, and then the two bush-
rangers were seen to emerge by the back door and walk
steadily down the paddock. The police followed, and some
shots were exchanged. Near the fence the bushrangers
made a stand, and there was a pause for a second or so.
Then Constables Hales and Bright fired together, and
Gilbert fell. Dunn jumped over the fence and dashed
in among the trees. Some of the police followed, but he
soon disappeared. On examination it was found that a
bullet had entered Gilbert’s breast and passed out below
the left shoulder-blade, having travelled through the left
ventricle of the heart. He was then about twenty-five
years of age. Old Kelly was arrested and charged with
having harboured bushrangers, and was sent to gaol.
John Dunn, the last of this notorious trio, did not long
survive his two mates. His record as given in the Yass


Courier is very instructive. He joined Hall and Gilbert a
few days after the capture of Mount and the wounding of
Dunleavy, and on the 24th of October robbed Mr. Chisholm
on the highway near Goulburn. On the 28th he stuck up
Mr. Macansh’s station. On the 28th robbed the Albury
mail near Jugiong. On November the Bth robbed Mr.
Rossi’s station, near Goulburn. On the 9th robbed the
Southern mail six miles from Goulburn. On the nth
robbed the Yass mail on Breadalbane Plains. On the 15th
robbed the Gundagai mail near Jugiong, and had a
desperate fight with the police, Sergeant Parry being shot
by Gilbert. On the 19th robbed Mr. Clarke’s station at
Bolero. On December 19th stuck up the Goulburn mail
near Towrang. On the 27th stuck up Mr. Morris’s store at
Binda, forced Mr. and Mrs. Morris to go to a ball, and
finally burned his store and dwelling-house. On the 30th
stuck up Mr. Davidson and others on the Murrumburrah
Plains. On January 19th, 1865, stuck up Mr. James
Christie’s store. On the 25th stuck up Mr. Ross and others
on the Gap Road. On the 27th stuck up a number of
carriers and the hotel at Collector, and shot Constable
Nelson. On February 6th stuck up the Goulburn mail
twelve miles from Goulburn. On the 18th stole racehorses
from Messrs. McAlister’s and Bowne’s. On the 23rd had a
desperate fight with the police on Bradalbane Plains, when
several were wounded and the robbers lost their horses.
On March 13th stuck up the Gundaroo mail near Geary’s
Gap. On the 14th attempted to rob the Araluen escort at
Major’s Creek, when one policeman was mortally wounded,
two others put to flight, while the fourth beat off the
bushrangers and saved the gold. On the 22nd seen at
Gardiner’s old haunt near the Pinnacle. On the 24th
went to Mr. Atkin’s place, near the Billabong Creek,
had a good dinner and enjoyed themselves, besides feeding
the horses they had stolen from Mr. Morton the day before.
Left on the 25th, taking clothes for winter wear and about
in cash from Mr. Jones’s store, Forbes. On April Ist
stuck up Mr. Sutton’s station at Boramble, On the 10th
robbed Mr. Watt’s Inn at Newra. On the nth robbed Mr,
Gallimore’s store and the White Horse Inn at Black Rock.
On the 18th bailed up the Newbiggen Inn, organised a


soiree dansante, and compelled all hands and the cook
to take part in it. Afterwards robbed Mr. Lee’s station at
Larras Lake. On the 25th robbed Mr. Cropper’s station on
the Lachlan. On May Bth robbed two travellers on the
Cowra Road, eighteen miles from Marengo. On the nth
robbed Mr. Furlonge’s station. On the 14th four policemen
attacked the bushrangers near Binalong, when Gilbert was
shot and Dunn wounded. On the 15 th Dunn alone stuck
up Julian’s station, and took a racehorse, a saddle and
bridle, and some food. He was not heard of again until
December 18th, when he was recognised by the police near
Mr. McPhail’s station, Walgett, and pursued. He escaped,
but two days later a man in whom he had confided gave
information to the police as to his whereabouts, and a
desperate struggle took place, Dunn being wounded in
three places and Constable McHale also severely wounded;
Dunn, however, was captured.
This record of the achievements of the gang during the
time that Dunn was a member—namely, from October
24th, 1864, to May 15th, 1865, or rather less than seven
months—although not quite complete, serves to give a very
vivid idea of the terrible scourge which the bushrangers
were to the country. The gang was not more active during
the time covered by this record than it had been before, or
since it was first organised by Frank Gardiner in 1861,
while some of the most extensive robberies committed by
the gang belong to the earlier period. However, with the
capture of Johnny Dunn this gang ceased to exist, and we
have only to finish the story of his life before turning back
to take notice of the proceedings of other gangs of bush-
rangers in other parts of the colony.
Constable McHale and John Dunn were conveyed as
carefully as possible, and by slow stages, from Walgett to the
lock-up at Dubbo, to be nursed back to health. After some
weeks, Dunn appeared to be growing strong, and as his
character was well known, it was deemed expedient to put
him in irons. He resented this treatment, very naturally
perhaps, and refused to eat. He groaned so continuously
that he prevented McHale, who was in bed in the same
room in the watch-house, from sleeping. The police were
taken in by this shamming, and thought that Dunn was


dying. They therefore took off his irons. The watch-
house was an ordinary four-roomed weatherboard cottage
with a verandah. It had been built as a residence for the
local policeman. Behind, was a stronger building divided
into two or three cells for the safe-keeping of the few evil-
doers likely to be arrested in this settlement on the borders
of civilisation. The sick men were in bed in the cottage,
the window of which was only a couple of feet above the
level of the plain on which the town of Dubbo stands.
Dunn was not altogether shamming. He was very weak,
but he was strong enough when his irons were removed to
watch for an opportunity to escape. He placed his pillow
length-ways in the bed, covered it with the sheet, which was
the only covering required in that district at that time of the
year, and placed a red silk handkerchief where his head was
supposed to rest, as if to keep the flies or mosquitoes off his
face. This was no doubt done to induce McHale, and
any one else who came into the room, to believe that he
was still sleeping. However, when daylight came, McHale
saw that the thing in the other bed was not Dunn and
pounded on the floor with a boot, being too weak to shout.
At the time the police on duty in the next room were
laughing and joking about something, and it was some
minutes before McHale could make them hear. At length
one of them came in, and on being told that Dunn was
gone, gave the alarm. The tracks in the dust outside showed
that the robber had simply stepped out of the window,
which was kept open on account of the heat, and had made
for the bush. It was Sunday morning, January nth, 1866,
and very few people were about in the little town. The
tracks were lost among the number of tracks in the road-
way and there was no one to give the police any informa-
tion as to the direction in which the bushranger had
gone. Search parties were organised and sent out in all
directions.
About two miles away a brickmaker was watching his
kiln and gathering brushwood for his fire, although it was
Sunday morning, when a man crawled out from behind a
log and begged for a “ drink of water, for God’s sake.” It
was Dunn. He told the brickmaker who he was and begged
him to lend him a horse to get away. “ Only save me from


hanging and I’ll make it up to you,” he cried, but the brick-
maker refused. He went and caught his horse and rode
into Dubbo to inform the police, who returned with him and
recaptured the runaway, Dunn was forwarded to Bathurst
without delay and was lodged in the gaol, while Smith, the
brickmaker, was rewarded for the assistance he had rendered
in effecting the recapture of the noted bushranger.
By the latter end of February Dunn was sufficiently
recovered from the effects of his wound to be placed on
trial. He was charged with the murder of Constable Nelson.
The evidence shows that a number of persons had
been stuck up on the road between Taradale and Collector.
They were marched to Kimberley’s Hotel and taken inside
by Hall and Gilbert, while Dunn remained outside in charge
of the horses, Dunn called a boy, who was standing in the
street and who chanced to be the son of Constable Nelson,
and told him to hold the horses and not let them go unless
he wanted his brains blown out. The party in the hotel
were singing and dancing, and the constable hearing the
noise walked from the watch-house to where his son was
and asked him what was going on. The boy told him the
bushrangers were there and the constable returned to his
house for his gun. When he came back he did not see
Dunn, who was hiding behind the fence, and walked towards
the front door of the hotel, when he was shot as already
related. Gilbert came to the door immediately and Dunn
cried out “ I’ve shot the trap.” Gilbert walked to
where the body was lying, turned it over, and took off the
belt, saying “ This is just what I wanted. I’ve lost mine.”
At that moment Hall came up and the three bushrangers
took their horses and went off. Dunn was found guilty and
sentenced to death. He was hung on March 19th, 1866.
He was of slight build and only twenty-two years old when
he died.
Of the chief members of this gang Gardiner was
sentenced to thirty-two years’ penal servitude ; Vane sur-
rendered owing to the influence of Father McCarthy and
was sent to gaol for fifteen years ; Bow and Fordyce were
sentenced to death, but their sentences were commuted to
fifteen years’ imprisonment; Manns, Peisley, and Dunn were
hanged; Lowry, Ben Hall, and Gilbert were shot by the


police, and Burke and O’Meally by civilians; Mount or
“ the Old Man ” was sent to gaol for ten years.
There were others who either claimed or were supposed
to be members of this gang, but it is difficult to say with
certainty how far these claims were justified. Some of these
have already been referred to, and others will be mentioned
further on. Probably some who intended to join the gang
were captured before they had an opportunity to do so.
Others merely said they had been out with Ben Hall or
Johnny Gilbert on account of the kudos they gained
among their fellows. However this may be, the majority of
the members of this gang were quite young men, many of
them little more than boys. Several were under twenty
years of age, and all with the exception of Mount, sometime
known as “ the Old Man,” under thirty. Their lives may
have been exciting, but they were short, and none of them,
with the exception of Gardiner perhaps, made any money by
their robberies. They all died poor.


CHAPTER XXL
Bloodthirsty Morgan; Morgan’s Opinion of the Police; Murder of
Sergeant McGinnerty; Murder at the Round Hill Station ; A
Pseudo Morgan; Morgan Threatens to Brand all Hands; He
Shoots Sergeant Smyth; Challenged to Visit Victoria; He
Accepts the Challenge; His Death at Peechelba.
Daniel Morgan began his career as a bushranger shortly
after the Great Escort Robbery, by sticking up travellers
on the roads about Wagga Wagga. His headquarters
generally were said to be in the huge patch of scrub, which
stretched away southward, from the Murrumbidgee River
across the low ranges between Wagga Wagga and Narran-
dera. He was credited with being the most bloodthirsty
of the New South Wales bushrangers after Willmore. We
have seen that some of the members of the chief gang of
this era held human life very cheaply, but it was the general
opinion that, except in the case of a few Chinamen, these
bushrangers murdered only when on the warpath. In many
cases they met the police boldly, and fought with some
degree of fairness; while Morgan, on more than one
occasion, fired on unarmed, and in some cases sleeping men.
For some months he pursued his career without much
interference from the police, and it was said that some of
the members of the Hall and Gilbert gang had made a raid
to the Southern district. When it became apparent that
he had no connection with that gang and continued his
depredations alone, a party of police was detailed to hunt
him down about the middle of 1863. In August of that
year, this party of police tracked him for several days, and
came on his camp on the 22nd. A desperate fight took
place, in which Morgan’s mate was severely wounded


and crawled into the bush to die. This man was known
as “German Bill.” On the other side, Mr. Bayliss, J.P.,
a volunteer who accompanied the police, was severely
wounded. He recovered, however, and was awarded
a gold medal by the New South Wales Government
for bravery in opposing bushrangers. Morgan made his
escape in the scrub. Later on the same day a shepherd was
shot dead on Brookong station, and it was supposed that
the murderer was in league with Morgan. About Christmas
Morgan iv ith three companions watched the road, near
Narrandera, with the intention of sticking-up several wealthy
squatters who were in the habit of travelling to Melbourne
at about that time of the year. Fortunately for themselves,
they that year took a cross track, and thus escaped the
meeting. While waiting Morgan took about 2lb. of cheese
from a bullock driver named John Cole. There were
several cheeses in the dray, and when Morgan said he
should “ like a bit ” Cole offered him one, and told him
to “take the lot.” Morgan replied that “the traps
would risk their necks climbing over the area railings for a
leg of mutton. I don t know what they’d do for a whole
cheese, but this lump s enough for me.” He afterwards
remarked that the police generally were “a sour milk lot.”
During the next few months robberies occurred in
various parts of the extensive tract of country between
Wagga Wagga and Deniliquin, and were, of course, all
attributed to the Morgan gang. On April 16th, 1864, Mr.
George Elliott, of Burrangong, with a stockman named
Donnelly reached Deniliquin, with a mob of horses for sale.
In consequence of some rumours which spread through the
town, Mr, Elliott was closely questioned by the sergeant of
police, and after some hesitation admitted that he had been
stuck up by Morgan and robbed of 17s. and a bay
horse ith saddle and bridle, on the road between
Narrandera and Jerilderie, He said that when he got rid
of his horses he would have to return home by the same
route, and thought it prudent to hold his tongue, “ the least
said the soonest mended,” as there was no saying whom he
might meet on the road.
In June, Sergeant McGinnerty and Constable Churchley
were riding along the road to Tumberumba, when they


overtook a horseman near Copabella. McGinnerty civilly
said “ Good-day ” as they passed, in the usual Australian
fashion. The man looked at him and replied, “ Oh, you’re
one of the wretches looking for bushrangers, are you ? ”
and hastily drew a revolver and shot McGinnerty through
the breast. The sergeant’s horse bolted, and the bush-
ranger galloped after him into the bush. Constable
Churchley rode back to Copabella for assistance, and on his
return with a party and fresh horses found McGinnerty’s hat
lying in the road, and opposite to it, at some distance away,
the body. It was supposed that the bushranger had placed
the hat on the road to indicate where the body was, and to
facilitate its discovery. The robber must have ridden
straight from the scene of this cold-blooded murder to the
Round Hill station, where he mustered all the men and
drove them into the carpenter’s shop. He then went to the
house, called out the proprietor, Mr, Watson, and led him
to the door of the carpenter’s shop. He enquired whether
the men had sufficient rations. “If they haven’t,” said
Mr, Watson, “they’ve only got to say so and they’ll get
more.” “ Well, I’m Dan Morgan, I just wanted to know,
and you’d better give them a nobbier,” replied the bush-
ranger. Mr. Watson said he’d no objection to the men
having a nobbier, and sent to the house. The messenger
returned with four bottles of spirits, and each man was
given a nobbier in a pannikin. The men laughed and took it
as a good joke. One of them asked the bushranger
whether he had “stolen his stirrup irons from Mr. Johnstone?”
Morgan with a curse immediately drew his pistol, and fired
into the room. The men ran out. Morgan followed them,
shouting, “ You wretches, do you want to give me
away?” He fired several times, until John McLean fell
wounded. By this time the men had sheltered themselves
behind trees. Seeing no one to shoot at Morgan dis-
mounted, lifted McLean carefully on to his horse, and led
the animal to the house. Mr. Watson and some of the
women took McLean in, and Morgan mounted and rode
away. Then it was discovered that another man,
John Heriot, was lying wounded in the carpenter’s shop.
Heriot’s injury consisted of a broken leg, and he was placed
in a buggy and conveyed with as little delay as possible to


the hospital at Albury. But McLean’s wound was too
serious to admit of his removal, and he died after lingering
in pain for two or three days. At the inquest held on the
body, Edward Smith, stockman at the Round Hill station,
deposed that Morgan had called at the station two days
after the attack to enquire how McLean was, and had sat at
the bedside for several hours. At that time there were
numerous parties of police and civilians searching the
country round in all directions in hopes of finding him. A
verdict of wilful murder was returned against Daniel Morgan
on June 23rd, and a few days later a proclamation was
issued by which the reward offered for his capture dead or
alive was increased from to
A man walked into the bar of the Five Mile Creek Inn,
near Bogolong, and called for a nobbier of brandy, which
was supplied him. He then demanded another, which
the barman refused to give him until he had paid for
the one he had drank. “Be careful what you do,”
exclaimed the customer, “ I’m Dan Morgan.” He
drew out a pistol, and the barman rushed from behind
the counter, jumped through a window, and ran. The
customer followed him to the window, but the barman
could not say how much further. The barman, however,
ran right round the house. When he returned to the
window through which he had made his escape, he saw the
bushranger’s pistol lying on the sill. He grasped it, and
having recovered from his momentary panic, walked into
the bar in time to see the pseudo Morgan helping himself
out of a bottle. The barman at once grappled with him,
and the cook, the only other man in the house at the time,
hearing the scuffling, came in. The man was soon secured,
and in due time was handed over to the custody of the
police. He was identified as a fiddler, who travelled about
the country playing for a living. He was sent to gaol for a
few months as a caution not to obtain grog again under
false pretences by personating a bushranger.
Morgan, with three mates, visited Yarribee station, stuck
up Mr. Mate, the overseer, with two bushmen and the
bullock-driver, and tied their hands behind them. He
demanded the key of the store, which was given to him.
He opened the door and selected a quantity of articles


which he packed on a horse. He served out tobacco, gin,
and porter to the men whom he had made prisoners, having
added several, who had arrived at the station after he began
operations, to their number. The liquor had its effect, and
some of the men became uproarious. Morgan swore at
them and ordered them to be quiet, and as they did not
obey he brought out the station brand—P.T—put it in the
fire, and swore he would brand every one of them on the
cheek. Whether the threat frightened the men into quiet-
ness, or whether the bushranger thought better of his
purpose, is not known. Morgan, however, rode away with
his plunder without using the branding-iron.
Under the heading—“ Comforting Bushrangers,” the
Deniliquin Chronicle of the 18th December said: —“Mr.
we hear has given orders that whenever Morgan calls
at his station he is to be given everything he wants, and
when he does not call food is to be taken into the bush and
left for him.” The paper goes on to accuse the unnamed
squatter with “holding a candle to the devil.” But it is
difficult to see where the blame comes in. The stations
were from twenty-five to fifty miles apart, and except at
lambing and shearing times had few men employed on
them. The police in the district were not very numerous,
and even if they had been very much stronger than they
were they could not have prevented a daring, reckless man
like Morgan from setting fire to the grass. It was so easy
at that time for even an offended bushman to have revenge,
for any real or supposed slight or injury, by starting a blaze
which would destroy the grass over hundreds of square
miles before it could be stopped, and this might go very
far towards ruining a squatter. In face of this danger a few
clothes or a quantity of food was a trifling loss. Certainly
Morgan never did fire the grass, because, perhaps, there was
no profit in it for himself, but there can be no doubt that
he would have done it had he desired to have revenge on
any particular run holder.
One of the many stories told about the brutality of
Morgan was that he went to a cattle station near Jerilderie,
and asked to see the overseer. The overseer’s wife
informed him that her husband was away at a back station
mustering and branding, and that she and the children were


the only persons at home at the head station. Morgan
replied that he was sorry for it. He’d travelled to the
station specially for the purpose of shooting the
overseer, who was too friendly with the police. He
then demanded a sum of money which he said he
knew the overseer had recently received. The woman
declared that her husband had no money at the
station, or if he had that she was not aware where he
kept it. Morgan refused to believe her. He made her boil
him a number of eggs, declaring that he would eat nothing
else, as there was too much strychnine and arsenic about
these stations. When these were ready he examined them
carefully, rejecting all which had cracks in the shells and
eating the sound ones only. He then made up the fire until
there was a big blaze, when he once more asked her for the
money, and as she persisted in declaring that she had none
he seized her by the shoulders, forced her back until she
was seated on the blazing logs, and held her there until her
clothes were on fire. Then he allowed her to get up, and
seizing a bucket of water standing near he dashed it over
her to put the fire out. Nothwithstanding this she was
severely burned. When he mounted and rode away he said
he would soon be round again and hoped then to find the
overseer at home.
Sergeant Smyth and Constables Cannon, Baxter, and
Reed, who were out seeking for the bushranger Morgan,
camped one night in September near Kyamba. They had
put up a tent and were seated inside. They had a candle
and this threw their shadows on the canvas and afforded a
magnificent mark, which the bushranger could not resist
firing at. The shot wounded Sergeant Smyth, but he and
the constables rushed out of the tent and blazed away, but
without seeing their assailant. It was supposed that this
attack was made by Morgan, but nothing was seen of the
bushranger. Sergeant Smyth fired twice after being wounded
and then he fainted. He was taken without delay to Doodal
Cooma station and a doctor was found, but he never rallied
and died a fortnight later.
It was said that Morgan was on the Wagga Wagga race
course at the Christmas races, and that he had lunch at the
booth where the magistrates, the police inspectors, and the


leading merchants and shopkeepers of the town went, and
that afterwards he rode into the town itself without being
recognised by the police.
On March 18th, 1865, he stuck up Mr. Rand’s station
at Mohanga, collected all the men in one room, and ordered
Mr. Rand to fetch some grog from the store. This having
been done, Morgan asked one of the men whether he could
play the concertina, and being answered in the affirmative,
told him to get his instrument and “amuse the company.”
When all was ready the bushranger said to Mr. Rand : “ I
understand you are a good dancer. Will you favour the
company with a reel ? ” Mr. Rand said he should be only
too pleased, and began at once. Morgan watched him
critically and applauded every now and then, but when Mr.
Rand stopped, he raised his pistol and said; “ Once more,
please, you dance very nicely,” and thus he kept the squatter
jigging till midnight, when he was allowed to retire. In the
morning Morgan took from the store a quantity of clothing
and some other articles, including a gun. He then asked
for a horse, saddle, and bridle, to pack his plunder on, and
got them.
At Jerilderie, when engaged in one of his usual robberies,
he spoke in the most contemptuous terms of the police. He
said that the Victorian police had been blowing that they
would soon catch him if he crossed the border, and declared
that he would soon show them that they were no smarter
than the New South Wales police, who were “frightened to
go near any place where they thought they might
find him.” A Beechworth paper, commenting on this
report, challenged Morgan to cross the Murray, and
prophesied that if he dared to do so he would be either
dead or in gaol within forty-eight hours. This challenge,
it was said, gave great umbrage to the bushranger, who had
apparently, owing, perhaps, to his long immunity from
arrest, developed the belief that he was invincible. He was
reported to have referred to it frequently, and to have
asserted his intention to cross the Murray River and “ take
the flashness out of the Victorian people and police.”
Accordingly, early in April, he made a raid south of the
Murray. Mounted on Mr. Bowler’s racing mare, Victoria,
Morgan stuck up Mr. McKinnon’s station on the Little


River. He crossed the King River, and set fire to
Mr. Evans’s barns and granary for “ having shot my fingers
off,” an event which had taken place some time previously,
in one of his many encounters on the “ other side.” Morgan
then stuck up and robbed a number of carriers on the road
between Wangaratta and Benalla. He also stuck up
Mr. Warby’s station, and on the evening of April Bth arrived
at Peechelba station, owned by Messrs. Macpherson and
Rutherford. Morgan rode up and knocked at the door of
Mr. Macpherson’s house. It was opened by Mr. Macpher-
son’s son. Morgan, pistol in hand, ordered him to bail up.
Then everybody in the house were called in and compelled
to range themselves in line along the wall of the dining-
room. A housemaid named Alice Macdonald, thinking he
was joking, refused to stand up against the wall “ like a
child.” Morgan took her by the arm to force her into line,
when she smacked his face. Raising his pistol he said,
“My young lady, I must take the flashness out of you. Do
you know who lam ? ” “ No,” replied the girl. “ Well,
I’m Morgan. Will you take your place ? ” The girl pouted
but did as she was told. Morgan placed two revolvers on
the table and sat down. He said he had had no sleep for
three nights, but he hoped to return to New South Wales next
day and have a good sleep. He asked a servant to make him
some tea and allowed her to leave the room. Then he said that
he had heard music as he approached the house, and he asked
which of the ladies played ? On being told “ Miss
Macpherson,” he asked her to favour him with a tune. She
replied “ Certainly, Mr. Morgan.” “ Call me Morgan,” he
said, “ I hate to be Mistered.” Mr. Macpherson asked him
what had induced him to lead such a life ? ” “I was forced
to it,” he replied. “ I was tried at Castlemaine for a crime
of which I was innocent and received a heavy sentence.
Well, I escaped from the stockade and there you are. What
else could I do ? ”
The party sat all night, and Morgan chatted freely, but
his vigilance relaxed so that Alice Macdonald contrived to
slip out without being seen and went to Mr. Rutherford’s
house, about a quarter of a mile away, and informed Mr.
Rutherford of what had taken place. She went back again
immediately in case the bushranger should miss her.


Morgan informed the company that he was born at Appin,
in New South Wales, and that his parents were still living.
In the meantime Mr. Rutherford mustered all the men
on the station and despatched a messenger to the police
at Wangaratta. He posted sentinels all round Mr.
Macpherson’s house, hiding them behind bushes or any
other cover. In the morning Morgan ate a hearty breakfast
and then walked out on the verandah. Mr. Macpherson
invited him to take a glass of whisky and poured out some
for himself. Morgan replied that he rarely drank. He was
almost a teetotaller. However, not wishing to appear
churlish, he accepted half a glass. He went into a bedroom
to wash his hands and face and comb his hair, and Alice
Keenan, one of the servants, took advantage of the oppor-
tunity to carry a can of coffee to the watchers outside.
When Morgan had washed he stepped out on the verandah
again and reminded Mr. Macpherson that he had promised
to let him have a fresh horse. Mr. Macpherson replied that
he had not forgotten it. He called to his son and they
walked together towards the paddock to catch the horse,
while Morgan waited on the verandah. They had not gone
far, however, when Morgan started to follow them, and
John Quinlan shot him from behind a bush. The bush-
ranger fell, crying “Why didn’t you challenge me?” He
was carried indoors, and every attention possible was paid to
him, but he died at about half-past one, or, as nearly as
could be ascertained, forty-eight hours after he crossed the
Victorian border.
The reward was divided as follows John
Quinlan ,£300; Alice Macdonald James Frazer,
who rode into Wangaratta and back—forty-two miles—in
three hours and a-half, £2OO ; Donald Clarke, who fetched
guns from the school house, cleaned and loaded them,
pCioo; Alice Keenan, who communicated between the
parties inside and outside the house, £ 5O. The remaining
were given to Mr. Rutherford and Inspector Singleton
oos° each) to be divided among the civilians and the police
who took part in the capture, according to the merits of their
performances.
The news of the death of Morgan was received generally
throughout Australia with satisfaction. There were a few


people whose love of fair play impelled them to express the
opinion that he should have been challenged, but the
majority held that he was little better than a wild beast, and
should be treated accordingly. He had given no notice to
Sergeants McGinnerty and Smyth, nor to the unarmed men
among whom he had fired at the Round Hill Station, and
it is doubtful whether those who declared that he should
have been accorded “fair play” would, knowing the
character of the man, have risked their lives by challeng-
ing him in circumstances similar to those in which he
was captured. There was a tendency among a portion of
the people of Victoria to glorify that colony at the expense
of the mother colony over the capture of Morgan. It was
said that bushrangers would never receive the public
sympathy and support in Victoria which they did in New
South Wales, and attributed this to the fact that Victoria
had never had a penal settlement within its borders. There
has always been an absurd jealousy between the people of
Melbourne and those of Sydney, and there can be no doubt
that it has been somewhat of a disadvantage to the colonies
generally. In this case there is no ground for believing that
the character of the people of New South Wales, which was
a penal colony, differs in any essential degree from that of
the people of any other portion of Australia. As a matter
of fact, the Australias are so intimately connected together,
—it is so easy for the residents of one colony to make their
way into any other colony, and the people as a body are
more prone to moving about than those of any other
civilised country, —that any claim of superiority either in
extraction, morals, or in any other particular, by the
residents of any one colony over those of any other colony
is absurd. It is true that there was no English penal settle-
ment within the present bounds of the colony of Victoria,
but in former times that colony was a portion of the penal
colony of New South Wales, while the founders of
Melbourne came from another penal colony, namely, Van
Diemen’s Land. Many of the early settlers were emanci-
pated convicts from either one or the other of these penal
settlements. But even if this had not been the case, the
whole population of Australia was so thoroughly intermixed
during the great rushes to the Victorian diggings that there


is absolutely no excuse for any pretence of superiority on
this account in this the smallest of the colonies on the main
land. I do not say this out of any ill-feeling towards
Victoria, or with the desire to glorify any other colony,
at her expense, but simply to point out the folly of such
petty and absurd jealousies as have tended to keep the
colonies apart hitherto. As a plain matter of fact South
Australia is the only one of the seven colonies which can
claim not to have had a convict origin. That colony was
founded directly from England by a syndicate. All the
other colonies were either portions of or were founded from
New South Wales, about the convict origin of which colony
there can be no doubt. But even South Australia, wedged in
as it is between what have been two convict colonies, could
not escape the contagion. But, judging from the statistics,.
Australia as a w r hole does not appear to have suffered much,
now that the bushrangers have been disposed of. The
percentage of crime in each of the colonies is lower than
in most other civilised communities, and the “convict
colonies,” as they w r ere called, do not show a higher per-
centage of crime than the “free colonies,” I have already
pointed out that the condition of Victoria, during the years
1853-55, was worse than that of any of the so-called convict
colonies at any time, so far as the number and ferocity of
the bushrangers were concerned, and we shall soon see that
Victoria can produce native-born bushrangers as well as
New South Wales. Only a few months after the poeans of
self-glorification had been sung by the Victorian press over
the death of Morgan in that colony, the same papers
lamented the fact that while bushranging appeared to have
been stamped out in the mother colony, it still flourished in
Victoria.


CHAPTER XXII.
The Brothers Clarke; The Raid at Nerigundah; Deaths of William
Fletcher and Constable O’Grady; Murder of Four Special
Constables at Jinden; Annie Clarke at Goulburn; Capture of
Thomas and John Clarke; A Terrible Record; A Plucky
Woman; An Attempt to Escape Custody; “Shoot Away, I
Can’t Stop You”; Some Daring Robberies; Murder and
Cremation of the Brothers Pohlmann; Blue Cap.
The brothers Clarke, of Manaro, although they did not
belong to the Gardiner gang, were more or less closely
connected with it. There were three of them, Thomas,
James, and John, and their education was on similar lines
to that which I have described as prevalent in the Western
Ranges. They were cattle duffers and horse planters until
the police began to enquire too closely into their mode of
life, when they “took to the bush.” James was probably
saved from the more elevated fate of his elder and younger
brothers by being arrested on suspicion of having been
concerned with Ben Hall, Johnny Gilbert, and others in
the robbery of the Cowra mail, but as the evidence of his
presence on that occasion was inconclusive he was acquitted,
and charged with having received stolen property, a number
of the bank-notes stolen from the mail having been found in
his possession. He was convicted, and was sentenced to
seven years’ penal servitude on January 12, 1865. He was
probably kept out of mischief during the troublous times by
this imprisonment. Thomas and John, the eldest and
youngest of this interesting family, operated over the district
in which the redoubtable Jackey Jackey first earned his
notoriety as a bushranger, but they did not confine their
operations within any strictly defined limits, and therefore


they, as it may be said, overlapped with the Hall and
Gilbert gang. The elder brother Thomas was arrested
in October, 1864, on a charge of highway robbery, but
contrived to effect his escape from the Braidwood gaol.
He stole several racehorses from residents in the neigh-
bourhood of Jembaicumbene and Mericumbene, stuck
up the Araluen mail, robbed the Post Office at Michelago,
besides sticking-up and robbing numbers of travellers on
the roads about Braidwood and Moruya. On January 12th,
the very day on which his brother James was being tried,
he stuck up Mr. George Summer’s store at Jembaicumbene,
and on the following day he bailed up John Frazer and
Kenneth Matheson, on Major’s Creek Mount, and robbed
them of 10s. in money, and a bank draft for a large
amount. In these enterprises he was assisted by several
young men and lads residing in the district. In April,
Thomas Clarke, Patrick Connell, Tom Connell, William
Fletcher, and two or three other young men were returning
home from the racecourse at Bega, where races had been
held, when Clarke stuck up a Chinaman, who was travelling
from the Gulph Diggings, and took his gold and money. A
little farther along the road the party met the mail boy, and
Clarke compelled him to exchange his horse, saddle, and
bridle for those stolen from the Chinaman, Some miles
from the scene of this outrage the party met Mr. John
Emmott, and ordered him to bail up; but he, having a
considerable amount of gold and money about him, wheeled
his horse and started to gallop away. By this time others
of the party had become excited, and several of them
chased Emmott, and fired their revolvers at him. Emmott
fell wounded and his horse was killed. About £lOO
in money and a parcel of gold dust was taken from him, and
the party went on, leaving Mr. Emmott to make his way to
where he could obtain surgical aid as best he could. On
the following day they arrived at the Gulph Diggings, stuck
up Mr. Pollock’s store, and stole between two hundred and
three hundred ounces of gold, besides all the money that
they could find. On leaving the store they met Charles
Nash in the street, and Clarke greeted him with “ Hullo,
Charlie, back from the Bega races ? ” “ Yes,” replied Nash.
“Then fork out,” cried Clarke, bringing out his revolver.


Nash at first thought this was a joke, and began to laugh,
but on the remainder of the gang crowding round and
presenting their revolvers in a threatening manner he put
his hand in his pocket, took out about thirty shillings, and
handed it over with the remark, “That’s all I’ve got.” He
was then permitted to pass on. Fletcher then led the way
to the butcher’s shop owned by R. Drew, and, putting his
revolver to the butcher’s head, told him to “shell out.”
Drew put his hands behind him and made no reply. Then
the rest of the gang crowded in and called for a light,
declaring their intention to search the place. Drew told
them to “clear out.” They refused, and threatened to
shoot him. The dispute grew so loud that it reached the
ears of Constable Miles O’Grady, the only policeman
stationed on the little diggings, who was ill in bed.
O’Grady got up and dressed, and went to the butcher’s
shop. He enquired what the row was about, and ordered
the crowd to leave the shop. Fletcher turned round and
fired at the constable, but missed. O’Grady immediately
returned the fire, and Fletcher fell dead. One of Fletcher’s
mates then shot O’Grady, who died a few days later. The
bushrangers rushed to their horses, mounted, and galloped
away out of the township. The Moruya Examiner said
that William Fletcher was little more than a boy, and was
born in the district. He had ridden in the St. Patrick’s
Day races on March 17th at Mullenderee only a few weeks
before. His father was a farmer in the district, and had
always borne a good character. The boy had been digging
for gold at Araluen, Nerrigundah, The Gulph, and other
diggings in that neighbourhood. It was his first essay at
bushranging. His mind had probably been inflamed by
the stories told of Gardiner, Ben Hall, and Johnny Gilbert,
and he had been induced to endeavour to emulate their
actions by the boastings of Thomas Clarke. Several
young men who had taken part in this fray returned home
afterwards, and were arrested by the police. Some of them
were acquitted on account of their previous good character,
and because there was no evidence to prove that they had
done more than accompany the robbers. Thomas Clarke,
his uncle Patrick Connell, his cousin Tom Connell, with
Bill Scott and one or two others, who escaped to the


ranges, continued to commit depredations similar to those
described in the previous chapter.
In September, 1866, John Carrol, Patrick Kennagh,
Eneas McDonnell, and John Phegan were sent by the police
authorities to the Braidwood district, to assist the police in
the capture of the Clarke gang. Phegan had been mining
in the district and was well acquainted with the ranges. He
paid a visit to Mrs. Clarke, and was received with some
suspicion as a stranger. On his second visit Mrs. Clarke
and her two daughters became quite friendly, and asked
Phegan to write out a petition in favour of her second son
James, who was a prisoner on Cockatoo Island. The party
camped as if engaged in surveying, and Phegan said that
Kennagh knew more about writing out petitions than he did.
He therefore took Kennagh to the place and introduced him
to Mrs. Clarke. They wrote out the petition and left.
During the next few days they saw the girls frequently. In
the absence of their brothers these girls looked after the
cattle, and were riding about the ranges every day. They
passed the camp several times and spoke in a friendly
manner. On the 4th of October, the party had been
pretending to survey a flat, and under this pretence had
searched a gunyah hidden among the timber. This gunyah
was believed to be one of the rendezvous of the bushrangers,
and was closely watched in the hopes that the bushrangers
might visit it. On the day named, the special constables
had finished their work and were standing round the camp
fire, when a gun was fired, and the bullet passed between
the men and struck the tree against which the fire was built.
The party had their guns ready and returned the fire,
although they could not see what they were shooting at.
In the morning a flask half full of powder was picked up,
but this gave no indication as to who had attacked the party.
After this no pretence of friendship was made, and Carrol
and the party under his charge openly took up the pursuit of
the bushrangers, penetrating the mountains and searching
everywhere where they thought it probable that the bush-
rangers might camp. In January, 1867, the bodies
of the four men were found near their camp on the Jinden
station in the Jingera ranges, in the Braidwood district.
How or when they were shot is not known, but it is


SU , tdat thg y were somehow drawn into an ambush
and shot down Carrol’s body was lying on its back, and a
handkerchief thrown across it with a one pound note
pinned to it. The bodies of Carrol and Kennagh were
close together, while the other two were half a mile away
1 hree revolvers were lying beside Phegan. One of the men
? /u 4 °” him ’ and anoth er The bodies were
ound by Mr. Edward Smith’s stockman when riding
through the ranges after cattle, on the 9th January, and
as they were in an advanced state of decomposition, they
must have been there for several days. The Governor, Sir
John \oung, immediately issued a proclamation, calling
upon magistrates, freeholders, and all other of Her Majesty’s
subjects, resident in the police districts of Braidwood,
Browlee, Qeanbeyan, Eden, Bega, and Cooma to assist the
police in the capture of the “notorious outlaw, Thomas
Elarke, whose life is forfeit to the laws of his country ” The
Colonial Secretary, (Mr. afterwards Sir) Henry Parkes,’ offered
a reward of for the capture of the persons guilty of
murdering the four special constables. A free pardon was
also offered to any accomplice, not being the actual
murderer. Carrol, Kennagh, and Phegan had been warders
in Darhnghurst gaol, and had volunteered to attempt the
capture of the bushranger Clarke, and McDonnell was an
ex-policeman who had accumulated a considerable sum of
money in business, and was about to visit Ireland, his
native but who volunteered to j’oin this party before
going home. Ihe firing had been heard at Jinden station,
three miles from the camp, but no notice had been taken, as
it was attributed to opossum hunters. According to the
medical evidence, the men were killed with rifle bullets fired
at close range—not more than twenty yards. Phegan and
McDonnell were first shot, McDonnell only having one
wound, which was fatal Phegan was shot in the right side,
and appears to have turned over after falling, and to have
been then shot on the other side to finish him. Carrol and
Kennagh appear to have been kneeling when shot, and had
perhaps surrendered. The ostentatious disregard of the
money on the bodies shows, said the Sydney Morning
Herald , that revenge and not plunder was the object of the
murderers.
T


No certain knowledge as to how these men came to their
death has since been arrived at. According to rumour three
of them were shot by Thomas Clarke and the fourth by Bill
Scott, who was afterwards wounded in a brush with the police,
and as is believed killed by Clarke, as the bushranger known
as German Bill had been killed by Morgan, to prevent him
from falling into the hands of the authorities and being
induced to give evidence against his former companions. In
both cases, however, the end of the missing bushranger is
uncertain. ,
At the Criminal Sessions, held in Goulburn in April,
1867, Thomas Cunningham, Charles Hugh Gough, alias
Wyndham, alias Bennett, James Baldwin, and Harry Brown
were each sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment for various
acts of bushranging in various parts of the district. William
Johnson for robbing and shooting at a man received a
sentence Of only two years. Several of these bushrangers
came from the neighbourhood of Braidwood, and the Yass
Courier reported that Annie Clarke, one of the sisters of the
bushrangers, stayed in Goulburn during the time that the
sessions lasted, her visit doubtless being one of sympathy
with some of the prisoners. She was about twenty years of
age, with a fine figure and good features. She was observed
to change her costume four times in one day. In the morning
she was very quietly dressed. Later she came out in a
second costume, also very quiet and neat. But in the
afternoon she walked about the streets in blood red silk, with
red hat and feathers to match, and later towards evening she
came out in a bright blue silk dress, white shawl, and a hat
with white feathers.
At Wellington, in the same month, John Kelly was
sentenced to fourteen years’ hard labour, the first two in
irons, for highway robbery.
At this time the reward offered for the capture of 1 homas
Clarke was raised to while was offered for his
brother John, who had just “turned out.” A similar sum
was offered for the capture of Bill Scott, whose death had
not then been ascertained, or for any other member of the
gang. .
On April 26th, Senior Constable Wright, and Constables
James Wright, Lenehan, Walsh, and Egan, with the assis-


tracker known as Sir W atkin Wynne,
tracked the bushrangers to a hut not far from where the
four special constables had been murdered. The hut or
cottage stood in a small cultivation paddock in which there
frn S a KK na )i day f ack - The constables watched the hut
orn behind this haystack until morning. At daybreak two
Wa^h^F^ 6 S< ~f' n f6eding behind the hut ’ and Constable
Walsh, making a detour round the hut so as not to be heard
y the occupants, walked down and caught these horses He
was leading them towards the haystack when the door
opened and the two brothers Clarke came out of the house
and fired at him The other troopers immediately rushed
forward from behind the stack and summoned the Clarkes
If"’ * key ™ ade no re P l Y, but went inside and
shut the door The police then took up positions, Constable
Lenehcin with Sir Watkm stopping at the stack with the
horses at about two hundred yards from the hut and nearly
racing it. The Senior Constable and Constable Wright
went to a fallen tree about fifty yards to the right of the
hut, while Constables Egan and Walsh went to about the
same distance to the left, where there was no cover The
paddock in which the house stood had been recently
ploughed, and the heavy rains which had fallen made the
ground difficult to travel over. The hut was built of slabs
and these had shrunk away from each other, leaving inter-
stices through which the bushrangers could point their guns
and revolvers. The bushrangers kept up an irregular fire
until Constable Walsh was wounded in the thigh and Sir
atkin in the shoulder, when the other four troopers made a
rush, forced open the door, and entered. The bushrangers sur-
rendered. 1 hey had two revolvers, two double-barrelled guns
two revolving rifles, one single-barrelled gun, and a horse
pistol. Ihe tracker s wound was so severe that he had to have
his arm amputated, and he bore the operation with the stoical
indifference of his race. He walked downstairs from the
upper ward of the Braidwood Hospital to the dissecting
room, and after his arm had been cut off and the stump
bound up he walked up again as coolly “as if he had
merely had his finger punctured,” said the Braidwood
-Dispatch. He was supposed to be about fifty years of age
and was well-built and “ handsome for a blackfellow.” He


was promoted to the rank of sergeant-major, and had two
stripes placed on his arm, of which he was very proud.
Senior Constable William Wright was made sub-inspector,
and the other constables engaged were promoted and
rewarded. . , . .
Thomas and John Clarke w r ere placed on tual charged
with having wounded Constable Walsh and Black 1 racker
Sir Watkin, while in the execution of their duty. In two
years Thomas Clarke had committed nine mail robberies,
and had stuck up and robbed thirty-six individuals, some of
whom had been wounded. He was also suspected of having
caused the deaths of at least two persons. John Clarke had
taken part in twenty-six of these robberies. They were
found guilty, and the Chief Justice the late Sir Alfred
Stephen—in his address said “ I never knew a bushranger
(except one who is now suffering sentences aggregating
thirty-two years) who made any money by it. • • • 1
will read you a list of bushrangers . . . many of them
young men, capable of better things, but who died violent
deaths. Peisley executed; Davis sentenced to death;
Gardiner sentenced to thirty-two years’ hard labour, Gilbert
shot dead ; Hall shot dead ; Bow and Fordyce sentenced to
death, but their sentences commuted to imprisonment tor
life; Manns executed; O’Meally shot dead; Burke shot
dead ; Gordon sentenced to death ; Dunleavy sentenced to
death ; Dunn executed ; Lowry shot dead ; Vane a long
sentence ; Foley a long sentence ; Morgan shot dead ; your-
selves, Thomas and John Clarke, about to be sentenced o
death; Fletcher shot dead; Patrick Connell shot dead; lom
Connell sentenced to death, but sentence commuted to
imprisonment for life ; Bill Scott, a companion of your own,
believed to have been murdered by you Ihe
list shows six shot dead and ten wounded. . ■ • • •
Unfortunately there were seven constables shot dead and
sixteen wounded in three years . _ . . ■ since 1863.
The murders believed to have been
committed by you bushrangers are appalling to think of.
How many wives have been made widows, how many
children orphans, what loss of property, what sorrow you
have caused ! and yet, these bushrangers,
the scum of the earth, the lowest of the Tow, the most


wicked of the wicked, are occasionally held up for our
admiration ! But better days are coming. It is the old
leaven of convictism not yet worked out, but brighter days
are coming. You will not live to see them, but others will.”
Sentence was then passed in the usual form, and the
brothers were hung on June 25th, 1867.
Meanwhile robberies were frequent in other districts.
Mrs. Colonel Pitt, with her daughter and Mrs. Colonel
Campbell, were driving along the Mechanics’ Bay Road,
near the Domain, Forbes, when a servant who was leading
the horses at the time was knocked down by an armed man.
Another robber tried to seize the reins, but Mrs. Pitt stood
up in the buggy and raised them out of his reach. She
brought the butt of the whip so heavily down on
the bushranger’s head that he fell. Mrs. Pitt shouted
and whipped the horses, and they galloped up the hill
and did not stop until they reached Parnell, where the
police were informed of what had occurred. A couple
of troopers immediately started down the road, and found
the servant lying where the outrage was said to have been
perpetrated. He had been severely beaten, but was still alive.
He was taken without any unnecessary delay to the hospital
at horbes, where he subsequently recovered. The robbers
were tracked and followed and were captured next day,
March sth, 1865. They were Richard Middleton, alias
Ruggy Dick, John Wilson, and Thomas Tracey. They were
tried, convicted, and sent to gaol for long periods.
On the 20th a man went into Richardson’s Inn, Evans’
Plains, and ordered those in the bar to “bail up.” He
obtained about He had been travelling on foot, but
when he left the bar he mounted a horse, belonging to one
of the men he had robbed, and which was hitched to a
verandah post, and rode straight into Bathurst, where he was
captured while spending the money he had stolen in the bar
of a public house.
On the 19th, two armed men rode up to Mr. Ryan’s
house, on the Burrowa River, and ordered Mrs. Ryan to
hand out her money. She refused, and one of the ruffians
struck her with the butt of his revolver. An old man named
Billy Dunn, who worked on the farm, jumped up from the
table where he was at dinner to protect his mistress, when


the other bushranger ordered him to sit down again,
adding, “I’ll shoot you if you interfere.” The leader
again demanded the money, and Mrs. Ryan struck him in
the face, when he fired and wounded her on the knee. As
she fell he struck her again with the pistol. They ransacked
the house, and at length found a roll containing in
bank notes, which the old couple had just received by
the Sydney mail. They also took a nugget of gold and
several rings, brooches, and other articles of jewellery. The
robbers were supposed to live in the neighbourhood and to
have known that the money had been received from Sydney.
They kept their faces covered, however, and the police
could not obtain a description which would enable them to
identify any persons as the robbers.
The Bathurst mail was stuck up and robbed on
February 2nd, 1866, near Pulpit Hill, by two young men
named Seymour and John Ford, who were followed and
captured next day.
On the 14th of April, 1866, Sergeant John Healey, with
Constables William Raymond, Edward William Mitchell,
and Andrew Kilpatrick, left Berrima in charge of eleven
prisoners, whom they were to take to the gaol in Sydney.
The prisoners were seated in the body of the coach, and were
connected together by “ a marching chain,” to which their
handcuffs and leg irons were attached. The police were
armed each with a short carbine and a revolver. The three
constables sat in the body of the coach with the prisoners,
while the sergeant sat on the box seat with the driver and a
passenger named Whatmore. The coach stopped for change
of horses at Bargo Brush, and the prisoners were taken out
of the coach into the public-house yard. One of them,
Thomas Berryman, produced keys with which to unlock the
handcuffs from his pocket, and asked Webster, another
prisoner, whether he would be one to “ rush the police.”
Webster said “ No,” as he had only twelve months to serve,
and was then threatened with vengeance if he informed the
police, and was called “ a hound,” and a coward.
Webster therefore promised to say nothing as to what the
other prisoners proposed to do. After the halt the prisoners
were again placed in the coach, and when they had travelled
about three miles they made a sudden and combined rush


on the constables. The prisoners who engaged in this
mutiny were James Crook well, William Lee, Thomas Berry-
man, John Owens, and Michael Slattery, Five others,
Webster, Bland, Foster, Hindmarsh, and Smith, sat still and
helped neither party. They had refused to join in the
attempt at escape, but had promised not to give
warning to the police. Crookwell snatched a revolver
from Constable Raymond’s belt and shouted, “Shoot the
.” Raymond had been seized by two of the prisoners,
but he shook himself free and jumped out of the coach.
Sergeant Healey was also seized by some of the
prisoners, who attempted to drag him backwards into the
coach. He also got free and jumped down :he ran to the
side of the coach and called to the prisoners to surrender,
and as they did not do so, he pulled the trigger, but the
rifle missed fire. Crookwell had got a revolver in his hand,
and was struggling with Constable Kilpatrick, and Healey
made a blow at the convict with the gun but struck an iron
bar in the coach and smashed the stock. Healey then
threw away his rifle and drew his revolver. He fired and
wounded Slattery, but at the same time Constable Raymond
fell. Bland and Slattery were also wounded, and then the
prisoners gave in. The passenger, Mr. Robert Whatmore, a
publican at Bargo Brush, had got on to the coach when it
left his place to go to Picton. He had his coat torn in the
struggle. When it was over he borrowed a horse and rode
to Picton for a doctor. The body of Constable Raymond
and the wounded prisoners were put into the coach, and the
sergeant and constables walked until they were met by the
police from Picton. When tried, the prisoners denied
having shot Constable Raymond, and said that he had
been killed by the fire from the police guns. This, however,
was denied by all the witnesses in the case. The six
prisoners named were found guilty of murder, and were all
sentenced to death.
Sergeant Grainger and Constable Carroll chased a young
man on the Carcour Road on suspicion that he was a bush-
ranger. When asked by the sergeant where he was going,
he replied, “Looking for work.” The sergeant made him
unstrap a coat which was fastened across the pommel of his
saddle, and a small revolver was found in it. “What do


you carry that for?” inquired the sergeant. “For protec-
tion,” was the reply. The sergeant then snatched
away the coat and saw that the man had a large revolver
in his hand. He was told that if he attempted to raise
this weapon he would be shot at once, and seeing
that escape was impossible he surrendered and allowed
the police to handcuff him. Then the sergeant opened
his vest to ascertain what caused a protuberance there,
and found a pair of false whiskers and moustaches. He
was identified as John Miles, who had raided the Chinese
Camp at Mookerawa, besides committing several highway
robberies on Evans’ Plains and in the neighbourhood of
Orange. He was sent to gaol for ten years, the Judge saying
that the prisoner had used less violence than was usual with
bushrangers, and had not ill-treated the Chinamen further
than by taking their gold.
Henry Evans, a settler at Little Plains, near Burrowa,
was stuck up by two armed men on January 7th, 1867.
When asked to give up his money he said that he had none.
He never had more than a few shillings in the house. This
was disbelieved, and the bushrangers threatened to take him
out and shoot him. “ Shoot away,” he replied coolly, “ I
can’t stop you.” They tied him up and ransacked the place,
breaking the furniture and even stamping on Mrs. Evans’s
best bonnet. Being unable to find any money they made a
bundle of some clothing and strapped it on a pack-horse.
Evans complained that the rope with which his hands were
bound was cutting his wrists. “ Serve you right,” exclaimed
the bushranger, “ you deserve no better.”
Mr. Kelly’s store on the One Mile Creek, Emu Creek
Goldfield, was stuck up by John Kerr, alias Maher, and
John Shepherd. Kelly, with his wife and children, and a man
named Gibbons were locked up in a back room while the
robbers were making a bundle of clothing, drapery, and
other articles in the store. Gibbons, however, succeeded
in forcing open a back window, without being heard by the
robbers, and making his escape. He ran to the police
station and gave information, but the robbers discovered his
escape before the arrival of the police, and decamped
without their booty. This, however, did not save them.
They were followed and captured by Sergeant O’Donnell


and Constable McGlone. They were convicted of more
than one robbery on the Cowra Road.
On Saturday night, June Bth, Cummings, while awaiting
his trial for highway robbery, made an attempt to escape
from the Bathurst Gaol. He filed a link of the chain of
his leg-irons with a small pocket knife, which he had somehow
procured, tore up two boards from the floor of his cell,
crawled under the joists and scraped away the mortar so as
to loosen several bricks in the gaol wall. The opening was
only about ten inches square, but he contrived to squeeze
through. Of course, when his cell was found empty on the
Sunday morning, the excitement in the gaol was very great,
but Mr. Forbes, the head gaoler, soon found the prisoner
seated in the summer house in his private garden. “ Here I
am,” cried the bushranger; “ I did my best, but could not
succeed.” The prisoner had found some pieces of scantling
in the outer yard, but they were not long enough to enable
him to reach the top of the wall which encloses the gaol
yard. An examination into the state of the gaol showed
that the boards were quite rotten, and that the walls them-
selves were not very strong, the bricks being quite soft and
rotten.
Several bullock-drivers were stuck up by John Egan and
Patrick Ryan on the Orange Road, in August, 1867. On
the 16th Robert and John Tait, father and son, and Edward
Barrell were camped together when the bushrangers rode
up and ordered them to “ fork out.” The robbers took all
their money and some articles from the drays. On the 19th
they repeated the operation on some other bullock-drivers.
They were followed by Sergeant Rush and Constable
Lawrence and arrested about forty-five miles from where the
robberies were committed. At the Bathurst Assizes the
prisoners called seven witnesses to prove an alibi, but they
contradicted each other under cross-examination, and on
the prisoners being found guilty his Honour, Judge Hargrave,
directed that they should be prosecuted for perjury. The
prisoners were sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Another bushranger, John Foran, who was convicted on
three charges, was also sentenced to fifteen years.
Patrick Fitzgerald, alias Paddy Wandong, was charged at
Wellington on October 21st, 1867, with having on the 21st


December bailed up Thomas Goodall, a free selector, on the
Castlereagh River. The prisoner rushed into the house in
the night and ran into the bed-room. Mr. Goodall was
sitting in another room and heard his wife scream and cry
“ Don’t kill me.” The prisoner, who was a half-caste, seized
her by the throat and pulled her out of bed. The other
man, led Ivelly, stuck up Mr. Goodall. The prisoner said
he was at Curbin, five miles away, but as he was positively
identified and was well-known in the district he was con-
victed and sentenced to fifteen years’ hard labour. The
judge said that Kelly had been tried for his share in the
crime and had been sentenced nearly twelve months since.
Circumstances connected with bushranging had greatly
altered since then, and this would naturally induce him to be
less severe ; yet, having passed a sentence on one man, he
could not now pass a lighter sentence on an accomplice who
was no less guilty.
On the 24th of November, 1867, a party of forty or
fifty shearers and others had assembled at Mr. William
Whittaker’s store on the Willandra Billabong, about a mile
and a half from Mossgiel station, for the purpose of holding
a race meeting, when they were bailed up by John Williams,
William Brookman, Edward Kelly, and John Payne, and
robbed of a considerable amount. Afterwards Michael
McNamara, a constable stationed at Booligal, about sixty
miles from Mossgiel, but who was at Mossgiel on duty at
the time, was talking to Mr. Dobbins on the verandah of
the store, when Williams and Brookman came up, and
asked Dobbins if he was Constable McNamara. Dobbins
replied “ No.” Brookman then turned to the constable
and asked him the same question. The bushrangers each
had a revolver in his hand, and so the constable also said
“ No,” and made a rush at Brookman. In the struggle
they got inside the store, and Brockman’s pistol exploded,
the bullet shattering McNamara’s wrist. Brookman was
shouting for help, and another shot was fired, wounding
Constable McNamara in the back of the head. Mr.
Peerman, overseer of the Mossgiel sheep station, and Mr.
Edward Crombie rushed up and secured Williams and
Brookman, who were placed in a hut and watched by
Messrs. F. G. Desailly, Robertson, and others. The two


bushrangers had five revolvers all loaded, except two barrels
which had recently been fired. Williams had £B2 is. icd.
and Brookman Bs. Bd., making in all 10s. 6d.
The two bushrangers were charged on January 14th, 1868, at
Deniliquin, with having wounded with intent to kill Michael
McNamara, a constable in the execution of his duty.
Williams, it was said, was a bullock driver, who had recently
sold his team for the purpose of turning bushranger.
Brookman was under seventeen years of age, and very
boyish in appearance. Mr. George Milner Stephen, w r ho
appeared for the prisoners, pleaded hard for a light
sentence on Brookman on account of his youth,
and also because his family were respectable people.
The Chief Justice said that in a recent case of a bushranger
who put a pistol to the head of an advancing constable, the
jury had found that there was no intent to kill, for what
reason no one could tell. In the present case the arresting
constable had not been killed, and the jury must decide as
to the intent. With regard to the youth of one of the
prisoners, it was an ascertained fact that lads when they
became bushrangers were more bloodthirsty, brutal, cruel,
and fiendish than grown men. The prisoners w r ere sentenced
to death, and the boy when he heard the sentence said
“ Thank you.” His sentence was afterwards commuted to
imprisonment for life.
Edward Kelly and John Payne pleaded guilty to the
robberies at Whittaker’s, and to two other charges of bush-
ranging. They had been followed by the police, and Payne
was captured while Kelly got away, but not without a wound.
Subsequently Payne led the police to the camp, and thus
assisted them to capture his wounded mate. For this act of
humanity, the judge sentenced him to ten years’ imprison-
ment on two charges, the sentences to be concurrent;
while Kelly was sentenced to two terms of fifteen years each,
or thirty years in all.
Walter Maher, another bushranger, also pleaded guilty to
a charge of highway robbery, and was sentenced to ten
years’ imprisonment.
Charley Johnson and Miller, alias Slater, who had been
arrested and lodged in the lock-up at Denison Town, on
April 3rd, 1868, made a rush on the watch-house keeper when


he entered their cell, knocked him down and took his
revolver. They fired two shots at him and walked away.
They called at the blacksmith’s shop and made the
blacksmith take off their irons. Then they left the town, to
resume their bushranging career. On the following
morning they stuck up and robbed Mr. Ashton of
about £lO. On the 6th they stuck up the Green
Swamp Inn, kept by Mr. McNaughton. In the evening
they walked into Mr. Tuckerman’s Hotel, in Mudgee,
and called for drinks. When these had been served
they ordered all in the bar to bail up, and began collecting
the money. When they had obtained all they could they
walked away, no attempt being made to detain them. They
went into Langbridge’s hotel, and collected the money in
the same way. Then they returned, mounted their horses,
and left the town by the Green Swamp Road. They stopped
for supper at Landell’s Hotel, about a mile from the town.
In the meantime a party under Constable Campbell,
composed principally of those who had been robbed, started
in pursuit. I hey rode rapidly, and as they came up to the
front of Landell’s Hotel the bushrangers left by the back
door, the horses they had ridden being captured, as they
were hitched to the verandah. On the following morning
Mr. Farrar was returning from Gulgong to Mudgee when
he saw three mounted men, whom he took to be bush-
rangers. He started to gallop away, when he recognised
Constable Webb’s voice, and pulled up. He informed the
police that he had stayed at Matthew Horner’s Inn on the
previous night, and had been suddenly wakened by a blow
on the head from the butt of a revolver. He w r as ordered
to keep quiet and to get up. He did so, and was compelled
to lead the way to the stable, saddle and bridle his horse,
and give the animal to the bushrangers. He had no idea
who they were, and had been too much confused by the
blow on his head to notice their appearance. They after-
wards roused up Mr. Horner and compelled him to supply
them with horses, giving Farrar his horse back again. On
obtaining this information the party in pursuit rode on to
Horner’s Inn to make further enquiries, while at the same
time the bushrangers must have been riding through the
bush to Mudgee, and so passed their pursuers. They called


at Tuckerman’s Hotel, and had breakfast. As soon as their
presence in the town was known, another party was made
up to capture them. When the bushrangers left the town
they were again followed, and were overtaken near Bambera
Hill, where a fight took place, but when the pursuers had
expended all their ammunition they returned to Mudgee,
while the bushrangers proceeded to stick up and rob the
Barragon mail. They were captured subsequently, and sent
to gaol.
The murder of the brothers Pohlmann, hawkers, was
reported in the Wagga IVagga Express of April nth, 1868.
The hawker’s waggon had been found standing a little off the
road which runs along the bank of the Yanco Creek from
Narrandera to Jerilderie. A few yards away was a gunyah
of boughs and bushes, supposed to have been constructed
by the brothers to shelter their camp fire from the wind.
Not far away were the ashes of a large fire, and on this being
carefully examined some metal buttons and remains of
charred bones furnished incontrovertible evidence that some
human being had been cremated there. The drawers and
lockers with which the waggon was provided were open and
had evidently been ransacked. The clothes and drapery
were disarranged and scattered about the waggon, while of
the large stock of jewellery which the brothers were known
to carry with them nothing could be found. When the
report was first published a rumour spread around that one
of the brothers had murdered the other and had made off
with the more valuable articles. A sister, who resided in
Sydney, wrote to the Press stating her opinion that this was
not true. Her brothers were too fond of each other to
quarrel, and as they had been very successful there was no
motive for the robbery. She added that there was a secret
receptacle in the axle bed of the waggon known only to
herself and her brothers, and it was their custom to carry
their money and the most valuable articles of jewellery in
this cache . She felt certain that if the police searched
they would find this secret hiding place with its
contents intact. The police did search, and found some
gold watches, and other valuables hidden as Miss Pohlmann
declared they would be. This effectually disproved the
rumour about one brother having murdered the other, and


made it evident that both had been murdered. A number of
suspicious characters were arrested and discharged, and it
was thought, as time passed away, that this murder would
have to be included among the many undiscoverable crimes.
Two years had elapsed, and the murder was almost
forgotten, when a man named Robert Campbell was
arrested and charged with the crime. One witness said
he had been camped on the sand hill near the Yanco Creek,
on March 13th, 1868. ihis sand hill was a favourite
camping ground, because there was plenty of scrub on it,
and there was no timber for firewood for miles on either
side. He had just finished his supper when Campbell came
up and asked him to take some tea to his mate who was
lying ill about a quarter of a mile away. Witness told him
he could take the tea himself, but he refused. The reason
why witness would not take the tea was because Campbell
bore a bad character. Campbell went away, and witness
removed his camp some distance away, as he believed that
Campbell was “up to some mischief.” The following
morning, soon after he resumed his journey, he met the
Pohlmanns going towards the camping ground. No one
could be found who had seen the Pohlmanns after this, and
the evidence as to the time when they left Gillenbah tallied
with the time when they were seen by this witness. The
police succeeded in tracing some of the jewellery which
had belonged to the Pohlmanns, and which Campbell had
sold. He was convicted of murder, and was hung on
October sth, 1870, but as he made no confession the
manner in which he carried out his crime can never be
known.
On April 20th, 1868, Robert Cotterall, alias Blue Cap,
was tried at Wagga Wagga for having stuck up and robbed
Carl Seeman at Rock Station, Reedy Creek, in June, 1867 ;
and William Marshall, Jeremiah Lehane, and several others
at various places, between July 15th and October 24th.
d he prisoner had made a hard struggle when run down by
the police, and had been wounded. He was still very ill
when brought to trial. He was deathly pale, and wore a
green shade over his eyes. He looked very little like the
popular ideal of a bold bushranger. He was convicted
and sent to gaol for ten years.


CHAPTER XXIII.
Bushranging in the Northern District of New South Wales ; Captain
Thunderbolt Robs the Toll Bar ; A Chinaman Bushranger ; A
Long Chase; A Fight with the Police; “Next, Please” ; The Bush-
ranger Rutherford ; Captain Thunderbolt and the German Band ;
Desperate Duel between Captain Thunderbolt and Constable
Walker ; Thunderbolt’s Death.
It must not be supposed that while the Southern and
Western districts of New South Wales were harried by bush-
rangers, that the great Northern district escaped from this
scourge. As a fact, although bushranging began rather later
than in the Western district, the Northern district was in no
degree behind the others in interest at this time. In April,
1864, Peter, James, and Acton Clarke, three brothers, with
John Conroy and a boy of twelve, named Samuel Carter, were
riding together towards Culgoa, near Warland’s Range. Ihe
boy had cantered some distance ahead, when he was ordered
to “ bail up ” by a mounted man, who suddenly came out
from behind a clump of trees. The boy took no notice and
the man fired at him and missed. The boy galloped away
and the man started to follow him, when he caught sight of
the other travellers, w T ho had just appeared round a bend in
the road. The bushranger stopped his horse, turned to meet
them, and ordered them to dismount. They did so. Ihe
bushranger also dismounted and came towards them. He
demanded their money, and they felt in their pockets to get
it out. Just then Peter Clarke made a rush, threw his arms
round the bushranger, and tried to throw him. r l here was
a short struggle, and a pistol went off. Peter Clarke fell
dead, and the bushranger broke away from him. Ihe


other travellers had come forward and endeavoured to
assist Peter, but had been unable to grasp hold of
the bushranger, as the wrestlers shifted so rapidly. Now,
however, they caught him as he was trying to reach his
horse. In the struggle both James Clarke and Conroy
were wounded, but the bushranger was overpowered and
disarmed. They tied his arms and took him along with
them. About two miles along the road they came upon
two men tied to trees, who said that they had been stuck
up and robbed by the prisoner about two hours before.
The prisoner was handed over to the police, and was
identified as Harry Wilson, twenty years of age. He was
taken to Maitland and charged with wilful murder. He
was convicted, and hung on October 4th. A public meeting
was held at Murrurundi and a committee was appointed to
raise a subscription for the purpose of erecting a monument
to Peter Clarke, who had “sacrificed his life in the cause of
order and justice.” This project was duly carried out.
Mr. Samuel Turner, travelling from Bingera Goldfield to
Newcastle in a buggy, put up for the night at Britten’s Hotel,
Willowtree. Next morning (Sunday, October 19th) he started
early, intending to breakfast at Wallabadah. He had gone
barely ten miles, however, when he was stuck up by a man
riding a fine-looking horse. The robber took him off the
road, tied him to one tree and hitched his horse to another.
He robbed Mr. Turner of about a gold watch and
chain, and a bunch of keys, and rode away. Mr. Turner
struggled desperately and succeeded in getting loose. He
was leading his horse through the scrub towards the road
when the robber returned, tied him up more securely than
before, and cautioned him not to “try that dodge again.”
This time Mr. Turner remained quiet, and about an hour
later the bushranger returned again, directing Mr. McShane
where to drive his mail coach. When the coach had been
placed in a satisfactory position the robber tied McShane
and a passenger back to back, with a sapling between them,
and laid them on the ground. The bushranger then sat
down to go through the letters. McShane said, “You’dbetter
leave them alone, you’ll get nothing out of them.” “Won’t I,”
replied the bushranger. “What do you call this? It’s a
hundred and forty quid anyway.” He held up a roll of bank


notes as he spoke. Having finished the letters he told them
to remain quiet until he <£ got the other mail,” and went away
again towards the road. It was fully two hours later when
he again returned, directing Smith, the driver of the other
mail, where to drive. Smith said his horses were young ones
and would not stand. “All right,” replied the bushranger,
“stand at their heads, but, mind, no hanky panky.” The
only passenger was Mrs. O’Dell. She was politely requested
to take a seat on a log and was not interfered with or asked
for her money. By a strange coincidence her husband had
been a passenger on the coach a week before and had been
robbed at the same place, presumably by the same bush-
ranger. By the present transaction the Bank of New South
Wales lost and it was doubtful whether this included
the “ hundred and forty quid ” or not.
J. Lowe’s mail coach, plying between Mudgee and
Sofala, was stuck up by an armed bushranger about two
miles from Peel. It was not known whether this highway-
man came from the Northern or the Western district, the
place where the robbery took place lying between the two
and being raided occasionally from either side.
On December 16th a toll-keeper named Delany was
“ sitting at the receipt of custom ” in the toll-house on the
road between Maitland and Rutherford, when a man
pushed the door open, presented a pistol at his head, and
cried out “ Give me your money.” Delany was of course
considerably startled by the suddenness of this attack, but
he replied “ I’ve got none.” “No nonsense ! ” cried
the bushranger. “ Give it here ! ” “I tell you,” exclaimed
Delany, “ there’s no money here. My mate’s just taken it
to Maitland.” The bushranger stepped into the house,
pushed Delany aside, opened the cupboard, and took out
the cash box, saying at the same time, “ I’m Captain
Thunderbolt.” Delany made no attempt to resist this
violence, and the bushranger put the box under his arm
and walked away up the road to where he had hitched his
horse to the fence. He mounted and rode away, and
a few minutes afterwards O’Brien, the lessee of the
toll-bar, returned from the town. Delany told him
what had occurred, and leaving O’Brien in charge
walked towards the Spread Eagle Inn at the Ruther-
v


ford Racecourse. Near the inn he came upon the
bushranger, who exclaimed, “ Hulloa, come after me?
“ No,” replied Delany, “ I’m going to the pub.” “ Has your
mate gone for the crushers ? ” asked the bushranger. “ No,”
was the reply, “ he’s minding the bar.” Captain Thunder-
bolt kept silence for a moment, as if thinking, then he said,
“ I was told that young Fogarty, the flash fighting man, was
keeping the bar, and I wanted to take it out of him. I
didn’t want to hurt you. You’ll find your cash box behind
that clump of trees and here’s your money.” He handed
Delany about four shillings, mostly in coppers, and Delany
walked away, picked up the cash box, which was uninjured,
and went back to the toll-house. The bushranger walked
into the bar of the inn and asked if he could have some-
thing to eat. Mrs. Byrne, the landlady, replied “ Certainly,
and went out to cut him some bread and meat. He sat
down and waited, and on her return ate the bread and meat
as if he was very hungry. When he had finished he asked
“How much?” “Oh nothing,” replied Mrs. Byrne, “we
never charge for a little thing like that. W ell, said the
robber, “ I came here to stick you up, but as you’re so
hospitable, I won’t.” He then asked for a bottle of rum,
paid for it, and went away. About half-a-mile away he met
Godfrey Parsons, who was taking his sick wife to Maitland,
to see the doctor. Thunderbolt ordered him to “ bail up
and hand out.” Parsons replied, “We’ve only two pounds,
and we want that for the doctor.” The bushranger asked
what was the matter with Mrs. Parsons and how long she
had been ill. Parsons told him. “Well,” said the robber,
“I’m a bushranger, but I don’t rob sick women; pass on.”
Mrs. Parsons had in her pocket and was crying at the
prospect of losing it.
Further along the road Thunderbolt met a man and four
women, and stopped to joke with them. He said he
thought it unfair that one man should have four
women, while he could not get one. As they were laughing
a trooper rode up, and the bushranger immediately
challenged him to fight; the trooper, however, said
he had no ammunition with him. “ I’ve been chased
by you traps near Armidale,” exclaimed Thunderbolt,
f£ but they pulled up at the Black Rock. They were


fonowed f me e ‘' ting b ° gged ” the Green Swam P if the y
He stopped a number of other people during the
afternoon, robbing some and letting others go, and in the
evening went back to the Spread Eagle to tea. He chatted
for some time with Mrs Byrne, telling her of his exploits.
Just after his departure four troopers rode up. Information
Mp/m P rr dmgS ° f the bushran ger had reached
Maitland, and these troopers had been sent out to catch
him if possible. They made some enquiries, and then
followed in the direction in which Thunderbolt had gone
overtaking him as he was talking quietly to a man on the
road. The foremost trooper presented his pistol at the
bushrangers head and said “You’re my prisoner.” “Am
1 ? cried Thunderbolt with a laugh, as he put spurs to his
horse and galloped away. After a long chase, and the
expenditure of a large quantity of Government ammunition
the bushranger escaped in the dark, the troopers’ horses
being almost too tired to return to Maitland. In its com-
ments on this escapade of the new bushranger the Maitland
Mercury enquires :“ Is this hitherto quiet district to be
disturbed as the Western district has been for so long a
time ? and events proved that it was.
Viithin a few days the Northern mail was stuck up bv
two armed men. One of the robbers was said to be in a
state of trepidation the whole time. Perhaps this may
account for the bushrangers missing two registered letters
one containing £6O and the other and a small bag of
gold-dust in a package. A gentleman who was accompany-
ing the mail cart on horseback was allowed to continue his
journey because he said he was on a visit to a sick friend
He was required to promise, “as a gentleman,” not to give
any information to the police, and he kept his word, but on
his arrival m Tamworth he made a bet that the mail coach
would not arrive by three p.m. The mail was delayed less
than half an hour, however, and the driver nearly made up
the lost time by fast driving. The gentleman therefore lost
his bet m spite of the special knowledge he had acquired
1 he robbers were followed at once, and on January 6th’
1865, William Mackie and Robert Johnstone were com-
mitted for trial for this robbery. Mackie was identified as


a bushranger who had been previously convicted at Bathurst
for robbery under arms, but had made his escape while
being conveyed to Sydney to be sent to Cockatoo Island.
The prisoners were taken from Bathurst to Penrith by
coach. From thence they went to Sydney by train. They
were handcuffed in the guard’s van, the door being open, as
the day was very hot. When running along the embank-
ment near Fairfield, between Liverpool and Parramatta,
Mackie, ironed as he was, jumped out. The train was
travelling at a fast rate, and it ran some distance before
notice could be conveyed to the driver and the train stopped.
It was expected that the prisoner would be found
dead at the foot of the embankment, but nothing could
be seen of him. It was then believed that he had crawled
somewhere into the scrub to die, but although diligent
search was made no body could be discovered. He was
now sent to Cockatoo to undergo his original sentence, and
Johnstone was sent to keep him company. It was said that
they intended to join Captain T. hunderbolt.
An attempt was made to stick up the Northern mail
about twelve miles north of Singleton, on January 7th. A
shot was fired from behind a culvert on the road, as the
coach was passing, and a voice called out “ Bail up. ’ Phe
driver, however, instead of obeying, lashed his horses, took
his foot off the brake, and the coach plunged down the hill
at a tremendous rate, and at the imminent risk of a capsize.
Two robbers came out from behind the culvert and fired.
The passengers declared that they heard the whizz of the
bullets, but no one was hurt, and the coach reached the
level ground safely.
On the same day the branch mail from Bendemeer was
stuck up and robbed near Stringy Barks, proving that more
than one party was raiding on the Great North Road.
There were no passengers, but a number of half notes were
taken. The robbers handed the driver several cheques to
“take care of,” one being for ,£lOOO. No violence was
used. . ~
The Northern mail was robbed again on January 30th,
at Black Hill, about two miles from Muswellbrook, by four
armed men. There were three male and one female
passengers. The amount stolen was estimated at between


p£7°° an d These and several minor robberies on
the road were all credited to Captain Thunderbolt, or to
men who were trying to join him, and it was said that the
immunity enjoyed by him encouraged other evil-disposed
persons to take to the road.
In one case at least a Chinaman turned bushranger.
Constable Ward was returning to his station at Coonanbara-
bran from Mudgee, on February 21st, when he was informed
that a Chinaman had recently stuck up and robbed a num-
ber of persons in the neighbourhood. The constable followed
him into the bush, found his camp, and called on the
Asiatic to come out and surrender. Instead of obeying
the Chinaman exclaimed, “You policeeman, me shootee
you! ” and did so. The constable, though wounded,
returned to the nearest farm, from whence news of the
occurrence was sent to the police-station. A party was
organised and the Chinaman was soon hunted down. He
was convicted of attempting to murder a constable while in
the execution of his duty, and was hung. Constable Ward
recovered from his wound.
On April 6th, Mr. Hughes, of Bourke & Hughes,
squatters, informed the police at Dubbo, that the hotel at
the Fisheries had been stuck up and robbed, and volun-
teered to assist in the capture of the bushrangers. They
tracked the robbers to Canonbar, about a hundred and
twenty miles, when Mr. Hughes’s horse knocked up. There
they were informed that the bushrangers had passed three
days before, and had stolen fresh horses from Mr. Baird’s
station, Bellerengar, leaving their knocked-up ones in
exchange. The black trackers were thrown off the trail
by this manoeuvre, as they followed the tracks of the
abandoned horses for several miles before they discovered
their error. They soon, however, picked up the new tracks,
although the bushrangers had kept off the road as much as
possible, as if aware that they were being followed. They
rode through the scrub and across arid or rocky patches
wherever they could find them, but the black boys followed
them with unerring skill and with but little delay. The bush-
rangers stuck up and robbed several people on the road and
took fresh horses, provisions, and other necessaries from the
stations as they went along. At Martell’s Inn the police


were informed that the bushrangers were only twelve hours
ahead. We will now leave the pursuers and see what the
pursued were doing. They stuck up Mr. Strahan’s station
and then went on to Gordon’s Inn, where they called for
drinks like ordinary travellers, shouting for all those in the
bar. Then the leader, Daniel Sullivan, produced his pistol,
while his two mates went to the door to prevent any of the
men inside from running away. They collected about
from the landlord and those in the bar, then they put their
pistols in their pockets and began “ shouting ” again. When
the was expended, they again produced their pistols,
compelled the landlord to hand over the cash, and proceeded
to spend it as before. The money had been expended some
three or four times, when Sullivan left his mates, Clarke and
Donnelly, to “keep the game alive,” mounted his horse
and rode into the bush. Mr. Gordon was compelled to
remain in the bar to serve out the liquors called for, but
Mrs. Gordon went on to the verandah to ascertain whether
she could find any one to send to Molong to give the alarm.
Presently she saw three dust}?, weather-stained travellers
walking towards the inn, and thought that they were more
bushrangers. Fortunately she did not go into the bar to
tell her husband, and when Sergeant Cleary, with Constables
Brown and Johnston, came up they speedily told her who
they were, and were informed in their turn that the men they
had ridden so far to arrest were inside. The police entered
the bar, and covering the two bushrangers with their revolvers
called on them to surrender. Instead of obeying, Clarke
put his hand to his belt and was immediately shot. Donnelly
made a rush towards the corner of the bar, where their guns
were standing against the wall, and he also was shot just
before he reached them. A moment later Sullivan rode up to
the front of the hotel, unconscious of the change which had
taken place during his absence, and when he found himself
covered by the police weapons he was so dumbfounded that he
permitted himself to be pulled from his horse and handcuffed
without resistance. The police had left their horses some
distance away in charge of the black tracker. Now they
went for their horses and fed them as well as themselves.
Later on a cart was procured, and the body of Donnelly was
disposed in the bottom. Beside it, wrapped in a blanket,


was the wounded man, Clarke, while Sullivan, being
uninjured, was mounted on horseback, and the whole party
proceeded to Molong, where an inquest was held on
Donnelly’s body. Sullivan, and Clarke, who recovered from
his wound, were subsequently tried and convicted.
On April 29th, the Taviworth Examiner said :—“A week
ago we reported that Frederick Ward, alias Captain
Thunderbolt, had stuck up the Warialda mail. He after-
wards went to Mr. Lloyd’s Manilla station and took two
first-class horses. Then he stuck up Cheeseborough’s and
Lethbridge’s stations. From the 20th to the 24th nothing
was heard of him, but on the last-mentioned date he and
another stuck up Munro’s Inn, at Boggy Creek. Mr. Munro
challenged them to fight singly, either with fists or pistols,
but they laughed at him and shot a valuable dog. They drank
a large quantity of spirits, and collected between £7O and
pCBo. They went on to Walford’s Inn at Millie, sticking up
Mr. Baldwin on the road. Mr. Walford, having been
informed of their approach, had hidden away everything of
value, so that they got very little, except more grog. The
police also had been informed, and three troopers, with a
black tracker, soon arrived on the scene. As they
approached, the bushranger on guard outside whistled, and
the other man came out and mounted, Thunderbolt waving
a revolver and pointing to a field behind the house as a
challenge. He led his men to the clearing and made a
stand. The police followed, and a number of shots were
fired on both sides. The police closed up, and Constable
Dalton shot one of the bushrangers, a mere lad, and he fell.
Dalton shouted to Constable Morris to ‘look after him,’ and
turned towards Thunderbolt, when the boy raised himself on
his elbow and fired. Constable Lynch shot the boy in the
neck, probably in time to save Dalton’s life. Ward made a
dash forward, perhaps with a view to driving the police
away from the boy and carrying him off, but the police fire
was too brisk, and after a few more rounds the robber
turned and rode into the bush. The police followed, but as
their horses had travelled fifty miles that morning, they were
obliged to give up the chase. The robber who was killed,
was identified as John Thompson, aged sixteen.”
The Namoi mail was robbed by one white man and two


blacks, near Tamworth, and on September 17 th the mail
from Walgett to Singleton was stuck up at Brigalow Creek.
The passengers and driver were conducted some distance
off the road, to where a fire had been kindled, and were told
to “make some tea and enjoy yourselves while we look
after the bags.” James Boyd, alias McGrath, and Charles
Stanmore were arrested after a smart chase, and were
convicted of having robbed the Walgett mail. A number
of similiar robberies occurred from time to time in various
parts of this extensive district, and the police were kept
constantly busy.
In December, 1865, Ward, riding Mr. Duff’s racer
Eucalyptus, stuck up Cook’s Inn at Quirindi on the 18th ;
J. M. Davis’s Inn at Currabubula on the 20th, and Griffin’s
Inn at Carroll on the 23rd. At this last-named place he
pulled up, and said to his mate in a loud voice, “ Let’s have
a glass of brandy. We want it this wet evening.” They
dismounted, and stepped on to the verandah. As he
entered the door Thunderbolt raised the corner of his
mackintosh to display his pistols, and said, “ I’ll trouble
you, ladies and gentlemen, to bail up.” The women began
to scream, and Ward said, “ Don’t be afraid. We shan’t
hurt any one. We only want a little money.” A traveller
who had entered some time before drew away from the
bar, and joined the bushrangers. The other men present
were ranged in single row along the wall, and when all were
in position each man was called up in turn to be searched.
The proceedings were very suggestive of the “ next, please,”
in a barber’s shop. While this was going on several people
entered, and were compelled to take their places at the end
of the queue. The bushrangers held the bar from five to
nine p.m., pausing in their work every now and then to
order drinks for all hands. Shortly after nine o’clock two
men rode up to the verandah, and shouted “ Landlord.”
The robbers looked out, and recognising the horsemen,
retreated into the back room. Mr. Griffin went to the door,
and said in a low tone to Constable Lang, “ We’re all
stuck up here.” “ Which are the bushrangers ? ” asked the
constable, and on being told that they were in the back
room he rode to the door and fired. The shot was
returned, and the shooting continued until the constable


was wounded in the arm and his horse in the neck.
The bushrangers went out through the back door, and
escaped in the darkness into the bush, but they left their
horses behind.
Early in 1866 Ward and his gang made a raid across the
Queensland border, robbing stations, hotels, and travellers in
the Curriwillinghi district, but he soon returned to his own
district, and in March the Tamworth and Wee Waa mail
was stuck up near Bullingall by two armed men supposed
to be Ward and another. The driver of the Northern mail
was also ordered to bail up near Murrurundi, and as he did
not obey with due alacrity he was speedily brought to a
standstill by one of his horses being shot dead. After
going through the letters the bushrangers rode into the
town and took a quantity of clothes, some money, and some
jewellery and other valuables from Barton’s and Johnstone’s
stores and Humphries’ Hotel.
The Northern mail was robbed by three armed men at
the Red Post Hill, near Falbrook. It was just before dawn
when the driver was ordered to bail up. The robbers were
on foot and had a number of pieces of rope ready to tie up
the passengers. Mr. Moore, of Abingdon, attempted to
run away, but was followed and knocked down with the
butt of a pistol. The six passengers and the driver were
tightly bound either to the fence or to trees, and their money
and watches taken away from them. The robbers then
mounted the coach and drove away along the road. As
soon as it was out of sight the bound men began to
struggle for liberty. Mr. Moore was the first to succeed
in breaking loose and he untied Mr. Dines and the
others. They followed the coach along the road towards
Singleton, but had not gone very far when they were
overtaken by Mr. Wyndham on horseback. They
informed him of their circumstances and he rode rapidly
away to give notice to the police in Singleton. He
found the coach standing on the road within a mile of
the town but did not stay to examine it. The police started
out immediately and arrived at the coach almost as soon as
the driver and passengers. Only one of the bags had been
cut open, and no damage was done to anything else on the
coach. The police spent the whole day in searching, but


failed to find any tracks or to ascertain in which direction
the robbers had gone.
James Booth, William Willis, alias Dunkley, and Thomas
Hampton were arrested in a public house at the corner of
Goulburn and Pitt Streets, Sydney, by Detectives Caraphin
and Finigan on April 17th, 1866, and charged with having
robbed the Singleton mail on the previous day. The coach
had arrived at the Red Post Hill, between Muswellbrook
and Singleton, when the men sprang out from behind the
trees bordering the road and sang out, “ Bail up, stand and
deliver, throw up your arms.” Mr. Moore, one of the
passengers, jumped out of the back of the coach, and
Hampton chased him and brought him back. Mr. Button,
a Government railway guard, also tried to get down, but
Willis told him that he would blow his “ brains out ” if
he didn’t sit still. The passengers were all tied up and
robbed. One of them, George Beved, said that Willis was
the man who threatened to “ Blow the roof of his skull
off” when Moore was wrestling with Hampton. The
prisoners were also charged with having bailed up and
robbed the mail near Campbelltown, on April 10th. The
proceedings were of the usual character. The prisoners
were convicted on both charges and were sentenced, Willis
to ten years’ and Booth and Hampton each to eight years’
imprisonment.
The April at Bathurst were unusually heavy.
John Weekes was sentenced to death for the murder of Mr.
Scheffts at Grenfell, and John Connors for attempted
murder in another bushranging exploit. Besides these,
Patrick Foran and James Kelly were sent to gaol for ten
years for sticking up the Half-Way House on the Carcoar
Road, and other acts of bushranging; James Kennedy, alias
Southgate, to fifteen years for sticking up John Edwards,
William Woodley, and Henry Rodwell, at Murdering
Swamp on January Ist—Kennedy also pleaded guilty to
robbing John Fawcett and John Eaton; Charles Rutherford,
who had been engaged in several robberies in company
with William Mackie, who, as already related, had jumped
out of the train while being conveyed to Sydney, and
was afterwards captured in the Northern district, was
sentenced to seven years’ penal servitude; Smith and Moran


sentenced to seventeen years each, and Kerr to ten years.
These, with some prisoners, sentenced for minor offences,
were being conveyed to Sydney to gaol on April 25 th, 1867.
There were fifteen prisoners in all, guarded by eight troopers.
Sergeant Casey, in charge, was seated on the box seat of
the Cobb’s coach. The prisoners were inside chained
together in two gangs of seven and eight respectively.
Constables Madden and Kennedy were seated, unarmed,
with the prisoners, while the other five troopers rode beside
the coach fully armed. At Pulpit Hill the prisoners,
notwithstanding the heavy force opposed to them, made a
desperate attempt to escape, and in the melee Constable
Holmes was killed, while Rutherford and another prisoner
got away in the bush. Rutherford immediately returned to
his old haunts and recommenced his depredations. In
December, 1867, he was captured by Sergeant Cleary, of
Bourke, and was conveyed to the lock-up, but he again
contrived to escape. In January, 1868, he stuck up the
Boggy Creek and Galathera Inns, and robbed numbers of
people on the road. He then went to Mr. Beauvais’ inn at
Cannonbar and called on the landlord to bail up. Mr.
Beauvais, however, had a pistol in the till and knew how to
use it. On pretence of taking out the money, to hand over
as commanded, he got out his revolver and shot the bush-
ranger. He was awarded a silver medal by the Government
for this act.
The districts raided by Rutherford and Thunderbolt
overlapped, so that it is difficult to decide which of these
two bushrangers were responsible for many of the outrages.
Ward, however, was not idle. In company with a boy named
Mason, he stuck up and robbed the Northern, the Walcha,
and several other mails in the district. He was frequently
chased by the police, but being a magnificent rider, with an
intimate knowledge of every gully, ravine, or hill in the
extensive district over which he ranged, he always
contrived to escape. Sometimes he was very hard pressed,
as, for instance, when he was compelled to abandon Talley-
rand, a racehorse for the recovery of which Mr. Wyndham
had offered a reward of £lOO, in April, 1869. His
companions were captured one after the other. They were
generally boys of from sixteen to twenty, but Thunderbolt


continued his career unchecked. No doubt he owed many
of his hairbreadth escapes to the superiority of his horses.
He would travel two hundred miles to steal a noted race-
horse. Thus he stole Mr. Samuel Clift’s horse, John Brown,
from Breeza. The horse had run on the Maitland and
Sydney courses.
One of the stories told about Ward was that he stuck up
a German band at Goonoo Goonoo Gap, and made the
Teutons play for him, besides giving him their money. The
Germans pleaded hard. They said they were only poor
men, and that their wives and children would suffer if they
were robbed. Thunderbolt told them that he must have
money. He was waiting for the principal winner at the
Tamworth Races, he added, and he promised that if he
caught him he would return the Germans their money. He
took down their names and addresses. Notwithstanding
this the Germans departed very sorrowful. They never
expected to see their money again. Nevertheless, on their
arrival at their home in Warwick, Queensland, they found a
Post Office Order for awaiting them. It was surmised,
therefore, that Thunderbolt had captured the winner.
On May 25, 1870, Ward met Mr. Blanche, innkeeper,
near Uralla, returning home with his wife from a drive, and
called on him to bail up. Blanche laughed, but took no
further notice of the order. Ward exclaimed, “No hum-
bugging. You wouldn’t let me have a bottle of rum the
other night, though I offered for it.” Blanche replied
that he never served any one after hours. He then took
four shillings and sixpence from his pocket and said, “This
is all the money I’ve got. You can have that.” The robber
said, “The missus has more than that.” “No,” cried Mrs.
Blanche, “ I’ve no money. We only came for a drive.”
Ward seemed to consider for a moment, and then told
Mr. Blanche to drive on. Several men came up the b) 7 -road
from Carlisle Gully, and Ward stopped and robbed them.
An old man named Williamson, and an Italian dealer
named Giovanni Cappisote, were also stopped, but after
handing over a gold watch and chain, a small nugget of
gold, and £•s 13s. 6d. in money, the dealer was allowed to
depart. The other men were taken to Blanche’s Inn, where
Williamson was ordered to shout. He did so, and then


Ward shouted. They danced, and sang, and enjoyed them-
selves. Becoming quieter, Ward asked Blanche whether he
remembered a fight between a bushranger and the police at
the Rocks, about three hundred yards away, seven years
before. Blanche said he remembered it well. “Well,”
cried Ward, “ I’m the man; I was shot in the leg.” Ward
went on to relate more of his exploits, the narrative being
interspersed with songs and dances.
In the meantime, Cappisote drove on to a selector’s
farm about a mile and a half along the road. Here he
told Mrs. Uorrington what had happened. He borrowed a
saddle and bridle, took his horse from the cart, and rode
to Uralla; making a wide detour round Blanche’s house.
He told the police where the bushranger was, and Con-
stables Mulhall and Walker armed and mounted at once.
Mulhall had the faster horse and he reached Blanche’s first.
As he rode up he saw Ward and a young man, both
mounted on gray horses, riding along the road. He
followed them, and as he approached Ward turned round
in his saddle and fired. Mulhall returned the fire but his
horse bolted. The trooper soon pulled him up. He
wheeled and, seeing one of the men on the grays gallop
away, followed shouting to Walker to “look after the
other fellow.”
The “ other fellow” was Thunderbolt, and he turned off
the road and rode down the steep hill towards the Rocky
River, followed by Constable Walker. Both men fired a
shot occasionally when an opportunity offered but neither
spoke. On reaching the bank of the river, Ward plunged
in, intending to cross and escape up the opposite range, but
Walker shot his horse. Ward fell into the river, which was
shallow there, and he rose immediately. Walker galloped
along the bank past a deep hole and crossed. Then he
returned to where Ward was standing in the water and
called on him to surrender. “Who the are you?”
enquired Ward roughly. “Never mind who I am,” replied
Walker, “ put your hands up,” “ Are you a trooper ?” asked
Ward. “Yes,” replied Walker. “Married? ” continued Ward.
“Yes,” said Walker, “Well, remember your family,” said
Ward. “ Oh, that’s all right,” returned the trooper. “ Will
you come out and surrender?” “No,” cried Ward, “I’ll


die first.” “Then it’s you and me for it,” said Walker.
The trooper urged his horse into the river. The animal
objected at first and then entered with a rush into deep
water. Walker raised his revolver above his head to keep
it dry. Ward fired several shots, none of which took effect.
When the horse steadied Walker fired again and Ward fell.
He rose again immediately and tried to scramble up the
bank. Walker struck him with the butt of his revolver and
the bushranger fell back into the deep hole and sank.
The trooper slipped from his horse, and reaching down
grabbed Ward’s shirt and pulled him up. He dragged the
bushranger out of the hole, up the steep bank, and laid him
out on the grass, believing him to be dead. Then he
remounted and rode to Blanche’s Hotel for assistance to
bring the body in. Several of the men about there volun-
teered to help, but on their reaching the river they found
that the bushranger had disappeared, A search was
made, but it was too dark to look for tracks. The next
morning at daybreak the police and several civilians
went to the spot and found a trail of blood. They
followed it, and found Ward hidden under some bushes.
He was placed in a cart and taken to Uralla, but he died
before night. The young man chased by Constable
Mulhall said he had gone after Ward to try and get back a
horse which the bushranger had stolen from him, and as
nothing detrimental to his character was known he was
discharged at the police court.
Constable Walker was highly complimented for the
pluck and determination he had shown in this desperate
encounter with the noted bushranger in a deep water
hole in a mountain stream with no one looking on.
Of the many brave actions recorded of the police
this was perhaps the bravest and the most tragical.
The constable was promoted and paid his well-earned
reward.
In referring to this duel the Melbourne Argus spoke of
Ward as the last of the “ professional bushrangers” of New
South Wales, and said : “ With a much more compact
territory than New South Wales, and with a population
which can entertain no ancestral or traditional sympathies
with burglars or highwaymen, we are nevertheless amenable


to the same reproaches as those with which the neigh-
bouring colony was assailed a few years ago.”
I have already dealt with this mild pharisaical glori-
fication of Victoria as compared with New South Wales,
and have no intention of enlarging upon it here. I refer to
it merely to remind the reader that bushrangers were at
work elsewhere than in New South Wales at this time.


CHAPTER XXIV.
Bushranging in the Wild Paroo ; A Raid into South Australia ; A Relic
of the Bushranging Era; Agitation for the Release of Gardiner;
Official Reports as to Twenty-four Bushrangers Still in Gaol; The
Cases of Gardiner and William Brookman; Gardiner and the Other
Bushrangers Released ; Gardiner Leaves the Country.
Bushranging in New South Wales practically ceased with
the death of Frederick Ward, alias Captain Thunderbolt.
Previously to his tragical death in the New England River,
the few stragglers from the big gangs had been captured, and
any new men who attempted to revive the “ reign of terror ”
were speedily dealt with by the police. There were some
few robberies besides those already related which may be
mentioned here. They were distributed over a wide range
of country, one party even crossing the border into South
Australia, where the bushranger had hitherto been known
only by hearsay. But these later bushrangers did not inspire
the terror which those who had passed away had done.
They were very small fry as compared with Gardiner, Gilbert,
Hall, Dunn, Morgan, Thunderbolt, and their companions.
Three bushrangers stuck up Mr. Wearne’s station at Crook-
well on January 6th, 1869, and stole worth of property.
The Carcoar mail was bailed up on the mountains, near the
Bathurst Road, by two bushrangers, when were taken
from the passengers and the bags were searched. A desperate
attempt was made to stick up the Joint Stock Bank at
Braidwood, but the robbers were beaten off. The Southern
mail was robbed on May 10th between Goulburn and
Marulan. An attempt was made to stick up the Yass mail
on the 24th. Mr. Longfield, a passenger, was wounded, but


the robber was forced to retire without having effected his
purpose.
In December, a number of people were bailed up and
robbed in the Paroo and Warrego districts. The “Wild
Paroo ” had not been very long reclaimed from its original
desert state, but this did not prevent an enterprising bush-
ranger from finding his way there, though he did not
continue his career for any very lengthened period. He
stuck up Messrs. Lyons & Martin’s station, and made the
men sit on the top rail of the stock-yard fence while he
rolled up a parcel of goods which he selected from the store,
Messrs. Browne, Zouch, and Bradley drove up in a buggy
while he was thus engaged, and were ordered to dismount and
take their places on the fence with the station hands. The
robber escorted them, pistol in hand, from where the buggy
stood to the stock-yard. While walking across this intervening
space, the bushranger inadvertently, or carelessly perhaps,
stepped rather top near to Mr. Browne, who stood six feet
five inches in his socks, and was proportionately strong.
With a whoop Mr. Browne pounced on to him and held
him as in a vice. This turned the tables completely. The
men on the fence got off, and the bushranger was in his
turn securely tied to the fence and kept there until the
police could be brought from the nearest town, Bourke,
about a hundred and fifty miles away, to conduct him to
prison. After this, bushranging does not appear to have
been popular in this district.
On the 9 th May, 1869, Mr. Henry Kidder Gillham,
manager of the Australian Joint Stock Bank at Braidwood,
returned home at eight p.m., and entered by the side gate,
when a man sprang out from the shadow and called on him
to stand. The bushranger presented a revolver, which Mr.
Gillham pushed aside, when another man struck him with a
life preserver and knocked him down. Two shots were fired
from revolvers. Michael Collins, a gardener living on the
bank premises, was in the kitchen when the two bushrangers
entered. One of them called out: “ Not a word, or it will
be the worse for you.” The tall man had a “ Northumber-
land voice—that is, he could not pronounce the r.” They
tied Collins, and went out of the kitchen. In the
meantime the firing had been heard, and Mr. Finnigan,
w


a teacher, with Sergeant Duffy and Constable Luke
Dacy, ran to the bank. When they got there two
men ran out of the garden, and after a chase, during
which several shots were fired, Joseph Horne was captured.
He had no boots on. The other man, John Bollard, escaped
at the time, but was tracked and captured subsequently.
The Chief Justice, Sir Alfred Stephen, said that Horne had
been sentenced to seven years’ hard labour at Maitland. He
was afterwards convicted in Melbourne and had escaped
from Pentridge stockade, having been shot in the shoulder.
Horne said that punishment had made him what he was,
and pleaded hard for Bollard, who was young and had been
enticed from the right path by him. Horne was sentenced
to fifteen years’ imprisonment and Bollard to ten years.
John Baker and William Bertram divided their attentions
between New South Wales and South Australia. In May,
1869, warrants were issued for their arrest for horse stealing
from the Mount Murchison station. They took to the road
and stuck up a number of people. In October they bailed
up a hawker named Charles Young, who resisted and was
shot dead. This occurred at the Barrier Ranges, not a
great way from where the Broken Hill silver-lead lode was
afterwards discovered. Bertram was followed and captured,
and was subsequently tried, convicted, and hung at Bathurst.
Baker escaped for the time and made his way to Koringa.
Said the South Australian Register , “He showed a remark-
able want of caution in returning to a district where he
had passed his hobble-de-hoy years and was consequently
well known.” He had been employed as a horse-breaker at
the Cross Roads Grounds, Burra Burra, about seven
years previously and had afterwards worked for Messrs.
Macdonald & Hockin, mail coach proprietors, on the
Great Northern Road. On his arrival at Koringa he went into
a barber’s shop and asked to have his hair cut and dyed. The
hairdresser refused to dye it. Baker swore at him, but could
not change his determination. The bushranger also grumbled
at the time spent in cutting his hair, and continually urged
the barber to “hurry up.” When the job was completed
Baker walked to Redruth, and sat down in the main street
opposite the Court House, where the police sessions were
being held at the time. There were a number of people


about, but Baker sat and cut his tobacco with all the
nonchalance of innocence. He filled and lighted his pipe
and was smoking comfortably, when Corporal Smith and
Constable Walker came up and said “ You’re our prisoner.”
What for ? asked Baker. “ Bushranging,” was the short
reply. Baker sprang up from his seat, and raced away at a
great rate along the road. He was speedily followed by the
police on horseback and brought back. He struggled
furiously, slipping his hands from the handcuffs with the
greatest ease. Ihe police, however, carried him into the
lock-up, and put him into a cell. When questioned he
said he had brought a mob of horses down country for sale
and carried a revolver for his own protection. In the same
cell was a man named Dobson arrested for horse stealing
who had been quiet until Baker came. But the door was
barely closed and locked when the gaoler heard a suspicious
noise in the cell. On opening the door he found that
Baker and Dobson were trying to make a hole in the roof
with a heavy board seat which they had wrenched from its
mortice, and were now using as a battering-ram. Baker
was placed in another cell and ironed. He was a small
wiry man, very active, and a daring rider. In company
with Bertram he had stuck up the Mount Murchison
station ; stuck up Mr. Cobham’s station two hundred
miles from Wilcannia, and taken money, a revolver
and several horses ; stolen the horse he was riding
from Mr. O’Leary, of Poolamacca ; robbed and
murdered a hawker at the Barrier ranges, and stuck up
and robbed a number of people on the roads about
Tiers, Gummeracha, and other places near the Murray
River, on both sides of the New South Wales-South
Australian border. When Bertram was captured, Baker
endeavoured to induce a young man whom he met to join
him, telling him that they could easily raise to
but the young fellow replied that he “ didn’t want to be hung
yet.” Baker was extradited to New South Wales, and was
tried and hung at Bathurst early in 1871.
On May 20th, 1870, The Queanbeya7i Age reported the
finding of a mail bag near the Big Hill. The bag was still
locked and the seal intact, but the bottom had been ripped
open. It had evidently, from its appearance, been lying in


the bush for a long time, probably several years. It was
referred to as “a relic of the bygone bushranging era in the
district.”
The Muswellbrook and Cassilis coach was stuck up at
Wappinguey, on November ist, 1870, by two armed men.
When ordered to bail up, E. Cummins, the driver, enquired
“What for?” “You’ll soon see. Drive into that bit of
scrub,” was the reply. Cummins did as he was ordered, and
when the coach was out of sight of the road he was made to
get down and hold his horses while the robbers went through
the letter bags. When they had finished, they told him to
gather up the letters and go.
On the 3rd, Mr. Bellamy was lying under his cart asleep,
about three miles from Forbes, on the Currajong Road, when
he was awakened by some one calling “ Come out o’ that.”
He asked what was the matter, and was told to come
out unless he wanted his “ brains blown out.” He
crawled from under the tarpaulin which covered his cart,
and handed the bushrangers three £1 notes. “Where’s
the rest ? We know what you got for your load at Forbes,”
said one of the bushrangers. “ I paid it away to a man I
owed it to,” replied Bellamy. “ That won’t do. You never
stopped anywhere; we were watching you. Where is it ? ”
As Bellamy still persisted in saying that he had paid away
the money, he was compelled to stand with his face to the
wheel and was tied there. A handkerchief was also tied
round his head, with the knot thrust into his mouth, as a
gag. They shook out Bellamy’s blankets, searched the
feed-bag of his horses, and hunted everywhere, until at
length they discovered thirteen jQ 1 notes tucked under the
tilt of the cart. Having secured their booty they cautioned
Bellamy not to move for an hour under pain of being shot,
and went away. Two of them jumped over the track in
what was called the road, to avoid leaving footmarks in the
dust, but the third appeared to be stiff and walked across
into the bush. After they had been out of sight for a time,
Bellamy began to struggle. He capsized the spring cart
before he succeeded in breaking the rope, but as soon as he
got loose he walked back to Forbes and informed the police
of the robbery. The robbers were followed and found in
a public-house drinking, a day or two after the robbery.


One day, about this time, a man walked into the branch
bank at Cassilis, pointed a pistol at the head of the cashier,
and ordered him to “ bail up, or I’ll blow your brains out.”
“Will you, by G—?” cried the cashier, as he placed his
hands on the counter and vaulted over. The would-be
robber was so startled by this unexpected action on the
part of the cashier that he dropped his weapon and ran.
The cashier immediately gave chase along Main Street,
and soon captured and brought back the pseudo bush-
ranger. The news spread rapidly, and in a few minutes the
whole population of the little township was in the Main
Street. It was soon learned that the only policeman
stationed in the town had gone to Mudgee “ on a case,” the
would-be robber was therefore treated to a good cuffing and
some threats, and turned adrift. The revolver was found to
be old, rusty, and useless, but for some time it hung in the
bank chamber as a caution to bushrangers. It may be
there yet for all I know. This attempted bank robbery
appears to have been conducive to thirst, as the bars of the
two “ hotels ” were crowded for the rest of the day by a
laughing and jeering mob of citizens.
This little comedy furnishes a very appropriate finish to
the story of the many tragedies which were enacted during
this the most serious outbreak of bushranging which has
occurred in New South Wales, During the following two
or three years the people were gradually becoming
convinced that the crime of bushranging had been
thoroughly stamped out, and a sort of reaction set in.
Letters appeared in the newspapers, in which the writers
urged that some clemency might safely be shown to some of
the young men who were still in gaol. In spite of the
brutal indifference which many of the bushrangers had
shown for human life, it was almost impossible to help
admiring the reckless courage exhibited by them. One
thought was frequently expressed in various ways. It was
that these bushrangers would have made magnificent
soldiers if they had been properly trained and made
amenable to discipline. There was in fact a disposition
to regard them much as the philosopher regards dirt,
as “ matter in the. wrong place.” Although no record
of the movement can be found in the newspapers


and other publications of the period, there can be no doubt
that the growth of the spirit of humanitarianism, now so
prominent a characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon in all parts of
the world, had an immense influence. The convict system,
which was regarded as the basis of bushranging, had long
since passed away. The convicts themselves had almost
died out, and had ceased to be a prominent class in the
community. Here and there one of the old fellows lingered
and told stories of the barbarous times which had once
existed in the colonies. But they were generally incapaci-
tated by age from doing much harm. There had been a
time when horror and detestation of the convicts was very
general, but even these feelings had gone now, and there
was a prevalent opinion that the convicts had been made
worse by the brutal discipline to which they had been
subjected. The very papers which were most strenuous in
their exhortations to the Government of the day to stamp
out bushranging at any cost, and which urged the police and
all orderly citizens to slay and kill any person who interfered
with the mails or who molested travellers on the high roads,
now admitted that the bushrangers had been harshly dealt
with. Those who had been convicted of murder, or of
attempts to murder, had been hung or shot, while the lesser
criminals had been sentenced to penal servitude for life or
for very long periods. The juries all over the country had
shown no leanings towards mercy or clemency, and the
judges had treated the bushrangers with great severity.
The people generally, it was asserted, had given ample
proof that they would not tolerate a reign of terror
such as the bushrangers had striven so hard to establish,
and if there should ever be another outbreak, which
was not considered probable, it would be crushed out
long before it could possibly assume such vast propor-
tions as it had gained during the past era. If there were
evil-disposed persons in the colony they would be aware
that public opinion was opposed to them and would hesitate
before they decided to adopt bushranging as a profession.
It is worthy of note that although the brutalities exercised
under the old convict system were said to have tended
towards the demoralisation of the community, and were
largely responsible for the prevalence of bushranging and


other crimes, the practice of flogging for serious offences is
still the law in many of the colonies. The general public,
however, is seldom logical, and therefore even the Australians
still strive to abolish brutal crimes by punishments no less
brutal, although the history of the colonies affords such
ample evidence of the futility of these means. But the spirit
of mercy was abroad. Public meetings were held in all
centres of population, petitions were sent to the Governor
and the Legislature, and the Press was full of letters praying
that mercy might be shown to the evil-doers. The prisoner
most frequently mentioned was Frank Gardiner. It is true
that he had organised the first gang, and had given a vent to
the evil passions of a class. But for him this terrible bush-
ranging era might never have been inaugurated. But he
had never committed murder, and had retired from the
country and endeavoured to lead a lawful life after only a
few months on the road. It had been said that he was
engaged in sly grog selling, even when he was ostensibly
keeping a store on the road to the diggings in Queensland,
but if so it was for the Queensland authorities, not those
of New South Wales, to punish him for this offence against
the licensing laws. The Queensland authorities had,
however, never made any charge against him, and the
report might not be true. At length the Chief Justice
(the late Sir Alfred Stephen) wrote to the Sydney news-
papers. His letter appeared on June 23rd, 1874. Sir
Alfred said that the end and aim of all punishment are, first,
the preventing of individuals, and secondly, the deterring
of other individuals, from the committing of similar crimes.
. . . Sentences aggregating thirty-two years had been
passed in a time of great excitement, and the punishment
seemed to have been measured more in view of the crimes
he was supposed to have committed than with reference solely
to those which were proved against him. . . . He
could not say whether the reported reformation was sincere,
but he thought that the prisoner had been sufficiently
punished and, therefore, recommended a conditional pardon.
Emanating from such a source, this opinion carried great
weight, and almost coincident with its publication, the
Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, afterwards Lord Ros-
mead, laid before the Executive Council six petitions signed


by a number of well known and responsible persons in various
parts of the colony praying for the release of the convict
Gardiner. He said it was true that no hope of an absolute
remission of his sentence had ever been held out to him,
but in the Governor’s minute of December sth, 1872, it had
been implied that if the prisoner continued to conduct him-
self well he might hope for remission at the end of ten years.
Official returns were laid on the table showing the
number of prisoners still in penal servitude for highway
robbery. The prisoner whose case attracted most attention
next to Gardiner was William Brookman. His parents were
said to be respectable. He was only seventeen years of age
when he was charged on January 16th, 1868, with wounding
with intent to murder. He was convicted and sentenced to
death, but his sentence was commuted to fifteen years’ penal
servitude. It was said to have been his first and only
attempt at highway robbery, and he had never previously
been arrested or charged with any offence against the law.
At the time of this enquiry he had served six and a-half years
of his sentence.
The other bushrangers in gaol were :—Samuel Clarke,
sentenced April 18th, 1866. Served five years, one month.
No previous conviction.
Daniel Shea, sentenced November 6th, 1865. Served
eight years, six months. Previously sentenced for two years
for horse stealing.
William Willis, alias Dunkley, sentenced May 16th,
1866. Served eight years. Three previous convictions
for horse stealing, of nine months, eighteen months, and
six months respectively.
Alexander Fordyce, sentenced February 23rd, 1863.
Served eleven years, nine months. No previous conviction.
John Payne, sentenced January 14th, 1868. Served six
years, six months. No previous conviction.
James Jones, sentenced March 31st, 1864. Served ten
years, one month. No previous conviction.
Robert Cotterall, alias Blue Cap, sentenced April 29th,
1868. Served six years, one month. No previous conviction.
James Boyd, alias McGrath, sentenced February 24th,
1864. Served nine years, three months. Previously sent
to gaol for fivp years for horse stealing.


Thomas Cunningham, alias Smith, sentenced April 9th,
1867. Served seven years, one month. No previous
conviction.
Charles Hugh Gough, alias Wyndham, alias Bennett,
sentenced April 9th, 1867, served seven years, one month.
Previously sentenced to three years for assault with intent
to rob.
Thomas Dargue, sentenced March 28th, 1867. Served
seven years, two months. No previous conviction.
Henry Dargue, sentenced March 28th, 1867. Served
seven years, two months. No previous conviction.
John Kelly, sentenced March nth, 1867. Served seven
years, two months. Previously sentenced to two years for
embezzlement.
Edward Kelly, sentenced January 14th, 1867. Served
six years, seven months. No previous conviction.
James Smith, sentenced April 15th, 1866. Served
seven years, one month. Previously sentenced to three
years for horse stealing.
John Foran, sentenced October 18th, 1867. Served six
years, seven months. No previous conviction.
John Williams, sentenced to death January 14th, 1868.
Sentence commuted to fifteen years’ penal servitude. Served
six years, four months. No previous conviction.
William H. Simmons, sentenced April 6th, 1868.
Served six years, one month. Previously sentenced to ten
years on two charges of larceny.
William Taverner, sentenced April sth, 1867. Served
five years, one month. No previous conviction.
Daniel Taylor, sentenced October 24th, 1865. Served
eight years, one month. No previous conviction.
John Bow, sentenced February 26th, 1863. Sentence
death, commuted to imprisonment for life. Served eleven
years, six months. No previous conviction.
John Bollard, sentenced October 19th, 1869. Served
four years, seven months. No previous conviction.
All these prisoners were very young men, little more
than boys, when they were convicted; and, of the twenty-
three, sixteen had had no charges brought against them
previously to their arrest for highway robbery. The four
others who had been previously convicted of horsestealing


were cattle duffers and horse planters, which had been, a
few years before, scarcely considered to be crimes by the
residents of the districts in which these young men were
born; although the law, when it came to be enforced in
these districts, called these acts criminal. It was said that
if Gardiner was to be released these young men, who had
been led away principally by his example, should also have
their sentences remitted.
The reports with such comments as had been made on
them by the Executive Council were placed before the
Legislative Assembly, and on July 3rd a debate began
relative to the cases of Gardiner and Brookman, it being
understood that the decision in the case of Brookman
should apply to the other twenty-two named in the reports.
On a division being taken the vote stood twenty-six for and
twenty-six against a remission of the sentences. The
Speaker gave his casting vote with the ayes, and it was
consequently resolved that the two prisoners should be
released on July Bth, 1874.
The Governor extended the prerogative of mercy to the
others named above, and they were all released at the same
time. In the case of Gardiner the pardon was coupled with
the condition that he should leave the colony forthwith,
consequently a short time after his release he sailed to
California, and was reported to have died there about nine
years later. Mrs. Brown, his paramour, had died in New
Zealand during his incarceration.
The release of the bushrangers was not carried without
opposition, however. A monster meeting of diggers was
held at Grenfell to protest against any mercy being shown
them. Large meetings were held elsewhere, and it was
said that remitting the sentences of the bushrangers was
tantamount to encouraging other evil-disposed persons to
rebel against the laws. The speakers deplored the action
of the Governor, the Executive, and the Legislature, and
prophesied a new outbreak of lawlessness. But the spirit of
the opposition was less active than that of the persons in
favour of mercy, while the majority of the population were
more or less indifferent. And so ended the great outbreak
of bushranging in New South Wales.


CHAPTER XXV.
Bushranging in Victoria ; Robert Bourke ; Harry Power : Pie Escapes
from Pentridge Gaol and Sticks Up the Mail; An Amateur Bush-
ranger ; The Police Hunt Power Down and Capture him Asleep ;
A Peacock as “Watch Dog”; The Power Procession at Beech-
worth; The Trial of Power; His Sentence; Engaged to Lecture
on Board the Success ; His Death.
While New South Wales was the chief centre of bush-
ranging during this epoch, the neighbouring colonies were
not entirely free from the disease. In those cases in which
the epidemic flowed, as it were, over the borders of the
mother colony—as when Morgan, Thunderbolt, and Bertram
crossed, into Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia
respectively—the inroads have been dealt with in connection
with the careers of these particular bushrangers in order not
to break the continuity of their stories. Having described
the rise and fall of bushranging in the older colony, it is
now necessary to return to Victoria and continue the narra-
tive there. Bushranging in this colony during this epoch
was rather a survival from the past than a new development,
and, with one notable exception, the police dealt promptly
with the lawbreakers. The exception will be noticed in
due course.
On September sth, 1862, Mr. Ryan, the landlord of the
Travellers’ Rest Hotel at Yalla-y-poora, was at breakfast
with his family and a visitor named Reid, when two armed
men entered the room. One stood at the door, while the
other, pistol in hand, stepped forward and cried “ Bail up.”
They tied Messrs. Ryan and Reid, and took ten shillings
from the till and ten one pound notes from under the


mattress of the bed, where it had been hidden. They did
not search the women, but they broke some of the furniture
in the bedroom while hunting for the money. One of the
robbers pulled the boots off Mr. Reid’s feet and put them
on his own, leaving a very much worn and damaged pair in
their place. They also took Reid’s horse, saddle, and bridle
from the stable. Mr. Reid told them that he was only a
poor man, and that the loss of his horse would ruin him.
The robber replied, “ Well, he ain’t the sort we want. I’ll
leave him for you at Macpherson’s as soon as I get a better
one.” When they had left Mrs. Ryan untied her husband
and their guest, and Ryan mounted his horse and rode to
Ararat to give information to the police. Constables Lawler
and Griffen followed the bushrangers, and tracked them to
a hut near Mount Sturgeon, in the Grampian Ranges. The
police expected a fight, but they rushed the hut and
captured the robbers without a shot being fired, although
one of them named Regent had a loaded revolver in his
hand. They were taken to the gaol at Ararat, and were
convicted and sentenced in due course.
In July, 1864, a sensation was caused in the Kilmore
district by a report which gaiped currency, that Gardiner
and his gang had stuck up a number of people near Yea.
A party of volunteers was speedily organised to assist the
police in hunting down the bushrangers. The pursuers were
divided into small parties, and on the evening of the 20th
one of these, composed of Mr. Grant and Constable Buck,
came upon three suspicious-looking characters camped on
Pack Bullock Flat with a mob of horses. Constable Buck
asked where they were going, when one replied “To
Melbourne,” and another “To the Jordan.” Buck called
on them to surrender, when one man sprang forward and
clutched him by the throat. Another rushed at Grant, who
was unarmed. Grant turned and ran to where they had left
their horses, calling on Buck to come away, and Buck broke
loose and joined him. Buck however lost his revolver in the
struggle. They rode away to find help, and returned with
Mr. Grant’s brother, George Grant, and Mr. Walker. Grant
shot one bushranger dead, Walker stunned a second with a
blow on the head with the butt of his gun, while Buck
captured the third after a smart run. The captured men


were convicted of robbery by violence, and it was said that
the horses they had with them had been stolen from various
stations.
Robert Bourke was employed as cook at Mr. Broughton’s,
Hume wood Station, on the Murrumbidgee River, New
South Wales, and appears to have been suddenly affected
with the bushranging mania. He ferried himself across the
river, and with the assistance of a young lad named Quinn
stuck up and robbed several people in the neighbourhood.
He was said to “know every bulga from Barren Jack to
Manaro,” but did not stop long in that district, perhaps
because it had already been “ worked out ” by the Brothers
Clarke and other bushrangers. In September, 1868, he
crossed the Murray River, and stuck up and robbed
travellers on the road near Wodonga and Wangaratta,
gradually working southwards. On October 4th he appeared
at Mr. Hurst’s station, Diamond Creek, about fifteen miles
from Melbourne, where a daring attempt was made to capture
him. The story is that Bourke called at William Horner’s
on the 2nd, and asked for a bed. He was told that there
was none to spare, when he drew a revolver and cried “ Bail
up.” Horner slammed the door in his face. Bourke fired,
and the bullet passed through the door panel, but did no
great injury. He tried to push the door open, but, failing
in this, he began to “ parley.” He said he was hungry, and
would go away quietly if he was given something to eat.
Horner then opened the door and gave him a pannikin of
tea and some bread and cold meat. He sat down on a log
and made a good meal. When he had finished he asked for
some “ tucker for the road ” and a horse, saddle, and bridle.
Horner said that the horses were all down the paddock, and
he did not intend to run them in until next morning, but he
could have some “ tucker.” He then gave him a large piece
of bread and some meat. They talked together very
amicably. Bourke said, “ I’m a bushranger from New South
Wales, and I’ve come here to see if your police are as clever
as you blow about them. They’ll never take me alive.”
He went away, and, it is supposed, slept in the bush. On
the morning of the 4th he went to Hurst’s place and asked
for some breakfast. Thinking he was an ordinary tramp,
Miss Hurst gave him some bread and meat in the


kitchen, but, as he sat at table, she noticed that he
carried pistols in his belt. She went into another room
and informed her brother Henry, who loaded a double-
barrelled gun to be ready for any emergency. He walked
into the kitchen, carrying the gun behind him, to have a
look at their suspicious guest, and asked him where he came
from and where he was going ? “ From Cape Schank to
Kilmore,” was the reply. “ Then you’re not travelling in
the right direction,” remarked young Hurst. Bourke
jumped up from the table, as if in a passion, and cried
“Do you doubt my word ? Do you want to insult me ? ”
He drew his revolver and Hurst brought his gun round and
fired. He missed, and Bourke immediately shot him in the
chest. Although he was severely wounded young Hurst
rushed forward and grappled with the bushranger, while Mr.
Abbott and two or three other men ran in to ascertain what
the shooting was about. They secured the bushranger and
carried young Hurst to bed, but, although every attention
was paid to him, he died in a few hours. Bourke was
identified by the police as a man who had been sentenced
to three years’ imprisonment for horsestealing at Ararat.
When he had served his term he was of course discharged
and, as was surmised, went to New South Wales and
obtained work on a station. He lived quietly for about
eighteen months, when he started bushranging as related.
He was twenty-five years of age at the date of his conviction
for the murder of Henry Hurst.
The central figure in Victoria of this era was undoubtedly
Harry Power, This notorious bushranger arrived in Victoria
from Ireland shortly before the proclamation of the discovery
of gold at Ballarat, and went to the diggings. In March,
1855, he was seen near Daisy Hill, in the Maryborough
district, riding a valuable horse, the description of which
tallied with that of a horse which had been stolen
and for which the police were seeking. He was
stopped and challenged to show his receipt for the
horse. Instead of producing it or saying where it was
deposited, Power disputed the right of the police to stop him
on the highway and drew a revolver. The police, very
naturally perhaps, took this as a tacit admission that he
could not show any right to the horse, and sought to appre-


hend him. Several shots were fired and at last one of the
troopers fell wounded. Power put spurs to his horse and
galloped away, A warrant was immediately issued for his
arrest and he was followed and captured. He was convicted
of “wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm,” and
was sentenced to fourteen years’ penal servitude. A short
time before the expiration of his term he was employed in
drawing refuse from the Pentridge Gaol to the rubbish heap
in a go-cart. A number of other prisoners were similarly
employed. While the cart he was helping to draw was being
tipped Power contrived to secrete himself under a corner of
the heap. He was not missed until evening, when the
prisoners employed at this work were mustered. The
prisoners at work with him must of course have been aware
of his evasion, but professed ignorance in accordance with
convict etiquette. A search was made and his hiding place
was discovered, but Power was gone. He stole some clothes
from a farm not far from Pentridge, and the blade of an old
pair of sheep shears to defend himself with, as he declared
that he would not be captured alive. Shortly after his escape,
on May 7th, 1869, he stuck up the mail coach near Pore-
punkah and continued to rob in the Ovens and Beechworth
districts for several months, when he made a raid into New
South Wales, going as far as Adelong. He returned about
the end of September to his old district and stayed there for
the remainder of his career.
Commenting on his actions, the Ovens and Murray
Advertiser said—“ Possessed of a thorough knowledge of
the country, this scoundrel has made periodical descents to
the settled districts, and afterwards, like a hunted dog,
betaken himself to the ranges. From a certain portion of
the population he —or whoever else has been masquerading in
his name has received succour and information , while the
police have been misled and deceived The article from
which this extract was made was copied and italicised in the
Melbourne Argus, and made the subject of a leading article,
in which it was contended that if bushranging was to be
stamped out the sympathisers and “ bush telegraphs ” must
be restrained from aiding the bushranger with food and
information. The Government was urged to pass a special
Act to enable the police to contend with the difficulty. It


was said on the other hand that the Outlawry Act, if
strictly applied, would meet the case.
William Moore, of Buffalo, was returning from a trip to
Eldorado, where he had sold his load of farm produce,
when a young man rode up and asked him “ Where have
you been ? ” “ What’s that to you ?”. returned Moore.
The young fellow said “ I only asked a civil question.”
“Well,” said Moore, “I’ve been to Eldorado, and I’m
going home. Will that satisfy you ? ” The young man
nodded, and cantered on. As he passed, Moore noticed
that he had pistols in his belt, and hastily took a roll of
notes, worth from his pocket, and thrust it into an
empty flour sack in the dray. The young man only rode
forward about fifty yards, and then wheeled round, revolver
in hand, and cried “ Bail up.” Moore stopped, and
willingly turned out his pockets, displaying a half-crown,
which he handed to the robber, who rode away. In
reporting this robbery Mr. Moore said that he believed that
this was the young man’s first attempt at highway
robbery, as he trembled violently and seemed glad when
it was over. The Ovens and Murray Advertiser of
May 7, 1870, in commenting on this case, said: “It shows
the necessity of more determined efforts to capture Harry
Power, who has for more than a year robbed rich and poor
alike in this neighbourhood, and it is the immunity which
he has for so long enjoyed that encourages young lads to
imitate him.”
Shortly before, in April, Patrick Stanton, otherwise
known as Jack Muck, was captured after a smart run. Pie
was convicted of having stuck up and robbed a coloured
man, a well-known splitter and timber cutter, on the Black
Dog Creek. The splitter had been to town to be paid for
a number of posts and rails, and was returning home along
the Rutherglen Road when he was bailed up.
The Kilmore Free Press reported that Power had been
seen in Mr. Dunlop’s paddock at Mount William. He was
firing at a mark on a tree. No one interfered with him.
On May 2nd, Edward Kelly was arrested at Greta and
was charged with having assisted Power in some of his
robberies. He was not identified by the witnesses, and was
therefore discharged.


On the 27th Superintendents Nicholson and Hare,
Sergeant Montford, and Black-tracker Donald left Wangaratta
and made a journey into the ranges near the head of the
King River. It was believed that they had received special
information from a friend of the bushranger. At the head
of the glen, near where Power’s camp was, a family named
Quinn resided, and it was said that Power would never be
caught while they were there. The Quinns owned several
dogs and a peacock, which it was believed would never
allow any person to pass up the ravine without giving notice.
The peacock was reported to be the “ best watch dog of the
lot.” His screams could be heard far away whenever
a stranger approached the hut, and he generally gave the
first signal, and thus roused the dogs. On this occasion,
however, the police passed without either the peacock
or the dogs giving a sign. They came to a hollow tree
with holes in the stem. This tree had been mentioned
as “Power’s look-out,” and it was reported that he
frequently went into it to survey the country round,
through the holes, without exposing himself. There was
plenty of room inside for more than one man, and
the natural holes formed by the decay of the tree had
been added to by augur holes bored at a convenient
height for spying through. They examined it, but it was
empty. All round was a dense growth of cherry and
wattle scrub, which they cautiously pushed their way
through, and peeped into a small clearing. A gunyah
of bark stood in the middle of this space, and before it was
a fire burning. Creeping cautiously up, the police saw a
man’s leg sticking out from under the gunyah. One of
them seized it, and drew the man out on his back. It was
Harry Power. He had been lying asleep under the impres-
sion that he was perfectly safe. He gave a loud howl on
being thus rudely awakened, and then asked, “Who are
you?” “The police,” was the reply. “No fear,” said
Power; “ you couldn’t have got past Quinn’s; the dogs and
the peacock would not have let you.” “We did,” replied
Inspector Nicholson; “ the dogs and the peacock never
saw us, but there were several men there and Quinn himself
—they saw us.” “You’ve given us a great deal of trouble,
Power,” said Inspector Hare, “ but we’ve got you at last,”
x


“ I’m very sorry I didn’t hear you,” remarked Power; “ I’d
have dropped some of you if I had.”
In the gunyah were a Government revolver, stolen from
the police, loaded and capped; a double-barrelled gun,
hanging from the ridge pole, loaded ready for use; and a
loaded pistol lying close beside the sleeping bushranger.
There were also a box of slugs, a powder flask, two boxes of
caps not quite full, a carpet-bag full of clothes, and a saddle
and bridle. The bed was a very comfortable one, with a
good supply of blankets.
The police informed Power that they had been out in
the ranges for more than a week and were starving. They
had not had a mouthful of food for more than twenty-four
hours, and were anxious to get back to town. “There’s
plenty of tucker here,” said Power. “Where?” asked the
police. “In that tree,” replied Power. They went to the
tree and saw a bag hung up among the branches, as is
common in the bush. In this “ bush safe ” they found part
of a large home-baked loaf, some potatoes, tea and sugar,
and a piece of fresh beef. “ Golly, what a feed we’ll
have,” cried Donald, the black, when he saw the food. The
police cut the beef into steaks and fried them and had a
good meal. In their search they found £ls 4s. 6d. in
bank notes and money.
They mounted Power on the horse ridden by the black
tracker, while Donald mounted behind Sergeant Montford,
and left the camp. They reached Wangaratta at seven p.m.
on Sunday, June sth,- 1870, eleven days after the death
of Captain Thunderbolt in New South Wales. The news
of the capture had already been noised abroad in the district,
and numbers of people, who were out for their Sunday
evening ramble, crowded the streets of Wangaratta to see
the noted bushranger. Power waved his hand in response
to their cheers, and cried “They’ve caught poor Harry
Power, but they caught him asleep.”
On Tuesday, the 7th, Power w r as removed to Beech-
worth gaol, and a number of men and women in carriages,
buggies, spring carts, and other vehicles, or on horseback,
went along the road to meet him and escort him into the
town. The procession as it passed over Newtown Bridge
was quite an imposing one, and there were collected the


majority of the residents who had neither horse nor vehicle.
Power was sitting in a police cart, and bowing right and left
to the crowd as if he had been some high potentate. He
wished the people “ Good morning,” and continually
repeated his formula about having been captured asleep.
On his arrival at the gaol he greeted Mr. Stewart as an old
friend, and hoped they would never fall out. He made a
short speech, in which he publicly thanked the police for
the kind and considerate manner in which he had been
treated since his arrest.
The Ovens Spectator at this time said : “ Henry Power,
alias Johnson, is a hale, hearty-looking man, although past
the meridian of life, with grisly hair and beard, and
certainly not of such an appearance as one would expect a
bushranger to have.”
On October 2nd Henry Power was tried on four charges
of highway robbery. On May 7th, 1869, he bailed up
Arthur Woodside, a squatter at Happy Valley, as he was
riding towards Bright. The robber took a horse, saddle,
bridle, and spurs, giving in exchange a knocked-up horse, a
broken saddle, a bridle tied up with string, and one rusty
spur. While Mr. Woodside was giving his evidence Power
exclaimed, “Speak up, young man. You spoke different
to that when I met you on the road.” The mail coach
from Beechworth was bailed up at the same time. Power
asked the driver, Edward Coady, to throw out the gold.
Coady replied, “ There is none.” “ I was told there was,”
exclaimed Power. “ Any parcels ? ” Coady threw down
two, which Power opened. There was only one passenger,
a Chinaman, and Power asked him for the key of his carpet
bag. At first the Chinaman said “No savvy,” but, on the
revolver being pointed at his head, he handed over the key.
Power searched the bag, but took nothing out. This was
the first case.
On August 28th, the same mail was bailed up. At that
time there were three passengers—Mr. Hazleton, Ellen
Hart (a servant), and Mrs. Li Goon. A boy also got on to
the coach at Boyd’s for a ride down the hill. The coach
had just passed the gap when the driver had to put the
the break on and pull up, because the roadway was blocked
with logs and saplings. Mr. Hazleton exclaimed “Who


did this ? ” when Power stepped out from behind a tree and
replied “ I did. Put up your hands.” The passengers
were made to alight and turn out their pockets. Hazleton
made a step forward to hand his watch and chain to the
robber, but Power cried out “ Stand back,” and raised his
revolver. He then told Hazleton to put the watch on
the ground and retire, and when this had been done Power
went forward and picked it up. Mrs. Li Goon said she had
no money, but when Power threatened to shoot her she
gave him fourteen shillings. “ It’s all I’ve got and I’ll want
a cup of coffee,” she said. “ All right,” returned the bush-
ranger, “take this,” and he gave her back one shilling.
The robber took £2 13s. 6d. out of Coady’s pocket-book.
There was also a threepenny-piece in it, and Power told the
coachman to give it to the boy. Mrs. Boyd camp down the
hill on horseback, and was bailed up. She said she had
no money. “ I don’t see how ladies can go riding round
with handsome dresses and fine saddles and bridles without
money,” cried Power. “ Here, give me your horse.” Mrs.
Boyd said if he would allow her to ride home she would
bring him some money, but he refused to trust to her
promise, and took the horse. He stuck up several China-
men and a white man, and took their money from them.
He said to them “ It’s a cold day, but I’ve got a nice fire
down there, go and sit by it; ” and he pointed down the
hill. He was in a good temper and gave the boy a shilling.
The little fellow immediately offered to give him the
shilling and the threepenny-piece for his sister’s horse.
Power laughed and gave the horse to the boy to
lead to where his sister was sitting. This was the second
case.
The third charge was the robbing of John Whorouly.
Power said “ I don’t like robbing a poor man, but I must
have money.” The fourth charge was the sticking up of
Thomas Oliver Thomas, on the Buckland Road. When
called on to bail up, Thomas wheeled his horse round,
and Power shouted “If you run away I’ll fire. My gun
will carry three hundred yards.” Power asked for his money,
and Thomas replied “ I’ve got none.” “ That’s a lie,” cried
Power, “ turn it out.” Power repeatedly threatened Thomas
with his revolver.


Power w T as found guilty on each of the four counts, and
was sentenced to fifteen years’ penal servitude.
Power served out his full sentence. At about the time
of his discharge the Victorian Government sold the hulk
Success, the President and the other hulks purchased to
supply the want of prison accommodation in “ the roaring
fifties ” having been sold years before. The Success had
been utilised as a training ship, and had been kept. In the
case of the other hulks, it had been stipulated in the terms
of sale that they were to be broken up, but this clause was
omitted in the case of the Success. Consequently she was
purchased by some speculators, and fitted up as a representa-
tive convict hulk for exhibition purposes, and Harry Power
was engaged to add interest to the show. The ship was
exhibited in Melbourne, and was then taken round to Sydney.
She was visited by a number of people during the two or
three weeks when she was berthed at Circular Quay, and she
was then taken down the harbour to be fitted for a voyage to
London. Here she sank at her moorings. With the
appliances in Sydney so small a vessel was soon raised, but
her immersion had damaged the wax figures intended to
represent the prisoners who had once been confined in her,
and the other exhibits. While these were being replaced or
cleaned, Harry Power was sent into the country districts for
the benefit of his health. He was fishing in the Murray
River near Swan Hill, on November 7th, 1891, when he fell
in and was drowned. At the inquest held on his body, a
verdict of accidental death was returned. The Success
shortly after left Australia for England without any living
representative of the bushranging times on board of her.


CHAPTER XXVI.
Bushranging in New Zealand; Alleged fears of the Escort being
robbed ; The First Bushranger, Henry Beresford Garrett ; The
Maungapatau Murders ; Arrest of Sullivan, Kelly, Burgess, and
Levy in Nelson ; Sullivan’s Confession ; The Discovery of the
Bodies ; Sullivan’s Release.
The reports of extensive and rich discoveries of gold in
the Otago Province, New Zealand, in 1861, naturally
attracted the floating population of Australia to that quarter.
In September the escort brought down to Dunedin for
shipment a smaller amount of “ the precious metal ” than
had been obtained in any previous month since the goldfield
was first proclaimed. Several reasons were given to account
for this falling off. One was that the weather had been
abnormally cold, and the freezing of the rivers had for a
time put a stop to sluicing. Another was that the gold
buyers declined to pay more than 10s. per ounce, and
the majority of the diggers, having come from Ballarat and
Bendigo where jQ 4 and 18s. 6d. per ounce were paid
respectively, refused to send their gold down and were
keeping it for an anticipated rise in the price. The Southern
Cross , however, said that the principal reason why the
diggers were not sending their gold forward was the fear of
bushrangers. The guard sent with the escort was wholly
inadequate in the mountains through which it had to pass,
and therefore the diggers declined to entrust their earnings
to its care. The Otago Witness pooh-poohed this assertion
and declared that there had never yet been a case of bush-
ranging in the colony, and that if a fair price was offered for
it by the banks and other gold buyers the gold retained on


the diggings would speedily be placed on the market. The
bank authorities, on being questioned, said that the New
Zealand gold contained a larger proportion of silver than
either the Ballarat or Bendigo gold, and was therefore of
less value than the gold won on those diggings.
The boast of the Otago Witness that there were no
bushrangers in New Zealand did not hold good for very
long. Henry Beresford Garrett, who was arrested in London
on the charge of robbing the Bank of Victoria at Ballarat as
already related, and who was convicted in August, 1855,
and sentenced to ten years’ hard labour, was liberated from
the Pentridge Gaol, Melbourne, in August, 1861, on a ticket-
of-leave, after having served six years. Early in 1862 he
made his appearance as the first bushranger on record in
New Zealand. The scene he chose for his operations was
the country between the Otago Goldfields and Dunedin.
In one day he is reported to have stuck up and robbed no
less than twenty-three persons near Gabriel’s Gully, now
known as the town of Lawrence. His career, however, was
short if lively, for he was captured before the end of the year
and sent to gaol for eight years.
In May, 1865, footpads were said to be becoming
numerous about Auckland. The New Zealand Herald
reported the story of a man being bailed up while walking
along Beach Street towards Mechanic’s Bay. A soldier,
however, chanced to come along at the time and the robber
bolted. These petty offenders, however, appear to have
been speedily dealt with, and nothing more was heard about
bushranging until the public was startled by the reports of
“ the horrible Maungapatau murders,” as they were called.
It appears that Thomas Kelly, alias Noon, Richard H.
Burgess, alias Miller, and Philip Levy went to the new rush
known as the West Coast Diggings, early in 1866, and
committed several robberies there. They were shortly
afterwards joined by John Joseph Sullivan, a recent arrival
from Victoria. On June 14th, Stephen Owens, landlord of the
Mitre Hotel, Nelson, went to the wharf to meet the coastal
steamer Wallaby , as she arrived from the west coast, and
saw four men on board. They were very shabbily dressed,
but he gave one of his cards to Levy and told him that he
and his mates could obtain accommodation at the hotel.


On the following day, Sullivan and Kelly came to the hotel
in new clothes. Sullivan gave the landlord two bank notes
for twenty pounds each, and one ten pound note, and asked
him to take care of them for him. There was nothing
remarkable in this. Diggers were frequently very shabby
when they returned from the diggings, and until they had
time to buy new clothes. Sullivan and Kelly appeared to
have plenty of money with them, as they spent it freely.
They each ordered a pair of trousers and a velvet vest from
Charles Flood, tailor, paying each for them. They also
spent X 7 S - 6d. for clothing at Herrington’s draper’s shop,
and Kelly paid besides ss. for a dress for a woman.
He afterwards bought a bonnet, a mantle, and other articles
of feminine wear.
Levy and Burgess went to lodge at an oyster shop kept
by Francis Porcelli, They were covered with mud when
they went there first, but bought new clothes at J. M.
Richardson’s and other places in the town.
On June 21st, the four men were arrested and charged
with the murder of Felix Mathieu. They were remanded
while the police made enquiries, Sullivan turned Queen’s
evidence, and the tale he told may be summarised as
follows.
Sullivan landed at the Grey River from Victoria in 1865
with the intention of digging. He was unlucky, and,
chancing to make the acquaintance of Kelly, Levy, and
Burgess, who had been sticking up people on the roads
about the diggings for several months, he joined them.
One day they informed him that Mr. E. B, Fox, a gold
buyer, of Maori Gully, was expected to pass along the road,
and they intended to bail him up, as he was sure to have
some gold or money on him. Kelly, Levy, and Burgess
hid themselves in some bushes beside the road, while
Sullivan was stationed on the road with a long-handled
shovel, so that those who passed along might take him for a
road repairer. Owing to this disguise he could keep watch
without exciting suspicion. He had not been long on
watch when a man named George Dobson came along, and
asked how far it was to the coal pits. Sullivan replied
“ About half a mile,” and the man thanked him and walked
on. When he was opposite where the other bushrangers


were hidden they fired and killed him under the belief that
he was Fox. When they discovered their mistake they
dragged the body off the road and buried it, and as it began
to rain heavily they all went to their tent. A day or two
later they went to the road again, and took up positions as
before, Levy giving orders that not a man should be allowed
to pass without being searched. Sullivan again appeared
as a road-repairer, and was pretending to be at work when
an old man named James Battle, commonly known in the
district as “ Old Jamie,” came along with a sluicing shovel
on his shoulder. Sullivan said “ Good day, mate. Where
are you bound for?” Old Jamie replied that he was going
to “look for a ship,” as the diggings were “played out.”
Sullivan went to the ambush and reported that the man was
an old whaler and not worth robbing, but Levy said he
must be brought back. Sullivan, therefore, followed him
and brought him back without difficulty, as he had no
suspicion. Kelly and Burgess seized him, tied his hands
behind him, and led him away into the bush. When they
returned they said he would not trouble them any more.
They divided 155., which they had taken from the
old man. He had informed them that he had not
done well at the diggings, and had, therefore, taken a
job of cutting flax to earn sufficient money to enable him
to get away.
Shortly after Old Jamie had been thus disposed of,
Felix Mathieu, John Kempthorne, James Dudley, and
James de Pontius, storekeepers and gold buyers from the
Deep Creek Diggings, passed along the road on their way
from Nelson to Canvas Town. Two of the bushrangers
stepped out from their ambush and confronted them, calling
upon them to stand. They wheeled their horses, intending
to gallop away, but found the other two bushrangers facing
them, revolvers in hand. The four travellers then surren-
dered and allowed their hands to be tied behind them.
Levy, Burgess, and Kelly led them away into the bush,
while Sullivan followed the pack horse which had been let
go, and which galloped a short distance along the road and
then stopped and began to feed. Sullivan very soon caught
it, and led it off the road. He took the gold and other
valuables out of the portmanteau, which was strapped on


the saddle, and shot the horse. Then he went to the camp
to meet his mates.
The four bodies were discovered by William Flett, when
he was out looking for horses in the bush. They were lying
less than half-a-mile from the roadway on the Nelson side of
the third creek from Franklyn’s Flat. Mathieu’s body was
lying in the loose ground broken up by the uprooting of a
large tree by the wind. It was on its back, the hands tied
behind, and the feet tied together at the ankles. It was
sheltered and partially hidden by the upturned roots of the
fallen tree. Dudley’s body was about eighteen yards away
with a handkerchief tied tightly round the throat. Kemp-
thorne’s body was some twenty yards further, lying on its
back, untied. The body of De Pontius was lying some
thirty yards further along with a number of stones piled
loosely around it, suggesting the idea that they had been
thrown at it from a short distance. Dr. Vickerman said that
Kempthorne had been shot in the head behind the ear.
The bullet and some paper were found in the wound, showing
that the shot had been fired at close range. Mathieu had
been shot in the stomach, and then stabbed. The wound
was under the fifth rib, and had apparently been made with
a large knife. De Pontius had a bullet-wound in the back
of the head, and the right side of the face was smashed, as
if from the blows of rocks or stones. It was supposed that
the bullet had not killed him at once, and he was therefore
stoned to death. Dudley had been strangled.
A revolver was found in the gorse hedge at Toitoi by
Constable Peter Levy. A gun, identified by James Street
as one which had been stolen from his place on the Kamieri
River, near Hokitiki, in the January previous, was also
found by the constable not far away.
Mrs, Mathieu identified Levy as a man who had fre-
quently visited her husband’s store at Deep Creek, and
exclaimed when she saw him in the court, “ Oh, Levy, Levy,
how could you be such a villain ? ”
The police ascertained that Sullivan had sold to the
banks in Nelson gold to the value of 7s. 6d. Kelly
had sold gold to the value of and a few shillings, and
Levy had sold another lot. These, with three nuggets
which were sold together for £$ 3s. qd., made a total of


about disposed of by the robbers since the murders
had been committed. It was, of course, impossible to say
what proportion had been stolen from each of the four
victims, or whether the whole of it had been taken from
them.
George Jervis, a publican at Canvas Town, said that he
gave the prisoners permission to camp in an unoccupied hut
not far from his hotel. When they were leaving Burgess
said “ Good-bye, old boy; we’re going away from this
country. There’s nothing to be done here.” The publican
had no suspicion as to the characters of the men, but
thought that they had not been very lucky recently.
Old Jamie left the diggings a short time before, and
crossed the river. The old man was well-known in the
district. His body was discovered by George James Baker,
of Nelson, one of the volunteers who accompanied Sergeant
Major Shallcross and the police who started out to search
for the missing men when the murders were first reported.
There was some freshly-turned up earth near a fern root
which attracted Mr. Baker’s attention. A log had been
rolled across the place, and on this being rolled aside and
the earth scraped away, a portion of the clothing was seen.
The body was buried in a shallow hole, lying on its back,
and only just covered with loose earth. The trousers had
been torn off, but the other clothing remained.
The trial lasted for three days, Kelly, Levy, and
Burgess being found guilty and sentenced to death on
September 17th, 1866. Sullivan was tried separately on the
19th for the murder of Old Jamie, and a verdict of guilty
was recorded against him. He, however, received a pardon
in accordance with the terms of the Governor’s
proclamation.
Felix Mathieu was well-known in Australia. Fie was a
native of Marseilles, about forty years of age at the time of
his death, and had been in the colonies about twelve years.
On his first arrival he was employed as barman at the
Union Hotel, Beechworth, after which he opened a baker’s
shop at Spring Creek. When the rush took place to the
Snowy River in New South Wales he went there and
opened a store, and later on he kept a store at the Lambing
Flat (Burrangong) and another at the Lachlan (Forbes).


From there he went to the west coast, New Zealand, where
he met his death as recorded.
Levy had been tried at Castlemaine, Victoria, about six
years before, on the charge of murdering a woman with
whom he was living, but was acquitted for want of con-
firmatory evidence.
Sullivan had been transported to Van Diemen’s Land,
from whence he went to Victoria in 1853. He opened a
butcher’s shop at Ironbark Gully, Bendigo, where he was
well known. He removed and opened the Half-way Inn on
the road between Bendigo and Inglewood. At the time that
he sailed to New Zealand he left his wife in charge of a store
at Mount Korong and sold an allotment of land at Wedder-
burn to raise money to pay for his trip. He was certainly
not driven to crime through want or poverty, and if, as he
said, he was unlucky on the New Zealand diggings, he could
without much difficulty or delay have obtained remittances
from Victoria which would at least have been sufficient to
enable him to return home.
After his companions in crime had been executed,
Sullivan was kept in gaol for some months, popular feeling
being so strong that it was deemed inexpedient to release
him at once. It was during this time that he made some
further revelations about his late companions. Soon after
he joined Burgess, Kelly, and Levy, he said he saw a young
man sitting propped up against the butt of a tree. He was
dead. Sullivan asked whether the body was to be buried ?
Kelly replied “ No, better leave it where it is. It will make
people think he died from exhaustion. I’ve put many a
man away like that.” It was supposed that he referred to
the wild times immediately following the discovery of gold
in Victoria. The young man in question had been strangled,
and the robbers had taken from his body a silver watch, a
gold chain, a compass, a few shillings in money, and a
deposit receipt for which they burned, to prevent it
from turning up in evidence against them.
Soon after his release he returned to Victoria, but was
recognised at Bendigo and other places and boycotted.
People refused to sell him food or to have any dealings with
him whatever. The Government was urged to put the
Criminals’ Influx Prevention Act (18 Viet., No. 3) in force


against him, but his case did not come under the provisions
of that Act, as he had not been sentenced to penal servitude
since his departure from Victoria. He drifted from town to
town, and finally made his way to Sydney, from whence, it
was said, he went to South America and was lost to sight.
The story of bushranging in New Zealand further
illustrates the intimate relationship between the colonies to
which I have already referred. Garrett, the first New
Zealand bushranger, was an old Victorian criminal, and the
Maungapatau murderers, with whom the record terminates,
also went to the islands from the same colony, some of them,
if not all, having been previously transported from Great
Britain to Van Diemen’s Land.
It may be advisable here, perhaps, to say a few words
with regard to Sullivan’s evidence. The point in it to which
I wish to draw the attention of the reader is the partial
exculpation of himself. Substantially, the confession was no
doubt correct, but we have only Sullivan’s own word to
prove that the murders were committed by his companions
and that he himself only shot a horse. We notice a similar
effort on the part of Daniel Charters and others who have
turned Queen’s evidence to minimise the share they took in
the outrages with which they were charged. Charters,
indeed, went rather further than the majority of informers
and stated that he was sent away to take care of the horses
while the escort was robbed, because he was too frightened
to “risk his skin.” He thus openly admitted his
cowardice in order apparently to justify himself, to himself,
for turning informer. Of course, his evidence may have
been true in this particular, but the constancy of this prin-
ciple in informers generally of claiming that they merely
took a very secondary share in the crimes which they are
the means of bringing home to their fellows, tends to raise
a suspicion that they do, as a rule, consciously or uncon-
sciously, endeavour to excuse themselves to the public, and
perhaps also to themselves, as a sort of relief perhaps to
their own conscience, for turning informer. Their action in
this respect contrasts strongly with that of men like Pierce,
the cannibal, or John Lynch, in making confessions after
they have been convicted. In these and other cases which
might be cited the condemned man appears to be anxious to


let the public know how very bad their actions have been. I
do not say that they exaggerate their crimes, but merely that
they are particular that even the smallest facts shall be made
public. At the same time, they endeavour to satisfy their
own consciences in some way or other for what they have
done. Pierce, for instance, excused himself by saying that
he must either have killed and eaten his companions or
starved, although this is not borne out by the facts as far as
they are known of his last act of cannibalism. Lynch, on
the other hand, endeavoured to prove that he was the
instrument of divine vengeance, that he had a mission. But,
whatever the excuse put forward may be, the fact remains
that they take care that their crimes shall be known to the
very smallest particulars. This point is I think worthy of
the investigation of the criminologist.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Bushranging in Queensland ; Some Bushrangers from Over the Southern
Border ; A Bogus Ben Hall; The Wild Scotchman : Queensland’s
Only Bushranger ; A Man of Many Aliases ; He goes to Fight a
Duel with Sir Frederick Pottinger ; He Escapes from the Steamer ;
Recaptured and Tried.
There was still another of the Australian colonies which
was affected by the evil influence of the bushranging mania
inaugurated by Frank Gardiner. This colony was Queens-
land. In May, 1864, Harry, the mailman, was travelling
along the road between Bodumba and Leyburn, when he
■was stopped by an old man and a boy, one of whom asked
him, civilly enough, which was the road to Warwick.
Harry, very obligingly, pulled up to tell them where to turn
off, when the old man drew a pistol and ordered him to
dismount. Harry protested against this outrage, and said
he was a Government employe, but this only produced a
reiteration of the order with a threat to blow out his brains
if he did not obey. He then dismounted, and was tied
very tightly, the robbers paying no attention whatever to his
complaints that the rope was cutting his wrists. The
robbers went through the bags, which they left on the
ground, and, when they had finished, the old man mounted
Harry’s horse, while the boy climbed on to the pack-horse,
and rode away. Harry, who was left lying on the ground,
rolled himself over and over to where there were some
jagged rocks by the side of the road. Selecting the one
with the sharpest edge, he wriggled about until he got the
rope across it, and then moved his body backwards and
forwards until the strands of the rope which bound his


hands together behind his back parted. Having freed
his hands, he soon untied the rope round his legs and
walked to Goondiwindi, where he reported the robbery to
the police. The Brisbane Courier in reporting this
robbery said it was the first case of bushranging that
had taken place in Queensland, and hoped that that colony
was not about to have its peace disturbed as that of the
southern colonies had recently been by bushrangers. The
Courier , of course, did not consider the convicts who
escaped into the bush when Moreton Bay was a penal
settlement as bushrangers in the modern acceptation of the
term. Some of the more notorious of these have already
been dealt with in Chapter XV., but if we accept the new
meaning of the term “ bushranger,” the Courier was, no
doubt, correct in its assertion that this was the first case
that had occurred in the colony. Of course a rumour was
raised that the perpetrator was Gilbert and some of his
gang, but the description given of the robbers shows that
this rumour was absurd.
About a month later a bushranger named Wright stuck
up and robbed a number of people in the Rockhampton
district. He was speedily followed by the police and some
black trackers, and was shot, early in July, at Wipend, on
the Mackenzie River, a few miles off of the Peak Downs
Road. He was riding a racehorse which he had stolen
from Mr. Cranston, a squatter of that district.
In September a man entered the bar of the Shearers’
Arms Inn at Knebsworth, and cried out “ Bail up ! I’m Ben
Hall! ” The proprietor, Mr. Philip Hardy, took a revolver
out of a drawer under the counter. The bushranger, seeing
him do this, fired, and missed. Mr. Hardy returned the
fire, and wounded the bushranger. The landlord ran round
from behind the bar, collared his assailant, and after a
struggle thrust him into a back room. Having locked the
door and made his prisoner secure, as he thought, Mr.
Hardy ran to the police station to report. He returned in
a few minutes accompanied by a constable, but the bird
had flown. The window of the room in which he had been
shut was wide open, so that the bushranger had merely to
step out and walk away. It is probable therefore that he
was making his way to the bush at the back of the house


almost as soon as the door was locked. He lost his horse,
however, as the animal was hitched to the verandah post in
front, and was taken away by the constable.
One or two other cases occurred, but they were all of a
paltry character, until the Celtic blood of Alpin Mac-
pherson, alias John Bruce, alias Mar, alias Kerr, alias
Scotia or Scotchie, generally known as the Wild Scotch-
man, was stirred to emulate the heroic deeds of Hall, Gilbert
and Co. Macpherson was born in Scotland and was taken
to Queensland when very young by his father. The elder
Macpherson worked for Mr. McConnell at Cressbrook and
was generally respected by those who knew him. His son
Alpin was sent to school in the town and was a favourite
with his teachers on account of his diligence. When old
enough he was apprenticed to Mr. Petrie, a stonemason in
Biisbane, and was again well-liked by his master and the
members of his family. Alpin was a diligent reader and a
fluent speaker. He became a prominent member of the
Debating Class in the Brisbane Mechanics’ School of Arts.
When Mr. Lilley, afterwards Attorney-General, was attacked
at a political meeting at the Valley, with mud, over-ripe
tomatoes, and other missiles, on account of his Militia Bill,
which was strongly opposed, young Macpherson defended
him bravely, receiving some bruises. Soon afterwards, with-
out any apparent reason, he ran away from his apprenticeship
and took to the roads. He began his bushranging career
by sticking up Wills’s Hotel on the Houghton River, after
the manner popular with the Hall and-Gilbert gang. From
thence he went to New South Wales to “ fight a duel with
Sir Frederick Pottinger,” the head of the police force in that
colony. This determination he announced himself. The
records of this portion of his career are somewhat obscure.
It is known that he did exchange shots with Sir Frederick
Pottinger and some troopers, and that he received a slight
wound, but it is doubtful whether he ever joined Hall and
Gilbert, and committed robberies in their company, as he
said he did. However, he did not remain in New South
Wales very long. He returned to Queensland and robbed
the mails, stuck up travellers, stole racehorses, and otherwise
endeavoured to work up to the standard ideal of the real
Australian bushranger.
Y


He had been thus employed for some months when Mr.
W. Nott, manager of the Manduran station, saw him in a
paddock belonging to the station, and recognised him.
Believing that he was there with the intention of stealing
some of the horses, Mr. Nott hastily collected a party and
started in pursuit. The party consisted of Messrs. Nott,
Curry, Gadsden, and J. Walsh. They came in sight of
their quarry about five miles away, as he was travelling
along the Port Curtis Road. He was riding slowly when
first seen, but, on observing the pursuers closing upon him,
Macpherson let go his packhorse, wheeled off the road,
and galloped down the side of a steep range. His pursuers
followed. When he reached the level ground at the foot
of the range, the Wild Scotchman pulled up, and began to
unstrap the double-barrelled gun which he carried across
the pommel of his saddle. Before he could succeed,
however, Mr. Nott came close up and cried “ Put up your
hands or I’ll fire.” The rifle barrel was only a few feet
away, and as the other men came up at once with arms
ready for use the Wild Scotchman yielded. “All right,” he
said, “I give up.” “I knew you were not policemen,” he said
later, “by the way you came down that ridge, but you wouldn’t
have caught me if my horse had not been done up.” They
took away his arms, and then returned to the station, two of
the captors riding with the bushranger between them, while
the other two rode close behind. In the pack on the horse
which he abandoned was found a beautifully-fitted case of
surgical instruments, with lint and other necessaries for
treating wounds. He also carried a pocket compass, an
American axe, and some other useful articles. The axe was
required for cutting fences or for making temporary stock-
yards to catch horses in.
A warrant had been issued for his arrest for his attack
on Sir Frederick Pottinger and the police in New South
Wales, and the Wild Scotchman was therefore extradited to
stand his trial in New South Wales on a charge of shooting
with intent to do grievous bodily harm. His arrival in
Sydney was coincident with the resignation of that officer
as already related. Sir Frederick, however, was summoned
to appear against him, and it was on his journey to Sydney
for this purpose that the accident happened which put an


end to Sir Frederick’s life and the prosecution against the
Wild Scotchman at the same time.
The Wild Scotchman was returned to Queensland in
charge of the police. He was sent from Brisbane to Port
Denison, and was there committed for trial and remanded
to Rockhampton, the nearest assize town, for that purpose.
He was shipped on board the steamer Diamantina in
charge of Constable Maher. He was accommodated with
leg irons, his hands being so small that he could easily
shp them through any ordinary handcuffs. In fact he
boasted freely that the handcuffs to hold him “ had
not yet been made. ’ When the steamer reached
Mackay he was seated reading near the galley, but
he had behaved so quietly all through the earlier
part of the passage that the constable did not think it
necessary to disturb him by taking him below. There was,
of course, the usual bustle while the steamer was at the
wharf, and Constable Maher appears to have lost sight of
his prisoner, and did not miss him until the vessel had been
an hour at sea. Then a search was instituted, but no Wild
Scotchman could be found, and as the Maryborough
Chronicle remarked, “Constable Maher reached Rock-
hampton minus his prisoner.”
How he got ashore and removed his leg-irons was a
mystery which was not solved for some time. However, his
escape did not profit him much. He went to a paddock on
the Kolongo station with the intention of stealing a horse
to enable him to stick up the mail coach, and “make a
rise.” But a party was organised by Mr. Hall, and he was
recaptured without attaining his purpose. This time greater
care was exercised by the police to whom he was handed
over, and he reached Rockhampton, where he was tried on
several charges of highway robbery and sentenced to twenty
years’ penal servitude.
There can be no doubt that young Macpherson, like
many other high-spirited young men, was led away by the
glamour which gathered round the bushrangers Hall,
Gilbert, and their young associates; and which appears to
have appealed so strongly to the youth of certain tempera-
ments as to blind them to the enormity of the crimes
committed by these bushrangers. The quiet bush life in


Australia afforded them no escape valve by which their
desire for excitement might be worked off. They did not
pause to realise that their fight against society was hopeless
from the beginning, and that in taking to the bush they were
setting themselves, almost single handed, against the whole
force of public opinion in the colony. Had they lived in
Europe they might, perhaps, have enlisted in the army and
thus been able to do something to satisfy their cravings for
notoriety and adventure in a legitimate way. In Australia,
however, there was no standing army, and even if there had
been there was nothing for it to do in the colonies, and no
chance of its ever being employed outside, where hard
blows were to be struck and glory won. It may be true
that even soldiers do not always find congenial work for
them to do, and that many of them have lived very hum-
drum lives, but there is always the hope that they may be
called on to defend their country, or to fight for its aggran-
disement, and this hope is sufficient to induce them to enlist,
when they are brought under the control of the disciplinarian
and kept out of mischief until their boyish enthusiasm sub-
sides and they are old enough to enter into the business of
life. However, Queensland’s “ only bushranger,” the Wild
Scotchman, was captured after a brief but exciting career of
about eighteen months, and the colony has not been troubled
by bushrangers since.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
Captain Moonlite ; The “ Reverend Gentleman ” Robs the Bank, and
Nearly Makes his Escape ; He Breaks out of Ballarat Gaol ; He
Becomes a Reformed Character ; He Sticks Up Wantabadgery
Station ; A Desperate Battle with the Police ; Moonlite is
Captured ; His Young Companions in Crime ; Sentenced to
Death ; The Wild Horse Hunters Turn Bushrangers ; An Abortive
Attempt to Rob a Bank.
From about June, 1872, to April, 1878, or nearly six years,
Australia was free from bushrangers. With the exception of
the two or three robberies in the far west of New South
Wales, so far west as to be almost out of the colony, the
roads were safe ; travellers journeyed in all directions without
fear of molestation ; and the public, as well as the authorities,
began to congratulate themselves once more on having at
length definitely stamped out the scourge of bushranging.
Since the shooting of Thunderbolt and the capture of Power,
there had been no sign of a recrudescence of the crime, and
bushranging was beginning to be referred to as belonging to
a past age. But this peaceful condition of the country was
not always to continue. The old leaven of convictism so
frequently referred to, had not as yet been so completely
eliminated as the public and the authorities hoped and
believed. Reports began to spread about in 1878 that
robberies had been committed in the neighbourhood where
Power had so long set the police at defiance, and shortly
afterwards the name of Ned Kelly began to be associated
with them. Ned Kelly is still spoken of as the last of the
bushrangers, and as his death closes the story, it may be as
well to deal with some other bushrangers who finished their


careers before “ the gentleman of the Strathbogie Ranges.”
The most remarkable of these was George Scott, alias
Captain Moonlite. His story belongs partly to the former
era, but I have reserved it in order to make it more
complete than would have been possible had it been
divided. Scott was born in the North of Ireland, and
emigrated to Victoria. He went to the diggings at a time
when agents from New Zealand were endeavouring to raise
a corps in Victoria for service against the Maoris. He
enlisted and fought through the war in 1861-65, being
wounded in the leg. On his return to Victoria he showed a
strong desire to join the Church, and as he was well
educated and a good speaker he was appointed lay reader
at Bacchus Marsh, with a view to his being ordained a
minister of the Church of England, when the Bishop of
Melbourne should consider him worthy of the charge. His
duties as lay reader were to travel round the settlement, to
read prayers and conduct services, his head quarters being
in the town at Mount Egerton. His chief friends here were
the manager of the Union Bank and the schoolmaster. He
soon came to be respected and liked in the district. One
night, however, a masked man walked into the living
apartments connected with the bank and ordered the
manager, who was alone, to bail up. The manager recognised
the voice and asked him whether he thought this a suitable
practical joke for a clergyman. Scott replied that he would
soon find it was no joke. He threatened to shoot the
manager unless he surrendered and did as he was ordered.
He then gagged the manager, took him across the street to
the school-house, and compelled him to sign the following
statement: —“ Captain Moonlite has stuck me up and
robbed the bank.” There was no one at the school-house,
Scott having apparently timed his visit when he knew the
school would be empty. Leaving the paper on the desk in
the school-house, Scott took the manager back to the bank,
tied him hand and foot, and then took about worth
in notes and coin from the safe. The schoolmaster found the
paper lying on the desk when he went to open the school
next morning, and at first did not know what to make of it. He
handed it to the police, who, on going to the bank, found the
manager gagged and tied. Having heard his story the police


considered it absurd, and arrested the manager and school-
master as having been jointly concerned in the crime. The
idea of charging the minister, as Scott was generally called,
appeared to be preposterous, the more especially as Scott
was very active in trying to find incriminating evidence
against his quondam friends. Being intimately acquainted
with the lives led by the two men, he was able to supply the
police with several facts, true or false, which were considered
strong circumstantial proofs of their guilt. They were com-
mitted for trial, Scott being bound over as a witness against
them. He did not wait for the trial, however, but went to
Sydney, where he put up at one of the leading hotels and
spent money lavishly. He represented himself as a wealthy
visitor to the colonies travelling for pleasure, and spoke of
his intention to visit some of the South Sea Islands, hor
this purpose he purchased a yacht, for which he paid partly
in cash and partly by a cheque for This cheque was
returned by the bank on which it was drawn as valueless,
and the man who had sold him the yacht immediately com-
municated with the police. Scott had already set sail, but
the police followed him in a steam launch and caught him
just outside the Heads. He was brought back and tried foi
fraud and was sent to gaol for eighteen months.
Even the flight of Scott from Mount Egerton did not at
first convince the police and others of his guilt in
connection with the bank robbery, but without his evidence
the case against the bank manager and the schoolmaster
was so weak that it broke down, and they were discharged.
Later on a warrant was issued for the arrest of Scott, alias
Captain Moonlite, but he was then in gaol in New South
Wales. On his release he was rearrested, and extradited to
Victoria to be tried for the bank robbery. He was taken
to Ballarat, and lodged in the newly-built gaol, a most
substantial structure of blue stone (basalt). Ihe building
stands in a large courtyard, surrounded by a wall twenty-five
feet high, also constructed of basalt. Looked at from the
outside it appears to be one of the most hopeless places for
a prisoner to escape from imaginable, but Scott had been
educated as an engineer, and therefore what might have
been impossible for another man was not so for him.
There was a wooden partition which divided one cell into


two. Scott was imprisoned awaiting trial in one portion of
the cell, and a man named Dermoodie in the other portion.
Scott cut through this partition, and with the aid of
Dermoodie contrived to take the lock off the door. The
two men walked into the corridor and hid in a dark
corner until the warder came round, when Scott sprang
on him, grasped him by the throat, and with the assistance
of Dermoodie gagged and tied him. Scott then took the
keys, and having shut the warder into the cell, with the door
closed, so that any other warder in passing it would not
notice that it had been opened, walked down the passage.
With the keys he opened four more cells and liberated the
prisoners in them. He made them take the blankets from
their beds and follow him, after carefully closing the doors
again. He opened the door leading into the great yard and
went to a dark corner under the wall where he tore the
blankets into strips and tied them together to form a rope.
Scott then stood up against the wall. One of the other men
climbed up and stood on his shoulders, another climbed up
and stood on his, and so on until the last, Dermoodie, was
able to take the rope and sit on the wall. With the aid of
the rope each man was enabled to go up in turn to where
Dermoodie was, and was then lowered down on the other
side. Here they stood on each others’ shoulders as before,
to enable Dermoodie to climb down, then the others followed
in turn, and they were free. The south-eastern corner of
the gaol wall stands near the edge of the hill where the
ground slopes sharply down to Golden Gully. The six men
went down the slope to a safe distance, and then Scott said
they must part, as they would have a better chance of getting
away separately than if they all kept together. The four men
liberated by Scott to help him over the wall were speedily
caught, some in Ballarat and the others not far away, but as
they were not bushrangers we have nothing further to do
with them. Scott and Dermoodie went away together and
slept in the bush. Scott said they must have money, and
proposed to rob a bank, which he said could be easily done,
but Dermoodie said he had only been arrested for a small
offence, and he had made his case bad enough by escaping.
He did not wish to make it worse. Scott called him a
coward, a contemptible cur, and said he should never leave


that spot alive. He gave him five minutes to say his
prayers. He was in a terrible rage, but before the five
minutes were over he said that Dermoodie was not worth
killing, gave him a few kicks and blows, and ordered him
out of his sight, an order which was quickly obeyed.
Dermoodie went back to Ballarat and was recaptured a day
or two after his escape, while Scott was found about a week
later in a hut near Bendigo. He was tried, and was
sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment for the bank robbery,
and to one years’ imprisonment in irons for breaking gaol.
Scott behaved in the most exemplary manner while he
was in Pentridge, and contrived to convince both the chap-
lain and the gaol authorities that he intended to live “ on
the square ” for the future. He was allowed all the remission
possible under the rules for good conduct, and was released
in March, 1879. He was a forcible and fluent speaker, and
he made a living by open-air lecturing in Melbourne on
prison discipline and other subjects. About this time the
Kelly gang was at the zenith of its career, when suddenly
Scott disappeared from his usual haunts in Melbourne.
Probably his imagination was stirred by the reports current
about the Kellys; perhaps he was prompted by jealousy of
their doings; or, perhaps, by a sudden desire for notoriety.
However this may be, he was gone.
On Saturday, November 15th, 1879, at about three p.m.,
six armed men rode up to Mr. C. F. J. Macdonald’s station
at Wantabadgery, on the Murrumbidgee River, New South
Wales, and bailed up all the men at work there. Nineteen
men were collected from various places about the station
and marched into the dining-room of Mr. Macdonald’s
house. Mr. Miles was then ordered to unlock the door
of the store, and the robbers selected a quantity of
clothing and other goods which they required or fancied.
They were engaged in packing these on some spare horses
when Mr. Weir, of Eurongilly, and a schoolmaster rode up,
and were called on to bail up. The schoolmaster refused,
and one of the bushrangers loudly declared that he would
shoot him. Hearing the altercation, the leader of the gang
came out of the store, seized the schoolmaster by the leg,
and dragged him from the horse, saying at the same time,
“You old fool, get down and do as you’re told. Pm


Moonlite.” He pushed the schoolmaster along, and forced
him to go into the dining-room where the other men were
sitting.
Towards evening Mr. Baynes, the manager of the
station, returned from a back station, and was bailed up
and conducted to the dining-room. The women had been
told that they would not be interfered with, and were
ordered to cook dinner. When it was ready it was served
in the dining-room, where all partook of the food, the bush-
rangers sitting down in turn, while two remained on guard.
After the meal some grog, obtained from the station store,
was served round, and Mr. Macdonald was permitted to
retire to bed. The others remained at the table all night,
the bushrangers taking it in turn to sleep like the others
with their heads on the table.
Breakfast on the following (Sunday) morning was taken
as supper had been on the previous evening. During the
meal Mr. Baynes said to one of the young bushrangers who
was seated near him, “ This is bad work.” Moonlite,
who was sitting on the other side of the large table,
heard him and jumped up. He charged Mr. Baynes
with trying to tamper with his men, and swore that he
would shoot him. He seemed to be in a paroxysm
of rage, and flourished his revolver about in a dangerous
manner. The women, however, clustered round, assuring
him that Mr. Baynes did not mean any harm, and
begging him to spare him. In a few minutes Scott’s rage
had evaporated, and he sat down again and went on with
his meal apparently oblivious of Mr. Baynes’s presence.
During the morning several men came to the station, and
were bailed up and marched into the dining-room. One of
these men was leading a young filly which had only recently
been broken in. Scott admired her very much and said,
“ She’ll just suit me.” He led her round and then tried to
mount her, but she was very skittish and would not let him.
This threw him into a passion and he became violent, thus
frightening the filly and making her more ungovernable.
At length he swore that if she did not stand still he would
shoot her, and as she continued to rear and try to get away
he drew his revolver and sent a bullet through her head.
When his fit of passion had passed off, Moonlite said he was


sorry he had killed the mare, but she should have stood
still when he told her. He then ordered Lindon, the groom,
to put the horses into the buggy, and, taking Mr. Alexander
Macdonald as a hostage, drove to the house of the super-
intendent of the station, Mr. Reid. Here he obtained a
Whitworth rifle and some ammunition. He then forced
Mr. and Mrs. Reid to mount the buggy, and drove away to
Paterson’s Australian Arms Hotel, which he stuck up, taking
two shot guns and a revolver. He ordered Mr. and
Mrs. Paterson to walk to the station, and, to ensure obedience,
put their two little children into the buggy and drove away.
On the return journey to the station he stuck up seven more
men, and compelled them to march in front of the buggy to
the station, and go into the dining-room.
As Moonlite jumped down from the buggy he caught
sight of Mr. Baynes standing on the verandah. He rushed
across to him, and charged him with attempting to corrupt
his men. He ordered Mr. Baynes to be pinioned with a
fishing line, and had him lifted into the buggy, saying “ I’ll
drive under that tree and you can tie the rope to the limb,
and we’ll leave this gentlemen hanging there.” A rope was
tied round Mr. Baynes’s neck ready, but the women, seeing
these preparations for a tragedy, again gathered round
Moonlite and begged him to let Mr. Baynes go. At first
he refused, saying “ The gentleman does not deserve it,”
but gradually he became less violent, and finally ordered
Baynes to be untied. Then he called a muster of all the
men in the dining-room and counted thirty-five.
After having given orders as to the custody of his
prisoners, Moonlite mounted a horse and rode round, going
for some distance along the road on each side of the home-
stead. He met a man coming from the adjoining station,
Eurongilly, where he worked. “ Hulloa,” cried Moonlite,
where are you going with that pistol ? ” “To fight the
bushrangers,” replied the man. “By G— —,” exclaimed
Scott, “ you’ve found them, here we are. Hand over that
revolver and we’ll try you for unlawfully carrying firearms.”
The man was compelled to obey, and was taken into the
dining-room. Moonlite took his seat as judge, having
appointed two of his mates and two of the station hands as
jury, and the trial was carried out as nearly in the orthodox


manner as circumstances would permit. The charge was
read by the clerk, witnesses were heard and cross-examined;
the judge summed up, and the verdict returned was “ Not
guilty.” Scott turned to the prisoner and said, “ You may
think yourself lucky. If the jury had found you guilty,
I’d have given you five minutes to live.” He then ordered
the prisoner to be discharged, and said it was dinner time.
In the afternoon the vigilance of the bushrangers relaxed
so far that Alexander Macdonald contrived to make his
escape. He got a horse and rode to Wagga Wagga, twenty-
five miles away. He informed the police of what had taken
place, and Constables Howe, Hedley, Williamson, and
Johns saddled their horses and started back with him to
Wantabadgery, where they arrived at four a.m. on Monday
morning. The robbers were still in possession, and the
police hoped to find them unprepared, but this was not the
case, and the police retreated to Mr. James Beveridge’s
station, Tarrandera Park, where they obtained fresh horses.
By this time five more troopers had arrived from Gundagai,
sixty-five miles away, and the police decided that they were
strong enough to begin the attack. The people who had
been detained in the dining-room speedily made their
escape and collected on a ridge a short distance from the
scene of battle, other persons, attracted by the sound of the
firing, rode up from the stations round until some three
hundred spectators of the fight were collected on the ridge,
but they left the police to do the fighting unaided. Constable
Bowen, who had already shot a bushranger in the Thunder-
bolt rising, was the first to make any impression, and a great
cheer went up as one of Moonlite’s men was seen to fall.
The bushrangers went into the house, and the police took
shelter in a hut some distance away. They advanced very
cautiously, and Constable Bowen shot a second man, falling
wounded himself almost at the same time. Some time
afterwards Constable Carroll, who had crept close up to the
verandah, in spite of the heavy fusilade which was kept up,
shot a third bushranger, and soon after the other three came
out and surrendered. Moonlite asked Mr. Wise to go for
a doctor to attend to Nesbit, saying “ Poor fellow! He was
shot trying to save me.”
James Nesbit, alias Lyons, who was shot dead, was born


in Melbourne and was twenty-three years of age. Augustus
or Gus Wernicke (also from Melbourne), aged nineteen,
died a few days after the battle. Graham Bennett, also born
in Victoria, was twenty years of age. He was wounded in
the arm and recovered. Thomas Williams, alias Jones,
nineteen years old, was born in Ballarat, Victoria. Thomas
Rogan was born at Hay, New South Wales, but had been
living for some years in Melbourne, where he became
acquainted with Scott. Scott, the leader, was thirty-seven
years of age.
Constable Bowen died of his wound on the Sunday
following the fight, and the prisoners were tried on the
charge of murdering him. The trial took place at Darling-
hurst Court House, Sydney, and lasted for four days, A
verdict of guilty was returned, but the jury recommended
Rogan, Bennett, and Williams to mercy on account of their
youth and the belief that they had been led into crime by
Scott. In consequence of this the sentences on Bennett and
Williams were commuted to imprisonment for life, but
although some pressure was brought to bear on the Governor,
Lord Augustus Loftus, the executive declined to extend
mercy to Rogan. He and Scott were therefore hung in
Darlinghurst gaol.
One of the witnesses at the trial, named Ah Goon, said
that he had been robbed of a gold watch and chain valued
at When taking these and some money from him,
Scott said he was “ a Chinaman who took the bread
out of the mouths of honest workers.” It is worthy of note
also that on the second day of the trial of the prisoners at
Darlinghurst, the Melbourne Argus reported that James P,
Nesbitt, father of the recently killed bushranger, was charged
at the City Police Court, Melbourne, with having thrashed
and abused his wife, the mother of the bushranger. He
was ordered to be bound over to keep the peace for six
months under a penalty of £2s, and as the money was not
forthcoming, he was sent to gaol.
The gallantry of the police in breaking up this gang of
bushrangers at so early a stage in its career was duly
recognised. The police authorities voted a reward of £ 100
to Constable Carroll, to Constable Curran, and £so
each to the other constables engaged in the fight. A public


monument was erected to Constable Bowen, and a pension
was settled on his wife, while the Government undertook the
care and education of his children. The police were
paraded in Sydney ; the Inspector General, Mr. E. Fosbery,
read a letter from the Colonial Secretary (the late Sir Henry
Parkes) publicly thanking the police constables for their
services. After this ceremony, the purses containing the
rewards were presented and acknowledged.
It is impossible to divide the bushranging of this epoch
so as to keep the story of the different colonies concerned
separate as I have in the previous epochs, because both the
Moonlite and the Kelly gang operated in both Victoria
and New South Wales. The small number of bushrangers
who worked separately from these gangs are not worth
dividing and may be dealt with here.
In February, 1879, three young men who had been
engaged in running in and capturing warrigal horses on the
lower Murrumbidgee, thought, perhaps, that that employ-
ment was less profitable than bushranging, and took to the
roads. Their names were Thomas Gorman (twenty-one),
Charles Jones (twenty), and William Kaye (nineteen). They
bailed up a few travellers on the road between Balranald and
Ivanhoe, and were then joined by William Hobbs, otherwise
known as Hoppy Bill, because he had a crooked leg and arm.
Hobbs had been employed as cook at the Hatfield sheep
station, and was about thirty years of age. On the 21st
they stuck up Mr, Grainger’s store at Hatfield, about sixty
miles north of Balranald, and stole worth of clothing
and other goods, two horses, with saddles and bridles. On
the following day they stopped a hawker, saying “ Bail up.
We’re the Kellys,” and took jQ 40 worth of goods and
jewellery from his waggon. On the 23rd they arrived at Till
Till station, and bailed up twenty-five persons there. Mrs,
Crombie, wife of the manager, was very much frightened at
first, but they soothed her by telling her that they “ wouldn’t
hurt any one.” They took six horses, a quantity of
ammunition, and some other articles from the store. When
they left they said that they intended to stick up Wool-
pagerie station.
In the meantime Mr. John Thomas Day, storeman at
Grainger’s, travelled as fast as his horse could go to


Moulamein, and informed the police of the sticking up of
the store. He was sworn in as a special constable, and
accompanied by troopers Beresford and Powers and a black
tracker, started in pursuit. They rode one hundred and
eighty miles between nine a.m. on Sunday and seven p.m.
on Monday, changing horses at Clare, where they came on
the tracks of the bushrangers. On their arrival at Kilferra
Mr. Casey supplied them with remounts, and joined in the
chase. The tracks led down to the Four Mile Dam, where
the pursuers came on the bushrangers in camp preparing
their supper. As they went forward the bushrangers came
to meet them, crying out, “ Bail up.” The police replied,
“ Surrender in the Queen’s name.” Both parties fired, and
Constable Powers fell wounded in the shoulder. The bush-
rangers then threw down their arms and surrendered. They
were tried on April 19th for shooting with intent to murder,
and were found guilty. When asked if they had anything
to urge why sentence of death should not be passed on
them, Hobbs was the only one who spoke, and he said,
“ God forgive me if I have to die.” Sentences of death
were pronounced, but these were subsequently commuted to
imprisonment for life.
On Wednesday, November sth, 1879, an attempt was
made to stick up the Bank of Australasia at Moe in the
Gippsland district of Victoria. At first it was supposed that
the Kellys had paid a visit to this part of the colony. The
bank was a wooden building, situated about fifty yards from
the Moe railway station, and nearly opposite the Selector’s
Arms Hotel. The bank closed at the usual time and nothing
occurred until about nine o’clock p.m. At that time Mr.
Hector Munro, the manager, was sitting in his parlour behind
the bank chamber reading. He was alone in the house, his
wife having gone up the main street to the grocer’s shop.
There was a knock at the door, and on Mr. Munro opening
it, a man with a white cap over his head, with holes to look
through cut in it, tried to force his way in. Munro
endeavoured to slam the door to, but the white cap
individual had got his foot inside and managed to push his
way in. “ Who are you ? What do you want ? ” cried
Munro, but no answer was returned. Munro still held the
man and endeavoured to drag him out of the house. The


white cap drew a pistol, but Munro clutched him by the arm,
and in the struggle the pistol went off without doing any
damage, except to the wall. Then another white-capped
man appeared and struck Munro on the head. At the same
time several people rushed over from the hotel to ascertain
what the shooting was about, and the two would-be robbers
bolted. Sergeant Irwin and two constables, with Dr.
Archibald Macdonald and several other civilians, followed
the bushrangers. They picked up two felt hats and a
serge mask in the yard, not far from the back door
of the bank. It was, however, too dark to do anything
further that night, but at daylight the tracks were
carefully followed, and shortly before six a.m. Constable
Beck and Dr. Macdonald found two men sitting on the
Trafalgar railway platform. The doctor covered them with
his rifle while the constable handcuffed them. The men
said that the constable was making a great mistake, as they
were unacquainted with each other, having arrived there by
different routes. They were waiting for the train from
Melbourne to go further up country to look for work.
Constable Beck replied, “ Oh, that’s all right; I’ll stand the
racket. What’s your names ? ” As they hesitated, he con-
tinued, “ Now, no humbug; I know you. You don’t live
far away, and if you give false names you’ll soon be bowled
out.” They then admitted that they were brothers, and
that their names were Robert and James Shanks. Their
ages were twenty-three and twenty-one years respectively.
Two revolvers were found in their carpet bags, and the
white caps were picked up not far from the platform. They
were convicted of having attempted to rob the bank, and
assaulted the manager.


CHAPTER XXIX.
The Kelly Gang; Horse-stealing, a Great Industry of the District ;
Faking the Brands ; Assault on Constable Fitzpatrick ; The Bush
Telegraphs ; Murder of Sergeant Kennedy and Constables Scanlan
and Lonergan ; Sticking up of the Faithfull Creek Station ;
Robbery of the National Bank at Euroa ; A Big Haul.
In the early years of Australian settlement bushranging was
one of the normal conditions in the colonies, and therefore
attracted little notice. Even the exploits of such heroes of
the roads as Mike Howe, Brady, the Jewboy, and Jackey
Jackey are very briefly related in the Press, and, with the
exception of the first-named, about whom Mr. James
Bonwick has written a romance, very little has been heard
of them since the age in which they lived. In the next epoch
the doings of the bushrangers were dwarfed in the public
estimation by the sensational reports of the gold finds, and
although in consequence of the growth of population and
the great increase in the number of newspapers their
actions received a wider publicity than those of their
predecessors the accounts of them are still meagre. The
sensational inauguration of the next era by the Gardiner
gang—the sticking up and robbing of the Government Gold
Escort —attracted wider notice to the bushrangers of that
epoch, and some notice of them appears even in the
English Press. But the notoriety of even the most
celebrated of the bushrangers of that epoch was nothing
as compared with that of the Kelly gang, about whom more
columns of newspaper matter have been printed than of all
the bushrangers together in the earlier epochs. Several
histories of the Kelly gang have also been published, the
z


best known, perhaps, being those of Mr. Superintendent
Hare, who was for a time in charge of the police who were
trying to capture the bushrangers, and Mr. John McWhirter,
the reporter of the Melbourne Age , who accompanied the
police in their final and successful effort to suppress the
gang. Mr. McWhirter’s “History” is largely compiled
from the reports which had appeared in the Age , and Mr.
Hare is also largely indebted to the same source. The
Kellys have also inspired more than one drama, although
the subject is not a favourite one with moralists, and the
representation of bushranging dramas has not met with
favour from a large section of the community. In this
connection we may note the influence of modern science.
The stage of the performances of the earlier bushrangers
was confined to their own locality. They were rarely heard
of outside the colony in which they appeared. In the next
stage the telegraph carried news of their performances all
over Australia, and occasionally a stray newspaper paragraph
was quoted in England. With the Kellys, however, it was
different. Notices of their exploits were even sent across the
ocean by cable, and the British public naturally desired to
hear more of these daring robbers, and therefore extracts from
the newspapers of Australia appeared more frequently in the
English Press than at any former epoch. The consequence
is that we can reconstruct the history of the Kellys more
easily than that of any other bushranging family. The
father of Ned Kelly was transported from Ireland. The
maiden name of his wife was Ellen Quinn. The eldest son,
Ned, was born at Wallan Wallan in 1854. Jim was born in
1856, and Dan in 1861. There were besides four daughters
—namely, Mrs. Gunn, Mrs. Skillian, and Kate and Grace
Kelly. In 1871, the second son, James, then about fifteen
years of age, was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment on
two charges of horse-stealing. On his discharge in 1876 he
went to New South Wales and stuck up a number of people.
He was captured almost immediately, and sent to gaol for
ten years. Edward, commonly known as Ned Kelly, was
arrested in 1870 and charged with having assisted Power in
one of his numerous bushranging exploits, but was acquitted,
as none of the witnesses could swear to his identity. It is
§aid that on more than one occasion he took care of Power’s


horses while that worthy was engaged in robbing. In 1871
he was sent to gaol for three years for horse-stealing.
Horse-stealing appears to have been the principa
industry of the district, as cattle-duffing had been of the
Wedden Mountain district, and of Manaro, and the Kellys,
the Harts, the Byrnes, and others in this district, were quite
as adept in “ faking ” brands as the Lowrys, the O’Meallys
or the Clarkes had been. But science had made advances
even in these mountains since the era of the Gardiner gang.
In earlier times the brands of horses and cattle were “ faked ’
— i.e., altered so as to represent something different from what
they were intended to do—by branding over them and adding
to them. There were some expert blacksmiths among the
cattle-duffers, and these would make a brand to fit over an old
brand and completely change its character. For instance, a
simple A brand might have a circle burned round it thus
(A), or it might have another letter conjoined to it thus—
A-B. The manner in which brands might be “ faked ” was
endless, and when it was impossible to “fake” a brand it
was “blotched,” or burned over, so that the original design
could not be recognised. The Kellys and their companions
in the Warby and Strathbogie ranges, however, did not go to
the trouble of making special brands to “ fake ” other brands.
They obtained the same results by the use of iodine, which
burned such marks into the skins of the stolen animals as
were desired. The plan adopted was to make raids into
distant parts, collect a mob of horses, drive them into an
inaccessible ravine in the mountains, “fake” their brands
and keep them until the sores had healed and the brands
looked old. Then the animals, having got fat in the
meantime, were driven to market and sold without fear of
detection. Horses stolen in the north—some even from
across the New South Wales border—were driven south to
Melbourne, Ballarat, Geelong, or some other large town, and
sold openly in the public sale yards • while those stolen in
the south were driven to some northern market, sometimes
being taken as far as Sydney.
In 1876, Daniel, the youngest of the Kelly boys, was
sent to gaol for three months for having taken part in a
house-breaking robbery in conjunction with the Lloyds, who
were connected by marriage with the Kellys. In the


following year, 1887, warrants were issued for his arrest
on six charges of horse-stealing, but he could not be found.
On April 15th, 1878, Constable Alexander Fitzpatrick,
having learned that Dan Kelly was at home, went to the
Kellys’ hut at Greta, to arrest him. “This hut,” said
the Benalla Standard , “was a well-known trysting-place
for the bushranger Power.” The constable rode up,
and seeing Dan standing at the door said to him,
“ You’re my prisoner.” “ All right,” replied Dan non-
chalantly. The constable dismounted and hitched his horse
to a sapling, when Dan said that he had been riding all day
and had had nothing to eat. After some conversation the
constable agreed to wait while Dan had some food, before
taking him to Benalla, and Dan went in and sat down. As
he did so Mrs. Kelly said to Fitzpatrick, “You won’t take
Dan out o’ this to-night.” “ Shut up, mother,” exclaimed
Dan, “ it’s all right.” The old woman continued to grumble
in an undertone, while she placed bread and meat and tea
on the table. Presently she asked the constable, “ Have
you got a warrant ? ” “ I’ve got a telegram, and that’s as
good,” replied Fitzpatrick. The constable was standing at
the door, and Dan, who took his arrest coolly, as if it was a
mere matter of course, told his mother not to make a row
about it, as it did not matter, and then invited the constable
to take some food. Fitzpatrick accepted the invitation, and
went in. As he seated himself Mrs. Kelly remarked, “If
my son Ned was here, he’d throw you out of the window.”
Dan was looking out of the window at the time, and he
exclaimed “ Here he is.” Fitzpatrick very naturally turned
to look, and Dan pounced on to him. Mrs. Kelly seized a
heavy garden spade which had been used as a fire shovel
and was much damaged, and struck Fitzpatrick a furious
blow on the head, making a dint in his helmet. Fitzpatrick
fell down, and several people hearing the noise rushed in.
Among them were Ned Kelly, William Skillian (husband of
one of the Kelly girls), and William Williams, alias Bricky.
Ned Kelly held a revolver in his hand which was still
smoking, and Fitzpatrick was wounded in the arm. Ned
said, “ I’m sorry I fired. You’re the civilest trap I’ve
seen.” He offered to cut the bullet out and bind up the
wound, but Fitzpatrick refused to let him touch it. Then


Ned said that the constable could not be allowed to go
away until the bullet was cut out and he had promised not
to tell how he got wounded. “ You can say your pistol
went off by accident,” he said. “Tell him if he does tell he
won’t live long after,” cried Mrs. Kelly. The old woman
was again told to “ shut up.” Fitzpatrick, knowing the men
he had to deal with, promised not to say who had wounded
him, and took his knife from his pocket. He cut a small
gash, over where the bullet was, and squeezed it out. Then
he twisted his handkerchief round the wound and said it
was “all right.” Ned Kelly picked up the bullet and put it
away on a shelf, and a few minutes later the constable was
allowed to mount his horse and go. On the following day
a party of troopers went to the Eleven Mile Creek and
arrested Mrs. Ellen Kelly, William Skillian, and William
Williams. A search was made for Ned and Dan Kelly, but
they could not be found. Skillian and Williams, when
brought up for trial for their share in this assault, declared
that they only came in after the shot was fired, and had
taken no part whatever in the scrimmage. They were,
however, sentenced to six years’ imprisonment, while Mrs.
Kelly was sent to gaol for three years.
It was generally understood that Ned and Dan Kelly
were in hiding somewhere in the neighbourhood, and some
twenty-five troopers with black trackers were told off to
search for them. Fourteen men, residents in the neighbour
hood, were arrested under the Outlawry Act, on suspicion
that they had harboured or aided and abetted the bush-
rangers, and were remanded from week to week for some
three months, while the police were seeking for evidence
against them. Mr. Zincke, who appeared at the police
court on behalf of the prisoners, protested against this
arbitrary act of the police, and urged that it was illegal
to detain as prisoners persons against whom no specific
charge had been made. “If the Kellys were caught,” he
said, “ these men would be told to go about their business.”
He stated his belief that the Outlawry Act would not
warrant these proceedings and that the law was being
strained in a dangerous manner. The magistrates on the
bench generally listened to his pleadings with exemplary
patience and then granted the remand asked for by the


police. There can be very little doubt that Mr. Zincke was
perfectly justified in saying that these proceedings were
illegal, but the magistrates of Beechworth and other parts of
the disturbed district had learned by experience that, as
long as the sympathisers and “ bush telegraphs ” were at
liberty, the police had very little chance of capturing
the bushrangers, and so, during the whole time that
the Kelly gang was in existence, a number of
people were kept locked up because they were suspected
of giving food or assistance to the outlaws and, more
important than all, of giving the bushrangers information as
to the movements of the police. The number of persons
thus held under restraint varied from month to month.
Sometimes a few were discharged while others took their
places. The largest number in the police cells at any one
time was thirty-five. But the authorities after all acted in a
half-hearted and inefficient manner. They arrested only
men and boys, while the women and girls were left free to
assist the bushrangers as they pleased, and the women were
quite as active and quite as efficient in affording assistance
and information to the bushrangers as the men could have
possibly been.
On October 26th one of the parties of police in search
of the outlaw's w'ent into camp at Stringy Bark Creek, about
eight miles on the King River side of the Wombat Range.
Sergeant Kennedy w r as supposed to have received infor-
mation from a friend of the Kellys as to their whereabouts,
and thus to have penetrated nearly to their hiding place.
The friend w r ho had informed the police, however, also told
the Kellys of their appproach. The country is densely
covered with stringy bark trees and scrub, and is almost
impenetrable. Sergeant Kennedy and Constable Scanlan
had gone into the scrub to endeavour to ascertain the
w'hereabouts of the tw r o Kellys, w'hile Constables Lonergan
and Mclntyre were left in charge of the camp. Lonergan
w r as employed in making tea, ready for the tw r o w’ho w r ere
away, w'hen four men on horseback came up and cried
“ Bail up ! put up your hands.” Lonergan made a jump to
get behind a tree, putting his hand to his belt for a pistol at
the same time, and was shot. He cried out “ O Christ, I’m
shot,” and fell dead. Constable Mclntyre was sitting


down. He jumped up, but having no weapon upon him
at the time he surrendered. Ned Kelly walked to Lonergan’s
body and examined it. Then he rose, and said, “ What a
pity ! Why didn’t the fool surrender ? ” He after-
wards said that it was all Constable Fitzpatrick’s fault.
“ He’d no right to lag my mother and brother-in-law for
nothing.” Ned Kelly ordered Constable Mclntyre to sit
down as if nothing had happened, and warned him that he
would be shot at once if he “gave the office” to the sergeant.
The bushrangers then hid themselves behind the trees.
Sergeant Kennedy and Constable Scanlan rode up some
time later, unconscious that anything had happened. When
they came close Mclntyre said, “ Sergeant, we’re surrounded.
You’d better surrender.” Scanlan laughed, and put his
hand to his belt, when Ned Kelly fired at him and missed.
Scanlan jumped off his horse and made for a gum tree, but
was shot dead before he reached it. Kennedy wheeled his
horse round and started at a gallop, but had gone only a
few yards when he was brought down with a rifle bullet.
His horse, frightened at the noise and the fall of its rider,
dashed through the camp, and as it passed Constable
Mclntyre threw himself across its back. He got into the
saddle, and urged it forward, when it was brought down,
shot by a rifle bullet through the heart. Mclntyre fell
clear, and crawled into a patch of scrub. He found a
wombat hole near at hand. He crept into it, and lay theie,
while he could hear the bushrangers walking round
searching for him in the scrub, and swearing they
would “do for” him when they caught him. When it was
quite dark he crawled out of his hole and walked twenty
miles to Mansfield to inform the police of what had taken
place.
Inspector Pewtress, with a party of police, started from
Melbourne on Sunday, the 27th, in a special train, and
soon reached the camp in the ranges. The bodies of
Lonergan and Scanlan were lying as they _ had fallen
not far from where the fire had been lighted, but
that of Sergeant Kennedy could not be seen from
the camp. It was not found until the 31st, owing to the
density of the scrub around the little cleared patch, where
the camp had been pitched. Three bullet w r ounds were


found in it, and a cloak had been thrown over the face
to protect it from dingoes or the weather. It was said that
Ned Kelly had ridden to his camp to fetch the cloak to
cover Kennedy with, because he considered him to be the
bravest man he had ever met.
Rewards of each had been offered by the
Victorian Government for the capture of Ned and Dan
Kelly. Now the rewards were increased to while
similar rewards were offered for Steve Hart (twenty years
of age) and Joe Byrnes (nineteen years of age).
It was reported that on October 31st the Kellys had
stuck up and robbed Neil Christian and other persons at
Bungowanah, near Baumgarten’s, on the Murray River, but
as the whole of that country was under water, in con-
sequence of a flood in the river at that time, this was
discredited. The police asserted that the Kellys were
somewhere in the mountains, but they searched the “ Rat’s
Castle ” and other hiding places without success.
On the Bth December a rough-looking bushman called
at Younghusband’s station, on Faithfull’s Creek, and asked
if the manager, Mr. Macaulay, was about ? An old man
named Fitzgerald, employed on the station, replied
that the manager was away and would not return till
morning. He asked the man if he could do anything for
him ? The traveller replied “ No, it’s of no consequence.”
He walked to the house and said to Mrs. Fitzgerald,
“I’m Ned Kelly. You needn’t be frightened, we only
want food for ourselves and our horses.” Seeing the
man talking to his wife, Fitzgerald went to them, and
Mrs. Fitzgerald said to him “This is Mr. Kelly. He
wants some refreshments.” By this time Ned had his
revolver in his hand. Fitzgerald grasped the situation
and replied “ Well, if the gentleman wants refreshments he’ll
have to have them.” Ned gave a whistle and the other three
bushrangers came forward and Dan took their horses to the
stables. Joe Byrnes took care of the Fitzgeralds, while
Ned and Steve Hart went round and collected all the men
at work on the station and locked them up in the store room.
Shortly afterwards a man named Gloster, who had a store in
Seymour and who frequently travelled round with a spring
cart loaded with goods for sale at the farms and stations,


came to the station for a bucket of water to make tea with,
and Ned ordered him to bail up. Knowing that Gloster
was of a determined character Fitzgerald shouted to him to
advise him to “give in.” “What for?” asked Gloster. “I’m
Ned Kelly,” exclaimed that hero. “ I don’t care a who
you are,” returned Gloster. At this moment Dan Kelly came
up and threatened to shoot Gloster, but Ned forbade him,
and Fitzgerald persuaded Gloster that resistance was useless
and prevailed on him to surrender.
When Macaulay, the manager, came home he was also
bailed up. “What’s the good of your sticking up the
station ? ” he asked, “ you’ve better horses than we have and
anything else you require you can have without all this
nonsense.” Ned said he had a purpose. After some con-
versation, during which Macaulay said he had no intention
of interfering with them, Macaulay was permitted to remain
free, but was closely watched to prevent him from sending
for the police. The bushrangers then searched Gloster’s
cart, selected suits of clothes for themselves, and made very
free with the bottles of scent and other small articles.
On the following day, the nth December, 1878, Messrs.
McDougal, Dudley, and Casement, in a spring cart, were
about to pass through the gate over the level crossing of the
railway, close to the station. Mr. Jennant, who was riding,
dismounted to open the gate for the cart to pass through,
when Ned Kelly, on horseback, cried “ Surrender, or you
will be shot.” Another bushranger, Joe Byrnes, walked
down quickly from the station to assist his mate if necessary,
Mr. McDougal, taking them for troopers as they carried
handcuffs in their hands, asked what right they had to arrest
them in this manner, when Ned replied, “ Shut up. I’ll
shoot you if you give me any cheek.” “ You wouldn’t
shoot an old man unarmed,” exclaimed McDougal. “ Not
if you surrender quietly,” replied Ned. They said they
surrendered, and Byrnes opened the gate and told them to
drive to the homestead. As they came up a station hand
who was standing at the store door said, “ Gentlemen, allow'
me to introduce you to Mr. Edward Kelly.” McDougal
and his companions w r ere not much surprised, as they had
already begun to perceive that their captors were not
troopers in plain clothes, as they had at first thought. The


prisoners were taken into the store, the bushrangers telling
them that the horses would be looked after.
The store-room was a long wooden building situated
about twenty yards from the house. It had only one door
and one window, both near together, so that it could easily
be guarded. With so many men confined in it the air soon
became foul, and the prisoners were allowed to come out in
small batches to obtain some fresh air. Only the men were
locked up, the women being left free and were not molested
in any way.
At about three o’clock Ned Kelly asked Mr. Macaulay
for a small cheque. Mr. Macaulay gave it to him. It was
for Then Joe Byrnes was left in charge of the station,
while the others started away, Ned in Gloster’s cart, Dan in
McDougal’s, and Hart on horseback. At about half-past
four there was a knock at the door of the National Bank at
Euroa, and when it was opened a man requested that a
cheque might be cashed for him. The manager, Mr. Robert
Scott, said it was after hours, and he could not open the
bank again till morning. The man said it would inconveni-
ence him greatly to have to call again, as he did not live in
the town. He begged so hard that at length the manager
consented to give him the money to oblige him. The
manager opened the bank door, and as soon as they were
inside the man said, “ Put up your hands. I’m Ned Kelly.”
Taken by surprise, the manager was compelled to obey.
The manager was forced to open the safe door and to hand
over os. 6d. in notes, gold, and silver, thirty-one
ounces of smelted gold, five bags of cartridges, and two
revolvers. There had been rumours that the Kellys
intended to stick up a bank, and arms and ammunition had
been sent from the head offices in Melbourne to most of the
country branches. The National Bank at Euroa had been thus
furnished, but in consequence of the cunning of the bush-
rangers the arms were useless. Mr. Scott had a loaded revolver
on his table when Ned Kelly asked him to cash the cheque,
but he was so unsuspicious of the character of his customer
that he left it there when he went into the bank chamber.
Having obtained all the money he could get Kelly turned
to enter the private apartments, when Scott said, “ If you go
in there I’ll strike you whatever the consequences may be.”


Steve Hart put his revolver to Scott’s face and said “ Keep
back.” Kelly laughed, and walked through the door. He
went along the passage, and looked out of the back door
into the yard. Then he returned and told Scott to go and
put his horse into the buggy. “That’s the work of the
groom,” said Scott, “ but he happens to be away just now.”
“ I’ll do it myself,” returned Ned, and went into the yard.
When the horse was harnessed, Kelly said he was going to
take the family out for a drive. He made Scott get into
Gloster’s cart, and Mrs. Scott and the child into the buggy.
Dan Kelly and Hart came on behind. When they had
gone out of the little street Scott asked Ned where they
were going. “To Younghusband’s,” was the reply. “ I’ll
drive,” said Scott, “ I know the road.” “ All right,” replied
Ned, handing him the reins. “ But if you try any pranks,
look out.” Ned Kelly treated Mrs. Scott with great
politeness, so that she said that she could never believe he
was the bloodthirsty villain he had been represented to be.
The telegraph wires had been cut on each side of the
station soon after their arrival, and while the main body of
the robbers was gone to Euroa a train stopped close to the
station to set down a line repairer named Watts. As the
railway station was some distance away it was thought that
the train had brought the police, and Byrnes prepared to
defend himself. He shut all the men in the store, and
charged them to keep quiet. When Watts came to the
station to enquire how the break in the line had occurred
and to obtain assistance Byrnes bailed him up, and told
him that he could repair the line later on. Nothing of
importance occurred after this until the return of Ned and
his mates with the bank manager and the money.
During their drive together Ned Kelly told Scott that he
was sorry that Sergeant Kennedy had been shot. He
was a brave man. “ But,” he added, “ I couldn’t help it.
The police ought to surrender when they are called on.” He
showed Scott the presentation gold watch which had once
belonged to Kennedy and which he had taken from the
body “ to remember him by.”
Soon after their return to the station they all had tea,
Ned Kelly telling his prisoners that he would not detain
them much longer. The meal was barely over when a train


drew up opposite the station and whistled. Ned Kelly
shouted “ Hullo boys, here’s a special with the
bobbies. We’ll fight ’em. We’re ready for ’em, however
many there may be.” The driver waited for a few minutes
and then the train went out. It was soon ascertained that
Watts, the line repairer, had arranged for the train to pick
him up after he had had time to repair the break, but owing
to his being shut up in the station store he had neither
repaired the line nor been able to inform the engine driver
of the reason of his non-success. At about half-past seven,
the prisoners were mustered and told to remain in the store
for three hours. Scott took out his watch and asked
“ Eleven ? ” “ No,” replied Ned, “ half-past. If any one
leaves before, I’ll hear of it and make it hot for him.
I’ll track him down and shoot him dead. You can’t escape
me.” Byrnes turned to Scott and said “ That looks like
a good watch. Let’s see it.” Scott handed him the
watch and the robber put it in his pocket. This was a signal
to the other bushrangers. One took Macaulay’s watch, and
another asked McDougal for his. McDougal took it from
his pocket and said “ I should be sorry to lose it. It is a
keepsake from my dead mother.” “Is it,” said Kelly,
“ then we’ll not take it.” Ned Kelly warned Macaulay that
he held him responsible for the men. “If you let them
go before the time,” he said, “ I’ll shoot you like a
dingo the first time I see you.” Shortly afterwards the
bushrangers mounted their horses, which had been feeding
in the stables during the time the station was held, and rode
away. The men were released from the store but were kept
at the station for about three hours. Mr. and Mrs. Scott
returned to Euroa in their buggy and telegraphed the news
of the robbery as soon as possible, which was not before the
next morning. Gloster rode off to inform the police at the
nearest town, and the information as to this daring outrage
was spread about by others who had been robbed.


CHAPTER XXX.
The Kellys Stick up the Town of Jerilderie ; Robbery of the Bank
of New South Wales; A Symposium in the Royal Hotel; A
Three-days’ Spree ; “ Hurrah for the Good Old Times of Morgan
and Ben Hall” ; the Robbers Take a Rest for a Year ; The Kelly
Sympathisers Again ; The Kellys Reappear ; Murder of Aaron
Sherritt.
After the bank robbery the “ gentlemen of the Strathbogie
Ranges ” again retired to their mountain fastnesses.
Occasionally a paragraph in one of the local newspapers
recorded the movements of the police or furnished a story
about the black trackers, but these notices were necessarily
very meagre, as the police declined to furnish any information
as to their proceedings or intentions, because this would be
of more use to the bushrangers than to any one else. For
more than a month nothing reliable had been heard of
them. Even the reports of the arrest and detention of
numbers of “ bush telegraphs ” failed to attract any
attention, and the Kelly gang had almost ceased to be
spoken of, when suddenly the whole country was roused
by the news that the bushrangers had stuck up the town of
Jerilderie, in New South Wales. Jerilderie is situated on the
Yanko Creek, not far from its junction with the Billabong,
and at that time contained about 300 inhabitants, a bank,
four public-houses, a post and telegraph office, and several
churches, schools, and other buildings. The local police
station and lock-up was near the outside of the town, and
there were two officers —Constables Devine and Richards —
stationed there. At midnight of February Bth, 1879, a
man roused Constable Devine from his bed, and informed
him that a row had taken place at Davidson’s Hotel and a


man had been killed. He exhorted the constable to “ come
quick.” Constable Devine woke Constable Richards and
both dressed as hastily as possible. When they came out
they were confronted by Ned Kelly, revolver in hand, and
ordered to “bail up.” Not having their arms on them, and
being taken completely by surprise, the two constables
surrendered at once and were locked up in the cells. The
bushrangers then compelled Mrs. Devine, who had also
partially dressed, to hand over all arms and ammunition,
and took possession of the lock-up, remaining quietly there
till morning, their horses being placed in the police stables
at the rear. It was Sunday morning, and as the Catholic
church had not yet been finished, the court-house had been
rented for religious purposes, and Mrs. Devine had been
accustomed to clean up the place, set the temporary altar,
and place the forms and chairs ready for mass. The bush-
rangers told her to perform her task as usual, after having
extorted a promise from her that she would not mention
their presence to any one, and to make certain of her keep-
ing her word one of them, dressed as a constable, went
with her to the court-house and stayed while she swept the
floor and prepared the room. Then they returned to the
lock-up, which was about one hundred yards from the court-
house, and remained there all day, the bushrangers, arrayed
in the constables’ uniforms, sitting quietly in the guard-room.
No doubt numbers of people passed and saw them, but no
one had any suspicion that the bushrangers were in charge
instead of the police.
Early on Monday morning Byrnes took two horses to
the blacksmith’s shop to be shod, and the blacksmith, feeling
some doubt as to the bond-fides of the pseudo trooper, made
a note of the brands on the horses. At about ten a.m. Ned
and Dan Kelly, accompanied by Constable Richards, went
to the Royal Hotel, the largest hotel in the town, where
Richards formally introduced them to the proprietor, Mr.
Cox. Ned informed Mr. Cox that he required the use of
some rooms, as the gang intended sticking up the bank.
He selected a large and a small room on the ground floor,
near the bar, and conducted the few men about at the time
into the large room, where they were ordered to remain until
given permission to depart. Dan Kelly was placed on guard


at the door to keep order and prevent anybody from
escaping, and was instructed to shoot the first man who
refused to do as he was told. On Mr. Cox passing his word,
as a gentleman, not to mention their presence to any one
who should come in, he was permitted to take charge of the
bar as usual, and was given to understand that he would be
held responsible for the discretion of the women and
servants. Any one of them whom he could not trust was to
be sent into the large room. The preliminaries were
arranged so unostentatiously and quietly, that no rumour of
the presence of the bushrangers had yet been heard, and as
customers dropped into the hotel they were taken into the
big room, and told to remain on penalty of death.
Having made these arrangements, Ned Kelly walked
into the hotel yard to reconnoitre. There was a detached
kitchen here, and the rear of the bank of New South Wales
was only a few yards from the rear of this kitchen. The
bank faced on another street, and there was no dividing
fence between the yard at the back of the bank and the
hotel yard. Hart was placed on watch near the kitchen,
while Byrnes entered the back door of the bank. Mr.
Living, the teller, was in the bank chamber. He was not
surprised to hear a man enter by the back door, as Mr. Cox
and other customers frequently came in that way, it being a
short cut from the hotel. Suddenly, however, Byrnes came
to the counter, pointed a revolver at Living’s head, and
cried out, “ I’m Kelly, keep quiet.” Living held his hands
above his head. “Where’s your pistols?” asked Byrnes.
“ I’ve got none,” replied Living. Byrnes then ordered
Living and the accountant Mackie to “ Come over to the
hotel.” They came from behind the counter and did as
they were told, Byrnes following them. When they reached
the door of the large room Dan Kelly inquired, “ Where’s
Tarleton ? ” “In his room,” replied Living. “ Then go
and fetch him and no nonsense,” said Dan. Living
went back to the bank, but being unable to find the
manager in his rooms began to fear that something might
have happened to him. He was about to return to the
hotel to inform the Kellys that he could not find the
manager, when he heard a splashing. He went to the bath-
j-QOm and knocked. Tarleton had been for a forty-mile ride


that morning, and had just returned and was having a wash.
When he opened the door and was informed that the town
was in possession of the Kelly gang, and the bank was stuck
up, he laughed heartily, believing it to be a huge joke.
Living assured him that it was not a laughing matter, but
he was still incredulous. However, he dressed and went to
the hotel, where he soon discovered that what he had
deemed impossible had come to pass. The three bank
officials were placed in the large room. Tarleton, who took
a seat next to Constable Richards, whispered, “ I can knock
Hart down, shall I?” “What’s the good?” replied the
constable, “ Dan Kelly’s there, and he’d shoot you down at
once.”
Ned Kelly had hitherto been walking round as a sort of
inspector-general of the proceedings and giving orders.
He now entered the room and ordered drinks to be served
all round. Then he made a speech in which he blamed
Constable Fitzpatrick for all that had occurred. “ I wasn’t
within a hundred miles of Greta when he was shot,” said
Ned, “and up to then I’d never killed a man in my life.”
He went on to say that he had stolen two hundred and
eighty horses from Whitby’s station, and had sold them at
Baumgarten’s. He took out a revolver and exclaimed:
“This was Lonergan’s! I took it from him. The gun I
shot him with was a crooked, worn-out thing, not worth
picking up. I shot him because he threatened my mother
and my sister if they refused to tell where Ned Kelly was.
The police are worse than the black trackers. I came
here to shoot Devine and Richards, and I’m going to do it.”
The men at the table began to intercede for Richards, who
was sitting quietly among them and who did not speak, but
Kelly exclaimed dramatically, “ He must die.”
Ned got the key of the bank safe and took ,£1450 worth
of notes and money from it. He also took from the
teller’s drawers. While thus employed, Messrs. Gill,
Hardie, and Rankin came in on business in the ordinary
course and were ordered to bail up. They turned and ran.
Ned Kelly followed and caught Rankin, but the others got
away. Ned was furious at this escape. He said that news
of their presence would be all over the place in a few
minutes, and he swore he would shoot Rankin in revenge.


He took Rankin to the hotel, stood him up against the
wall in the passage and flourished his revolver about. The
men in the room pleaded that Rankin might be spared, and
urged that he could not have prevented Gill and Hardie
from running away. While this was going on Byrnes came
in with Mr. Hardie and said that they could not find Gill,
the proprietor of the local newspaper, as he had not returned
to his office. Ned Kelly then let Rankin go and declared
that he would burn the newspaper office. Mr. Gill it is said
went out of the town and hid in a clump of trees by the side
of the river till evening. Ned then walked down to
McDougall’s Hotel and shouted for about thirty men who
were in or about the hotel at the time. On his return to the
Royal Hotel he was informed that Hart had robbed the
Rev. Mr. Gribble of a gold watch. He called Hart up and
asked indignantly, “ What right has a thing like you to rob a
clergyman ? ” He swore a good deal and compelled Hart to
give the watch back. Complaints were made that he had
stolen a new saddle and bridle from a saddler’s shop, and
some other articles from other places. Ned called him a
thief, and ordered him to return everything he had
taken.
Ned Kelly paid more than one visit to the Post and
Telegraph Office to “ see how things were going on.” The
robbers had cut the wires on either side of the town before
their entry and had chopped down seven telegraph posts in
the main street near the office. They had given orders to
Mr. Jefferson, the telegraph master, that no repairs should
be attempted until permission was given, and Ned took care
that these orders were obeyed. The robbers held the town
for three days, in imitation of the manner in which the
Hall and Gilbert gang had held Canowindra. Jerilderie
was at this time slightly larger than Canowindra at the time
when it had been stuck up and held, but there was less
traffic through it, and consequently less connection between
it and the outer world than with Canowindra. The road
running through Jerilderie leads from Conargo to Narran-
dera. Jerilderie is about thirty miles from Conargo and
sixty-five from Narrandera. All round are huge sheep and
cattle stations, with only a few men employed on them except
at shearing or mustering time. All through the remainder of
AA


the year the traffic is inconsiderable. There was in Jerilderie,
however, a large wool-washing and fellmongery establishment
which employed a fair number of workmen. Canowindra, on
the other hand, was a wayside town on the main road from
Bathurst to Forbes, the traffic being considerable all the
year round. There were also several small diggings settle-
ments not far away, and the residents of these frequently came
to purchase articles from the stores at Canowindra. It was far
easier, therefore, to isolate Jerilderie for three days than it had
been Canowindra in the earlier days of bushranging. The
Hall and Gilbert gang also robbed everybody except the
landlord of the hotel they took possession of. The Kellys,
on the other hand, robbed no one outside of the bank.
Jerilderie also was a much more compact town than
Canowindra, the latter consisting of one long straggling
street, with only a few houses outside this line, while
Jerilderie had several cross streets, and at least two parallel
with the river.
The robbers held the town from midnight on Saturday,
until about four p.m. on the Wednesday following. Shortly
before the men were allowed to leave the Royal Hotel, Ned
Kelly gave Living a paper which he said gave a history of
his life, and the truth about what he had done. Living
promised that he would do his best to get it published, and
handed it to Mr. Gill, who read it and forwarded it to the
Government. It was a long rambling statement, in some
parts quite incoherent, and much of it false. It was never
published. At about four o’clock Byrnes left the town in
the direction of the Murray River. He was riding his own
horse, and had the money stolen from the bank packed on
one of the police horses, which he was leading. A minute
or two later Dan Kelly and Steve Hart mounted their horses,
and galloped several times up and down the main street,
flourishing their revolvers and shouting, “ Hurrah for the
good old times of Morgan and Ben Hall.” Then they left
the town along the main road. Ned Kelly, mounted on his
gray mare and leading a second police horse, left some
minutes later. Before going, he rode from the police station
to the Royal Hotel, and told the men detained in the large
room there that they were free.
The bushrangers had left the town by different routes,


probably to prevent any information as to the road
they had travelled from being furnished to the police,
but no doubt they had arranged where they should
meet outside at a safe distance. Late in the evening
they rode up to Wannamurra station, about twenty-five
miles from Jerilderie, when Ned Kelly asked Mr. A. Mackie
whether his brother was at home yet ? Mr. Mackie replied
that he did not know. “ I’m going to shoot him for giving
horses to Living and Tarleton to ride to Deniliquin for the
traps,” said Ned. They all went to the station together,
but evidence was soon brought forward to prove that the
bank employes had not obtained horses from Mr. Mackie,
and at length Ned exonerated that gentleman for what he
called “ his treachery,” but forcibly expressed his intention
of shooting Living. “ I gave him back his life policy,” he
said, “ and I only burned two or three of the bank books
instead of the lot to oblige him. He asked for them, and I
treated him as fair as I could, and now he takes advantage
of my kindness to betray me.” He walked up and down
on the verandah of the house for several minutes swearing
at Living, and more than once said he had a good mind to
go back and “ settle him ” at once. His rage, however,
soon subsided, and the gang proceeded on their way, no
attempt being made to detain them.
Jerilderie lies about one hundred and fifty miles, as the
crow flies, from where the bushrangers were supposed to
have been hidden, in the Strathbogie Mountains, and when
the news of the bank robbery at Jerilderie was telegraphed
all over the country, wonder was everywhere expressed as to
how the robbers had crossed this country, some of it thickly
populated, without being perceived. The skill with which
the robbery had been planned, the boldness and complete-
ness of the arrangements, and the apparent ease with which
it had been accomplished, made the Kelly gang the principal
topic of conversation. The New South Wales Government
issued a proclamation declaring Ned and Dan Kelly, Joe
Byrnes, and Steve Hart outlaws, and offered a reward of
for their capture, dead or alive. The associated
banks of the colony supplemented this reward by another
of The Victorian Government increased the
rewards already offered to the same amount as was offered


by the New South Wales Government, while the banks in
that colony added another £lOOO ; thus making the total
reward offered for the capture of the four members of the
gang ;£Booo. Two thousand pounds per man was the
highest reward ever offered for the capture of bushrangers in
Australia.
For some time the police of New South Wales scoured
the country round Jerilderie and the plains between that
town and the Victorian border, while the Victorian police
were quite as active on their side of the Murray River, until
at length it was definitely ascertained that the bushrangers
were safe back in their mountain fastnesses. The paragraphs
published from time to time in the Beechworth, the Benalla,
and the Wangaratta papers, and in local papers even further
removed from the home of the Kellys, tend to show that
although the black boys failed to follow a trail in the moun-
tains with the certainty and skill displayed by them in
leveller country, they still kept the outlaws in a continual
state of fear of capture. Ned Kelly is reported to have
called them “those six little black devils,’’and to have sworn
to shoot them if ever he “got the chance.” “Those
trackers,” he cried, “Fd like to shoot ’em. They’re no
good in this country. They can’t track in Victoria.
I can track as well as they can out on the plains. I can run
an emu’s trail for miles as well as them. They may be good
in Queensland or the plains, but they’re no good in the
mountains.” Nevertheless they worried him, as his frequent
complaints of their activity prove. The district was no doubt
a difficult one to track in. None but a first-class horseman
could ride through it with any degree of certainty, and no
one but an aborigine or a white man born in the district
could cross the ravines and gullies without getting hopelessly
“ bushed,” without a guide.
The arrests and detentions of Kelly’s sympathisers
continued with increased vigour. “Wild” Wright and his
brother Tom, relatives of the Kellys, Frank Hart, brother
of the bushranger, the Lloyds and others, passed a
considerable portion of their time in the cells of the various
lock-ups around the district. Robert Miller was arrested
and detained because his daughter, a daring horsewoman,
was observed to go into the mountains at night with what


were supposed to be provisions for the bushrangers. She
was followed more than once, but contrived to elude her
pursuers by plunging up or down a steep mountain, or across
an almost impassable gully. She never started twice in the
same track, sometimes going up one spur or ravine, and
next time choosing a different one, and leading even the
black trackers astray. The newspapers frequently urged the
folly of detaining the father while the daughter was left free
to furnish the outlaws with food and news. The plain fact
is, that when special laws have to be applied, there should
be no exceptions; otherwise they are valueless. In this
case the women were far more active and reliable partisans
of the Kellys than the men, and, as there can be little doubt
that the Outlawry Act w r as strained, to put it mildly, by the
police and the local magistracy, with the connivance of the
Government, another turn of the screw r would not have made
the actions of the authorities any more illegal, and might
have made them efficient. However, determined as the
authorities w r ere to stamp out lawlessness, they did not
carry their own illegal acts to this extreme point, and
probably this postponed, though it did not prevent, the end
which was inevitable, as it always must be when a few array
themselves against an overwhelming majority.
It was about this time that the name of Aaron Sherritt
was first heard of in conection with the bushrangers.
Sherritt was the son of an ex-policeman. He was about
tw T enty-four years of age and had settled in the district some
time earlier. He selected one hundred and seven acres ot
ground on the Woolshed Creek, and the Kellys and Byrnes
helped him to fence it in and clear part of it. He had,
however, recently sold his farm to a Mr. Crawford, ot
Melbourne, and had built himself a hut at Sebastopol, about
two miles aw r ay, until he could take up another selection.
He was engaged to be married to a sister of Joe Brynes.
and w r as regarded as one of the family. He was suspected
of having taken a share in some of the extensive horse
stealing raids in company wdth the Kellys and their friends,
and had been in consequence an object of police suspicion
and supervision. This w r as the man to wdrom the police made
advances, and, by promising him the wdiole of the eight
thousand pounds reward offered for the capture of the bush


rangers, on condition that it should be through his aid and
assistance that this capture was effected, they succeeded in
winning him over to their side. He led Superintendent
Hare and a party of police into the innermost recesses of
the mountains, and pbinted out several camps where the
bushrangers had been ; but, in each case, the bushrangers
appeared to have received warning and to have removed
before the police came. Some thought that Sherritt was
playing a double game, and that he contrived to let the
bushrangers know when the police might be expected to
arrive, but there appears to be no foundation for this
opinion, as it delayed his chance of obtaining the reward.
At first he was careful not to be seen in company with the
police, but their association could not be kept secret for
long, and Sherritt soon became suspected by the Kelly
family. One day Mrs. Byrnes openly accused him of trying
to betray her son. There was a row, and Sherritt was
ordered from the house, his engagement with the daughter
being broken off. After that Sherritt appeared more openly
in company of the police, parties of whom were constantly
watching the homes of the four bushrangers on the chance
of capturing them should they visit their parents or other
relatives. Sherritt married the daughter of another settler
in the district, and all communications between him and the
families of the bushrangers were broken off. Sherritt instead
of being a friend was considered an enemy of the bushrangers.
During the latter half of 1879 and the first half of 1880
nothing of any importance was heard as to the movements
of the bushrangers. More than once it was reported that
they had left the country, sometimes it was said for New
Zealand, and at other times for America, but these reports
were invariably contradicted within a few days, and the
Kellys were said to be still somewhere in the ranges. Some-
times it was said that the money stolen from the Jerilderie
Bank must be all expended, and that the Kellys would be
forced to leave their hiding-place shortly, but frequently,
during the twelvemonths following that raid, nothing would be
heard of the bushrangers for weeks, and the public almost
forgot that there was such a gang in existence. Then
suddenly came the news that the robbers had shot Aaron
Sherritt on June 27th, 1880.


For some weeks a party of police had been secreted, as
much as possible, in Sherritt’s house, for the purpose of watch-
ing Byrne’s mother’s house, and four of them were quietly
sitting in the inner room at the time of the murder. The
particulars of the murder were as follows: —A German market-
gardener named Antoine Weeks was living on the Woolshed
Creek, not far from Sherritt’s and Byrnes’s houses. He was
walking home on the evening of the day mentioned when
he was met by Dan Kelly and Joe Byrnes. “Do you know
who we are ?” asked Dan. “ No,” replied Weeks. “ Well,
we’re the Kellys,” said Dan; “ you do as we tell you and no
harm will come to you.” They handcuffed the German, and
led him along the road to Sherritt’s house. Here Dan told
him to shout “Aaron.” Weeks did so, and on Aaron
Sherritt coming to the door to ascertain who wanted him,
Byrnes shot him dead without a word. Ihe bushrangers
took the handcuffs off of Weeks and told him to go home.
Then they went to the door of the hut, called Mrs.
Sherritt out, and told her that she had better send some
of the traps in her house out to bury her husband,
because “ We’ve shot him for being a traitor. ’ The
Kellys were fully aware that the police were in the
house, and called on them to come out and “ fight
like men.” If the constables had come out as invited they
would have been courting almost certain death. A bright
wood fire was burning in the hut and the front room wap as
bright as day, while all outside was as dark as possible.
Had the police therefore left the shelter of the inner room
and entered the front apartment they would have been shot
down before they could have seen their enemies, whose
whereabouts could only have been guessed at from their
shots or from the flash of their revolvers. Going to the door
under these conditions would have been almost tantamount
to committing suicide. The bushrangers raged round the
hut calling the police the most opprobious names and
threatening and taunting them in hopes of inducing them to
come into the light, but as the police kept quiet and made
no reply whatever to their taunts the bushrangers swore
that they would “ burn ’em like rats in a trap. 1 hey fired
through the windows and doors, but they appear to have
been just as unwilling to enter the lighted room as the


police were. In fact neither party would give the other
a chance. The robbers remained round the hut at this
labour of hate until two a.m., when they departed. At day-
break one of the troopers went to where the horses were
kept, and rode to Benalla to give information of the
reappearance of the Kellys, while the other three followed
on the tracks of the outlaws.


CHAPTER XXXI
Fight Between the Police and the Bushrangers at Glenrowan ; The
Railway Torn Up ; Attempt to Wreck the Police Train ; The
Glenrowan Inn Besieged ; Ned Kelly in Armour ; His Capture ;
The Burning of the Inn ; Deaths of Dan Kelly, Steve Hart, and
Joe Byrnes ; Trial and Conviction of Ned Kelly ; His Death ;
The Kelly Show ; Decrease of Crime in the Colonies.
As soon as the news of this fresh outrage was telegraphed to
Melbourne, Sub-inspector O’Connor of Queensland, with his
six black trackers, with Superintendent Hare, Inspector
Pewtress, and several other officials of the Victorian police,
a number of newspaper correspondents, and a few other
favoured persons, started by special train for the scene of
disorder. Eight troopers were picked up at Benalla, and at
twenty-five minutes past three p.m. the train was stopped
near the Glenrowan platform by Mr. Curnow, the local
schoolmaster, who stood on the line waving a red scarf.
He informed those on the train that the robbers had torn
up the rails a short distance ahead, with a view to wrecking
the train, and that they were waiting near to shoot the police
or any one else who might be sent to capture them. A
consultation was immediately held to decide as to the next
step, and while this was going on, Constable Bracken, the
local representative of the police force, arrived and reported
that the bushrangers had taken possession of the Glenrowan
Inn, not much more than a hundred yards distant, and that
he had just made his escape from them.
The Glenrowan Inn was built on the Sydney Road,
about half-way between Winton and Wangaratta, shortly
after the discovery of gold at the Ovens River, in 1853.


The glen was then a camping-place for teams travelling
between Melbourne and the diggings. A second hotel was
constructed later, and a small village, or what the Australians
call a township, grew up on the little flat at the gap in the
hills, locally known as the Futter’s Range, a spur jutting out
from the larger Strathbogie Range. For some years Glen-
rowan was quite a flourishing little town, the traffic to the
diggings being large. But when the Great Northern Railway
was opened in 1873 the village began to dwindle away.
The railway carried the trade past it to the more con-
veniently situated and larger towns on either side, and
consequently the population left for these towns. The two
hotels remained, and there was also a store, a blacksmith’s
shop, and a few other houses, and these depended for their
support on the fruit growers, market gardeners, and farmers
who cultivated the rich alluvial flats with which the lower
spurs of the mountains are interspersed. The railway
platform had been constructed by the Government to
accommodate the trade in fruit, vegetables, and other
produce which formed the staple industry of the district
in 1880.
The Glenrowan Inn was a long, low, weather-board
building, with a wide verandah along the front. It stood
some distance back from the road, with a large trough hewn
from the stem of a tree in front for horses and bullocks to
drink from. Near this was a sign-board
with the names of the hotel and the
proprietor on it thus :
THE GLENROWAN INN
ANN JONES
BEST ACCOMMODATION.
The robbers, it appears, did not go
very far when they left Sherritt’s hut. They were aware that,
when the news of the murder reached Melbourne and other
centres, an attempt would be made to follow them, and they
seem to have made up their minds to a final effort to conquer
the police force of the colony. They went to the camp of


the line repairers and roused them up. James Reardon, on
coming out of his hut, was ordered to get his tools, as the
robbers were determined to rip up the line and wreck the
train which they expected to arrive. Reardon at first
refused, but on being threatened with death he gave in.
He said that the tools were locked up and that he could not
get them till morning, but he was told that the chest would
soon be broken. His mate, Sullivan, was also secured, and
at length they agreed to do as they were told. They went
to a bend in the road, a short distance north of the
platform, being under the impression that the train would
arrive from Wangaratta or Beechworth. They ripped up
a number of the rails and piled them across the track.
Then they marched Reardon and his wife and child and
Sullivan to the Glenrowan Inn, and took possession.
They collected sixty-two people in the township, including
Mr. John Stanistreet, the station-master, and escorted
them to the hotel. Among the prisoners also was
Constable Bracken. Ned Kelly walked about telling the
people that the train would “ soon be here ” from Rushworth
with the black trackers and “a lot of other and we’re
going to kill the lot.” There was some confusion owing to
the fears of the women and children, and while the bush-
rangers were engaged in restoring order, Constable Bracken
contrived to get hold of the key of the front door. He
watched for an opportunity, opened the door and ran out.
He reported that three of the troopers who had been hidden
in Sherritt’s hut had followed the bushrangers, and had
watched all their proceedings, but they had not ventured to
attack them, as their ammunition was short, and they were
not strong enough. Presently a man came out on to the
verandah, and the police, recognising him as Ned Kelly,
fired a volley. Ned laughed, and shouted “ Shoot away, you
, you can’t hurt us.” At this juncture Mr. Stanistreet
came out of the house, and walked from the hotel to where
the police were, at the imminent risk of being shot, as he
was between the two firing parties. He escaped, however,
and reported that Miss Jones, aged fourteen, and several
other of the prisoners in the hotel had been wounded by
the police fire, but none of the bushrangers had been hurt.
Superintendent Hare had also been severely wounded by


the bushrangers, the bullet having shattered the bones of
his wrist. He was taken to the railway station-master’s
house and attended to. At about five p.m. Mrs. Jones, the
landlady of the hotel, appeared on the verandah, wringing
her hands and weeping. She called the police murderers,
and said that her son had been killed and her daughter
wounded. The police ceased firing, and the boy was
brought out. He was still alive, and was sent off at once to
the Wangaratta Hospital, where he died next day. An old
man named Martin Cherry was also said to have been killed.
Mrs. Jones and her children and servants, and the men
and women who had been made prisoners by the bush-
rangers, left the hotel after dark during a truce, and firing
was then kept up during the night. About daybreak another
party of troopers arrived from Benalla, Wangaratta, and
Beechworth, making the attacking party about thirty strong.
There was a lull in the firing for a time, while the newly-
arrived men were being placed in positions, when suddenly a
revolving rifle and a cap known to have belonged to Ned
Kelly were found a hundred yards from the hotel at the rear
of the attacking party. The rifle was stained with blood.
The police were still discussing this find and speculating
how the articles could have got there when they were fired
at from behind a tree. The next moment an extraordinary
figure marched across the space between two trees. The
figure looked like a tall, stout man, with a nail can over his
head. Sergeant Steel, Constable Kelly, and Railway-guard
Dowsett fired at it simultaneously, but the bullets appeared
to rebound from the body of the figure. Steel then fired at
the legs, and at the second shot Ned Kelly, for he it was,
fell, crying out “ I’m done for.” The police rushed forward,
but Kelly raised himself on his elbow and fired, howling
like a wild beast and declaring that they should never take
him alive. He continued shooting, but the bullets “ went
wild,” owing, perhaps, to his weakening through loss of
blood, and he was soon grappled with and handcuffed.
The armour worn by Ned is said to have been made from
stolen plough-shares by a local blacksmith. It consisted of
a helmet shaped like a nail can and coming down to the
shoulders, with a slit in it to enable the wearer to see ; and a
breastplate, very long, with shoulder plates and back guard.


The steel averaged nearly a quarter of an inch in thick-
ness, and the weight of the suit worn by Ned Kelly was
ninety-seven pounds. The breast-plate showed several
dints where it had been struck by bullets, but it had not
been pierced. Ned had, however, received two wounds in
the groin, and one each in the left foot, right leg, right hand,
and right arm. He was immediately removed to a safe
distance, and placed under medical care. Notwithstanding
the loss of one of their small number, the bushrangers kept
up a brisk fire from the hotel. At one time a report was
circulated that Joe Byrnes had been shot dead while
drinking a glass of brandy in the bar, but as there was no
apparent slackening in the fire this was discredited. At
three p.m. Constable Charles Johnson, under cover of a
volley from the besiegers, rushed up to the side of the hotel
with a huge bundle of straw, which he placed in position
and set fire to. The straw blazed up famously, but soon
died out, and the spectators, of whom there was a goodly
number, pronounced the attempt to fire the building a
failure. It was at this time that Mrs. Skillian, a sister of
the Kellys, rode up, dressed in a well-made black cloth
riding habit and a Gainsborough hat. She advanced boldly
towards the hotel, but was stopped by the police and warned
of the danger she was courting. She replied that she was
not afraid, but she desired to persuade her brother Dan to
surrender. A consultation was held as to whether she
should be permitted to try, but before a decision was
arrived at the flames burst out of the roof of the building.
It may be as well to explain here that the wood of the
district is principally stringy bark, and that the timber of
these trees will not burn. It seems probable, therefore, that
when the straw was ignited against the wall of the building,
the calico sheeting, with which the rooms were lined
and ceiled, caught fire and burned, while the stringy bark
weather boards resisted the flames and only charred through
slowly. However this may be, the furniture and other
fittings burned fiercely, and the whole building was in a
blaze. At this time the Rev. Father M. Gibney, a Roman
Catholic priest from Perth, Western Australia, who was on a
visit to the Benalla district at the time, walked up to the
front door holding his crucifix in his hand. He was followed


by a number of the police. When they entered the front
door they saw the body of Joe Byrnes lying in the bar,
in such a position as to make it probable that the report
which had been spread as to his death had been true. The
body was dragged out slightly scorched. Dan Kelly and
Steve Hart were found dead in a small parlour off the bar.
From the position in which they were lying it was con-
jectured that they had either committed suicide or that
they had simultaneously shot each other. But there was
no time to decide whether either or which of these con-
jectures were true. As Father Gibney was about to stoop
down to examine the bodies, a gust of wind swept the
flames towards him and compelled him to retire. The
building was thoroughly alight at last, and the priest and
the police and others who had entered were forced out by
the fierce heat. In a very short time afterwards the house
collapsed, and nothing was left but a heap of ashes, the
sign post and trough in front, and the detached kitchen
at the rear. In this kitchen was found old Martin Cherry,
severely wounded. He was carried out and placed under
the doctor’s care, but died before night. Close beside the
kitchen was the body of a dog, which had been wounded by
the attacking party and had crawled between the two build-
ings to die. Some time before the attempt to fire the building
had been made, a telegram had been sent to Melbourne to
ask for a small cannon to blow the house down with. Now
a telegram was sent to say that it was not required. Con-
sequently the 12-pounder Armstrong gun with the requisite
number of men of the Garrison Artillery which had been
sent off by special train were stopped at Seymour and sent
back. When the fire had burned down sufficiently for an
examination to be made, the two mounds of ashes which
were all that remained of Dan Kelly and Steve Hart were
given to Mrs. Skillian for burial, while the body of Joe
Byrnes was reserved for an inquest to be held. Two other
suits of armour, similar to that worn by Ned Kelly, were
found, the lightest being ninety-two pounds. During the
fight “ Wild ” Wright, Tom Wright, Frank Hart, Kate
Kelly, several of the Lloyds and the Byrneses, and other
relations and friends of the bushrangers, had been stationed
on a ridge a short distance away to see the fun. There was


also a large number of other and perhaps more disinterested
spectators, some of them from Melbourne or Beechworth,
or other even more distant localities. After the inquest the
body of Joe Byrnes was given to his friends for burial.
Ned Kelly soon recovered from his wounds and was tried,
convicted, and sentenced to death for the murder of
Sergeant Kennedy. In conversations with Inspector Sadlier
and other police officials before his trial, he said that the
bushrangers had known of every movement of the police.
They were aware that the police had been hiding in
Sherritt’s hut for more than a week, hoping to catch Joe if
he visited his mother. The police had no right to stop a
man from going to see his mother. When the special train
arrived the intention of the bushrangers had been to rake it
with shots as soon as it reached the place where the rails
had been removed. “ But,” exclaimed Sadlier, “ you would
have killed all the people in the train.” “ Yes, of course,
God help them,” replied Ned, “ they’d have got shot, but
wouldn’t they have shot me if they could ? ” He said that
Steve Hart had visited his mother at Wangaratta, and
“ didn’t we laugh when we saw it in the Wangaratta
News afterwards. It was true, too, though the police didn’t
believe it.” He also said that he had been told that after
the sticking up of the banks at Euroa and Jerilderie, all the
branch banks in Victoria sent their receipts to Melbourne
almost daily. They were not going to stick up any more
banks. It wasn’t worth it. What they had intended to do
was to stick up a railway train, and they’d have done it,
“ only those little black devils were always about.”
On November the sth, a mass meeting was held in the
Hippodrome, in Stephen’s Street, Melbourne, with Mr.
Hamilton, President of the Society for the Abolition of
Capital Punishment, in the chair. The principal speaker
was Mr. David Gaunson, M.L.A., and a resolution was
unanimously carried to the effect that the case of Edward
Kelly was a fit one for the exercise of the Royal Prerogative
of Mercy. The Melbourne Argus said that “ those present
belonged to the larrikin classes,” but the attendance was
estimated at 4000 persons (including 300 women) inside the
building, and about 2000 outside who could not obtain
admittance. Similar meetings were also held in Ballarat,


Bendigo, Geelong, and other towns, but these efforts were
of no avail, and Ned Kelly, “ the last of the bushrangers,”
was hung in the Melbourne gaol, on November nth, 1880.
Within a few days afterwards, a show was opened in
Melbourne, with Kate Kelly, one of the sisters of the dead
bushrangers, “ mounted on Ned Kelly’s celebrated grey
mare.” A suit of the armour used in the last great fight at
Glenrowan, several guns, pistols, and revolvers alleged to
have been used in the various raids committed by the
bushrangers, some handcuffs and other articles which had
belonged to, or were used by them, were exhibited, and some
particulars of their careers were given in the form of a
lecture, but the police authorities soon interfered and the
show was closed. It was re-opened in Sydney, but was
suppressed there as “ tending towards immorality ” almost
immediately, and the Kellys returned to the obscurity of
private life.
Thus ended the last act in the great tragedy which
had supplied almost the only feature of romance to Aus-
tralian history. Bushranging had been spoken of as “ the
national crime of Australia,” but, as I have shown, there
was very little bushranging outside the three colonies —
New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and Victoria. It
was rather an excrescence on, than a development of,
Australian character. It has been estimated that the bush-
rangers in the colonies from the date of the great outbreak
inaugurated by Frank Gardiner in 1861, to the death of
Ned Kelly, with their more active partisans, never exceeded
300 persons, and the story of their exploits shows how even
so small a party can disturb a whole country when the
rebels are reckless and determined. It may be said in con-
clusion, that crime has steadily decreased in Australia from
the cessation of transportation. At first, while the gold
fever raged, the improvement was very slight, but from the
date when the population settled down to steady work the
criminal statistics, which are very complete in the colonies,
show a steady diminution in crimes against the person or
property. There was an increase in the years during
which the Ben Hall and Gilbert gang, and their imitators
in New South Wales, Victoria, and New Zealand, were
most active, but even this did not materially affect the


general result, and was speedily compensated for after
the death of Thunderbolt and the capture of Power.
In this last epoch of bushranging the Moonlite and
Kelly gangs arrested the movement to some degree, but
far less sympathy was exhibited with them than in the
earlier epoch, and their deeds did not inspire so many
young men with the desire to go and do likewise, as those
of Hall and Gilbert had done. In fact, bushranging had
ceased to be popular, so that the retrogression was small in
comparison. Since then numbers of gaols have been closed
or converted to other uses. There was a time when every
little town in New South Wales had its gaol. Now many of
these gaols have been converted into factories or stores, or
are used for municipal or other purposes. In Victoria the
gaols were fewer but larger, and several of these have been
closed, while others once full are now almost empty. A
similar story might be told of each of the other colonies of
the Australasian group, and Australia as a whole compares
favourably with other civilised countries in criminal matters.
What the Irishman calls “ the bad drop ” in the blood of
the country has been purged away by the most drastic
remedies, and it is extremely improbable that there will ever
again be a Frank Gardiner or a Ned Kelly to incite the
young and thoughtless to deeds of violence.
THE END.


INDEX.
Allerton, Benjamin, 195, 196
Anderson, James, 155
Anderson, see Beveridge, John
Armytage, 117, 118
Atkins, William, 165
Atterill, James, alias Thomson,
ill—ll 3
Baker, John, 306
Baldwin, James, 274
Bankes, Anthony, in—ll 3
Barry, 163
Baylie, John, 145, 146
Beavors, George, alias Berry,
108—no
Bennett, alias Wyndham, see Gough,
Charles Hugh
Bennett, Graham, 349
Bermingham, George, 229
Berry, James, 79, 80
Berryman, Thomas, 278
Bertram, William, 306, 315
Beveridge, John, alias Anderson,
106, 107
Billy from the Den, see Jenkins,
Henry
Bird, 44
Birkett, Moses, 186
Black Jack, 24
Black Mary, 19
Blue Cap, see Cotterall, Robert
Bodenham, Thomas, 33 —35
Bollard, John, 306, 313
Booth, James, 298
Booth, John, 130
Boulton, John, 167 —169
Bourke, Robert, 316
Bowe, Charles, 145, 146
Bow, John, 202—204, 256, 276,
313
Boyd, 57, 58
Boyd, James, alias McGrath, 296,
312
Brace, Emanuel, 56, 57
Brady, Mathew, 44 —47, 71, 82,
353
Brannagan, Francis, 155
Brennan, see Smith, Henry
Brennan, Stephen, 123
Britton, Frederick, 207
Brookman, William, 282, 312 —314
Broomfield, James, 114
Broughton, 41
Brown, 47
Brown, Harry, 274
Brown, James, 33 —35, 39
Brown, William, 155
Brownlow, John, 206
Bryan, William, 166
Bryant, James, 41 —47
Bryant, James, 87
Bryant, Richard, 154, 155, 158
Bull, 57, 58
Bullfrog, Jacky, 199
Burgess, Richard H., alias Miller,
327—332
Burke, 221 —225, 276
Burns, John, 41
Burrow, Arthur, 166
Byrnes, Joe, 360 —382


Campbell, Robert, 286
Captain Melville, see McCallum,
Frank, alias Smith
Captain Moonlite, see Scott, George
Captain Thunderbolt, see Ward,
Frederick
“ Carrots,” 29
Cash, Martin, 118—123, 130
Cashan, alias Nowlan, 99 —101
Charters, Daniel, 202 —204, 333
Cheetham, 37
Chesley, John, 155
Chinese Bushranger, The, 293
Chitty, Robert, 87
Christie, see Gardiner, Frank
Clarke, 294
Clarke, James, 269—270
Clarke, John, 269—276, 317, 355
Clarke, Samuel, 312
Clarke, Thomas, 269 —276, 317, 355
Clayton, 239
Clayton, Thomas, 173 —176
Clegg, James, 173—176
Connell, Morris, 48
Connell, Patrick, 270, 276
Connell, Tom, 270, 276
Connelly, Patrick, 41
Connors, John, 298
Conway, John, 115 —117
Cooper, Patrick, 173 —176
Cornelius, Bill, alias Kenelly,
33—35. 39
Cotterall, R.obert, alias Blue Cap,
286, 312
Cowan, or Cohen, 45, 46
Cox, Thomas, 37, 38
Coxen’s Tom, see Long Tom
Crawford, James, 41, 46
Crookwell, James, 232, 279
Crumsden, George, 123
Cummings, 281
Cunningham, Thomas, alias Smith,
274. 313
Curran, Paddy, 71 —73, 78, 79, 80
Dalton, 185
Dalton, Alexander, 33 —34, 39
Dalton, James, 121, 122
Daly, Patrick or Patsy, 213, 214
Dargue, Henry, 313
Dargue, Thomas, 313
Davis, 200, 276
Davis, Bill, 37
Davis, George James, alias Huntley,
106, 107
Davis, Joseph, 173 —176
Davis, Michael Henry, 195
Davis, Teddy or Edward, The Jew-
boy, 71, 82—88, 353
Davis, William, III —113
Dermoodie, 344
Dido, see Driscoll, Timothy or
William
Dobson, 307
Donnelly, 294
Donohoe, Johnny, 55
Donovan, Daniel, 155
Donovan, John, 145
Douglass, John, 166
Downes, John, 41
Downey, James, 199
Driscoll, Timothy or William, alias
Dido, 182—184
Duncan, James, 143
Duncan, William, 129, 130
Dunkley, see Willis, William
Dunleavy, John, 239 —241, 276
Dunleavy, see Lynch, John
Dunn, Johnny, 241 —256, 276, 304
Dunne, 41, 42, 44, 47
Dunne, William, 228
Edwards, William, 160
Egan, John, 281


Ehrstein, Aaron von, 195
Ellis, John, alias Yanky Jack,
96—99
Ellison, George, 161
Eumarrah, 30
Eureka Gang, The, 145, 146
Everett, John, 87
Farrell, Christopher, 140
Farrer, Abraham, 129, 130
Finegan, John, 145, 146
Fitzgerald, Patrick, alias Paddy
Wandong, 282
Fletcher, John, 117
Fletcher, William, 270
Fogarty, Young, 96 —99
Foley, Charles, 206
Foley, Francis, 217
Foley, John, 212, 216, 217, 276
Foley, Timothy, 217
Foran, John, 282, 313
Foran, Patrick, 298
Ford, Henry, 180
Ford, John, 278
Fordyce, Alexander, 202—204, 256,
276, 312
Forster, John, 236
Gardiner, Frank, alias Christie,
193 204, 212, 254—257,
269,271,276, 304, 311—314,
316, 335, 353, 355, 384, 385
Gardner, John, 129, 130
Garrett, Plenry Beresford, 167 —169,
3 2 7
Garroway, William, 166
German Bill, 259, 274
Gilbert, Johnny, alias Roberts, 205,
212, 217 253, 256—258,
269, 271, 276, 304, 326, 337,
339, 369, 384, 385
“Ginger,” 173—176
Glanvill, Richard, 87
Goldman, 141
Goodison, Christopher, 165
Gordon, 276
Gordon, Richard, xBi
Gorman, Thomas, 350
Gough, Charles Hugh, alias Wynd-
ham, alias Bennett, 274, 313
Green, 95
Greenhill, Bob, 33 —38
Gregory, 47
Griffiths, Dennis, 173 —176
Griffiths, George, 115
Griffiths, John, 41
Gunn, John, 115
Gunn, William, 91
Hall, 59
Hall, Ben, 217, 221 —253, 256 —258
269, 271, 276, 304, 337, 339,
370, 384, 3 8 5
Hammond, James, 160
Hampton, Thomas, 298
Hanslip, George, 170
Harrison, Samuel, 115
Hart, Steve, 360 —382
Hath, see Hitchcock Anthony
Healy, John, 207
Heather, 208, 209
Herbert, William, see Jones, Charles
Hickson, 186
Hill, James, 233
Hitchcock, Anthony, alias Hath,
51—53
Hobbs, William, alias Hoppy Bill,
35°
Hodgetts, 47
Hogan, 117, 118
Hopkins, 40, 41, 47
Hopkins, Jonas, 114
Horne, Joseph, 306
Houlihan, Michael, 130
Howe, Mike, 19—21, 82, 353


Huntley, see Davis, George James
Hum, Thomas, 115
Hutchinson, William, 90
Jackey, Bullfrog, see Bullfrog
Jackey, Jackey, the Gentleman
Bushranger, see Westwood,
William
Jack, Muck, see Stanton Patrick
Jackson, James, 86
Jackson, John, 129, 130
Jack the Dagger, see Jones, John
Jack the Rammer, 57, 58
James, John, alias Johnston, 142,
143
Jamieson, George, 182
Jefferies, 40, 46, 47
Jeffs, Riley, 115—117
Jenkins, Henry, alias Billy from the
Deu, 181
Jenkins, John, 56, 57
Jepps, the Vandemonian, 96 —99
Jewboy, The, see Davis, Edward or
Teddy
Johnson, Charley, 284
Johnson, see Power, Harry
Johnson, William, 274
Johnston, Henry, 145, 146
Johnstone, Robert, 291
Jones, 182
Jones, Charles, 350
Jones, Charles, alias Herbert,
William, 233
Jones, David, 51, 53
Jones, James, 233, 312
Jones, John, 184
Jones, John, alias Jack the Dagger,
108—no
Jones, Richard, 155
Jones, see Williams, Thomas
Jones, Thomas, 118—122
Jones, William, 155
Kavanagh, Lawrence, xiB—l23,
129, 130, 132
Kaye, William, 350
Keene, Henry, 194, 196
Kelly, 185
Kelly, Bartley, 109
Kelly, Dan, 354—384
Kelly, Edward, 282, 313
Kelly, James, 154, 155
Kelly, James, 298
Kelly, James, 354
Kelly, John, 274, 313
Kelly, Ned, 320, 341, 345, 353
384
Kelly, Ted, 282
Kelly, Thomas, alias Noon, 327 —
332
Kenelly, see Cornelius, Bill
Kennedy, James, alias Southgate,
298
Keer, John, alias Maher, 280, 299
Keys, 58
Lacey, George, 41
Lambeth, William, 115
Lawler, Michael, 194, 196
Layworfh, William, 161
Lee, Henry, 117
Lee, William, 279
Levy, Philip, 327—332
Lewis, Nicholas, 108 —no
Liddell, John, 121, 122
Long, Tom, alias Coxen’s Tom,
93
Long, Ned, 93
Lowe, see Young, John
Lowry, Frederick, 212, 219, 220,
256, 276, 355
Lynam, George, 232
Lynch, John, alias Dunleavy, 60 —
70, 77, 333
Lynch, Patrick, 123


Lynch, William, 93
Lyons, see Nesbit, James
McCabe, James, 41, 42, 44, 45
McCallum, Frank, alias Thomas
Smith, alias Captain Melville,
148—156, 236
McCallum, James, 114
McCann, John, 93
McCarthy, 184
McDonald, Hector, 22
McDonald, William, see O’Donnell,
James
McGrath, see Boyd, James
McGuire, John, 202 —204
McGuire, Thomas, 84
Mclntyre, 99 —102
McKenny, 47
McLean, 109
McMahon, John, alias McManus, 195
Maberley, 186
Mack, William, 158
Mackay, Charles, 207
Mackay, James, 207
Mackie, William, 195, 291, 298
Macpherson, Alpin, alias The Wild
Scotchman, 337 —340
Maher, see Kerr, John
Maher, Walter, 283
Maloney, Thomas, 155
Manns, Henry, 202—204, 276
Marriott, Henry, 167—169
Marshall, John, 87
Mason, 299
Mathers, John, 33—36
Mathews, Daniel, 232
Maynard, Donald, 59
Mayne, 59
Melville, Edward, 142
Melville, George, 164, 165
Melville, Captain, see McCallum,
Frank, alias Smith
Middleton, Richard, alias Ruggy
Dick, 277
Miles, John, 280
Miller, see Burgess, Richard H.
Miller, see Slater
Mills, Peter, 21
Mitchell, Robert, 173 —176
Moonlite, Captain, see Scott,
George
Moran, 298
Moore, 122
Moore, 109
Mordecai, see Woolf, James
Morgan, Daniel, 258 —268, 276,
304. 315. 370
Morgan, James, 143
Morgan, John, 91
Mount, James, alias The Old Man,
237—241, 257
Murphy, 42, 45,
Murphy, Jeremiah, 164, 165
Murphy, John, 164, 165
Musquito, 23, 24, 29
Naisk, John, 173 —176
Nesbit, James, alias Lyons, 348
Noon, see Kelly Thomas
Nowlan, see Cashan
Nugent, James, 167
O’Connor, William, 205, 206
O’Donnell, James, alias McDonald,
William, 93
Old Man, The, see Mount, James
O’Meally, 212 216, 221 228,
276, 355
O’Sullivan, Jeremiah, 173 —176
Owens, John, 279
Paddy, Wandong, see Fitzgerald,
Patrick
Parrott, Samuel, alias Powell, 51
Payne, John, 282, 312
Peisley, John, 196 —199, 276


Perry, 47
Perry, John, 52, 53
Perry, Peter, 186
Pickthorne, William, 130, 132
Pierce, Alexander, 33—39. 73. 333
Pilcock, 139
Poole, John, 51 —53
Poulston, 186
Power, Harry, alias Johnson, 318 —
3 2 5, 34D 356, 385
Price, John, 117, 130
Quinn, 317
Quinn, Thomas, 167 —169
Regan, 196
Regan, James, lII— II3
Regent, 316
Rider, Charles, 41
Riley, James, 51—53
Roberts, 167
Roberts, see Gilbert, Johnny
Roberts, Thomas, 117
Roberts, William, 148 —152
Robinson, 185
Rogan, Thomas, 349
Rogers, William, 161
Ross, Alexander, 205, 206
Ross, Charles, 195
Ross, Charles, 205, 206
Ruggy, Dick, see Middleton, Richard
Russell, 40
Rutherford, Charles, 298
Ryan, 238
Ryan, James, 51—53
Ryan, Jeremiah, 41
Ryan, Patrick, 281
Scotchman, The Wild, see
Macpherson, Alpin
Scotchy, 73
Scott, Bill, 271—274, 276
Scott, George, alias Captain
Moonlite, 342—350. 3 8 5
Scott, William, 140
Scrimshaw, William, 130, 132
Sears, Henry, 108—no
Seary, Michael, 232
Seymour, 278
Shanks, James, 352
Shanks, Robert, 352
Shea, Daniel, 312
Shea, John, 87
Shepherd, John, 280
Simmons, William H., 313
Simpson, William, 161
Slater, alias Miller, 284
Slattery, Michael, 279
Smart, Henry, 180
Smith, 160
Smith, 298
Smith, Henry, 155
Smith, Henry, alias Brennan, 155
Smith, James, 313
Smith, Robert, 195
Smith, Thomas, see McCallum,
Frank, alias Captain Melville
Smith, Thomas, see Cunningham
South, John, 91
Southgate, John, 232
Southgate, see Kennedy, James
Stallard, Alfred, 165
Stanley, Frank, alias Wright, 233
Stanmore, Charles, 296
Stanton, Patrick, alias Jack Mack,
320
Steele, Henry, 88
Stevenson or Stephenson, Alexander,
alias Telford, 106
Stroud, Thomas, 161
Suffolk, Owen, 140
Sullivan, Daniel, 294
Sullivan, John Joseph, 327—333
Swallow, William, alias Waldon,
104—X 07


Tattersdale, Thomas, 56, 57
Taverner, William, 313
Taylor, Daniel, 313
Taylor, John, 233
Telford, see Stevenson or Stephen-
son, Alexander
Thomson, see Atterill, James
Thompson, John, 41
Thompson, John, 295
Thunderbolt, Captain, see Ward,
Frederick
Tierney, James, 41
Tilly, 47
Tracey, Thomas, 277
Travers, Mathew, 33 —36
Underwood, Will, 55, 56
Vandemonian, see Jepps
Vane, 221—225, 256, 276
Vaut, Charles, 88
Waldon, see Swallow, William
Walker, Isaac, 41
Walmsley, 55, 56
Ward, Frederick, alias Captain
Thunderbolt, 289 —302, 304,
3*5, 322, 370, 34G 38S
Watson, William, 194
Watts, William, alias Charles or
George Williams, 106—107
Webb, Thomas, 233
Webber, 55, 56
Weekes, John, 298
Welsh, Michael, 59
Wernicke, Gus, 349
Westwood, William, alias Jackey
Jackey, 71—78, 82, 127—133
269, 353
Whelan, Thomas, 108
Whitehead, 18, 19
William Byles & Sons, Printers, 129, Fleet Street, London, and Bradford.
Whiting, Henry, 130, 132
Whitton, 73
Wild Scotchman, The, see Mac-
pherson, Alpin
Williams, 45
Williams, Charles or George, see
Watts, William
Williams, George, 22
Williams, George, 207
Williams, Herbert, see Jones,
Charles
Williams, Jack, 96 —99
Williams, John, 155
Williams, John, 282, 313
Williams, Thomas, 155
Williams, Thomas, alias Jones, 349
Wilkinson, John, alias Wilton, 91
Willis, William, alias Dunkley,
298, 312
Willison, George, 207
Willmore, Thomas, 178 —180, 258
Wilson, 93
Wilson, 95
Wilson, George, 164, 165
Wilson, Harry, 288
Wilson, John, 182—184
Wilson, John, 277
Woolf, James, alias Mordecai,
108—no
Wright, John, 80
Wright, 336
Wright, see Stanley, Frank
Wyndham, alias Bennett, see Gough,
Charles Hugh
Yankee Jack, see Ellis, John
Young Fogarty, see Fogarty
Young, John, alias Lowe, 155
Young, William, 161












