

The
Littlejohn Memorial
Chapel
Scotch College, Melbourne
Met
sea
z>i




The
Littlejohn Memorial
Chapel
f" & C<9 '6s
Scotch College, Melbourne


W. S. Littlejohn, M.A., LL.D.
From the oil painting
By W. B. Mclnnes


THE
LITTLEJOHN MEMORIAL
CHAPE
AN APPRECIATION
GEO. R. KING, 0.8. E., S.B.St.J., Hon. Fellow R.V.I.A.
MELBOURNE has been enriched aesthetically by the erection of
this gem of Gothic Architecture. Nay, it may be confidently
claimed that already it is one of the recognized architectural
features of the Commonwealth.
Many waters go to the swelling of a stream, and so in the case of
this Chapel many attributes have been absorbed in its making. The
spiritual needs of the School for a Chapel, thereby providing an essential
feature of its operations, must be regarded as the prime factor. A major
feature, however, lies in the Memorialship to Dr. W. S. Littlejohn, and
the consequent linking up of his personality, life, and work, with the
School for all time. This Memorial crystallizes into shape and form the
recognition of a life’s devotion to duty, and makes visual an appreciation
of one who was a pillar of our educational edifice: in fact, he may be
regarded as the Titan of our Victorian Public Schools. It can in truth
be said that no Memorial in wood or stone is required to perpetuate the
memory of the late Dr. W. S. Littlejohn in the time and life of his
own scholars and the wide circle of his friends and acquaintances. He
endeared himself to all with an exalted esteem, and to his friends with an
unending affection. It is, however, fitting that the Torch of Remembrance
should be handed down from generation to generation. "Let us now
praise men of renown,” and particularly those who have gained glory
and become men of great power by and through their wisdom in moulding
the minds and thoughts of the rising generation.
It is the fabric of the Memorial with which we are immediately
concerned, and not the originating cause of it. This brochure contains
a full setting forth of the Movement in warm and generous, though
An Appreciation


-N
5
,, <i *> * **
a. r Hill i * ■
WLkM v%, If ill t
*»#
i
LAiJb r
\fLJA
’ r ?
t0
»* V. V
■ "
i$$gam ■
A * f ’*; V‘ ' -'^1
Genera! View of Chapel


well-merited, terms of recognition of the great man whose name now
is, and for all time will be, associated with the Chapel.
The architectural description of the building by those responsible
for its design and erection is herein also set forth. At the risk of repetition
we would, however, present a few thoughts concerning this delightful
gem of ecclesiastical architecture. What are the qualities that go to make
up its fine effect? Wherein he the features of its general success? In other
words, what constitutes its excellence? It is dangerous at times to attempt
to define beauty, or describe its elements. The genius of the poet enables
one to visualize the beauties of a Grecian Urn with all its creative basis
and classic charm. Critics may similarly describe the beauties of works
of Art in terms of technique. Nevertheless, the acceptance of the
Littlejohn Memorial, as an architectural work of outstanding quality,
is due to its features and qualities appealing to the lay and professional
mind alike. It is remarkable to contemplate that but three generations
were engaged in the flowering of Greek architecture and art, while Gothic
architecture, which was born of another spirit and may be regarded as
essentially associated with Christian edifices, has continued for centuries
in continuity of its origin and source. It was fitting, therefore, that a
Memorial to be established in connection with a denominational collegiate
institution should be Gothic in design and character.
It was a wise determination on the part of the authorities to institute
a competition for the selection of the Memorial design, and a liberal
measure of commendation is due to the adjudicator responsible for the
choice of the premiated design. While the Chapel in its completed stage
may be generally, and with enthusiasm, accepted as a beautiful expression
of architecture, it required the seeing eye of a competent judge to choose
and place the first award from the many excellent contributions submitted
for the competition. What was pleasing in design is confirmed in the
completed structure, and an envisagement of the future promises a
confirmation for all time.
Traditionalism has for many years been a rigid taskmaster for the
architectural profession. Hence we have too many instances of slavish
adherence to the relics of the past. Architecture at its best is a living
force; in its true presentation it is a reflex of the age of its time, without,
however, any departure from traditional sources of thought and principles.
It has the habiliments of a life existent; not the shrouds of a dead past.
In the case of the Littlejohn Memorial our architects have expressed with
a touch of genius the spirit of the age, and have vitalized their conception
accordingly.


West Elevation


Site at all times is an important factor in the consideration of a
building, and in this respect the building in review is fortunately placed.
It becomes an integral feature of its surroundings. It relates itself to its
fellow buildings with a due sense of importance, and seems to grow, as
it were, out of the very geological conformation of its base.
Architecture has been termed the art of building upon those
principles which embody strength, utility, and beauty, and a building
should sense these attributes to make an effective appeal and satisfy the
onlooker. Comment is needless regarding the viewpoints of strength and
utility. Its beauty is beyond doubt a source of great joy and inspiration,
not only to the aesthetically minded, but to the average beholder. A fine
sense of majesty is perhaps its leading feature. This is emphasized by a
happy allocation of voids and solids in combination with a liberality of
proportions, with a resultant poise and balance. A pseudo-buttress
treatment on the lateral walls provides a delicate, yet definite, light and
shade treatment, which at certain hours produces broad facets for
radiant reflection. The delicate, yet fulness of, Gothic curves is manifest
throughout, with here and there a touch of severity not altogether
inappropriate, having regard to the national characteristics of the subject
of the Memorial. There is a phase of mysticism in much of the detail and
decorative features, which creates, as it were, a medieval atmosphere and
provides in itself a mine for thought and contemplation.
Perhaps one of the outstanding charms in the Memorial lies in the
choice of material with its resultant texture and colour. "While there
is given unto the things of earth, which time has bent, a spirit’s feelings,”
and in colour, warmth, and depth, already a heritage of opulence is
assured by the natal texture. The sublety of colour in architecture is
the theme of admiration of every artist. Ruskin particularly emphasizes
this feature, and cites St. Mark’s as a glowing example. Down the long
trail of time emphasis is made by critics and commentators, alike, of
the charm of colour effects. We know of no other building erected in
Australia, that so fully embodies the truth of the dictum that colour is
an essential in the satisfactory ensemble of an architectural composition
as does the Littlejohn Chapel.
The qualities of the exterior have been referred to in terms of
composition. The interior reveals itself in full harmony with the whole
design. The lofty walls, proportionately fenestrated, and sheathed at
the base in beautiful oak panelling, rise in soft textures to the heavily
timbered roof, supported by sturdy trusses. The whole Chapel is bathed
in a mellow light, and indeed is a truly delightful conception. Here and


C
o
4-»
a
>
_o
LL3
~Z-3
13
o
IS)


there are revealed delicate touches of craftsmanship and Gothic detail,
like the warp, woof, and design of a master weaver.
Let some words of praise be added regarding the work of the
builder and craftsmen engaged on the erection of the Chapel. It would,
indeed, be invidious to enumerate any single group, for a unity of effort
seems to have been part of the organization, and the evidences are
manifest throughout of a spirit of love for the work and a keenness for
craftsmanship of a high order.
It has been my privilege to view this Memorial on various occasions.
At dawn, when the "hunter of the east” has caught some feature of the
Chapel in the noose of light, the building takes shape, as it were, from
mass into definite and detail form, and manifests itself in terms of
subtlety. In the noonday of its glory it stands in full majesty. But, for
mystic beauty, this building has to be seen, as Byron viewed the Coliseum,
in the azure gloom of night when "the moonbeams shine as ’twere its
natural torches.”
Scotch College will ever revere the memory of Dr. Littlejohn
while this Chapel stands. The scholars who are fortunate enough to be
brought within the pale of the educational influences of the School,
are privileged also to come within the shade and shadow of an edifice
calculated to awaken every element that makes for ideality in manhood.
In this building the highest thoughts of life will be presented. Here, in
this sublime setting, the memory of one who was truly great will be
perpetuated, and the influence of his life and character, extending into
far years, will react to the inspiration and uplift of each succeeding
generation of Scotch Collegians.


The Commemorative Tablet


A DREAM AND ITS
REALISATION
THE BUILDING OF THE CHAPEL
THE Hawthorn Glen site now occupied by the Scotch College was
acquired in 1915 with the idea that gradually the School would
be removed from its cramped position at East Melbourne to a
spacious demesne. It was not until February, 1923, that the Senior School
classes were completely transferred to Hawthorn, the shifting of the
Boarders being completed in February, 1926.
The transfer of so large a school was a great undertaking and
necessitated very heavy expenditure. As a tribute to the Old Scotch
Collegians who served in the Great War, a large sum (over £40,000)
was raised by the Old Boys and others for the erection of a Memorial
Hall as part of the new buildings at Hawthorn and towards the cost
of the necessary classrooms for the Senior School. During the campaign
for funds for this purpose one of the School’s most loyal and generous
Old Boys, the late Mr. W. H. Melville, m.a., 11. m., suggested in writing
that an effort be made to include in the new buildings at Hawthorn a
Chapel, which, as he pointed out, would not only be used by the Boarders
at the College, but also be available to Old Boys for weddings, christenings
and other services. Mr. Melville offered to start a "Chapel Fund” with
a donation of £2 50, in addition to the very large sum already given by
him to the War Memorial Hall and School Buildings Fund.
The total sum found necessary for the Memorial Hall, the School
buildings and boarding houses at Hawthorn, however, was so great as
to prevent any possibility of financing the cost of a Chapel at that
time. For years after the transfer to Hawthorn all the financial ability
of the Chairman of the College Council (Sir John MacFarland) and
the provident management of the Principal (Dr. W. S. Littlejohn) had
to be exerted to the utmost in efforts to get the heavy debt on the School
reduced to an amount which could not be called overwhelming. Hence
the idea of building a Chapel was shelved for ten years.
Though shelved, the need of it was urgent. The Boarders’ Sunday
evening services, as well as many weddings of Old Boys, were held in
the Memorial Hall, the great size of which rendered it unsuitable for
A Dream and its Reali


Detail of West Doorway


those purposes. A service for 150 to 200 boys in a building with a seating
capacity of 1,000 could not be as effective and whole-hearted as one in
a consecrated building of smaller size designed especially for religious
ceremonies. No one knew better than Dr. W. S. Littlejohn how necessary
a School Chapel was, and no one longed more ardently than he for the
day when the College would have its own Chapel in its own grounds.
The year 1933 saw the transformation of a dream into that which
gave promise of reality.
With the object of keeping the Old Scotch Collegians’ Association,
and particularly its Council, in closer touch with the daily life of the
School, a little Dinner was held early in February, 193 3, at which Dr.
W. S. Littlejohn was the guest, the others present being members of
the Council of the Association. At this Dinner various methods of
strengthening the ties between Old Boys and the School were discussed,
and the President of the Association urged, as a bold move to this end,
that Old Scotch Collegians should forthwith initiate a campaign for
funds for building a Chapel in the School grounds and not rest until
that Chapel was completed and in use. It was claimed that the Chapel
would be the heart of the School and that success in this project would
clearly demonstrate that Scotch College was indeed "a corporation having
perpetual succession” comprising the Old Boys, the present-day boys
and the boys of the future.
The proposal seemed to some premature. The world was still in the
throes of the great depression, and an attempt to collect money for a
non-utilitarian purpose appeared doomed to certain failure. But it was
decided to try, and the President was authorized to wait on Sir John
MacFarland. Sir John was most sympathetic, but pointed out that the
work of raising the necessary funds would be an exceedingly onerous and
lengthy task, and that the prevailing financial stringency would prevent
many who would like to contribute from doing so.
By letter from the Association dated April 5, 1933, the matter was
brought formally before the Scotch College Council, who gave their
approval of the project, provided that no part of the cost of the Chapel
fell upon the School funds. In other words, no building could be
started unless sufficient money to pay for it had first been collected. The
Council appointed Sir John MacFarland and Dr. W. S. Littlejohn as
its representatives to consider and discuss all matters relating to the
project with representatives of the Council of the Old Scotch Collegians’
Association, who were Sir Arthur Robinson, Lieut.-Col. Clive S. Steele
and Major Stuart Love.


Interior of the Chapel


Two essentials had first to b( decided. One, the actual site of the
proposed Chapel; the other, the litit of its cost.
Great argument took place cer the site, and the College Council
held a meeting at the School andinspected the various sites suggested.
Finally, the site recommended by )r. Littlejohn was approved, and this
was roughly marked out one wet lorning in July by Dr. Littlejohn and
Sir Arthur Robinson. The exper opinion of Lieut.-Col. Steele, b.c.e.,
was sought as to the suitability of tis site for a substantial building and on
the other cognate points. Havig examined and tested the ground,
Lieut.-Col. Steele recommended tat a competition for designs be held,
open to all recognized architects nd architectural students in Victoria,
in accordance with the rules of ie Federal Council of the Australian
Institutes of Architects.
For this purpose an Assessor r Judge of the designs to be submitted
was necessary, and the Associatic was fortunate enough to secure the
services of Mr. P. H. Meldrum, c the well-known firm of Stephenson
& Meldrum. Instructions and ceiain suggestions relating to the project
were prepared for the guidance o:competitors, and a cost of £9,000 for
the building (exclusive of levellig, roadway or approaches, all internal
furnishings and equipment, orgi, etc., etc.) was given as the limit
desired.
One of the last tasks of Dr.UC. S. Littlejohn was the consideration
of a draft of the conditions anc suggestions for the competition. On
August 3 he returned the draft ating, "They appear to me to be both
complete and explicit, and I corially approve.” A week later he took
to his bed with an attack of inflmza which developed into pneumonia,
from the effects of which he pas;d away on October 7.
The suggestions to competnrs expressly stated that they were not
made "to cramp originality of deas in design and construction, but
rather to obtain an expression c the best ideas that a competitor can
put forward.”
The brilliant achievement othe successful architects in their design
for the Chapel indicates how thcoughly they grasped the ideas of those
who framed the suggestions. Ti nature of these may be judged from
the following extracts:
The site has been selected because 6m the door, or steps leading to the door, of the
Chapel a commanding view of tw thirds of the surrounding terrain is obtained—
Camberwell to the east, the Glen Is valley to the south-east, Malvern and Toorak
A Dream and its Realisation


East Elevation


to the south and south-west, and the 'kkrra valley to the west. In the near distance
looking west are the main School builengs, and the Chapel will therefore dominate
the School.
The Chapel will be reached from the drive in the School grounds entering from
Glenferrie Road. The ground level ofthe Chapel should be fixed so that the access
to the building by steps from the dive is rendered easy and impressive and full
advantage is taken of the view. . . .
Appearance
It is desired that the Chapel should be beautiful and dignified, and, if possible, the
most attractive-looking building, extrnally, in the surrounding district. It will
dominate the School and its playing fiilds. As the boys lift up their eyes they will
see this Chapel, and it is hoped that Its appearance will leave a lasting impression
of beauty. ... A suggestion of peacf and rest is sought for in the design.
Internal Arrangemerit
Although the cost of organ, pulpit, ictern and seats is not to be included in the
estimated cost of the building, yet carful consideration should be given to the type
and position of these furnishings.
Regard being had to weddings, the intrnal arrangement of seats (or pews), lectern,
pulpit and organ, must be such as till permit of the ceremony being performed
without crowding of the participant) and with due dignity and decorum. . . .
Organ
The appearance, size and position of he organ must be considered, and the design
must show where it is intended the c'gan should be placed. Care should be taken
to avoid any appearance of the orgn being an excrescence or inserted without
reference to the general internal desin. . . .
Pulpit and Lectern
Similar considerations apply, and sujestions as to the type of these furnishings,
with estimates of cost, are desired.
Seats
Particulars of the type of seat or pe recommended should be given, and a design
for these should be submitted in kefing with the general internal appearance of
the Chapel.
The competition was annouced on August 22, and the closing
date for submission of designs wa fixed for November 15. Forty-four
drawings were submitted, and lie Assessors awarded the first prize
(£100) to the design submitted jcntly by Messrs. J. F. D. Scarborough,


' - ; -
?
“ 7 ■•;
IP :
m
?!
| v
:!;llOl|ll|W
I im.Wk mm
I |((p 4P !
I
11
"*' *?*•' “
s§jik
**
1
;’Jf' *
1
J$m
4 *
if
I
Jpj £gf«jr J|
fpll '''■''/ H
ly ,i 1
L A
|
M
Mil “
oo
* 1 | B f
»1 i
riHI 'H'l
Wk 1
I
.W._
f
k ill
iili 1 r -
?!
11
,
•*■1 :
«
jji
III
f|frf:
,i If
i 'll flr
W,! J |
* 1
h JHI i 1 MfflMP®' 4M
■ | 1 HMnan
1 I Sp—
-..^L
llfli 1
19
««'V 1 II
Pur ’ it* "i* /
vH HHHP; * j
*li| ififcs 1
Uli
g*r. ■WMBWagagg y. - r f
33w ■ ,% -~ta-. -■* f ' iS '“
■ %|.
1
4 ' - : *&**$k
CL
I HEjiitf. -.*__ -xsswt- _Jm
,r - - ■
IIM®
9 1
| iPj i jj | gf i|
ill
i IH
nterior of Narthex


J. Kirkland Robertson and Allan RLove; the second prize (£SO) to the
design submitted jointly by MessrsD. R. Gillam and H. Garnet Alsop;
and the third prize (£25) to thatlubmitted by Mr. W. E. Gower. In
his report the Assessor stated: "Th : average standard of the drawings is
very high. . . . The design whin receives first premium presents a
scheme that is almost above criticm. The plan is very good and the
author’s knowledge of the requiremnts of a Presbyterian place of worship
quite obvious.”
An exhibition of the designs siomitted was held at the Scots Church
Hall from November 20 to 27, mny hundreds attending.
In the latter part of Septembe Dr. Littlejohn’s family intimated to
the College Council that he woul not be able to resume his work as
Principal. At a meeting of the Guncil of the Old Scotch Collegians’
Association held on September 25 fie following resolution was carried:
The Council deeply regret that Dr. r . S. Littlejohn feels compelled by illness to
retire from the leadership of Scotch Collegiand tender their sympathy to Mrs. Littlejohn
and the family in the strain which this illess is placing on them.
Dr. Littlejohn’s services to educaton and the advancement of learning are
unsurpassed in the history of Victoria, ad the great achievements of Scotch College
during his long term as Principal have been due largely to his inspiring lead and
unflagging zeal. He retires from his pos with the personal affection of thousands of
Old Boys, who, individually and collecively, desire to express their wholehearted
admiration for his magnificent work in cveloping the Old School to its high state of
efficiency.
Every Old Boy will agree that som substantial evidence of appreciation of Dr.
Littlejohn’s work for Scotch College shotd be visible in the School grounds.
The Council believe that the tributi to Dr. Littlejohn’s services which would be
most in keeping with his own wishes wuld be the speedy erection of the proposed
Chapel at Scotch College, and that he wold regard the completion of that edifice as a
noble recognition of his efforts for the Saool.
The College Council having approvd of this Chapel being called the "Littlejohn
Chapel” the call is made to Old Boys an lovers of Scotch College in all parts of the
world to strain every effort to secure the speedy erection of this Chapel in the School
grounds.
Appreciation of his life and T ork were extraordinary in range and
intensity. There is little doubt thaithe passing of Dr. Littlejohn deepened
the resolve and strengthened the purpose of those associated with the
Chapel project. It seems certain iat the association of Dr. Littlejohn’s
name with the Chapel secured aresponse from many quarters which


Baptistry and Font


otherwise would not have been fortlcoming, and thereby largely nullified
the fears of failure expressed in vaious quarters at the inception of the
Chapel proposal.
After Dr. Littlejohn’s death he "Littlejohn Chapel Fund Com-
mittee” was formed, comprising representatives of the Old Scotch
Collegians’ Association, the Old Scolch Collegians’ Club, and the teaching
staff of the College. Their names wre Mr. J. A. Seitz, Sir Julius Bruche,
Lieut.-Col. C. S. Steele, Messrs. C. F. McKay, L. B. Davies, J. H. McColl,
J. W. Leckie, C. E. Sandford, H. fi Bowden, with Sir Arthur Robinson
as Chairman and Hon. Treasurer,and Messrs. Bruce Laing and F. E.
Down as Assistant Hon. Treasurers
The appeal launched immediacy after Dr. Littlejohn’s death asked
for a sum of £12,500, which it wa:then believed would be sufficient for
the work. By the end of 1933 aout £3,5 00 had been received. Mr.
J. A. Seitz suggested a scheme fo issuing "brick certificates” for the
contributors of smaller sums, eacheertificate representing a gift of five
shillings to the Chapel Fund. Th; method proved very popular with
the boys at the College, many of wbm took a keen interest in the project.
In view of the definite undetaking that no part of the cost of
the Chapel should fall on the Coege funds, instructions for working
drawings and quantities could no be given until a substantial sum
had been collected. By February 193 5, the amount of contributions
available (after deducting the cst of the architectural competition,
printing, postages and other expems) had increased to £7,900. Happily,
there was in existence a fund rised by the Old Scotch Collegians’
Association in 1923-24 for furthe buildings at the School, which, with
interest, amounted in 193 5 to oveE6,ooo. This fund was made available
for the Chapel project on the uderstanding that repayment, either
wholly or in part, would be madeif and when donations to the Chapel
Fund were sufficient to enable thi to be done. The Chapel Committee
thereupon decided to authorize Mesrs. Scarborough, Robertson and Love
to call for tenders for the erectiomf the Chapel, and these were received
in April.
The lowest tenderers were Mssrs. T. R. and L. Cockram Pty. Ltd.,
whose tender for the whole builoig and its furnishing and equipment
was £16,794, an amount considrably in excess of the Committee’s
resources. Nevertheless, it was dffided to proceed with the erection of
the building only at a cost of £13,500, and simultaneously appeal for
further donations so that when ercted it might be completely equipped
and furnished.


Detail of Organ Gallery


Work was started by the end o May, and was advanced sufficiently
by October 12, 193 5, to permit of te laying of the Memorial Stone. An
open-air Service was conducted froi the western terrace of the Chapel
by the Rt. Rev. the Moderator (the Lev. W. Huey Steele, m.a.), an Old
Boy of the College, and the stone lai by the President of the Old Scotch
Collegians’ Association.
A strong effort for further ffiancial help received good response,
and, in the belief that more would b forthcoming, the Committee, early
in 1936, authorized the building ofan organ and the manufacture and
carving of pulpit, lectern, pews, panelling, and a number of other
essentials omitted from the contract zt in May, 1935.
By the end of September, 196, the Chapel was almost ready for
use. On October 7, the third annversary of the death of Dr. W. S.
Littlejohn, his ashes were placed uner the Memorial Stone. On Sunday,
October 18, a Service of Dedication conducted from the open-air pulpit
was held, the Rt. Rev. the Moder.tor (the Rev. A. Irving Davidson,
m.a. ) officiating, assisted by the School Chaplain (the Rev. S. E. Yarnold),
the Rev. W. D. Marshall, m.a. (an Did Boy, who preached the sermon),
the Rt. Rev. the Moderator-Geneml (the Rev. Dr. John Mackenzie),
the Principal of the College and tie Chairman of the College Council.
Within a few weeks of this Service further welcome and generous
donations to the Chapel Fund were received.
The first wedding of an Old 3oy was celebrated in the Chapel on
October 20 (two days after the abdication), and the first Service for
Boarders on the Sunday evening folbwing. The first Communion Service
was held on Thursday, November 2t, when ninety-four boys participated.
The first christening took place in he week following the dedication.
It may be mentioned that Oldßoys and their relations are welcome
at the Sunday evening services, anc that the Chapel is not only for such
services, but for weddings of Oldßoys and the christening of their
children. Above all, it is hoped tha: many of the boys at the College will
attend Communion Service in the Lttlejohn Memorial Chapel.
While it is not practicable to nfer to all who worked for the success
of the Chapel project, the writerof this note feels that some cannot
be allowed to remain unmentiond. The work of the architects is
generally acknowledged to be an oustanding contribution to ecclesiastical
architecture in Australia. Lieut.-Gl. Clive S. Steele, b.c.e., gave without
stint the benefit of his wide experence in constructional work. In the
collection of funds Messrs. Bruce laing and F. E. Down, and, later, Mr.
K. M. Wilson, as Assistant Hon. Teasurers, were indefatigable. The new


South Doorway


Principal (Mr. C. M. Gilray) strove with success to keep the idea of a
Chapel alive in the hearts of the boys attending the School, and in this
was ably assisted by three successive Captains of the College (S. J. Steele,
W. Morgan and G. H. Nicholson). Among those of an earlier dispensation
Mr. George L. Aitken set a standard: of continuous and unwearying
service of the highest and most effective type.
The Chapel stands as a memorial to one who devoted his life to the
worship of God and the education of the young, and was raised by those
who knew him and his work, many ©f whom were at some time his
pupils. It is, moreover, a temple of the faith he so devoutly held, as well
as a triumphant vindication of the foresight and courage of those pioneers
who, in unpropitious circumstances during the earliest years of the
settlement of Victoria, established the Scotch College so that education
and religion might go hand in hand. Of Dr. Littlejohn, of those who
strove for the achievement of his dream, and of the founders of the School,
may it always be true to say:
For their work continueth,
And their work) continueth,
Broad and deep continueth,
Greater than their knowing
A.R.
October, 1937.


View of Interior, looking
towards Organ Gallery


THE CHAPEL
AS DESCRIBED BY ITS ARCHITECTS
THE conditions governing the competition for the Littlejohn Memorial
Chapel required a design in the Gothic style, and suggested that
the use of stone was a desideratum, but the cost limit indicated
brick as the only possible material for the exterior. It was felt that the
wisest course was to evolve a design whereby brick might be used in a
logical manner, without undue forcing of so simple a material to act the
part of stone, and that without the exaggerated use of stone dressings.
THE EXTERIOR
The general mode of simplicity being dictated by the material, and
the general proportions of predominant height and length being suggested
by tradition, the resultant expression of these requirements is somewhat
reminiscent of the nave and east end of Albi Cathedral, a sixteenth century
fortress church in the south of France. That the one is a copy of the
other is, of course, not so, nor even possible, but the French cathedral was
an admitted inspiration in the spirit of the Chapel style.
The Design:
A school chapel stands primarily to serve the needs of corporate and
individual worship of the boy at school. Such a building bespeaks its
simple purpose in its direct planning aqd one-ness of mass.
It is a truism in architecture that mass is more important than
line, and the chosen site of the Chapel dictated the massing of its parts.
Standing upon the lower slopes of a steep hill, an assymetrical disposition
of masses provides the best balance of building and surroundings.
On the south, or lower, side, the high Nave is buttressed into the
slope of the hill by the turret, South Torch, Ambulatory and Vestry.
The West Front:
The main outlines of the West facade clearly indicate the section
of the Nave: tall and narrow, with low-pitched roof.
The dominant motif is the grest window, of five slender lights,
finishing with a very rich head of tracery under a deep and heavily-
moulded brick arch. The curved reveals of the window extend down to
the level of the terrace, and between them is set the doorway, very full


in detail. Surrounding the door is a wide, square-headed architrave of
carved foliage—rose, thistle, shamrock, acanthus and vine—representative
not only of the three kingdoms, but also of the Classic and Gothic eras.
Above the architrave band, and surmounted by a delicately pierced
cresting, is a broad, plain panel, bearing in Gothic lettering the words
"The Littlejohn Memorial Chapel,” flanked by two shields quartered with
the Cross of St. Andrew.
The Open Air Pulpit:
Justified in its use during the opening Service of Dedication, the
open-air pulpit serves also an architectural purpose of leading the lines
of the Turret down through the Terrace balustrade. This Pulpit (which
is permanently wired to an amplifying system, embracing also the Organ
within the Chapel) commands the main oval and the road of approach.
The Burning Bush:
Throughout the Chapel, a number of representations of the badge
of Presbyterianism, the Burning Bush, will be found in various materials.
One of the most interesting is in carved brickwork on three faces near
the top of the Turret.
New Buttressing:
One of the distinctions of the exterior is the unity of wall and
buttress, achieved by carrying the walls out to a point between the
windows, to avoid the "hardness” of the conventional buttress. These
projections break back, about five feet from the top, on to a straight
parapet, the sheer line of which is broken and relieved by two terracotta
gargoyles, acting as overflow outlets from the roof gutter.
The South Side:
The results of the buttress treatment adopted and referred to above
are clearly evidenced in the south side of the building. An effect of
undulation is produced in the wall surface, assuring continuity and
rhythm in the design. The Ambulatory wall, linking up the projecting
masses of southern porch and Vestry, and projecting in front of the main
wall buttresses, assures cohesion in the architectural treatment of this
important side, facing as it does not only the private roadway but also
the Rugby field.
This side, when seen in conjunction with the west front from the
main School oval, provides one of the most impressive views of the Chapel.


The aesthetic importance of long flights of steps in connection with
buildings is perhaps too seldom realized. (The height of a step, being of
necessity so definitely related to human £ature, at once gives a basis for
the appreciation and realization of a builling’s size or "scale.”
The repetition of rich traceries in thi upper portions of the windows
produces a horizontal band of ornameit practically analogous to the
classical use of ornamental friezes fomd in the great architectural
examples of the Classic age. It is this suble creation of a horizontal band
or line, used in conjunction with repeaed verticality, whether this be
produced by Classic columns or Gothic buttresses, which provides the
basis for that feeling of balance or restidness so essential to the success
of any edifice.
The Bast End:
Although the east end might be onsidered to be the back of the
building it is the portion first seen on entering the School grounds, and
consequently special care has been besowed upon its design to attain
that quality of dignity, and if possible alfeeling of inspiration which will
not only be retained but enhanced as the Chapel is approached, and, when
entered, the climax reached.
The ultimate growth of the mary trees recently planted in the
comprehensive scheme now in hand ha; been carefully considered in the
Chapel design and the necessity for height is at once apparent. It is only
necessary to cite the importance attachel to height in the many mediaeval
examples of Gothic art for the inspiriig effect of this characteristic to
be appreciated.
The North Side:
The main features of the south anl east sides are repeated here, with
the addition of the Bell Turret. The bel is mounted on a shaft, extending
through the wall into the organ chanber, from whence a rope passes
through the floor into the Narthex bdow.
Virtuosity in Bricks:
The whole of the exterior is of specially textured bricks—a texture
evolved for this particular job—and n addition to the unusual design
in this material, both the making andlaying of the bricks is greatly to
the credit of those concerned. Over eghty special shapes were detailed,
modelled and burnt.


Detail of Vestry


THE INTERIOR
Narthex and Baptistry:
The chief items of interest in theiNarthex are the oak-panelled
ceiling, flush-moulded, and decorated with small, rich accents of
vermilion, blue and gold (this treatmert is typical of the use of colour
throughout: in small, carefully studiel accents of great richness of
effect) ; the Panel of Dedication, and tie Baptistry, which occupies the
northern bay of the Narthex.
Font and \Vindow :
The only decoration on the font is : band of inset lettering, quoting
from St. Peter’s sermon on the morning of Pentecost: "For the promise
is unto you, and to your children.” Bhind the Font, a small window
typifies in lovely colour the wording pi the Font. This window is the
work of Mrs. M. Napier Waller.
( Half darkness, and half light ”
The only touch of the dramatic is t( be found in the contrast between
Narthex and Nave. The former, onl} dimly lighted, spanned by two
low, wood-panelled ceilings, has an atmsphere of warmth and intimacy,
contrasting very forcibly with the gret height, length and light of the
Nave, separated by beautifully carved oors.
The Nave:
The Nave is panelled all around ith Manchurian oak to a height
of eleven feet. This timber has been u:d throughout for all joinery and
furniture.
The panelling is treated with speial richness around the entrance
doors from the Narthex, and in the A>se, around and above the Elders’
Stalls. Here the plain panels have beenalled with linenfold ornament.
The IVindows :
The unusually tall windows at pesent admit a great flood of light
through pale amber glass. While the re of very deeply coloured stained
glass is not intended, a certain ultimo reduction of light will enhance
the quality of light within the Nave, i


The Apse:
The Apse floor, semi-hexagonal in plan, is raised by three steps across
the full width of the Chapel.
The Communion Table occupies a central position, and behind it
are the canopied Elders’ Stalls. The Pulpit and Lectern are respectively
on the north and south sides of the Apse.
The Nave Ceiling:
Until such time as stained-glass windows may be installed, the chief
field of colour is in the roof trusses and cornice.
The roof, of very low pitch, is carried on heavy iron-strapped king
post trusses, bearing at each end on grotesque corbels. The rafters are
allowed to show, and between them are sound-absorbing tiles of very
light red ochre colour. The woodwork is stained to a deep walnut, and
polychrome decoration applied to the chamfered edges of the truss
members, and colour and gold to the cornice.
The Vestry:
Octagonal in plan, the Vestry walls are in flush oak panelling to
their full height, with polychrome decoration in red, gold and green on
the cornice, picked up and centred in the jade pens and green glass base
let into the table top.
The Ambulatory:
Extending between the South Porch and Vestry, the Ambulatory
provides an emergency exit from the Nave, but its chief interest lies
in the rhythm of repeated arches across the ceiling—the outcome of the
necessity of strengthening the roof slabs beneath the great buttresses
below.
The Turret:
Giving access to the Organ Blower Room below, and the Organ
Gallery above, the Turret houses an interesting spiral stair. It is formed
of pre-cast concrete treads, with continuous newel, and unbroken winding
soffit. The three repeating units were pre-cast on the site in an ingenious
series of timber moulds evolved by the job foreman. When fitted in
place, the soffits matched perfectly.


The Organ Gallery and Organ:
The Organ Gallery is above th< central bay of the Narthex, with
the great and swell organ chambers oreither side, and the console between
them.
The casework is in four part covering two openings in each
chamber. The pipes are faced with>olished spotted metal, an alloy of
frequent use in organ-builders’ worl and one of great beauty. The
frontal pipes are held by carved v-oden bands of great intricacy of
design and of excellent craftsmanship The organ, by Hill, Norman and
Beard, is of two manuals, compriseithirteen stops, and is complete in
every detail, incorporating in the ccsole all reasonable aids for facility
in playing.
THE FURfISHINGS
Angel Finials:
The panelling is divided at eac bay with vertical moulded styles,
which, breaking through the cornice develop into finial figures.
Each is an angel, with wings ou;pread against the wall, and holding
a shield. The varying charges upo the shields are the Rose, Thistle,
Burning Bush, the Southern Cross,the Cross of lona, the Torch, the
Imperial Crown, and the crosses of t. George, St. Andrew, and St. John
of Malta.
The Pulpit and Lectern:
The Pulpit is octagonal in forr, and restrained in design. Carving
is limited to ornamentation of strutural lines, so that the Pulpit may
not unduly detract from the centil motif of the Communion Table
and Canopied Stalls.
The Lectern has a panelled fron between two solid ends, with carved
and moulded front edges.
The Organ Gallery Front:
With the side walls of the Nav kept reasonably plain, enrichments
have been concentrated at the twomds. At the west end, the entrance
doorway, organ gallery front, and tb organ cases are designed with much
carving. The projecting Gallery Frdt is carried upon four corbels carved
as angel heads. The centre panel is mbellished with a carved and pierced
inset tracery panel.
The Chape!


.
u : - *
s'.*BA5
mm
,<>: ’ !, mM'1
I *
n * * j
-i
?U- J (
S
tj
—»-— —.—
S=sM:|
ps?
n
«— .......
| " ti- ; • 1
' 1
:
jjj
; i
-US*
ps*s
1 I
j! J
■— * IE
A
f 4
r
5 ij? '$!
y
HH
™ 2SS22SS!
fPl : 1
I i |
*
-,agej *
-
Ixgj
■
k 1 1 -|t£ J-
I i Hk
"J. 11
r -: |
— .AlWrw. i
Ik I i
dH i
H— IM|HL :
0 I
nf
j ••■lat^vx - • *
1
■mL
i
|§}lllfc ••" -
g§
Pulpit, Communion Table and Lectern


Narthex Doors:
There are two pairs of doors at the west entrance: the outer pair
slide back into the walls, the inner pair are hung on double-acting check
hinges. Similar pairs of doors are hung between the Narthex and the
South Porch, and between Narthex! and Nave. Of chief interest are the
carved and pierced tracery heads of the glazed panels. The same motif
is repeated in panels just within theiNave doors.
Colour:
In addition to the polychrome treatment of the roof trusses and
cornice, colour is planned in various other fields. The woodwork
throughout (Manchurian oak) has been lightly fumed, limed and waxed.
The stippled plastered walls above are a natural sand-finished buff. The
carpet, a specially woven and imported Wilton, is mole grey. The
Communion Table is stone, off-white.
As contrasts and accents against all these neutral tones, a number
of items call for attention in the Apse.
On the bookrest of the Pulpit is a hanging of royal blue, fringed
with silver bullion, and bearing the Cross of St. Andrew in silver bullion
thread, superimposed upon a vesica piscis of paler blue, edged with two
lines of gold cabling.
On the Lectern, and showing against the gold edging of the great
Oxford Bible, are two markers, in the same blue, and similarly edged
with silver fringe, and embroidered with the St. Andrew’s Cross in silver.
On the Communion Table, enhanced in colour value by the blue of
Pulpit and Lectern, are two strip hangings or orphreys of crimson, fringed
with gold bullion, and bearing, one of them, the sacred monogram, and the
other, the Latin Cross.
Standing upon the orphreys are two silver rose bowls.
The Communion Table itself hears a band of blue opus sectile across
the top, and the final colour climax in a brilliant octagonal panel
of opus sectile, showing the Burning Bush in red and gold, on a back-
ground of deep blue.
THE ORGAN
The placing of the organ above the Narthex at the west end arose
primarily from the need for both linternal and external simplicity at the
east end. It has been agreed by many authorities that, musically, the organ
is best placed behind the congregation. In the Chapel the co-relation of
the two organ chambers with the great west window between them, made
possible the very interesting vaulted organ gallery.


THE SIGNAL SYSTEM
An ingenious electrical signal system has been evolved by the organ
builders, for communication between the Organ Console, and the Pulpit,
Vestry, West Door and South Porch, or between any two of the three.
Briefly, each point of the system appears as an ivory disc, set in the
wall, and engraved with the name of another point. On pressing any
one of the buttons or discs, a light appears behind that disc and another
at the point being called. A pressure on the "called” button extinguishes
both lights. This system obviates the many undignified signal "systems”
frequently adopted in connection with wedding services.
TECHNICAL DETAILS
Righting and Heating:
A very complete electrical installation has been provided. Externally,
the steps and approaches are lit from reflector boxes built into the brick
balustrade walls, and fronted with Holophane prismatic lenses. The
West Doorway is lit by a flush panel in the soffit of the opening, and the
South Entrance by two jamb lights, covered by decorative cast bronze
grilles.
Internally, the Narthex is lit by units flush with the panelled ceiling.
The Nave light fittings are of the "dual purpose lantern” type. In
the base of each is an intensive reflector, directing clear light straight
downward without side glare, while above are low-powered lamps for
general illumination. One of the lanterns carries a spotlight focused
upon the Pulpit bookrest. The Apse is lit by four reflectors mounted
behind the last roof truss, while the vault above the Organ Gallery is
floodlight by a unit built into the Organ Console.
Remote Control:
Control of all lights (and also all Nave heating units) is by remote
control switches concealed behind the panelling, and operating magnetic
switches in the switchroom, which is located within the thickness of the
front wall.
Heating is by means of electrical tubes fixed beneath the pews,
in the Pulpit, and in the Organ Chambers. Each of the latter is
thermostatically maintained at sixty degrees Fahrenheit, to ensure
constant pitch in the organ.


Public Address System:
An outlet at one side of the outloor Pulpit is wired for a microphone,
connected to amplifying equipment in the Organ Blower Room. From
here, leads are taken to a monitoi speaker concealed behind the organ
pipes (and modulated by the org;nist with a rheostat on the console)
and to a microphone point in the Organ Gallery (also switched by the
organist) for picking up the orgat music for amplifying outside.
Acoustics:
The satisfactory acoustics of the Chapel are due to the advice and
services of Dr. L. H. Martin, of tae Melbourne University. The roof is
lined with acoustic tile, and the baiT wall plastered with acoustic plaster.
These two surfaces, together with the area of carpet used full width
in the wide aisle, comprise the sound-absorbing surface necessary to
ensure optimum conditions for both voice and organ music in the Chapel.
CONCLUSION
It is felt that any measure of success that may belong to the Chapel
is largely due to the rare and happy circumstance that placed all relevant
considerations, direct and indirect,within the jurisdiction of the architects
—furnishings, glass, silver, embroidery, and so on —and the architects
here express their sincere appreciation of this consideration.
The goodwill of clients, and the best endeavours of architects,
however, would be of little avail without the co-operation of contractors,
sub-contractors and craftsmen, and, in this respect, the architects have
been particularly fortunate in their association with artists and craftsmen
who have wrought well in all that has been done. There may be happier
associations possible in the course of an architect’s duties, but we have
yet to discover them.


Dedication Service
I Bth October, 1936


FINANCIAL
AS will be seen from the appended statement, the total monetary
contributions and donations to the Chapel Fund up to July 31,
1937, amounted to £11,067/14/4, and, in addition, £652/4/11
interest was credited to the Furid, making a total of £11,719/19/3.
To enable the Chapel to be completed and handed over to the
College, the Council of the Old Scotch Collegians’ Association authorized
the utilization of moneys to the bredit of a fund raised by it in 1923-
1924. This was done on the definite understanding that all moneys
drawn from that particular fund should be recouped by the Chapel Fund
Committee as and when the Committee received further donations for
the Chapel. The Chapel Fund Committee received £6,871/3/6 from
this 1923-1924 fund, which should be repaid in pursuance of the under-
standing mentioned. Only £9ll is available in redemption of this debt,
thus leaving a sum of about £5,960 still owing by the Chapel Fund.
In these circumstances the Committee of the Chapel Fund trust
that Old and Present-day Boys and their parents, as well as friends of
the College or of the Church, will continue their efforts to raise funds
until the whole cost of the Chapel has been met by contributions for
that purpose. Contributions may be sent to Sir Arthur Robinson, 360
Collins Street, Melbourne, or Mr. ,K. M. Wilson, 422 Little Collins Street.
The purchase of copies of this brochure will assist the Chapel Fund, as
the net proceeds from its sale
will be paid
over to the Fund,
LITTLEJOHN
MEMORIAL
CHAPEL FUND
:s to 31 st July, 1937
Statement of Receipts and
Payments
RECEIPTS
Monetary donations £11,067 14' 4
Interest 652 4:11
Cost of sewering refunded .. .. 257 17 : 0
Advance from Memorial Build'
ings Fund 6,871 3! 6
£18,848 19 9
Liabilities still outstanding :
Estimated amount of outstanding
accounts £25 ( 0
Amount to be repaid to Memorial
Buildings Fund £6,871 111
(Sgd.) Arthur Robinson, Chairman, i
K. McK. Wilson, Assist. Hon. Jec.
PAYMENTS
Expenses of competition for de-
signs, prizes therefor, and exhi-
bition thereof £283 19 11
Cost of building and furnishing,
including also survey fees, ap-
proaches, organ, floor coverings,
hangings, communion service
requisites, etc 16,408 13 6
Architects’ fees and expenses .. 948 1 0
Printing, postages, collection ex-
penses, exchange and petty cash 296 12 3
Balance at Commercial Bank of
Australia, and with Presbyterian
Church of Victoria 911 13 1
£18,848 19 9
Audited and found correct.
(Sgd.) D. R. S. McGregor,
Chartered Accountant (Aust.).


SOME OF THE BUILDERS
THE architects were Messrs. Scarborough, Robertson and Love; the consulting
engineer Mr. C. S. Steele; the general contractors T. R. and L. Cockram Pty.
Ltd.; the Foundation Stone and its lettering were the gift of Messrs. James
Taylor & Son (the latter an Old Boy); the Organ was built by Messrs. Hill, Norman
& Beard; the Baptistry window was designed by Mrs. Napier Waller and was the gift
of the architects; the glass and glazing (other than the Baptistry window) was the
work of Messrs. Mathieson & Gibson; the electric lighting installation of W. Tolson
& Co. Ltd.; the joinery and furniture of Messrs. Thear & Son; the bricks and terra
cotta of the Eureka Terra Cotta and Tile Co.; the synthetic stone and fibrous plaster
of the Modern Art Co.; the synthetic stone pavings of de Marco Bros.; the copper work
and roofing; of L. J. Buddie & Co.; the acoustic tile and plaster of James Bell Mineral
Products Ltd.; the bronze work of Messrs. Harrison-Bedford; the lanterns and light
fittings of James McEwan & Co.; the modelling of Mr. George Allen, of Melbourne
Technical College; the wood-carving of Messrs. A. Werner, W. Langcake and J. E.
Lenegan; the embroidery of the hangings of Miss Kessler, of J. and J. Cash Australian
Weaving Co.; the hangings of the Myer Emporium; and the silverware of Wm.
Drummond & Co. and Hardy Bros.
St., Melbourne
Printed and published for the Old Scotch
Collegians’ Association, 422 Little Collins
St., Melbourne, by Brown, Prior, Anderson
Pty. Ltd., Printcraft House, Little Bourke




