

The
Unemployment
Problem
Proposed Solution by the Labour
Government of Queensland
The Text of the Bill, and the *Speech
delivered in the Legislative Assembly, on
2nd September, 1919, by the Treasurer
and Secretary for Public Works (Hon.
E. G. Theodore), in explanation of the
Scheme.
*As Revised for Circulation.




The Unemployment Problem.
Speech delivered in the Legislative Assembly, 2nd September, 1919,
by the Hon. E. G. Theodore, M.L.A.
As Revised for Circulation.
UNEMPLOYED WORKERS BILL.
Second Reading.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS
(Hon. E. G. Theodore, Chillagoe) : In moving
’the second reading of this Bill, I desire to
place before the House a full explanation
of the principles of the Bill, because those
principles are somewhat novel. It is the
first practical attempt which has been made
in the State to deal with the problem.
Mr. Coesee ; Unpractical.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
'This, I take it, is .the first practical attempt
made anywhere to deal with the question in
an adequate manner. I want to give hon.
members an idea of how the scheme might
apply, in order that they will have a full
understanding of what the intentions of the
■Government are with regard to the proposal.
I am aware, at the outset, that much
criticism might be directed against tbe
scheme on the ground that powers are
sought in the Bill which might be arbitrarily
or unwisely exercised or more drastically
applied than is necessary.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : That is a very early
excuse.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
That is an argument which can be directed
■against almost any kind of legislation, and
certainly against legislation that necessarily
establishes arbitrary power in the hands of
some authority. If legislation is to be
opposed on the ground that the power given
might be unwisely exercised, nothing would
be done anywhere.
Cardinal Principles of the Scheme.
The cardinal features of this scheme might
be said to be these—
1. The establishment of an unemploy-
ment council.
2. Relief works as a remedy for unem-
ployment.
[As amended .]
3. The “ right to work ” provisions,
and the unemployment insurance scheme.
4. Labour farms for the normally
unemployable.
5. Other minor and ancillary pro-
visions of the Bill. /
I desire to deal seriatim with these, in
order that hon. members might get an
explanation from me as to what is intended,
at any rate, by the measure. I hope that
hon. members will carefully listen to the
arguments and not attempt to base their
criticism upon a misconception either of the
intention of the Government or of the
provisions of the Bill.
Unemployment Council.
The unemployment council is a very neces-
sary part of the machinery of this scheme—
the establishment of a competent authority
whose business it will be to collect infor-
mation, to study the problem, and gener-
ally to act on behalf of the State in keeping
the Government informed as to the problem
generally. The study of the problem of un-
employment should be systematic. It should
not be haphazard, as it has been in the past.
Its study also should be continuous and per-
manent. We should not defer consideration
of the problem until we are faced with a
large body of unemployment from time to
time. The question should be studied
continuously and systematically, in order that
the situation can be dealt with when,
through slackness or depression, drought, or
or from whatever cause, unemployment exists
within the State.
of the Council.
Now, we have endeavoured to provide for
the constitution of an unemployment council
upon fair lines.
Hon W. H. Barnes : Questionable.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon, member will have anjple oppor-
tunity of voicing his antagonist!** to the Bill


later on. We are not going to limit dis-
cussion upon it. If he will withhold his well-
known hostility to any measure for the
amelioration of the condition of the worker
for a little white—(Opposition laughter)—
we may be able to make more progress.
Hon. W. H. BApNES : That is not correct.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS;
If that is not what is inspiring the hon.
member, perhaps he will withhold his inter-
jections for a little while and listen to what
I have to say.
We desire to establish an unemployment
council upon fair lines, making it a
thoroughly effective, and, at the same time,
workable body; because upon the council
devolves very important duties. Now, what
is the scheme for the constitution of an
unemployment council? It is to consist of
the Minister in charge of the legislation—
the Secretary for Public Works —who shall
be chairman of the council. The necessity
for a Minister being on that council arises
from the fact that the council will be dealing
with very important questions, and will be
exercising very responsible functions. If the
scheme is to be effective, the council must
have very extensive power involving public
expenditure and, in some cases, involv-
ing Government policy. I shall touch
on that later on. For the reason that the
council will be a responsible body, a Min-
isterial representative of the Government
should be on council. There will also be
a judge of the Arbitration Court. The
reason for that is, not that the functions of
the council will be judicial, but that the
judges of the Industrial Arbitration Court
have an opportunity, in the course of their
duties, of specially studying the questions
relating to industry in various parts of the
State. Matters are placed before them which
should be of great importance, and of great
value, to a council of this kind, in enabling
them to understand and thoroughly appre-
ciate the industrial conditions which exist in
different parts of the State and applicable
to different callings and industries. Then the
Director of Labour is provided with a seat
on the unemployment council. That is neces-
sary also, for the machinery of his depart-
ment will largely be used by the unemploy-
ment council in exercising their functions.
Further than that, it is if this
scheme develops as successfully as we antici-
pate, the unemployment council will, to some
extent, control the Department of Labour,
control the exchanges, and exercise functions
which will bring them into very close touch
with the machinery of that department.
In addition to those three members of the
unemployment council, there will be a
workers’ representative and an employers’’
representative, elected in that behalf by the
respective employers’ and employees’ unions.
It is right that that representation should
be given on the council, for no one can
deny that the employees are vitally interested;'
in the solution of this problem; and no can
gainsay, of course, that, under this scheme,
the employers also are vitally interested.
Hon. J. G. Appel ; They have to find all
the boodle.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS;
No, they have not to find all the boodle.
I can see much opposition to this Bill i*
going to arise unfortunately from ignorance-
as to what the Bill provides. That inter-
jection is an illustration.
Powers and Duties of the Council*
The council will exercise very important,
duties. They will be charged with the neces-
sity of continuously studying the problem,
inquiring into it, and considering what-
measures should be adopted from time to*
time to reduce or eliminate unemployment
within the State, and to disseminate in-
formation bearing upon this question. There-
has been a great -.deal of study, but
more or less of a haphazard nature, iib
the past by those who have taken an-
interest in industrial matters. It has not
been a systematic study, nor have the results
of the study been applied, you may say,
anywhere in the world. No country in the-
world has found a complete solution of the
unemployment evil. It is necessary that this*
study should be systematic, and that it should
be made as complete as possible. The unem-
ployment council, if it carries out its func-
tions, will obtain that information which i»-
necessary, and will disseminate it, for the-
people generally to get a better under-
standing of the problem affecting unemploy-
ment.
Then certain powers are given to the coun-
cil to inquire into and report upon industrial'
efficiency within the State, to inquire into*
and report upon the working of the State-
labour exchanges, to inquire into the machi-
nery which is established under existing-
laws dealing with employment, and gener-
ally the council will be charged with the-
duty of observing this problem in all its
bearing and devising means of mitigating
the evil or formulating plans which, if
adopted by the Government, will have the
effect of reducing unemployment.
To a very large extent the success, or
failure, of this scheme will depend upon the
success of the council itself. If it takes-
up its work seriously, if it studies the-
question fully, and if it uses its power**
discreetly and wisely, I think we wilt have &


solution of <£he unemployment difficulty. If,
on the other hand, the council does not
exercise wisdom in these matters, if it
regards the question carelesslj*, we may not
have a solution.
Mr, Elphinstone : Is it intended to pay
any members of the council?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Yes, the non official members will have to be
paid, of course. This Government is adopt*
ing a different stand from previous Govern-
ments on matters of that kind. For services
rendered to the State we desire that pay-
ment should be made.
The Minister, the Arbitration Court judge,
and the Director of Labour are fully paid
officers, and will receive no extra remunera-
tion, but the elected members of the council
will be paid for their services, and the scale
on which thgy will be paid will have to be
fixed by regulation. '*
Means of Reducing Unemployment.
Now, I regard as the second cardinal
feature of the scheme the system as estab-
lished by the Bill of providing relief works
as a means of reducing unemployment. I
want to say here that, necessarily, to effec-
tively and successfully deal with unemploy-
ment, you must find work for the unem-
ployed, you must bring about conditions
under which those who are unemployed may
obtain employment. No scheme which is
based merely upon a system of paying sus-
tenance to those who are out of work would
be a satisfactory scheme. We desire so to
operate the powers of this Bill that we will
avoid Unemployment as much as possible,
and for the unemployment which may be
created through unforeseen circumstances—
or circumstances over which the council, at
any rate, will have no control—we desire
to bring about conditions which will rapidly
absorb the unemployed men in callings
suited to their respective abilities and train-
ing, or in industries which may be estab-
lished. We desire to rely upon the payment
of unemployed sustenance es little as
possible. I regard the provisions of this
Bill relating to relief work as being of
thfe utmost importance on those grounds. In
my opinion, it is far better to supply work
than to supply monetary assistance. It seems
to me that, if this problem is looked at in
a proper way, end if the unemployment
council, after a thorough study of the ques-
tion, exercises a proper discretion and wis-
dom, and balances the body of work avail-
able to the workers in one part of the year
as compared to another part of the year, we
will to a very large extent solve the problem.
Causes of Unemployment.
Even the most cursory examination of the-
unemployment problem at the present time
shows that unemployment exists, not because-
there is insufficient work to do within the
Sfcate, but because there are seasonal occu-
pations which at certain periods result in
large bodies of men being suddenly cast
upon the labour market without adequate
provision for their absorption elsewhere.
Unemployment is caused also by depression
in trade or dislocation, as a consequence of
war, strikes, and other disturbances; unem-
ployment frequently arises also as an after-
math of droughts, floods, and failures of
crops. All these factors contribute towards
the curse of unemployment. But in the past
there has practically been normal unemploy-
ment every year, for the reason that
seasonal industries are carried on in
Queensland, and there has been no scientific-
attempt to balance employment by provid-
ing more work in what is normally the slack
season.
Mr. Vowles : Don’t they get high wages
in those industries?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Yes, but not sufficiently high wages to carry
them through the rest of the year. Let me
ask the hon. member about the canecutters.
Some canecutters work five months in the
year. Many work only four months, and
this year it is doubtful if, on the average,
they will work more than three months.
Mr. Vowles: Why? Who is responsible
for that ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. gentleman had better give notice of
that question to Providence, who might be
able to answer it. A dry season is respon-
sible to a large extent.
An Opposition Member : The Government
is responsible, too.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Does the hon. member think that a cane-
cutter who is working three months in the
year receives sufficiently high wages to keep
him going through the other nine months?
Take the case of the shearer. The occupa-
tion of shearing lasts for only three or four
months in the year—the average would not
be much more than that. Would a shearer
get enough in that time to keep him for the
remaining eight or nine months ? The thing
answers itself.
Mr. Vowles : Give the average.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Well, I say that is the average. It is doubt-
ful whether the average for canecutters this


year will be more than three months. I
•commenced by saving that the average would
not be more than five months. Does the hon.
member think the remuneration the cane-
cutter gets under the award for five months’
work would keep him during the other seven
months? And the same question might be
asked with regard to other seasonal occupa-
tions. Although the court can take into
account the seasonal nature of the occupations
in fixing wages awards, it does not attempt to
sufficiently remunerate the seasonal worker to
keep him during the whole year. It seems
■to me that we can so arrange our industrial
affairs as to provide steady employment
-during the whole year.
An examination of the employment returns
prepared by the Director of Labour shows
that unemployment fluctuates in normal years
—month by month. Generally from July
until the end of December there is a busy
period in Queensland, and from January
until June a slack period, but especially be-
tween January and April. Take the regis-
trations at the Government labour exchanges
for the past twelve months: In August-
last year there were registered as unem-
ployed at the end of the month in the Go-
vernment exchanges, 1,058 men; September,
1,254; October, 1,452; November, 1,702;
December,' 1,718; and January, 3,538; Feb-
ruary, 3,195; March, 2,685; April, 2,162;
May, 1,940; June, 2,212; July, 1,954. These
numbers do not include all who were unem-
ployed, but only those registered at the
exchanges.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : Under this Bill must
*they be,a member of a union?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I would recommend the hon. member to
exercise his intelligence and peruse the Bill,
and he will find the answer there.
I think that the problem to a large extent
•can be solved by the council studying this
-question and exercising the powers under
■the Bill that work shall be found for those
who are available for it in the months of
January, February, March, and so on; and,
if the efforts of the council meet with success
in that direction, there will be no actual
unemployment difficulty at all. The unem-
ployment evil which may exist will be dealt
with month by month. Ultimately, the insur-
ance premiums necessary in the first year or
•two need not be continued. Of course, a long-
-sighted policy is necessary. The council must
*make provision well ahead.
Means to be Adopted to Create
Employment.
The Bill provides lor three principal ways
in which the council can provide work for
ihose likely to become unemployed. The
prime responsibility rests upon the Govern-
ment. First of all, there is the develop-
mental work, railway construction, building
construction, harbour improvement, and so
on, for which the State is responsible. That
may be considered for the purpose of equalis-
ing employment within the State. Secondly,
the local authorities are called upon to pro-
vide work, and that lends itself to some
extent to being so regulated as to provide
work in what otherwise might be a slack
period. Thirdly, private employers may be
called upon in certain cases to create employ-
ment.
Government Works.
With regard to Government work, there is
no doubt that that offers an opportunity to
the unemployment council, provided, of
course, that they get the sympathetic assist-
ance of the Government, which they will get
from this Government. I do not* know if they
would be so fortunate if some other Govern-
ment came into power. The provision «f
Government work will be very valuable as
a means of reducing unemployment, and the
unemployment council can deal with the
situation from time to time.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : And plenty of in-
creased taxation.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I do not know whether the hon. member
thinks this is a problem that can be solved
by the mere waving of a magic wand. At
any rate, the hon. member was Minister for
Public Works himself for four years, and he
never attempted, during that period, any
scheme of the sort. (Hear, hear!)
The only means, in the absence of any
scheme of this kind, that the Government
have been able to adopt to obviate the evils
existing, have been the starting of develop-
mental works, and we have been able to
reduce unemployment to a very considerable
extent by that means. Since last December
the Government have placed upon railway
construction work about 2,500 men. And
these are not relief works in the ordinary
acceptance of the term; they are develop-
mental works which have to be gone on with,
and in many cases it has only been a matter
of expediting the commencement of the
works.
Mr. Vowles: Particularly in the Maranoa
electorate, where there is an impending
election.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS: .
The Maranoa electorate has been one of
the places. We relieved the unemployment
in the Maranoa electorate in December last,
and that was before there was any talk of


an election. If the hon. member thinks the
Government should act on the principle that
we should not find employment because there
might be an election pending, nothing will be
done to solve the unemployment problem. If
the hon. member is assuming that because
unemployed workers are sent to some electo-
rate prior to an election —and whenever they
are sent it must come to the same thing,
because more than three years cannot elapse
without an election—it is only done for elec-
tioneering purposes, he is only demonstrating
his helplessness to deal with problems of this
kind. (Hear, hear !) As a matter of fact, the
2,500 men who have been absorbed on Govern-
ment developmental works since December
last have been distributed in various parts of
the State. Ido not say in every electorate.
I do not know whether the hon. member
wants to lay down another principle that no
man should be employed on developmental
works unless there is an equal number em-
ployed in each electorate. You could not
carry out the practice. You must send the
men where the work is available. The policy
we have adopted is that the men are sent
where the developmental work may be which
the Government desires should be carried on.
The Northern, Central, and Southern dis-
tricts each have had their quota. The prime
factor in considering where the work shall be
found is the location of the men out of
employment. If there is a large body of men
out of work in Rockhampton, we will en-
deavour to create work in the Central district.
The closing down of the Cloncurry mine
at the beginning of this year threw literally
thousands out of work, and the Government
were particularly energetic and active in
endeavouring to prevent the calamity which
would have overtaken the families of many
of them by creating employment and start-
ing developmental works in order to give em-
ployment, without any undue burden to the
taxpayer or the State. No one can say the
men employed on those works, or any other
works which have been started, have not
been giving a fair deal to the State.
Local Government Works.
We also give authority to the unemploy-
ment council to call upon the local authorities
to commence certain works where necessity
demands.
Mr. Bebbington : Will the liability be con-
fined to the area of the ehire or local
authority ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
That is another example where the hon.
member may exercise his own intelligence.
He will find the answer by looking in the
Bill. The loans are subject to the Local
Authority Act, and, of course, no local
authority will be committed to any expen-
diture outside its own area.
This question of local authority works-
offers an opportunity of regularising the-
employment that might be found for the
workers of the State, and thus obviate to a
large extent the difficulties occasioned by a
normally slack season. At the present time
there are applications from local authorities
in various parts of the State and local
bodies —I do not mean merely shire and town
councils, but harbour boards, water authori-
ties, and other local bodies as well exercis-
ing local government powers—for loans for
works of one kind and another which would
involve an expenditure of about a million
and a-half, and that amount is by no mean»
abnormal. This shows that in any year, and
at any period of the year, there is a large-
body of work in prospect which the local
authorities in one part of the State or
another desire to go on with if they can be
financed and if certain conditions are com-
plied with. From that body of work it is
proposed to make a certain selection and
expedite the starting of them in order to
give employment without any hardship or
loss to the local authority and without any
difficulty whatever.
If the unemployment council is informed
of the applications that are made, and the
works which are proposed by various local
authorities, they can make a discreet selec-
tion and authorise—in fact order, under
special circumstances—the local authority to
commence forthwith certain works. I have
endeavoured myself to exercise some autho-
rity of that kind for the purpose of reducing
unemployment in the last six months. The
difficulty is that the local authorities more
so slowly. Even when they are willing to
assist the Government to cope with the
unemployment, their assistance is reduced
to a minimum because they cannot start
until months of delay have been occasioned.
A town council might propose to establish a
water supply which might involve excava-
tion, or the construction of a dam or work
of that kind, which would entail very much
labour. They might desire to go on with
it, but all kinds of delays intervene. If the
local authorities could be ordered and autho-
rised to commence that work forthwith for
the purpose of relieving the unemployment
situation in their own town or district, no
one could say anything against that power
being exercised.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : What is- the use of
a local authority if someone supersedes them ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
What is the use of a local authority if they


Will not assist in the solution of a problem
Of this kind ? When I asked one or two
of them were they prepared to accept a loan
and'act' forthwith, they said: “No, let the
•Government solve its own,, unemployment
d£scuUy.” That is the kind of assistance
yoa get from some. Fortunately, the
majority of local authorities are not
actuated by that spirit. The majority of
local, authorities are only too willing to assist
the Government by getting possession of
their loans and starting works forthwith,
Irtit in many cases they are debarred from
making an early start with their works for
the reason that the Local Authorities Act
provides for certain delays—they have to
adopt a resolution of the council; they have
to allow a certain time to elapse and affirm
the resolution; they have to advertise their
intentions to borrow, and then they must
take p, poll. Where work in the opinion of
the department is desirable, where work can
be advanced, there is nb reason why those
-delays .should not be dispensed with. To
relieve the industrial situation the work
should be commenced forthwith. It is true
that occasionally a local authority will be
mulcted through having to start
its works policy sooner than anticipated, but
provision is made in the Bill to recoup such
local authority. If they suffer any loss
through having to start works six months or
twelve months earlier than they intended,
they will be recouped.
Mr. Elphinstone ; Why not give the local
authorities representation on the council?
Mr., Peteie: They have no representation
at all.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
The hon. member will see that a great many
interests are affected by this Bill, and it is
utterly impracticable to give all interests
representation on the unemployment council.
Mr. Elphinstone : It is a very important
interest.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
This council is to be a practical working
■council. It is no use overloading it by
representation in such a way that will pre-
vent its effective administration -and pre-
vent its dealing with any situation. It may
be said to be true, logically, that any.
employer who, under the Bill, has to assume
drastic responsibilities as the result of recom-
mendations of the council should be directly
represented on the council. Under the
scheme, however, we can only provide them
with indirect representation by allowing the
■employers’ unions to elect one member.? As
a matter of fact, it may be said that
the employers’ unions, comprising many
.dissimilar bodies—the traders’ association,
the pastoralists’ union, and all kinds of
associations and unions representing em-
ployers—should be separately represented.
The result of that would be that you
would have a large and unwieldy council
that could not possibly do its work. We
have to assume good faith on the part of
the council. They are not going to set out
to do foolish things or unwise things, but
they are going to exercise their intelligence
and do their duty to the State.
Mr. Peteie : You exempt the Government
altogether. It is the biggest employer in
the State.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The greatest obligations under this Bill rest
upon the Government, and, as a matter of
fact, in the past the Government has been
seized of its responsibility. We have
absorbed 2,500 men in the last seven months
in Government work. They were not Go-
vernment employees; they were men who
were discarded by private enterprise em-
ployers, but, because of seasonal factors and
other factors over which they had no control,
the workers became unemployed and had to
be absorbed on Government work.
Under this scheme the first obligation rests
upon the Government. Where unemploy-
ment may be occasioned by the stoppage of
private enterprise, the Government will
have to start works in order to absorb the
men affected. The Government has the chief
obligations under this Bill, and it is easily
conceivable that the Government may have
to start works, or put on a sufficient number
of employees as would require the expendi-
ture of £1,00(1,000 in the course of a year to
get these men employed.
Mr. Peteie : Don’t forget you have closed
a lot of avenues of private employment.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. member says so, but the hon.
member cannot demonstrate it. It is well
known that the activities of this Government
and its innate fairness have led to expansion
and increased confidence in such a way as to
make for the progress of the State.
Mr. Moegan ; It has made unemployment.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
If the hon. member assumes that we have
unemployed for that reason, it only shows
that he has a superficial knowledge of the
question. If the hon. member thinks that
the unemployment situation in Queensland
during the last six months is due to the
Government
Mr. Moegan : To a great it is.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
The hon. member is dreaming. As a matter


«of fact, to no extent at all has the Govern-
ment been' responsible. Bad seasons and
-depression caused by droughts and conditions
-of that kind, and industrial dislocation, for
which the Commonwealth Government are
-chiefly responsible, have been the cause of
unemployment in Queensland during the last
•few months.
Mr. Morgan : Bad government and bad
■administration.
Obligations of Private Employers.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
[be third moans by which this power to
stablish relief works will be exercised will
be by means of calling upon the private
employer where necessary to create employ-
ment for the absorption of the unemployed,
and this is the clause which so far has been
criticised to the greatest extent in the news-
papers. It is a clause that should be fully
explained. The power is that on the recom-
mendation of the unemployment council, the
Government may issue an Order in Council
and thereby compel any company, person, or
firm, whose income in the preceding year
exceeded 15 per cent, upon the capital
actually invested in the business, and at the
same time exceeded in the case of a company
the sum of £IO,OOO, and in the case of a firm
or person the sum of £5,000, to create em-
ployment by investing money to an extent
mentioned by such Order in Council, in
development work in connection with the
business carried on by the employer or other-
wise. In the alternative the employers to
invest in Queensland Government securities
such sum as ’is mentioned in the Order in
Council at such interest and on such terms
as are stipulated. That, of course, is a
drastic provision. I want to point out that
you cannot have any solution of the unem-
ployment problem without having, drastic
provisions. You can ignore the problem
altogether, as the Liberal party has done for
fifty years, but that is not solving the
problem. This is an honest attempt to solve
the problem, which can only be solved by the
exercise of drastic measures and arbitrary
power. Although drastic and arbitrary, this
provision is not likely to be operated in an
unfair and unjust way. The powers under
that clause are not likely to be invoked until
the possibilities of relieving the situation by
creating Government work have been ex-
hausted, and the possibilities of relieving the
situation by creating local authority work
have also been exhausted. If there is some
. great stress, or great depression, which will
mean more unemployment to be dealt with,
then the private employers will be called
upon,
Mr. Fry : Will the unemployment council
say just how much work will be provided by
the Government and the local authorities?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
They will make a recommendation. That is
why I have endeavoured to constitute a
thoroughly competent and representative
council, a council that will not make recom-
mendations that will only throw discredit
upon themselves and the Government who
operate the powers. I think the council, as
constituted by this Bill, will not be easily
misled; I think we will be thoroughly well
safeguarded by the council.
Mr. Moore : Is clause 7 in connection with
that ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I will deal with that in one moment.
Small Traders Not Affected.
I regard this clause as one of the most
important provisions in the Bill, and I want
to show that it will not be exercised except
where the circumstances warrant it. If I
may be permitted, I wish to take notice of
criticism that has appeared in the public
Press on this point since the Bill was circu-
lated. The opponents of the Bill seem
to think that this power will be operated all
the time, in every month throughout the
whole year, whether there is unemployment
or not, and that this power will be so
operated as will require every employer in
the State—small traders, small business men,
as well as- large employers—to provide em-
ployment or 'invest in Government deben-
tures.
Mr. Vowles : You have made all of them
subscribe to the fund. You have evaded
that so far.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. member will find, when I have
finished, that I have not evaded anything in
Bill.
I want to point out that the council will
only exercise these drastic powers when the
possibilities of Government employment and
local authority employment have been ex-
hausted, end there is still a large body of
unemployed to be dealt with, and they will
only exercise the powers with due regard to
the necessities of the occasion and the oppor-
tunities of certain businesses to provide em-
ployment. It is not likely that they are
going to call on every employer in the State
to create a certain amount of employment,
but they will select employers in those indus-
tries which, according to the knowledge of
the unemployment council, can in the cir-
cumstances give some relief. And you must
remember that the council will consist of


men whose duty it is to study the question.
They will have date and information in
their possession to indicate what industries
and what employers can, in the circum-
stances existing, give employment, and it is
to them, in the first place, that the Orders in
Council will be issued.
Mr. Sizer : How can the council be able
to get information as to private employers?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The Bill provides for it; they have access
to the income and land tax returns, and to
other official information. Such information
can, however, only be used by them for the
purposes of the council, and officials who
become possessed of this information will be
placed under oath to maintain secrecy.
When dealing with this question it is neces-
sary that it should be dealt with drastically.
What is the use of asking the council to exer-
cise intelligence and wisdom on matters of
that kind if you do not give them the requi-
site information? That is why the Bill pro-
vides that the council should get that infor-
mation, and information from all sources
that will enable them to arrive at a decision.
Mr. Vowles: Do they make an award?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
They recommend.
Mr. Vowles : Just so !
The SECRETARY,FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
For a very good reason. The powers are
so arbitrary that I did not wish to put in
the hands of the unemployment council, con-
sisting of officials, that extensive power to be
exercised in their name. Let that responsi-
bility rest upon the Government. The Go-
vernment will ultimately have to bear the
responsibility of all orders that are issued.
They will have to take the consequences if
Orders in Council are issued which are
unjust in their incidence.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : Who will issue the
orders to the Government from outside?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I notice that when the hon. member finds
his mind absolutely, destitute of ideas, he
resorts to interjections of that kind.
Who Will he Called Upon to Create
Employment.
In my opinion there will be no unemploy-
ment if wise provision is made by the local
authorities and the Government; I believe
they will deal with the whole situation. In
some years there may still be some unem-
ployment to be dealt with. Suppose there
were 2,000 unemployed. The unemployment
council will have information at their dis-
posal, and will be able to select a few large
employers in the State who can conveniently
provide employment, and issue orders to
them, and thus deal with the situation for
the time being. If there is a large body of
unemployed, a great many more than 2,000,
then Orders in Council may have to be issued
to another class of employer who is able to
provide employment.
Mr. Vowles ; Will you pay any losses?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
No. In this case the employer who is called
upon to create employment, and invests
further in his own business or in some other
way for the creation of employment, will
no doubt get an adequate return. If he
considers it inadvisable to introduce any
extension in his own business, or if it does
not lend itself to any development, then he
has the alternative of investing in Queens-
land Government debentures, which will give
him a return on his money.
Mr. Vowles : Four and a-half per cent,
when he is getting 15 per cent.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. members says per cent., but the
rate is not mentioned in the Bill. Presum-
ably, the current rate will be paid on the
amount. The point is that when the Govern-
ment get possession of the money the Govern-
ment will have to take the responsibility of
using those funds to create employment.
Hon. members want to get back to this posi-
tion : they do not want the employer to have
the responsibility, and they do not want the
Government to have the responsibility; eo,
apparently, they want the unemployed to
remain out of work.
Mr. Coeser : It is a Government respon-
sibility now.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
It has been, and under Liberal Governments,
although the responsibility has been theirs,
they have not dealt with the question.
Mr. Coeser : They never had the unem-
ployment that you have.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Although the , responsibility of solving the
problem does not rest upon us alone, we
have been accepting our share of the responsi-
bility and exercising our powers. We have
employed 2,500 men during the last seven
months on Government works, and we are
bringing in this Bill because, although the
responsibility partly rests on us now, we have
no power to fully deal with the question. If
this Bill is passed, we will have to shoulder
the full responsibility of coping with the-
question.
Mr. Coeser : Encourage unemployment.


The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
That interjection also indicates a destitution
of ideas on the subject.
The Rationing of Work.
Much power will rest with the unemploy-
ment council. They will have to exercise
very drastic powers, and much criticism may
be directed against this provision of the Bill
on the grounds that it will be operated
harshly or unjustly against particular em-
ployers. We will have to rely on the good
sense of the council in any action they take,
and if legislation is to be rejected on the
ground that it might be unwisely operated,
that is an argument against almost all legis-
lation. That is an argument against the
exercise of any kind of authority by Govern-
ment institutions or by the Government. It
is my opinion that the Council will exercise
their powers wisely, and by rationing the
work on the basis I have indicated they will
be fully able to deal with the situation.
I read only yesterday an article in “ The
World’s Work ” magazine of June issue,
which only came into the library the day
before yesterday, and which, therefore, was
not the inspiration of the Bill, but which,
nevertheless, bears very cogently upon this
phase of the question, and I would like hon.
members to listen to it particularly, as it is
the opinion of an impersonal and impartial
advocate of a Right to Work Bill. The article
is headed “ The Right to Work,” and the
writer says—
“ The Government which can ration
food should find no insurmountable dif-
ficulty in the rationing of work, even
though hitherto our labour exchanges
have not done much of which the nation
can be proud.
“ Would it be utterly impracticable for
bona fide applicants to be sent to shops
in proportion to the known capacity,
turnover, or output of each shop?”
That query touches the essence of the scheme
which we are discussing now. The writer
goes on to say— ■
“ Such a system would involve the con-
sideration of dismissals as well as of the
refusals to entertain, applications for
work, and would certainly create its own
difficulties—a truth applicable in prac-
tice to any scheme, particularly at ite
birth. Yet the enormous advantage
which would accrue to the community
by the abolition of unemployment should
make the greatest effort seem not unrea-
sonable. What would the employer be
likely to say of a scheme which put him
under any compulsion, or semblance of
compulsion, to employ more hands than
[Ae amended.]
seemed good to him? Sentiment apart,
his only real ground of complaint would
be reduced to one of possible loss of profit.”
It may be said that the only real ground of
complaint, even were" we to put the employer
under the compulsion of creating employ-
ment, would be on the ground that he
would get less profit than he otherwise would
get. That is a very small sacrifice to make
on behalf of the State if this problem can
be dealt with in that way.
Mr. Vowles : It might me&n ruination.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
It might, but the hon. member will have an
opportunity to show, if he can, that this Bill
will act detrimentally to anyone in the State
or act detrimentally to the general interests
of the community.
Compulsory Postponement of Work.
Provision is made in the Bill to enable the
Governor in Council, again on the recom-
mendation of the unemployment council, to
order the postponement of work where they
consider it necessary. This only applies to
local authority work or to Government work.
They might find it necessary, in anticipation
of a slack season later on in the year, to
ask certain local authorities not to commence
so early that work they propose to under-
take; or it might appear to them that a
certain slack period might take place and
the work might be gone on with more
expeditiously later on in the year, and thus
cope with the slack season. The starting of
large works in a particular locality or the
vigorous prosecution of work in general may
create difficulties in the labour market at
that particular period and might, on the
other hand, do nothing whatever to mitigate
the difficulties of unemployment later on in
the year. It seems to me the unemployment
council might find a means of considering
these matters and of balancing the amount
of work which is provided during various
periods of the year.
Mr. Bebbington : There is no unemploy-
ment in country districts.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
If there is no unemployment in the country
districts, that furnishes a pretty good justifi-
cation for this Bill. If in some parts of the
State there is no unemployment, but, in fact,
a demand for labour, while in other parts of
the State there is unemployment, it shows
that our system is wrong, and the evil is
capable of a cure by simply using the labour
from one locality in another or by ‘providing
means, at any rate, by which the demand
for labour in one locality will be satisfied by
the excess supply of labour in another.


An Opposition Member : Can you compel
a man to work in a particular district?
The SECRETARY FOE PUBLIC WORKS :
You cannot compel him. You can take a
horse to the water but you cannot make him
drink. We do not set out in this Bill to
perform miracles. We can only offer employ-
ment. We will create employment, and once
employment is created we will offer a man
work, and if he won’t take that work then
there is no further obligation on the Govern-
ment in regard to that man.
Regularising Employment.
One hon. member called attention to a very
important principle of the Bill which enables
the Governor in Council, from time to time,
to call upon employers to take such measures
or do such things as, in his opinion, would
be effective in temporarily or permanently
reducing unemployment. That certainly is
a kind of dragnet power, and the reason
for it exists in the necessity of the unemploy-
ment council taking certain measures to
cope with a situation which could not be
foreseen when the Bill was being drafted.
For instance, the council might advise some
means of regularising employment in certain
businesses and callings. They should have
power, if- it is necessary to regularise that
employment for the purpose of relieving
unemployment, to call upon the employers to
do things—to take such measures as
will bring that desirable end about, and that
is the justification for that clause. It might
be urged that this power will be used to do
most absurd things. The same thing could
be urged against any legislation.
Mr. Moore : That was done in connection
with the Sugar Acquisition Act.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
Under the Sugar Acquisition Act it was
possible for the Government to have exer-
cised their powers in a most absurd way.
They might have acquired the hon. member’s
clothing or done some other foolish thing.
Of course, that power is not exercised
foolishly, it is only exercised in a reasonable
way, and will only be exercised in reason-
able cases, because the consequences of the
exercise of that power rest always on the
Government.
Mr. Morgan : You have done it in the
past, you know.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I do not know. In what instance have we
done it?
Mr. Morgan : They made the Sugar
Acquisition Act apply to galvanised iron and
cattle.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS ;
That was not an unreasonable exercise of
the power. The requisitioning of galvanised
iron under that Act resulted in a vast amount
of good to the State of Queensland and to
the users of galvanised iron. As a matter
of fact, those powers were exercised as a
result of an application by the users of
galvanised iron in order that there should
be no undue exploitation or profiteering in
regard to galvanised iron. That power was
also exercised in regard to explosives at the
request of th© users of explosives to the
great advantage to those who use that com-
modity. There is no case that the hon. mem-
ber can quote where we exercised powers
under that Act which were not eminently
justifiable, and there is no danger in giving
these powers into the hands of a Govern-
ment which is a responsible Government
answerable for its actions to this House and
to the country.
The Right to Work Principle.
The third cardinal feature of the Bill ia
that it establishes the right to work. That,
I think, is a basic right. We will never find
an adequate solution of the unemployment
problem unless we start out with the assump-
tion that every citizen of the State has a
right to get work and earn a livelihood
within the State. If we take the stand that
if an individual cannot get work, that it is
his concern and not the concern of anyone
else, we would be very inhuman. We would
be very callous if we took up that stand,
but it is pretty well conceded, as a univers-
ally accepted dictum in these times, that
every citizen within the State has a right to
work and earn a livelihood and keep him-
self and family in a reasonable degree of
comfort.
Hon. J. G. Appel ; Will there be prefer-
ence to unionists ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. member wants to get off the sub-
ject. Does the hon. member not consider
that this is a basic right—the basic human
right of every citizen that he shall have the
opportunity to work and earn a livelihood.
Hon. J. G. Appel : Quite so!
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
If we recognise that right, let us carry out
the obligation.
Mr. Morgan : Whether unionist or not ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I say it is a basic right. One of the con-
ditions is that the man must work and not
that he must be provided with a job and
loaf on the job; but that he must work.


)ther condition is that he must not leave
job unreasonably. The responsibility
.ests on the State to provide every citizen
with work in order that he can earn a live-
lihood for himself and family.
It is said work is the inevitable condition
of human life and the true source of human
welfare, and I think it is, but if we establish
that, we must recognise the obligation to
give every man an opportunity to work. But
what do we find happening ? In every
country in the world, in Queensland as well
as elsewhere, .there are men who find them-
selves without work through no fault of their
own. In the last six months we have found
numerous instances of it. Men who, through
no fault of their own, are without Workj
married men—men who have looked for work
most assiduously have had to go home at
the end of the day’s tramp and report no
work. I say it is a tragedy of life this
enforced idleness and unemployment, which
occurs, perhaps, through no fault of the
individual, and which reduces him to a con-
dition of penury and want, and in many
cases to the verge of starvation. It is a
, reflection on our civilisation, and if any
scheme can be found which will eliminate
that evil or do away with the danger of it,
it is our duty to adopt it no matter how
drastic the proposals are. X confess candidly
that this Bill does not lay it down that every
man shall get a job, but we go as far towards
that as we can. We say every man shall be
found with work suitable to his capacity,
and if we cannot carry out that obligation
at any rate we give him sustenance allowance
until such time as he can be provided with
work. Surely that is not a revolutionary
proposal!
Mr. Vowles : Who is to provide the sus-
tenance ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
I will explain that when I come to it in due
course.
Unemployed Sustenance Allowance.
Associated with the right to work under
this Bill is the system of the payment of
sustenance allowance to unemployed workers.
Every citizen has the right to work. We find,
therefore, it is a necessary corollary to the
recognition of that right that if we cannot
provide a man with work we should at least
provide him with sustenance. If we cannot
provide a man with work, it is right that
we should pay him something towards the
sustenance of himself and family. Certain
disqualifications are laid down in the Bill,
but destitution is not a test of eligibility.
After a man has become registered, and has
been unable to secure employment for four-
teen days, he becomes entitled to the susten-
ance allowance provided for in the Bill, and
set out in detail in the schedule. It has
been considered necessary —and, I think,
members generally will approve of this —to
require some qualification of residence
within the State before a man becomes
entitled to the sustenance allowance. No
man will become entitled to sustenance allow-
ance or any right to work under the principle
of this Bill who has not been a resident
continuously for twelve months in Queens-
land. The only reason for that provision is
that it will prevent an influx of unemployed
workers from other States who would
become a charge on the fund.
Mr. Sizee : Is there any provision requir-
ing that he must prove continuous residence?
Th§ SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
If anyone is suspected of giving false infor-
mation in regard to that qualification, it
will be very easy to test his statement —in
the same way that a man’s statement on
making a claim to be enrolled as an elector
is easily tested. However, I do not think
there will be any imposition of that kind.
Under the Bill the residence qualification
does not apply to returned soldiers—to men
who have been absent on active military
service during the period mentioned in the
measure. The provision with respect to resi-
dence does not, in short, apply to returned
soldiers, and for very obvious reasons.
Neither will the sustenance allowance be
applicable to returned soldiers who are in
receipt of an allowance from the Repatria-
tion Fund.
Mr. Sizee : Would a man on a pension
have a right to sustenance allowance?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
That is a question I am not able to answer
off hand. If it was a case in which there
was a small pension only which by no
means adequately provided for the man, no
doubt he would have some claim against the
fund, but these are details which will have
to be gone into by the unemployment coun-
cil, and appropriate regulations to deal
with them will have to be framed.
There is a disqualification also against
persons participating in an illegal strike.
The disqualification in ' the Bill is for six
months. It might be considered that this is
too harsh a disqualification, inasmuch as
persons who go on strike against the pro-
visions of the Arbitration Act would
ordinarily be subject to a penalty, and this
provision will have the effect of increasing
that penalty. It might be considered neces-
sary to review the disqualification with
regard to illegal strikes, and if the six
months is considered too long a disqualifica-
tion members will be able to reduce it when
we are considering the Bill in Committee.


We can easily conceive o£ circumstances
under which a man might find himself par-
ticipating in a strike, and three months, or
four months, or five months after the strike
is over, finding himself out of work, not as
a result of the strike, but owing to other cir-
cumstances altogether. In those circum-
stances, it might be considered an unfair
thing to penalise such a worker. However,
that some penalty should be provided in the
case of an illegal strike is, I am convinced,
necessary. We shall have an opportunity of
further considering that aspect of the matter
when the Bill goes into Committee.
An Honotjeable Membbb : What is an
illegal strike? Is that a strike without first
taking a ballot?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
An illegal strike is a strike in contravention
of the provisions of the Arbitration Act —a
strike where notice has not been given, and
a ballot has not been taken, would be an
illegal or unauthorised strike.
Mr. Sizeb : Have the penalties referred to
in the Arbitration Act been put into opera-
tion in any case?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
Yes.
The Unemployed Insurance Fund.
An insurance fund will be established for
the purpose of enabling sustenance allow?
anoe to be provided for unemployed workers
who are qualified for such allowance. The
fund will be established by an assessment
upon employers.
The Bill provides, in connection with the
assessments, a certain system of rebates in
consideration of regular employment and
remissions in cases of hardships. The assess-
ment for the first year, as laid down in the
Bill, is £2 per each employee, calculated on
th« average number of persons employed by
any employer during the previous twelve
months. The assessment only applies to
employers who' employ five or more em-
ployees. As to how the average number
employed during the year will be calculated,
the principle upon which the calculation will
be made is laid down in the Bill itself. It
provides that the average number of em-
ployees employed by an employer will be the
average number employed during the period
for which the employer is assessed. If a man
employs nineteen employees for three months,
ho will not be an employer of five employees
on the average throughout the year. It may
be considered that this system of assessment
is somewhat crude. It may be crude, but
when we are considering the Bill in Com-
mittee we can deal with that matter in
detail. The Workers’ Compensation Act pro-
vides for an assessment on' the average
amount of wages paid, varying from ss. per
employee to £3 per employee. In this case
the assessment will be equitable, as it will
be based on the per capita number of em-
ployees engaged.
Financial Obligations of the
Government.
There has been some criticism of this
provision in the newspapers, and perhaps I
shall not be considered unwise in taking
notice of that criticism. One objection taken
by the critics is that this fund is to be con-
tributed solely by the employers. It is true
that under the scheme of the Bill that is
so. A fund must be built up by an assess-
ment on employers. The employees will not
contribute anything, and the Crown, so it
is said, does not contribute anything. True, 1
the Crown does not contribute directly to the
fund, but, as I have already indicated, ample
obligations rest upon the Crown, and the
obligations which rest upon the Crown are
decidedly greater than those which will rest
upon individual employers or companies.
No doubt, the Government will be called
upon to find employment in the majority of
oases and as concerns the vast majority of
the unemployed as against other employers.
Private employers will only be called upon
when the Government cannot find employ-
ment, and when the local authorities’ possi-
bilities are also exhausted. So there is a
very great and exact obligation resting on
the Government under the Bill.
Hon. W. H. Ba6nes ; Why should the
Government bo allowed to contract them-
selves out of those obligations?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
In what way?
Hon. W. H. Babnes : In not contributing
the £2 to the funds.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
Because their employees will not be so likely
to be unemployed. The Government do
not sack large numbers of employees.
Perhaps the hon. member has in mind
a fear that some Government might
resort to the vile tactics of past Governments
of retrenching men unnecessarily and creating
unemployment in that way, but surely he
cannot consider that there is any possibility
of this Government doing that? So far as
the possibility is concerned that any other
Government may come in and do such a
thing, all I can say is that the possibility is
remote, and that if any such Government
were to come in—that is a misfortune that
is barely possible—it would be a bad lookout
for the principles of any legislation such a*
this unemployed workers’ scheme.


To get back to the question of Govern-
ment subsidy. I would point out that in
administration the Government will really
subsidise the scheme. What will happen?
Suppose that the fund is in credit, by reason
of the assessments of the employers, to the
extent of £IOO,OOO or £120,000 —it is very
difficult to make an estimate just now. Sup-
pose that the claims against the fund should
be far and away above the amount standing
to the credit of the fund, the Government
would still have to carry its obligation in
the matter of giving the unemployed susten-
ance allowance to bona fide claimants and
to that extent the Government are obliged,
if necessary, to recoup the fund.
Mr. Vowles : The Government are getting
some money and the other people nothing.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. member has failed to notice the
statement I have just made. In the event of
the funds being insufficient the Government
would have to make it good. If it became
exhausted the Government would not be
justified in closing down.
Mr. Mooke : It would increase the assess-
ment next year.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
It might be used as a basis of increasing the
assessment; but l am showing how an obliga-
tion can fall on the Government. If the
House thinks that it would be better to pro-
vide an annual subsidy of the fund, my
mind is open, and I have no doubt that the
Government would consider the matter,
but my idea is that the Government woqld
carry a very specific obligation in the shape
of the financial support of the scheme to the
extent, if necessary, of paying unemployed
sustenance allowance when the fund became
exhausted.
Mr. Bebbington : I think you should be
made to pay on your employees all the same.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
The hon. member touches a very basic prin-
ciple in this Bill in that suggestion. First of
all, we have to realise that this is a charge
on industry, unless you are going to say that
no industry or individual or State shall have
any obligation to an unemployed man. If
you say that industries have an obligation
to the unemployed man, you must admit
the justice of the assessment being charged
against the industry. Take a case of large
employers—say, the sugar-mills, or the
meatworks, or the pastoralists. They carry
on work intermittently, and in order to carry
on their work profitably to themselves, when-
ever they desire to commence operations they
require a large number of men to be avail-
able on the spot. A particular sugar-mill
may engage 200 hands and require them to
be ready, waiting on the spot, on a certain
date.
Hon. W. H. Baenes : Or the railway
hands, who are Governhient employees.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS :
Or the railway hands. Industry requires
that body of labour existent, waiting on the
convenience of the individual employers, and
if it is to the convenience of industry why
should there not be a charge’against industry
generally ? —that is, an obligation to find
work or sustenance for those who are kept
within the State for the purpose of carrying
on industry.
Mr. Swayne : Will the State-owned mills
pay the assessment?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
They are part of the Government establish-
ment, controlled by the Government, who
carry more obligations under this Bill, as I
have explained half a dozen times, than all
the rest of the employers put together. There
is not only the case of the State-owned mills,
but, as the hon. the ex-Treasurer suggested,
the railway lines might require 100 men or
any other number to be on the spot. They
might be actually required by the unemploy-
ment council to find employment for 100 men
in that locality. That is the obligation under
this Bill, If the private employers carried
the obligations whicji the Government carry
under this Bill —that is, to create employ-
ment to the extent of absorbing thousands of
men at the request of the unemployment
council —there would be no necessity for the
insurance fund —there would be no unemploy-
ment at all. * Hon. members must have
omitted to notice that fact. If the Govern-
ment is not contributing to the fund, we
are doing more towards the solution of the
unemployment problem than all the private
employers.
Hon. W. H. Baenes : We notice that you
are contracting yourselves out very carefully.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
The hon. member must find himself hard
pressed for argument to resort to thaf parrot-
cry, which is not an argument at all. It is
admitted that the employers under this
scheme will be called upon to make a certain
small sacrifice. What does it amount to
when jove analyse it ? Two pounds per head
per year where their employees are not in
continuous employment.
Mr. Cokseb : It will coat some of them
£BOO.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
It will cost some more than that, as, for
example, the Mount Morgan Company, who,
on the average, employ 1,200 men. Bo you
think that is a matter that will lead to" the.
ruination of the Mount Morgan Company T


Rebate of Assessment for Continuous
Employment.
Then the full assessment of £2 per
employee will only be collected where the
men are not continuously employed; where
they are continuously employed the employer
will be entitled to a rebate. If you collect
£2 for each employee casually employed,
you would give a rebate of, say, £1 per
head —which, I think, would be a fair thing
—to an employer who furnishes continuous
employment, and is thus entitled to con-
sideration. He would only pay £1 per
employee. Here I would say that the parti-
cular clause in the Bill dealing with that is
not as clear as it could be and may require
alteration, for the reason that it seems to
indicate that an employer would be entitled
to a rebate, only in connection with the par-
ticular individual who has been employed
for the whole twelve months. As a matter
of fact, the scheme is intended to be con-
strued in this way—that the business that
continues to employ a certain number of
employees should get a rebate for that full
number. If a business works throughout
the year and employs 500 men it would be
entitled to a rebate in respect of 500 mek,
notwithstanding that they are not the same
500 men throughout the whole twelve months.
Mr. Morgan : And if that is the number
they employ the whole year round, they pay
nothing ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
They get a rebate.
Mr. Vowles: Where is it in the Bill?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
I have already stated that the clause may
be taken not to indicate that, and it may
require amendment.
Mr. Yowles : You have an open cheque
in that respect.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
For this first year, and the reason is pretty
obvious. Here is a scheme in respect of
which we can look to no other scheme for
guidance. We are breaking new ground.
It is all innovation, and we will have to be
guided by the experience of the first twelve
months as to the wisdom of the assessment
or otherwise. The hon. member may refer
to other schemes, more or less tinkering with
the question of unemployment, such as insur-
ance schemes and so on, but he cannot find
any workable scheme so comprehensibly deal-
ing with the problem as this Bill attempts to
deal with it, and, consequently, we must be
guided by experience when the scheme be-
comes operative. At the end of twelve
months or two years we will be in a much
better position to see what are safe grounds
on which to legislate, or to frame regula-
tions with regard to the assessment insurance
fund, or the application of the “ right t©
work” principle.
Hon. W. H. Barnes : The assessment can
be anything the first year.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
That means that it will be according to the
wisdom of the unemployment council.
Effect Upon Small Business Men.
I do not think there is much in the sugges-
tion as to whether the assessment is going to
seriously affect small trades or busi-
nesses. The small trader who employs only
a small number of hands will make an
annual contribution relatively small. If he
has ten men, his annual contribution will be
only £2O; and, if he is continuously employ-
ing them, it will be less. A small trader or
small business man will get a considerable
advantage under this Bill, for the reason
that there will be steady employment in the
State, consequently there will be increased
prosperity and more money circulated, which
will be better for business than a large
number of men continuously out of work;
therefore small business men need not fear
to shoulder the responsibility.
The Extent of the Sacrifice.
In the article I have quoted from “ The
World’s Work,” there is a reference to this
very principle. This topic is dealt with rather
effectively by the writer, who says—
“ The employer who insists on the
uttermost fraction of profit, knowing that
a relatively small sacrifice on his part
would relieve the working classes gener-
ally of periods of acute want and a life-
time of keen anxiety, is hardly the kind
of man who should be permitted where
civilisation holds sway to be master of
anyone. Putting this matter of possibly
reduced profits in another way, on©
might ask is it really for the welfare of
the whole community that the rich should
continue to be so very rich while the
poor remain lamentably
of nothing, possessors of nothing, defin-
itely entitled to nothing?”
I think that puts the obligation of a State
or community towards the unemployed
workers very cogently. If a small sacrifice
on the part of employers is likely to remove
that lifelong anxiety, and lead to the cure
of unemployment, which is always a spectre
before the eyes of workmen, then that sacri-
fice ought to be made; and if that small
sacrifice is going to be of material assistance
in the solution of the problem, then the
sacrifice is a small matter. I do not think


there is any argument against it. It is true,
with regard to this as in other matters,
unemployment council has to act with
wisdom, foresight, and discretion, and we
must assume that they will act bona fide
and in good faith, and if they do that we
need not complain.
Labour Farms for the Normally
Unemployable.
There are certain subsidiary provisions in
the Bill, including provision for labour farms.
We have to recognise that in an indus-
trial community there are certain elements
which might be described, and are described
in the Bill, as the “ normally unemployable.”
It is very difficult to deal with these by
legislation. You cannot give a man a taste
for work by passing an Act of Parliament.
There are a certain number of vagrants and
inebriates, and industrial defectives, and
also the man who has a chronic distaste for
work.
Mr. Elphinstone : The politician, also.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
Perhaps it might be said that men who have
a chronic distaste for work reach a period
of their lives when they become politicians
or swell the ranks of unemployables. (Opposi-
tion laughter.)* When they become members
of Parliament they usually find themselves
on the opposite side of the House. (Renewed
laughter.)
This is a very serious problem— not so grave
in a country like Queensland, because, after
all, there is a relatively small proportion of
men who are normally unemployable men
who will not work, and in regard to whom
nothing you can do to induce them will cause
them to toil. In other countries they are a
very grave problem, indeed. We have to
endeavour to provide for them here, and if
we offer them remunerative employment on a
labour farm they cannot become a charge
upon the insurance fund.
Mr. Vowles : Was it not tried in France?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
It was tried in France. In France, they
tried what they call,“the right to work”
principle, and men came from all parts of
the country to Paris, to work in the national
workshops, and it did not work success-
fully, and the reason for the failure is obvious
enough. Let us hope that in the seventy
years which have intervened we have been
able to profit by these failures and have
formulated a scheme which will work, and
I venture to say that that scheme is formu-
lated in this Bill.
Unemployables £re not likely to become a
charge on the fund, because any man
without reasonable excuse, refuses to work
when it is offered, cannot obtain sustenance
allowance. I can say from my own know-
ledge of the working of the labour exchanges
that a certain number of men hang on there
without any desire to become permanently
employed. They are offered work, occa-
sionally some men refuse; some men take
the work, and in a week again are back at
the exchange. There is a small section like
that. These men want saving from them-
selves. If wo can give them an opportunity
by establishing a labour farm to practically
redeem their lives and become more indus-
trious, let us give them the opportunity.
At any rate, the cost of the labour farm and
the upkeep of it will not be on the insurance
fund —that is a charge which will fall upon
the Government, and it is hoped that it will
become self-supporting.
It has been said by some writers that this-
class, or the actually unemployable, is really
created through the existence of unemploy-
ment. A man gets into the habit of shiftless
indolence, and it becomes difficult for him to
accommodate himself to the industrial re-
quirements and to get back again into per-
manent industry, and to a large extent that
danger will be reduced by the solution gener-
ally of the unemployment problem which we
suggest. I think it was Charles Lamb who
said—
“No work is worse than overwork.
The mind preys upon itself —the most
unwholesome of food.”
I believe that is absolutely true. Long
periods of unemployment are demoralising
both to the individual and to the State. The
solution of the problem will not only furnish
work to those who want it, but, to a large
extent, prevent this creation qf a class of
unemployables.
There are certain rules laid down for the
government of the labour farms. No liquor
is to be allowed on the farm. The reason
is that many men become unemployable in
consequence of their fondness for liquor, and
to bq saved from it they must be kept entirely
from the temptation. (Hear, hear!) It i*.
not intended so far to use the labour farms
as places to which vagrants and other
offenders of that kind may be committecL
That has been tried in older countries, and
possibly is more justifiable in old&r coun-
tries than here, but if it is considered by the-
unemployment council to be a necessary
concomitant of an unemployment scheme we
may make provision for it later.


Free Kailway Fares to Places where
Employment Obtainable.
The Bill provides for the issue of free
railway passes to men Who are out of work
and desire to travel where work exists.
This is a very good provision. ,
Mr. Bebbington : You do it now.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
No, we give reduced fares to men who are
travelling to employment; where an em-
ployer will guarantee work to an individual
and take out of his wages the amount in-
volved, we give a man a pass, on the under-
standing that the money has to be refunded.
There are some oases in which a man has not
refunded the amount, but the practice works
very well, and it enables labour to become
mobile. If we have the means of sending
labour to where work exists, that is one
means of solving the unemployment problem.
It often happens in the State that unem-
ployment exists in a particular locality, and
it is known to these men that work can be
obtained, say, 500 miles away, but they have
no means to go there. The fact that they
-cannot go there creates an unemployment
situation amongst the people in the locality
where they are living. It is a fair thing to
enable those men to travel where the work is
—to give them free passage over the rail-
way. It does not involve a large amount
in the aggregate, and, after all, it solves
the difficulty.
Mr. Bebbington : But you are making the
councils pay for it.
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
Jfo, it is a charge against the unemployment
insurance fund. It is a small amount each
year. Hon. members ought to bear in mind
that it is a charge against industry, too.
To whose convenience is it that these men
should be carried about the State? Is it
not for the convenience of the employer? If
it is to their convenience that 1,000 men
should be taken to where industrial opera-
tions are about to commence who should
bear the expense but the employers?
Begnlatlon of Advertisements.
- There is another thing in this Bill relating
to a matter which has been exploited to a
very undesirable extent in the past.
Certain employers may want hands, and
they advertise that there is plenty of work
available for workers at a certain locality.
The advertisement is inserted in newspapers
in various parts of the State, and sometimes
in the other States, and often has led to
a rush of men to the particular locality—
three times as many men as there are jobs
for. The Chillagoe Company resorted to this
practice, and quite recently other mining
companies in the Cloncurry district, and
employers in other parts of the State have
also done it. I do not want to particularise,
but I could give any number of instances
where this has been done, to the detriment of
the men who have travelled to those places
in response to advertisements. It is not a
thing that can be contemplated without some
degree of concern —that a man should leave
his home and travel 400 or 500 miles, very
often at his own expense, expecting to get
a job, and after he arrives there finds that
the jobs are already filled, that there are
hundreds of others besides himself out of
work, and he has to walk away seeing
employment elsewhere. We are giving power
to the unemployment council to regulate
that. It is very difficult to lay down any
definite rules in the Bill. We shall have to
investigate the subject and see on what
lines regulations shall bo framed. It indi-
cates, too, that the unemployment council
will have to consider many matters of great
importance in connection with this Bill, and
that is but one of the matters. Upon the
success of the council in solving those prob-
lems will depend the measure of success with
which we will meet in dealing with the
unemployment evil
, Let the Scheme he Tried.
I think I have dealt pretty fully with all the
salient points of the Bill. There are many
details which can be discussed in Committee.
It is easy to criticise a scheme of this kind.
It is easier to pull down and destroy than it
is to build up. Those who criticise this
scheme and think there is no good in it,
let them offer something better, something
practicable, that would lead to the same
results as are intended by this Bill—the
complete elimination of unemployment within
the State. If they can do that, well and
good; their criticism may be justified. If
they cannot, they ought to let someone try
to solve the problem who is willing to do so
and think they have a scheme capable of
meeting the situation.
Mr. Petbie : Will you accept any amend-
ments in Committee?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS;
Oh, yes ! The hon. member cannot say that
the Government have been unreasonable in
matters of that kind. (Opposition laughter.)
The problem of unemployment is not a new
one, nor bnc which came into existence with
the Labour party. It is a world-wide pro-
blem. It is a problem which is as old as the
wages system. It is as old as capitalism
itself. Wherever there has been capitalism
there has been this problem of unemploy-
ment. For centuries it has existed, and in
no country in the world up to the present
time have they found an adequate solution


for it. The reason is, not that there has
been no solution to be found, but that there
has been no sympathetic Government willing
to take the drastic measures necessary to
solve the problem.
Government Members ; Hear, hear ■
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
If this scheme is drastic, if it is arbitrary,
so long as it offers a solution, let it be
given a trial. That is what the Government
ask, and they are prepared to stand or fall
by it. If, after this schem© has operated,
the people say it has brought difficulty or
dislocation, the Government will bear the
consequences. The Government have given
sufficient consideration to the scheme to
know that, if it is given a fair trial, it will
justify itself. It is not mere window-dressing.
It is not introduced with the hope that it
will be defeated.
Mr. Vowles : Why suggest it ?
The SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC WORKS:
Because the hon. member is in the habit of
suggesting it.
A Sane and Practical Scheme.
This scheme is not merely empirical, nor an
attempt to apply the halt-bated theories of
economic quacks*. It is intended * be *
practicable and scientific project; and the
hope is that it will be allowed to pass sub-
stantially as it is introduced, in order that
it will be given a fair trial on its merits,
and, if necessary, continued, in order to
-completely solve the problem. We all agree,
I think, that there is nothing so demoralising
or distressing as unemployment. It is a
dreadful spectre in the minds of almost every
worker —all casual workers, at any rate, and
all those depending upon the basic wage
for a livelihood. It is the menace which is
always facing them. As a matter of fact, it
leads very often to that demoralising condi-
tion when a man thinks there is no use in
saving, no use in being thrifty. If he is out
of work a month or two, all his savings are
gone. It is a very demoralising thing,
if we can remove the fear and the anxiety
from the minds of the industrial worker We
shall have accomplished a very big reform,
indeed. (Hear, hear !)
It has been said that idleness is the
sepulchre of a living man, and I believe it
is. Very often men are brought to the
verge of desperation, their families are
reduced to penury and want, as the result of
unemployment. In idleness there is perpetual
despair. If this Bill Will alter that condi-
tion of things, let us have it. If it operates
successfully in Queensland, no doubt it will
be followed in all other States and in other
countries. The world is only looking for a
lead in matters of this kind, and we are
in a particularly fortunate position to be
able to demonstrate the success of a scheme
of this kind, I hope that the Bill will be
allowed to pass, and that a fair opportunity
will be given to the Government to demon-,
sir ate the success of the scheme it has put
forward.
Honourable Members ; Hear, hear 1


Unemployed Workers Bill.
Analysis of Contents.
1. Short title.
2. Interpretation.
Council.
Director of Labour.
Employer.
Fund.
Industrial magistrate.
■ Minister.
Prescribed.
Prescribed return.
This Act.
Worker.
3. Unemployment Council.
_ ' , . " ..
4. Powers and duties of Council.
5. Unemployed insurance fund.
„ .
ReturnT”
When assessment deemed to be
evie .
Payment of assessment.
. r . . ~ ,
Assessment, how enforced.
Remission in case of hardship.
7. Power to direct employers to take
steps to remedy unemployment.
Penalty assessment.
8. Relief works to reduce unemploy-
ment.
When Local Authority, &e., may
be recouped out of fund.
9 Power to order postponement of
certain work.
10. Duty of public officers, &c.
11. Railway passes.
12. Advertisements.
13. Land may be set apart for labour
farms.
Overseers and officers.
Power of overseer.
Who is to be admitted into
labour farm.
Trugt accoun t.
Application of moneys.
Sale of liquor prohibited.
Rules.
It' wor^-
15. General powers.
i(j. publication and effect of orders.
A
17. Offence against Act.
-. T * . 0
ls. No action against Minister, Sot.
Regulations
20. Report to be laid before Parlia-
ment.
Schedule.
1919.
A Bill to make provision for Unemployed Workers.
BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
Preliminary.
1. This Act may be cited as “The Unemployed Workers
Act of 1919.”
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise indicates, the
following terms have the meanings respectively assigned to
them, that is to say:—
“Council”—The Unemployment Council constituted by
this Act;
‘ ‘ Director of Labour ’ ’ —The Director of Labour appointed
under “The Labour Exchanges Act of 1915”: th<
term, where necessary, includes any labour agent fo
the time being deputed under the said Act to act fo
the Director of Labour;
Short title.
Interpretation.
Council.
Director of
Labour.


“Employer”—Any person, company, firm, or association
employing or usually employing five or more workers
in the State, whether on behalf of himself or any
other person, and whether or not the employer
resides within the State: the term includes every
managing director or manager of any company, firm,
or association corporate or unincorporate, and every
manager for any employer: the term does not include
the Crown or any Minister of the Crown or any
corporation or officer representing or acting as the
agent of the Crown;
“Fund”—The Unemployed Insurance Fund created by
this Act;
“Industrial magistrate”—An industrial magistrate
appointed under “The Industrial Arbitration Act of
1916”;
“Minister” —The Secretary for Public Works or other
Minister of the Crown for the time being charged
with the administration of this Act;
“Prescribed” —Prescribed by this Act;
“Prescribed return” —The annual return relating to
workers prescribed to he furnished by employers for
the purposes of this Act;
“This Act”—This Act and all Orders in Council and
regulations made thereunder;
“Worker”—Any person, male or female, of the age of
sixteen years or upwards, in any manner engaged
or employed by an employer in work of any kind
whatsoever subject to the direction and control of
an employer, and whether the worker’s remuneration
is to be according to time or by piecework, or at a
fixed price, or otherwise howsoever: used in relation
to a person whilst unemployed the term means a
person who when employed fulfilled the conditions
aforesaid: the term does not include—
(а) A barrister, solicitor, conveyancer, or legal prac-
titioner, or a legally qualified medical practitioner,
or an authorised surveyor, or a registered phar-
maceutical chemist, or a registered dentist, or a
registered optician, or a public analyst, or a veterin-
ary surgeon, or a consulting engineer, or an archi-
tect, or a public accountant actuary or auditor, or
any other person retained or engaged to render
professional services requiring personal skill, know-
ledge, and attention; or
(б) A person who contracts directly with an employer
for the performance of work not performed solely
by such person; or
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


(c) An auctioneer or agent; or
(d) An indentured apprentice.
For the purposes of this definition the term
“employer” includes a person, company, firm, or
association employing or usually employing one or
more workers.
Unemployment Council.
3. (1.) There shall be constituted an Unemployment
Council, which shall be composed of the following persons,
namely:—
( a ) The Minister, who shall be Chairman of the Council;
(h) A judge of the Court of Industrial Arbitration
appointed in that behalf by the Governor in Council;
(c) The Director of Labour;
( d) A workers’ representative elected in that behalf as
prescribed by regulations by the executives of the
industrial unions of employees registered under
“The Industrial Arbitration Act of 1916” and
appointed by the Governor in Council;
(c) An employers’ representative elected in that behalf
as prescribed by regulations by the executives of the
industrial associations, unions, and organisations of
employers in the State and appointed by the Governor
in Council.
* (2.) For the purpose .of the election of a workers’ repre-
sentative and an employers’ representative respectively, each
union, association, or organisation of workers or employers
respectively shall by its executive have votes proportionate to the
respective number of members of such association, union, or
organisation at the date of the voting.
The workers 7 representative and the employers’ representa-
tive shall respectively be so appointed for a period of twelve
months, but shall be eligible for reappointment.
Casual vacancies shall be filled as they arise by the appoint-
ment of a representative on the like election to hold the office
of the representative who has vacated office.
(3.) The, Council may make rules with respect to their
meetings and governing the procedure thereat, and with respect
to the conduct of the business of the Council generally.
4. (1.) It shall be the duty of the Council to obtain all
available information as to the condition of the labour market,
and for that purpose the Council shall be entitled to require the
Department of Labour or any other Government Department, or
local authority or other local body, to furnish to the Council
any statistics and data in their possession relating to this
matter.
Jmenployment
Oewncil
Power# end
duties of
Oewnoil
* Aa amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


v 2.) The Council may—
(а) Inquire into the causes and extent of unemployment
within the State or any part thereof;
(б) Inquire into and consider what are the most effective
measures to be taken for temporarily or permanently
reducing or eliminating unemployment within The
State or any part thereof;
(c) Obtain and disseminate information on all matters
connected with industrial occupations and fhe callings
of workers, with a view to improving the industrial
relationship between workers and employers and
lessening the evils of unemployment;
( d ) Consider and report to the Governor in Council upon
the industrial efficiency of the community, the organi-
sation of the labour market and opportunities of
employment, and all matters and questions relating
to unemployment.
(e) Consider and report to the Governor in Council upon
the working of the State Labour Exchanges and make
any recommendation deemed necessary for their
improvement and extension.
(3.) For the purposes of carrying out the powers and
duties of the Council under this Act—
(а) The Council may appoint any member thereof or
any other person to hold any inquiry and submit
the evidence taken thereat together with a report
thereon (if so requested) to the Council;
(б) The Council and the member thereof or other person
appointed as aforesaid shall he deemed to he a Com-
mission within the meaning of “The Official Inquiries
Evidence Act of 1910,” and the provisions of that
Act shall apply accordingly.
Unemployed Insurance Fund.
5. There is hereby created in the Treasury a fund to be
called the “Unemployment Insurance Fund.”
All moneys received by way of assessment from employers
under this Act shall be paid into the fund.
All payments in respect of unemployed workers and of the
administration of this Act shall be payable out of the fund.
6. (1.) For the purposes of this Act and in aid of the fund
the Minister shall, in respect of each year ending the thirtieth
day of June, make and levy an assessment on every employer.
(2.) The assessment payable by each employer in respect of
the year ending the thirtieth day of June, one thousand nine
hundred and twenty, shall.be a sum equal to two pounds for
each worker employed by him in the calendar year one thousand
nine hundred and nineteen.
Unemployed
insurance
fund..
Assessment.


(3.) The assessment payable by each employer in respect of
each subsequent year ending the thirtieth day of June shall be
such amount as shall be fixed by the Minister upon the recom-
mendation of the Council. The assessment shall be based on
the number of workers employed by each employer in the year
in question, or on such other basis as may from time to time be
prescribed.
(4.) For the purposes of this section, the number of workers
employed by an employer in any year shall be the average of
the number of persons (whether or not the same persons)
employed by him on each working day during such year.
* (5.) For the number of workers (whether or not the same
persons) who have been proved to the satisfaction of the Minister
to have been continuously in the service of the same employer
during the whole of the year in respect of which the assessment is
made, such employer shall be entitled to a rebate of assessment
at a rate to be prescribed.
(6.) In order to enable the Minister to make and levy the
said assessment, every employer shall, on or before such day in
each year as the Minister by notice in the Gazette directs, make
and forward to the Director of Labour the prescribed return
containing the prescribed particulars and verified as prescribed:
Provided that in lieu of requiring such return the Minister
may in his discretion accept as correct such particulars contained
in any return for the same period furnished by employers or
any class of employers or individual employer under any other
Act as will enable the Minister to make a proper assessment on
the proper basis.
(7.) The Minister shall cause notice of the making of the
annual assessment to be published in the Gazette; and the assess-
ment shall be deemed to have been duly levied on the last day
on which such notice was so published.
(8.) The amount of every assessment shall be paid to the
Treasury within the time and in the manner prescribed.
(9.) If an employer fails to pay the amount of an assess-
ment, the Minister may enforce payment of the same, together
with one-tenth more by way of penalty, by complaint against the
employer before a police magistrate or any two justices of the
peace, or by action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(10.) Notwithstanding anything herein contained, in any
case in which the Minister is satisfied that it would be a hard-
ship on an employer to enforce from him payment in full of an
assessment in any year, the Minister may in favour of such
employer remit the whole or such part of such assessment as he
in his discretion thinks proper.
7. (1.) The Governor in Council may from time to time by
Order in Council order and direct that employers shall do such
things and take such measures as in his opinion will be effective
Returns.
When
assessment
deemed to
be levied.
Payment of
assessment.
Assessment,
how-
enforced.
Remission in
ease of
hardship.
Power to
direct
employers
to take steps
to remedy
unemployment.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


for temporarily or permanently reducing or eliminating unem-
ployment within the State or any part thereof. Any such order
may be limited to any class of employers or individual employers
or employer.
Every such order shall be complied with either forthwith
or within such time as is stated in such order.
(2.) If the Minister is satisfied that any employer to whom p
any such Order applies has made default in compliance with a
such Order according to its tenour, the Minister may, by way of
penalty, levy upon such employer an additional assessment of
such amount, not exceeding the assessment of such employer for
the year in which the default has occurred, as the Minister
thinks proper; and such assessment shall be deemed to be an
assessment under this Act, and shall be payable and recoverable
accordingly;
Provided that any such employer shall have the right to
appeal to an industrial magistrate against any such assessment
on the ground that he has not made such default as alleged or
that such default arose through circumstances wholly beyond
such employer’s control, and on no other ground. The appeal
shall in such case be heard and determined by such magistrate
in accordance with the regulations, and his decision shall be final
and conclusive.
Belief Works.
8. (1.) If at any time the extent of unemployment within]
the State or any part thereof is such as in the opinion of the 1
Council to require that special measures should be adopted with'
respect to it, the Council shall report to the Minister as to—
(а) The number of workers unemployed in the various
localities affected,
(б) The callings or classes of workers unemployed,
and in such report may state the nature pf the work which in
the opinion of the Council will afford the greatest relief.
* (2.) The Minister shall submit such report to the Governor
in Council for his consideration, and the Governor in Council,
if satisfied that measures of relief are necessary, may—
(i.) Provide such Government work as in his opinion will
tend to afford the greatest relief of unemployment
in the localities affected;
(ii.) By Order in Council direct local authorities or other
local governing bodies in the said localities to com-
mence and carry out such works as are stated in the
Order for the relief of unemployment therein, and
all such authorities and other bodies shall conform
with such Order;
Gii.) By Order in Council direct any company or person
or firm carrying on business whose taxable income
Penalty
assessment.
Relief works
to reduce
unemployment.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


within the meaning of the laws in force relating to
State Income Tax in respect of the immediately
preceding period of assessment of that tax, exceeded
fifteen pounds per centum on the capital actually
invested in such business, and provided the amount
of such income exceeded in the case of such company
ten thousand pounds or in the case of such person
or firm five thousand pounds, at the option of the
company, person, or firm, either—
(a) To create employment by investing moneys to the
extent mentioned in the said Order in develop-
mental work or work of benefit to the State, either
in connection with the business carried on by such
company, person, or firm, or otherwise, or
(&) To invest in Government securities of the State
of Queensland such amount as is mentioned and
within such time and at such rate of interest and
on such terms ■and conditions as are mentioned in
the said Order.
✓
Works of the class mentioned in this subsection are herein-
after referred to as relief work.
An Order in Council under this subsection may prescribe
the time within which relief work is to be commenced and the
time allowed for the completion of the same.
(3.) For the purpose of enabling any local authority or other
local governing body to conform with any such Order it shall
be entitled to obtain from the Treasurer a loan under and
subject to the provisions of “ The Local Works Loans Acts, 1880
to 1899,” and “The Local Authorities Acts , 1902 to 1917,”
notwithstanding any limitation on its borrowing powers con-
tained in the said Acts or any other Act and without taking any
poll of ratepayers or obtaining their consent to the work or to
the loan, and for that purpose sections two hundred and seventy-
five to two hundred and eighty both inclusive of the last-men-
tioned Acts and any similar provisions relating to any other
local governing body shall not apply.
(4.) If the Governor in Council is satisfied that any such
authority or other body has made default in conforming with
such Order within the time stated therein, the Governor in
Council may by a further Order in Council so declare and direct
that all costs, charges, and ‘expenses incurred by the Minister
in conforming with the Order shall be paid by such authority
or body; and thereupon the Minister, for and on behalf of the
authority or body so in default and as its irrevocable agent, may
conform with such Order, and for that purpose may, if deemed
necessary, obtain a loan as in Subsection three hereof is provided,
and may recover from such authority or body all costs, charges,
and expenses incurred.


A copy of the Order made for the payment of such costs,
charges, and expenses may be filed in the office of the Registrar
of the Supreme Court, and may thereupon be enforced in the
same manner as if the same were a judgment of that Court; and
the certificate of the Minister as to the amount of costs, charges,
and expenses so incurred shall be prima facie evidence of such
amount.
(5.) If the Governor in Council is satisfied that any com-
pany, person, or firm has made default in conforming with an
Order made under subsection three hereof, the Governor in
Council may by Order in Council impose upon such company,
person, or firm a fine of such amount as is fixed by the Order,
but not exceeding in any ease an amount equal to one fourth of
the moneys directed by the first-mentioned Order to be invested
in work or securities by such company, person, or firm. A copy
of the Order imposing such fine may be filed in the office of the
Registrar of the Supreme Court and may thereupon be enforced
in the same manner as if the same were a judgment of that Court
for the amount of such fine with costs.
(6.) If it is shown to the satisfaction of the Governor in
Council that, by reason of certain relief work being commenced
or carried out by the Treasurer or by a Local Authority or
other local governing body at an earlier time than it would
otherwise have been, or that owing to some other good and
sufficient cause the expenditure will result or has resulted in
a loss, the Governor in Council may by Order in Council declare
the amount of such loss, and thereupon the Treasurer or .the
Local Authority or body shall be entitled to be paid the amount
so certified out of the fund.
(7.) When it is shown to the satisfaction of the Governor
in Council, by the report of the Council or by other evidence,
that in any locality in which any relief work is being carried
out the demand for labour has so increased as to render the
continuance of such relief work or some part thereof no longer
necessary, he may by Order in Council direct that such relief
work be discontinued either wholly or to such extent as is
mentioned in the Order.
9. The Governor in Council may from time to time, upon
the recommendation of the Council, order that works to be
carried out by any local authority or other local governing
body shall be postponed until the slack season of the year, so
that as far as practicable employment in the locality in question
shall be constant throughout the year.
10. All public officers, including all State officers of any
Taxation Department, and all other persons and bodies corporate
whatsoever having in their custody, possession, or power any
books, records, registers, papers, or other documents the inspec-
tion whereof may assist the Council in the performance of its
when Local
be
out°of P fund.
Power to
order post,
ponement of
certain work.
Duty of
&«.


powers and duties under this Act, shall at all reasonable times,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other Act,
permit any person thereunto authorised by the Council or the
Minister to inspect all such books, records, registers, papers, and
documents, and to take such notes, copies, or extracts thereof
or therefrom as he may deem necessary, without fee or reward.
Such powers of inspection and of taking notes, copies, or
extracts shall be exercised only for the purposes of the Council,
and the information so obtained shall not be used for any other
purpose; and the person authorised to exercise such powers shall
be bound to secrecy in manner prescribed.
Railway Passes.
11. The Minister may cause to be issued to any unemployed
worker a ticket or pass to enable him to travel by the State
railways to any place of prospective employment.
The cost of every such ticket or pass shall be defrayed out
of the fund.
Advertisements.
12. Regulations under, this Act may prescribe and regulate
the methods and conditions by and under which employers may
publicly advertise for labour.
Labour Farms.
13. (1.) The Governor in Council may, by notification in
the Gazette , from time to time set apart and appropriate an£
area* of Crown land for the purposes of a labour farm.
Unless such notification otherwise declares, such lands shall
not be liable to rating by the local authority of the Area within
which they are situated.
(2.) The Minister may from time to time appoint for a
labour farm an overseer and such other officers as, in his opinion,
are necessary.
* (3.) Subject to the Minister, the overseer shall manage and
conduct such farm, and for such purposes shall have all powers
and authorities necessary to the efficient and orderly conduct and
management of such farm.
The overseer may establish and manage any trade or
industry in a labour farm and dispose of the proceeds thereof.
(4.) The Minister may admit into a labour farm any man
whq, in his opinion, is normally unemployable and who is unable
to support himself otherwise. Thereupon such man shall be
entitled to such benefits as are provided by the rules of the farm
so long as he complies with the rules and discipline of the farm,
unless in the opinion of the Minister he is not of good character
or repute.
Railway
passes.
Advertise-
ments.
Land may •
be set apart
for labour
farms.
Overseers
and officers.
Power of
overseer.
Who is to be
admitted
into labour
farm.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


Every such man shall, upon admission, give particulars to
the overseer of his trade or calling, period of residence in this
State, place of birth, and such other information as may be
required of him; and the overseer shall enter such particulars in
& book to be kept for that purpose.
Every such man shall be paid in money for the work per-
formed by him at the farm such wages as the Minister may fix.
And this provision shall prevail over any industrial award.
Any such man, unless physically unfit, who refuses without
just cause to perform the work allotted to him by the overseer
shall be forthwith dismissed from the farm, and shall not be
entitled to receive any wages or other allowances then due, or
to be admitted into another labour farm, or to receive any allow-
ances from the fund.
(5.) All moneys received by the Minister under this section
or in respect of any moneys appropriated by Parliament for the
purpose of labour farms shall be paid to the credit of a trust
account.
AD. moneys so paid into such trust account may be
expended—
(a) In the payment of wages for work to workers at
labour farms; 1
(b) In the erection, construction, and making of neces-
sary buildings, erections, works, and conveniences in
connection with labour farms, and in the mainten-
ance thereof;
(c) In purchasing provisions, clothing, building materials,
stock, seed, agricultural implements, tools, and all
things necessary for the proper working of labour
farms, and generally for carrying out the provisions
of this section.
(7.) No license or club certificate authorising the sale of
any intoxicating liquor shall be granted within the boundaries
of a labour farm, and no license or permission shall authorise
the sale within such boundaries of intoxicating liquor by any
form of agency or in any way whatever; any person who sells
such liquor within or brings such liquor within the boundaries
of a labour farm shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty
pounds: Provided that this subsection shall not extend to pro-
hibit the bringing in or use of such liquor as a medicine upon
the certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner.
(8.) The Minister may from time to time make rules with :
respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) The rate of wages for work to be paid to workers at
a labour farm;
( b) The cleanliness, good order, and health of labour
farms;
(c) The maintenance of order and discipline;
Tnut
account.
Application
of moneys.
Sale of
liquor
prohibited
Role-*


( d) The punishment for breaches of rules, provided that
no pecuniary penalty for the breach of any rule
shall exceed five pounds;
(e) Generally, for the better carrying out of the purposes
and provisions of this section, whether hereinbefore
specifically authorised or not.
All such rules shall, on being published in the Gazette, have
the same effect as if they were enacted in this Act, and shall not
be questioned in any proceedings whatsoever.
Right to Work.
14. (1.) Every unemployed worker shall have the right to
apply to be registered and to be registered for employment at
any State Labour Exchange.
(2.) Subject to the provisions hereinafter mentioned, if
after the expiration of fourteen days from the date of his
registration for employment at any State Labour Exchange any
worker who has been hand fide resident in Queensland con-
tinuously for the twelve months immediately prior to such regis-
tration has not been provided with work, he shall, until he is so
provided with work, have the right to be paid an unemployed
sustenance allowance at the rate appropriate to his case set forth
in the Schedule to this Act: Provided that the Governor in
Council, by Order in Council published in the Gazette, may from
time to time make such alterations in or additions to the said
Schedule or of any of the rates, classes, or other particulars
thereof as he thinks fit, whereupon the Schedule as so altered or
added to shall be substituted for the existing Schedule to this
Act.
(3.) The condition of residence within Queensland for a
continuous period of twelve months prescribed by subsection two
hereof shall not apply to any returned soldier or member of the
military or naval forces who has been absent on active service
beyond Queensland, if prior to his enlistment he was a bond fide
resident of Queensland.
But no sustenance allowance shall be payable or be paid to
any such person whilst he is entitled to unemployment allowance
from any Repatriation Department.
# (4.) The right to receive such sustenance allowance shall
be subject to the following conditions and exceptions:—
(a) No aboriginal alien native of Asia, Africa, America,
or the Pacific Islands shall be entitled to receive any
such allowance.
(b) If the worker, at any time after his registration,
without reasonable excuse refuses or has refused to
accept any work offered to him, whether through the
Labour Exchange or otherwise, he shall not for
fourteen days after such refusal be entitled to receive
Right to
work.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


any such allowance. Objection on the part of an
unemployed worker to become a member of a regis-
tered trade or industrial union which enjoys the right
of preference of employment for its members con-
ferred on such union by an industrial agreement
duly registered, or by an award of the Court of
Industrial Arbitration of Queensland or the Com-
monwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration,
shall not of itself constitute a reasonable excuse on
the part of the worker for refusing to accept work
offered; a worker who refuses to accept employment
on that ground shall forfeit his right to sustenance
allowance and shall not again become entitled to any
such allowance until the lapse of fourteen days after
such refusal.
■(c) After his registration the worker shall have attended
and shall attend to seek employment at the Labour
Exchange at such times as are prescribed by the
regulations.
{<!) If at any time any strike occurs no person who goes
out on strike shall during such strike be entitled tp
receive any such allowance. If at any time any
strike occurs in contravention of or without com-
pliance with the provisions of “The Industrial
Arbitration Act of 1916, ’ ’ no person who went out on
strike shall, for a period of two months after the
cessation thereof, be entitled to receive any such
allowance • Provided that the Council shall have the
right to review the disqualification under either of
the provisions of this paragraph and if they think
fit remove such disqualification.
(e) When it is shown to the satisfaction of the Council
that any worker has become unemployed solely by
his own fault, the Council may direct that he shall
not whilst unemployed be entitled to any such allow-
ance during such period not exceeding two months
as the Council may fix.
\f) No person—
(a) Whose total earnings during the last preceding
calendar year exceeded two hundred and sixty
pounds; or
(b) Who is not a worker within the meaning of this
Act because his recent or usual employment has
been with an employer who is not an employer
within the meaning of this Act;
shall be entitled to receive any such allowance unless


the Council in their discretion think proper to extend
the benefit of this provision to the case of any such
person; in which event such person shall be entitled
to receive such allowance'.
(5.) If any dispute arises with respect to any person’a
right to receive such sustenance allowance, the matter may be
referred by the Minister to the Council for decision, and the-
decision of the Council thereon shall be final and conclusive.
(6.) The fund shall be charged with the payment of all
such sustenance allowances.
# 15. Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Council
that any worker has repeatedly lost his employment by reason
of imperfect technical knowledge or skill, the Council may direct
that he receive instruction at any State Technical College or in
any other institution or business, and that the cost of such
instruction, together with an allowance for the sustenance of the
worker during his period of instruction, shall be borne by th&
fund wholly or in part at-thc discretion of the Council.
General Provisions.
* 16. In addition to and without in any way limiting the
powers of the Governor in Council or the Minister under this
Act, the Governor in Council is hereby empowered from time
to time by Order in Council to issue such orders and give such,
directions and prescribe such rules as will in his judgment be-
calculated to safeguard the requirements and well-being of the
people and to give full effect to the provisions of this Act. And
every such order, direction, and rule shall be obeyed.
17. Every Order in Council made or purporting to be
made under this Act shall be published in the Gazette, and
forthwith upon such publication shall be read as one with this
Act, and construed as being of equal validity, and shall not be
challenged in any proceedings whatsoever.
18. Any person who by any act or default contravenes or
fails to comply with any provision of tips Act, or delays, or
obstructs, or hinders the doing of any act required by this Act
to be done, whether by himself or by any other person, or who
aids, abets, counsels, or procures any other person to so contra-
vene or fail to comply with any such provision, or who attempts
in any wise so to do, shall be guilty of an offence against this
Act.
Any person guilty of an offence against this Act shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding one hundred pounds. If such
person is a company, the individual person guilty of the offence.
Technical
training: of
worker.
•general
powers.
Publication
Mid effect of
orders.
dffence
against Act.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.


and also the managing director or other manager in Queensland
of the company, shall each of them be liable to the like punish-
ment.
All proceedings in respect of penalties for offences against
this Act may be heard and determined in a summary way by
and before a police magistrate sitting in petty sessions.
19. No action or proceeding shall be maintained against
the Crown or the Council or the Minister, or any overseer of a'
labour farm or other officer, for anything doVic or omitted to be
done by him in carrying out the provisions of this Act.
20. (I) The Governor in Council may from time to time
make regulations providing for all or any purposes, whether
general or to meet particular cases, that may be convenient for
the administration of this Act or that may be necessary or
expedient to carry out the objects and purposes of this Act,
and, where there may be in this Act no provision or no sufficient
provision in respect of any matter or thing necessary or
expedient to give effect to this Act, providing for and supplying
such omission or insufficiency.
(2.) The regulations may fix a penalty, not exceeding in
any case twenty pounds, for any breach thereof.
(3.) All such regulations shall be published in the Gazette,
and thereupon shall be of the same effect as if they were con-
tained in this Act and shall not be challenged in any proceedings
whatsoever.
Such regulations shall be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment within fourteen sitting days after such publication, if
Parliament is in session, and if not then within fourteen sitting
days after the commencement of the next session.
(4.) If either House of Parliament passes a resolution
disallowing any such regulation, of which resolution notice has
been given at any time within fourteen sitting days of such
House after such regulation has been laid before it, such regula-
tion shall thereupon cease to have effect, but without prejudice
to the validity of anything done in the meantime.
(5.) For the purpose of this section, the term “sitting
days” shall mean days on which the House actually sits for the
despatch of business.
21. The Minister shall cause a report to be laid before
both Houses of Parliament within one month after the commence-
ment of the session of Parliament in each year, giving full
information as to all proceedings under this Act during the last
preceding financial year.
No action
against
Minister, &o.
Regulations.
Report to be
laid before
Parliament.


Southern
District.
Central
District.
Northern
District.
Class or Workers.
Subdivision.
Subdivision.
Subdivision.
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
1. Individual workers, whether male or
female, unmarried, or widowers, or
widows
2. Married workers—
17 6
18 9
18 9
20 0
20 0
22 6
(a) Male worker living with his wife
and any dependent children
23 0
27 6
27 6
30 0
30 0
35 0
{b) Female worker living with her hus-
band dependent upon her earnings
and any dependent children
25 0
27 G
27 6
30 0
30 0
35 0
In addition , for each child of a married
worker or of a widower or widow,
(not exceeding four children) under
sixteen years of age living with and
dependent on the worker
4 0
5 0
4 0
5 0
4 0
5 0
* SCHEDULE.
Bates op Sustenance Allowance foe Unemployed Workers.
The rate of sustenance allowance shall in no case exceed one half of
the amount of wages payable weekly under any award to, or, if there is no
award, in accordance with the prevailing rates of wages of workers
employed in the same calling as that of the unemployed worker in the
locality where the unemployed worker lives; but, subject as last aforesaid,
the rate of sustenance allowance per week during unemployment to which
the unemployed worker of the class mentioned in the first left-hand column
of the table hereunder is entitled shall be the amount set against the name
of such class in the other columns respectively of the said table according to
the District and Subdivision of District of the State therein mentioned in
which the unemployed worker lives.
Districts.
1. For the purposes of this Act, the following Districts and
Subdivisions have been created: —
Southern District.— All that portion of the State lying between the
southern border and a line drawn west from Yandaran to the State’s
western border.
Central District. —All that portion of the State lying between a line
drawn westward from Yandaran to the western border of the State and a
line westward from St. Lawrence to the State’s western border, but to run
south of Winton. Yandaran and St. Lawrence shall be in the Central
District.
Northern District. —All that portion of the State north of the Central
District.
Subdivisions.
Each District is divided into two Subdivisions by a line commencing
on the southern border of the State at a point 29 degrees south latitude
149 degrees east longitude, thence north-westerly to a point 26 degrees
south latitude 148 degrees east longitude, thence north-westerly to a point
23 degrees south latitude 146 degrees east longitude, thence northerly to a
point 20 degrees south latitude 146 degrees east longitude, thence north-
westerly to a point 16 degrees south latitude 145 degrees east longitude,
thence easterly to the coast.
So much of each District as is east of the line defined in the preceding
paragraph shall be in No. 1 Subdivision, and so much of each District as is
not east of the said line shall be in No. 2 Subdivision of the Southern,
Central, and Northern Districts respectively.
* As amended by Legislative Assembly in Committee.
By Authority: Anthony James Gumming, Government Printer, Brisbane.
32
Unemployed Workers Bill.
