

THE ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATION
OF
His Royal Highness,
PRINCE ALFRED.
A TRIBUTE OF AFFECTIONATE LOYALTY TO ENGLAND’S
MATCHLESS QUEEN THE LOVED AND LOVING
MOTHER OF MANY NATIONS AND PEOPLES
AND KINDREDS OF THE EARTH,
“ Is there a crime
Beneath the roof of Heaven, that stains the soul
With more infernal hue than damned
Assassination ?”
BY
S. COZENS,
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA,
Author of “In Memorialin''—a Tribute to the Memory of Prince Albert.
Casmama :
J. S. V. TURNER, PRINTER, BRISBANE-STREET, LAUNCESTON.


[?]


THE ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATION
OF
His Royal Highness,
PRINCE ALFRED.
A TRIBUTE OF AFFECTIONATE LOYALTY TO ENGLAND’S
MATCHLESS QUEEN THE LOVED AND LOVING
MOTHER OF MANY NATIONS AND PEOPLES
AND KINDREDS OF THE EARTH.
“ Is there a crime
Beneath the roof of Heaven, that stains the soul
With more infernal hue than damned
Assassination ?”
BY
S. COZENS,
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA,
Author of “ In Manoriatn"— a Tribute to the Memory of Prince Albert.
GTa&nanta:
J. B. V. TUBNEB, PBINTEB, ÜBISBANB-STBEET, LAUNCESTON.




WELCOME TO PRINCE ALFRED.
WRITTEN IN ANTICIPATION OF THE PRINCE'S VISIT TO
TASMANIA.
To the Editor of the Launceston Times.
“ Sir,— The people on the other side have displayed a noble loyalty to the
British throne by the magnificent reception of His Koyal Highness, Eng-
land’s illustrious Prince, Scotland’s Duke, and Sax Coburg’s King (to be); and
we of this colony will accord to Austral! as’ guest a most hearty, cordial, and
British welcome to our shores and hospitality.
“ We love him for the love we bear his honoured Mother, our noble and
beloved Lady the Queen, whose sceptre we reverence, and of whose matchless
reign we are ever proud. To be an Englishman under such a Queen Is a
prouder position than to have been a Homan in the palmy days of Home’s
meridian splendours,
“ We love him for the cherished memory of a father whose wisdom made
him great, and whose prudence made him good; and we pray that the
endowments which made ‘ Albert the Good,’ may enrich our own ‘ Alfred’
into a popularity as great, wide, and lasting.
“We love him because in bis veins flows the blood of many nations—the
emblem of that unity which shall one day bind the nations together in the peace-
ful bonds of universal brotherhood, when his war ship the Galatea will lie
stranded on the shores of amity and goodwill—with its port holes for ever
closed and her hatchways opened like the grand old Dreadnought in the
Thames to receive indigent sick, and nurse them into health or tend them
to the grave.
“We love him for the history of his being—for the interests he represents—
for the hopeful prospects of a useful future—for his identity with those who
brave the perils of the deep in the maintenance of British rights.
“In short we love him as the son of a good father; of a great Queen ; of a
glorious nation: and with these sympathies we add to our prayer for the
Queen, and the Prince of Wales, God bless Prince Alfred.
“ I am, Mr. Editor,
“ Yours respectfully.
“S. COZENS.
“ Launceston, Dee. 5,1667.”


CHAPTER I.
A Royal Death.
“’Tis the only discipline we are born for;
All studies else are but as circular lines,
And death the centre, where they all must meet.”
On Sunday morning, Dec. 15, 1861, just after the midnight
chimes had marked another period in the world’s history, the
great hell of St. Paul’s, with its deep, booming, and solemn
voice, announced to the retiring citizens that death had stricken
down to dust the most illustrious Prince in the world, and the
most important man of the age ; —A Prince, dignified with many
honours : a man, rich in human attributes. A Prince, honoured
with a nation’s confidence: a man, sympathising with the
infantile wretchedness of the meanest of our race. A Prince of
rare sagacity; a man of strong attachments. That Prince
was the husband of an estimable Lady, and the father
of a large family; that Lady was our beloved Queen,
and one of that family is now wounded Prince Alfred!
The dreadful deed of the would-be assassin is a pro-
digious insult to the memory of one whose manly,
fraternal, conjugal, paternal, social, political and regal
virtues are historical —are written as in eternal brass. His
deathless fame as a wise Prince, a devoted husband, a fond
father, a judicious councillor, and the sincere friend of a thrifty
nation, will bo handed down to coming generations.
“Death makes no conquest of his conqueror,
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.”
Yes, it makes us weep to think that the deathless history
of a life so rich—that the royal widow’s memoranda, wet with
tears of loving memories, should be besprinkled with the blood
of a wounded, insulted son.
Let the deed of o‘Farrell be contemplated in the presence of
the widowed mother, at the grave of the departed father, and
its horrid magnitude swells beyond the vocabulary of words to


express our unbounded and inexpressible indignation. Dear
youth! would that we could heal his wound as though it had
not been. Would that we could blot out the event from the
pages of history ! Would that we could arrest the telegram,
and withhold the intelligence from the mourning widow’s ear,
and prevent that acute sorrow, that its utterance must create.
We feel for the Prince —we feel deeply for the Prince; but we
feel more deeply for the mother —the anxious mother —the
already stricken mdther. Our thoughts travel with the tidings,
and our sympathies accompany them into the Queen’s presence.
We hear her sobs, see her tears, feel the palpitations of her
beating heart. We gaze into her pallid face, listen to her inter-
rogatories—to her commands to summon her physicians, and
ministers. The former, to ascertain the probable results of the
wound; the latter, for advice. We can in imagination realize
the shock to her Majesty, and the confusion of her people.
Aye, most of all, we feel for that pure womanlv, motherly grief,
which must possess her soul for her wounded darling boy, so
far, far away from her fond attention. We have had mothers —
fond mothers : we know a mother’s care, and a mother’s fond-
ness. We send our condolence with expressions of devoted
loyalty, and redolent with profound respect for a widowed
mother’s love.
“ See-
Alone, she wanders where with him she trod—
No arm to stay her, but she leans on God.”
CHAPTER II.
A Dream.
“And dreams in their development have breath,
And tears, and torture, and the touch of joy:
They leave a weight upon our waking thoughts."
When the Prince died, I was lying on a bed of affletion; but
shortly before his death I fell into a reverie, and I thought thus
with myself: The Prince is surrounded with the wisest faculty
of the age ; he is tended with a loving and royal hand; all the
healing medicines of the maicria medica arc at his lips ; all the


delicacies of nature are awaiting his wishes. Yes; methought,
he has the most skilful advice —the best attention—the costliest
remedies —and the nicest dainties ; and here am I, in the hands
of an ordinary medical man, who pays me a daily and hurried
visit; tended by a nurse, who, having numerous other duties
demanding her care, is rarely seen except at physic-times and
meal-hours. He is rich, and lam poor. He can call in aid,
that I cannot command. He will live, and I shall die. With
these thoughts I fell asleep, and I dreamed? a dream. I went
into a large and beautiful garden, in the midst of which was a
glittering greenhouse, far more magnificent than the Tropical
Conservatory in the Royal Gardens at Kew. In the centre of
this glass house, on a stand, running nearly from end to end,
tender and delicate plants were flourishing in paradisiacal
magnificence. To the glazed roof a luxuriant vine
was trained, from the branches of which large, ripe,
and delicious clusters of grapes hung in great profu-
sion. This house had two doors: one in the side, directly
opposite the entrance to the garden; the other at the right
end, towards sunrise. I entered by the door in the side which
was open, at which moment the sun was shedding a soft —not
dazzling—light over all the plants. Walking towards the end
door, which was also open, and turning round the stand, full
in view the Queen; and a little to the right, the
Prince Consort. Immediately the Queen entered into familiar
conversation about my “Life" which she had been reading
with great interest; meanwhile the Prince gathered, and
brought me a delicious cluster of grapes, and assuming a some-
what celestial appearance/ disappeared ; whereupon I awoke—
to receive the tidings—the startling tidings that “ the Prince
was dead!” 11l as I was, I got up, and commenced writing
a tribute to his memory, which I finished during the week, and
subsequently published under the title “In Mcmoriam.”. The
whole of that dream has been interpreted except the “ Departure''
of the Prince. That departure has haunted my pillow with
dark thoughts, and filled my waking hours with many gloomy
apprehensions ; and those apprehensions are now intensified by
the diabolical attack upon the equally inoffensive son.
The interpretation. That garden, was the flourishing Empire


of Great Britain; the greenhouse, was England in the midst.
Her Majesty and the Prince being there, showed the interest
they took in the state of the vast political garden in general,
and the welfare of England in particular. Her Majesty’s
interest in my Life, her condescension to the meanest of her
subjects. The grapes given to me by the Prince, the fruits of
his good works, which have been largely shared by every
Englishman. The sim, the prosperity of her Majesty’s rule
during the lifetime of the great Prince. The departure. (?)
CHAPTER III.
A Scene at Clontarf.
God save our Noble Prince—
Long may he live in peace;
God save the Prince!
Send him prosperity,
Good health and purity,
Grace and felicity;
God save the Prince!
What a scene! We have seen a thundercloud suddenly
breaking in upon the bright heavens, and by its electrical forces
disturbing the serene sky, and by its terror-inspiring and earth-
shaking utterances hushing the voice of song. We have read
of the sudden rending of some beautiful mountain, by the unex-
pected outgushing of volcanic fires—spitting the fury of their
anger upward to the skies, and then spreading desolation all
around. We have heard of gorgeous palaces, and gay cities
tottering into ruins by the terrible vibrations of the quaking
earth; of the gentle placidity of the waters just above the falls
of Niagara, and then of their rapid, agitated, foaming descent
into the seething, roaring abyss below; of one nation stealthily
invading another nation, and filling the people with profound
and confused consternation. But there is no phenomenon in
nature—no fact in history illustrative of the scene at the


Sailor’s Home Picnic, Cloutarf, Sydney, New South Wales. At
twenty minutes past three o’clock, on Thursday, March 12th,
1868, the sun of pleasure which had been brightened by a philan-
thropic act, was suddenly overcast with a dark, dense, terror and
horror-inspiring cloud of death, which shot its lightning flash,
and hurled its thunderbolt at the cause of that innocent joy and
pleasure. The shot was heard—tho victim fell; mirth hushed
her song, and dropped her harp; indignation uttered its voice,
and pounced upon the guilty; sympathy wept, and fell fainting
with the wounded Prince. Why, what evil had he done ? He
is no party to the grievances of Ireland. His beloved mother is
not responsible for the condition of Ireland. She is not an auto-
crat. She only gives the dignity of sovereign force to tho
enactments of her Parliament.
“The effect,” says tho Sydney Morning Herald, “of this
dastardly attempt at assassinating the Prince, among tho
immense number of persons congregated at Clontarf, may be
more easily imagined than described. A large number of ladies
fainted, others were seized with hysterics, and the whole
multitude was convulsed. Suddenly a joyous throng had been
converted into a mass of excited people, in whose breasts
sympathy for the Eoyal sufferer, and indignation for his
murderous assailant, alternately prevailed; while pallid faces
and tearful eyes told of the deep anxiety that was felt in
reference to the extent of the injuries which his Eoyal Highness
had sustained. People crowded by hundreds around the tent in
which the sufferer lay, until they were informed that they must
keep back, in order to allow of free ventilation; they at once
fell back thirty or forty yards and formed a complete cordon
around the tent, and anxiously awaited the result of the exami-
nation. Finding the people so anxious about him his Eoyal
Highness said “ Tell the people I am not much hurt, I shall be
better presently.” His Eoyal Highness, who never lost
consciousness, although feeling faint and weak from the shock
to his nervous system, and from the loss of blood, described to
his attendants the sensation he experienced when struck by the
bullet. He said “he felt as though he was being lifted off tho
ground.”
“ The unanimous sentiment of commisscration expressed in


all forms of execration, indignation, and sorrow, leaves no
doubt that such crimes as the attempted assassination of the
Prince ■will find here no coiintenance or toleration except
among Fenians.
“ This dire deed has shown us how possible it is even for a
small faction to animate a wicked mind to a dreadful vengeance,
and how dependent we are even in our most secure enjoyments
on the acts of persons, who could have no effect upon the
ordinary course of life, or the common relations of society. It
is possible for a maniac to fire a cathedral; it is possible for a
fool to destroy the finest work of art; it is possible for an
assassin to fill an empire with mourning. A wretch whose
steps no one would follow for any interest in his person or
character, may make himself a name by a crime which shall
resound through the universe and never be forgotten by
history. All this we knew before, and we now feel that the
crime of this man will associate this country -with his name,
and before all nations.
“ It is, however, beautiful to see how spontaneous and uni-
versal is the emotion awakened by the news of this deplorable
event. All ranks, all classes, all creeds, all nations,
joined in one cry of execration and in one utter-
ance of grief. At first many were incredulous. They
thought it was one of those idle inventions which men circulate
and which live for the moment —a gratification to the malignant,
and an alarm to the timid. But when the truth came in its,
true proportions, and yet uncertainty still hung over the life of
the victim, there were no bounds to the utterance of sorrow and
regret.”
On receiving the intelligence of the attack upon the Prince’s
life I wrote the following hasty note of sympathy.
To the Editor of the Launceston Times.
Sir,— A'low me through your paper to express my unfeigned sympathy
with his Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, and my horror of the das-
tardly conduct of the villain who, but for a merciful providence, would have
been his assassin.
Thank God that the life of the Prince is spared. Let us pray that he may
be speedily restored to health and to the anxious bosom of his widowed and
afflicted mother, our beloved Queen, for whose person we entertain the most


loyal and devoted attachment, and in whose defence we would most cheerfully
buckle on the harness If such a necessity should ever occur.
It is stated that the Fenians are the tools of others; but I would let them
know assuredly that the divine and unrepealed law of retribution is still in
force, demanding blood for blood, and life for life, and that God’s ministers
of justice ruling in His fear must maintain the integrityof that law to the terror
of evil doers.
And we will pray a loyal nation’s prayer. “ God save the Queen.”
I am, Sir, yours respectfully,
S. COZENS.
Tuesday Evening, March 17.
CHAPTER IV.
Anger.
“When anger rushes unrestrain’d to action,
Like a hot steed it stumbles In its way:
The man of thought strikes deepest, and strikes safest.”
Angee is the boiling of the blood about the heart, or the boiling
of the heart in blood, the fumes whereof rise so fast into the
brain, that anger sometimes dislodges reason, and is therefore
called a short madness. The Latin word ira comes from ire y
which signifies to go: and Zanchium gives this reason, because
a man in anger goes out of himself; and when he is pacified, he
doth redire ad se, return again to himself. Our hearts hare
been boiling over with indignation; but we must come back to
reason, and look calmly and dispassionately at the deed that
filled us all with horror, disgust, and consternation. ' We must
be careful to exercise the right kind of anger, and apply it only
to the object deserving its inflictions.
“ Where sits the offence.
Let the fau't’s punishment be derived from thence.”
“ A wrong’ avenged is doubly perpetrated,—
Two sinners stand where lately stood but one.”
When the Mutiny broke out in India, the boys pelted
every black fellow they saw in the streets of London; as if every
black man was an Indian, and every Indian was a mutineer.
Gentlemen, every Homan Catholic is not a Fenian, and every


Fenian is not a Roman Catholic —is not an Irishman; and even
if they were they are not to be persecuted for their nationality,
nor for their belief, for they have a right to their own opinions.
They are only blameworthy as they put those opinions
into violent forms against persons wdio claim the right to
differ from them in forms of Government and modes of worship.
We would not interfere with the civil rights of our Irish po-
pulation. We desire for our Roman Catholic subjects to have
all and equal rights with ourselves, freedom to worship as they
think best. But at the same time we claim the right to lecture
upon Catholicism, as freely as they pronounce upon our Protest-
antism. And should we deem them “ heretics,” as they deem
us, we will neither curse them nor send them to Limbo, nor to
the other place, but pray for them, that they may learn of Him
Who was meek and lowly in heart: Who came not to destroy
men’s lives but to save them: Whose mission was “ good-will
towards men Whose conduct was holy and harmless: Whose
instructions were —“ love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that dispite-
fully use you and persecute you.” “ Let this mind be in you
which was in Jesus,” “who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; t but committed
himself (his cause) to him that judgeth righteously.”
“ Not all the pomp and pageantry of worlds,
Reflect such glory on the eye supreme,
As the meek virtues of one holy man.”
Anger without reason is madness, and surely it is a specie of
madness to condemn the Irish because an Irishman is guilty of
committing a great crime; or to denounce all our Roman
Catholic citizens because a Roman Catholic is the greatest
criminal of the age. Ido not like to hear the Irish condemned
for the act of an Irishman. There are Irishmen in the Emerald
Isle that will bear comparison with our own countrymen; aye,
and there are Irishmen in these colonies, and in this town, who
are worthy citizens and loyal subjects. Let those, and those
only be censured and punished who deserve all the censure
and all the punishment due to conspiracy, revolt, and murder.
The law must be strictly just, in order that hereafter its pitiless
vengeance may not be invoked. Those who are guilty must
suffer, that others who are swayed by impulse and passion may


not pass the barrier, and do acts which might hush the accents
of mercy into stony silence. o‘Farrell must not be judged by
mob-law, nor lynched by popular displeasure. The gravity of
his offence would not be enhanced, nor the ends of justice an-
swered, by making him the victim of an incensed and angered
populace. His punishment must be dictated by the laws of
justice, and measured by the supremacy of his guilt. Our laws
are potent enough to avenge crime in its most stupendous forms.
Anger without bounds is fury : we must not be furioiis beyond
the bounds of justice. The are men— men with im-
mortal souls —men with deathless interests. To call them
“ virmin” and “ reptiles” is neither wise nor prudent. “To talk
of these Fenians,” says the Argus, “ however dangerous and
wicked their crime, as of virmin that may and ought to be
hunted down with determined and malignant vengeance, is un-
worthy of England. The outburst of mob violence and lynch
law is criminal in the highest degree. There is too much of a
tendency to deal with Unusual crimes in an unconstitutional
manner, and everything that may be done should be done to
check this. Let us remember that we are strong, and though
such crimes As those of the Fenians are atrocious and startling,
let us not be shaken out of our manhood by them. Nothing
would be gained by casting aside the restraints of law. We
should, in all likelihood, ruin ourselves as well as degrade our-
selves by giving free scope to the passionate outburst of a cruel
and craven fear.” “ Fiat justitia mat ccelum." Let justice be
done even if the heavens were to fall! was the moral sentiment
of a noble Pagan. Justice is just, not cruel; and to hurry a
man into the awful presence of God, without giving him time to
reflect upon his guilt, or repent of his sin, is a terrible act of
cruelty : it is ungodlike, for He bears long with us all.
M The Lord! how tender is his tear!
His justice, how august!
Hence all her fears my soul derives—
There anchors all her trust!”
“ There are some crimes so astounding that no one can
feel any complacency even in the punishment of the criminal.
Anything that the law can do or exact from him seems small
indeed compared with the mischief he has done. It is, however,
a dangerous thing to permit this sentiment to obtain the do*


ml nation. It must be recollected that before the law all meli
are equal, and this is its glory. Though there are special con-
sequences in a crime so great —and where the son of the QuEEit
is the sufferer—they are not such as the law takes into account.
We are therefore bound, in the treatment of all these transactions)
to remember that there is something even more sacred tlmn the
life of the Prince, and that is the justice of the people.”
Let the advocates of lynch law learn a lovely lesson from
the Prince himself. We are informed that it is his Poyal
Highness’s intention to intercede with the authorities on
o‘FarreU’s behalf, so that they may not carry into effect the
sentence of death which will doubtless be passed on him for his
crime. What a blessing that o‘Farrell as well as the Prince
was spared; if he had not been, this beautiful picture of the
offended interceding for the offender had not called forth our
admiration, and given fresh cause for our loyalty to his beloved
mother, whose kindly nature he so largely inherits, and admir-
ably reflects.
“Be ye angry, and sin not.” A man may be said to be
angry and sin not, when sin is the object of his anger. We are
angry—intensely angry with o‘Fartell; not because he is an
Irishman —not because he is a Roman Catholic Irishman, but
simply because he is a cowardly ruffian and is guilty of the
greatest crime of modern times. Indeed his crime is un-
paralleled in the criminal annals of our country. That he
intended murder we have the evidence of his own lips. And the
murder of whom ? An inoffensive youth—a young gentleman
of amiable, kindly, and generous dispositions—an illustrious
guest of the sister colonies—a royal visitor come to ask after our
welfare, and encourage our energies and enterprise-7-a Prince
of noble birth—a son of our beloved Queen, whose fame is in all
the earth —a son of a widowed mother in great affliction —a son
of a father whose reputation is world wide, and whose excel-
lencies are household words. The manner —the time—the place
—and the object of the deed deepens the crime with the darkest
dye of blood-guiltiness. That the Prince is yet alive, no thanks
are due to O’Farrell. That he is alive, and doing well, we are
thankful—devoutly thankful to Him to whom belongeth the
issues from death. God bless the Prince! and make him a


blessing in furthering the welfare of our fellow creatures, and over-
throwing organisations of whose spirit o‘Farrell is the diaholes
and incarnation. God save the Prince, and shield him from all
further attacks upon his valued and valuable life ; and send him
health and prosperity, and carry him safely across the great and
wide sea to the maternal embraces of his fond and loving
mother—the Queen of our unshaken unwavering and unbounded
loyalty, and we will ever pray “God save the Queen.” The
heart of colonial sympathy—the lips of Protestant devotion—
the voice of Britains noble sons will everywhere echo, and
re-echo the prayer that places the Queen under the protecting
shadow of the Almighty—in the keeping of His salvation. We
will sing with heart and voice—with eyes and hands
uplifted to the hills, whence help cometh, God save the Queen !
God save the Queen from her enemies, in the court, in the
cabinet, in the palace, in the parliament —at home and abroad.
In England and Ireland—in London and Washington—in
Paris and Home, God save the Queen from crawling Jesuits,
and cruel Fenians, —blood-thirsty Fenians, and infernal organi-
sations of rebellion, and anarchy.
We will never see her Majesty insulted without volun-
teering to defend her cause —and should we be called upon to
measure swords with any of her foes, we will fight to the death
for the Queen, whose safety and honour is dearer than life; and
should we fall in the contest, our last prayer shall be God save
the Queen.
God save our gracious Queen-
Long may she live and reign;
God save the Queen I
Send her victorious.
Happy and glorious.
Long to reign over us;
God save the Queen;
O Lord, our God, arise,—
Scatter her enemies
And make them fall;
Confound their politics,
Frustrate their Knavish tricks,
On thee our hope we fix;
O, save us all.


CHAPTER V.
Loyalty.
“Honour to whom honour is due”
“ Honour and glory were given to cherish ;
Cherish them, then, though all else should decay ;
Landmarks be these, never to perish,
Stars that will shine on the duskiest day.”
“ A sovereign's great example forms a people;
The public breast is noble, or is vile.
As he inspires it.”
“ He that has nature in him must be grateful;
’Tls the Creator’s primary great law.
That links the chain of beings to each other.”
“ All should unite to punish the ungrateful:
Jngratituite is treason to mankind.”
We love our Queen —our widowed Queen —our gracious Queen
—our Protestant Queen. We love her for her pure unsophisti-
cated womanhood. Look at her, laying aside her insignias of
State—her robes of royalty—her sceptre and her crown, and
sitting in the humblest cottage of the meanest of her subjects,
and entering heart and soul into the domesticities of her poor
sister, and kindly sympathising with domestic cares and
generously supplying domestic wants, and taking -notes of the
number and names of all the children that she might assist their
up-bringing and promote their up-rising in society. Who can
read her Journal —who can follow her in her rambles over the,
heather, and not feel proud of the Woman ? I say the Woman!
Tennyson says, —“ Woman is the lesser man.”
“ The world was sad, the garden was a wild.
And man, the hermit, sighed till woman smiled.”
The womanly conduct of our beloved Queen makes us feel that
Woman Is the noblest part of man.
I have no sympathy with those who would degrade womankind
into abject vassalage—as the dependant and slave of my lord
Adam. Our beloved Queen shall be called Woman, for she is
the nearest approach *to simple womanhood that we have seen
since the gates of Eden closed on our great-grandmother


(excepting always the blessed mother of Christ). We love her
for her loifehood. It is a question if ever the conjugal oath was
more religiously kept, or the marriage state ever more honoured
than in the wedded life of Albert and Yictoria. The pages of
their social history are not blotted with immoralities ; we have
no record of riotous living—of licentious concubinage. No,
never! They were knit together in bonds of indissoluble
attachment; they lived in. each other’s affections,
and studied each other's happiness. Their love was
not a passion-flower, that suddenly blooms, and quickly
withers; but an amaranthine, a never-withering blossom,
a never-withering blossom. It was lovely to see their
fond regard for each other, retaining all the freshness, and bloom,
and vigour of youth. Nay, to see it, like the mountain torrent,
deepening and widening in its flow. “ The people could not set
up a better model of the performance of the duties of a wife and
mother than their Queen; no more complete pattern of a devoted
husband than her Consort.
“ He loved one only, and he clave to her.”
The Queen when smitten with the tender passion for her
cousin Albert acted like a Queen —like a strong-minded, noble
woman. She summoned her Privy Council, to whom she
addressed these Queenly and womanly words:—“ I have caused
you to be summoned in order that I may acquaint you with my
resolution in, a matter which deeply concerns the welfare of my
people and the happiness of my future life. It is my intention
to ally myself in marriage with Prince Albert of Saxe Coburg
and Gotha. Deeply impressed with the solemnity of the en-
gagement which I am about to contract, I have not come to this
decision without mature consideration, nor without feeling a
strong assurance that, with the blessing of Almighty God, it
will at once secure my domestic felicity, and serve the interests
of my country.” How frank ! How womanly! How Queenly !
How like Yictoria! We know the sequel. The history of
events never falsified her first impressions, nor libelled the
sagacity of her anticipations. No Queen was ever blessed with
a fonder or more devoted husband. Eead her books.
Of the happiness which attended the married life of the
Queen and Prince it is unnecessary to do more than quote the


remarks of the biographer who, when commenting on the beauty
of the domestic life of the royal family and the freedom of
Prince Albert from the vices of former generations of the royal
family, observes, “ above all, he has set an example for his chil-
dren from which they may be sure they can never deviate with-
out falling in public estimation, and running the risk of undoing
the work which he has been instrumental in accomplishing.”
The Queen, speaking of him, says—“ From the moment of his
establishment in the English palace, as the husband of the
Queen, his first object was to maintain, and, if possible, even
raise the character of the Court. He, therefore, from the first,
laid down strict rules for his own guidance.* He imposed a
degree of restraint and self denial upon his own movements
which could not but be irksome had he not been sustained by a
sense of the advantage which the throne would derive from it.
He paid no visits in general society. His visits were to the
studio of the artists, to the museums of art or science, to insti-
tutions for good and benevolent purposes. Wherever a visit
from him, or his presence, could tend to advance the real good of
the people, there his horses might be seen waiting ; never at the
door of mere fashion. Scandal itself could take no liberty with
his name.” There is a lovely picture of a good husband from the
pen of the Royal widow. Her Majesty said immediately after
their marriage, that she had solemnly engaged at the altar to
“obey” as well as to love and honour;” and this sacred obli-
gation she could consent neither to limit or refine away. His
life fully rewarded that conscienciousness.
The atrocious deed of o‘Farrellwas an insult to the memory of
the world’s best friend “Albert the Good,” with whom originated
the “Industrial Exhibition,” to which as to the temple of
universal peace, the world was invited to meet together in the
bonds of industrial and peaceful brotherhood. He knew that
war debases and brutalizes the nations of the earth. He knew
that if men had industrial and profitable employment that they
would have no time to quarrel. The Exhibition was a grand
conception —a glorious scheme of political wisdom. The world
* The rules are Intimated by him in a letter to Baron Stockmar“ I have
laid to heart your friendly advice, and it agrees entirely with the principles of
action which I had already framed for myself. An individuality, a character,
which shall win the respect, the love, and the confidence of the Queen, and of
the nation, must be the groundwork of my position.”


in general, and England in particular, owe tlie tcidow, and
orphans of the great Prince an immense debt of gratitude for
services rendererd to every people and nation in the civilized
world. And has he not been the means of reconciling political
disputes which threatened the most disastrous consequences. He
sat in the Cabinet Councils like the Prince of Peace, and his
influence has been felt in all lands. We never find his name
associated with party politics, with Cabinet trickiness, with uncon-
stitutional intrigues. His mission was to unite and harmonize,
not to distract and sever. His nautical axiom in the stateship
was “ a long pull, and a strong pull, and pull altogether.” “It
was,” said the Times, “ a singular piece of fortune that the Queen
should find in a young man, one whom a sudden and unlooked
for elevation could not elate, nor all the temptations of a splendid
court, and a luxurious capital seduce : who kept the faith he had
pledged with unwavering fidelity; and in the heyday of
youth ruled his passions and left no duty unperformed.
But it is still more singular that in this untried youth
the Queen found an adviser of the utmost sagacity—a
statesman of the rarest ability and honesty of purpose.
Perhaps all history cannot afford an instance of the per-
formance of high and irresponsible duties with a dignity
and singleness of intention comparable .to that which has
made illustrious the reign of Queen Victoria.” We revere
the momory of the Prince because he was England’s
brightest ornament, the world’s best friend, and our own loved
Victoria's husband. He was the Prince of the people; we have
not forgotten the every-day application of his talents, means,
and appliances, to elevate the public mind and to advance the
public good. He was no party man. One-sided interest was
not an article of faith in his political creed.
“ With what sublime repression of himself.
And in what limits, and how tenderly;
Not swaying to this faction or to that—
Nor making his high place the lawless perch
<)f winged ambition, nor a vantage ground
For pleasure; but throughout all his tract of years,
Wearing the white flower Of a blameless life
Before a thousand peering littlenesses.”
The first principle in his ethics was “ Do good unto all
menand it was his untiring devotion to that noblest of all
motives that gave his name precedence in the vocabulary of our
household words. He was the Queen’s attached, constant.


faithful, loyal, loving, and devoted husband ; and what he was
to the person of the Queen of Queens, that he was to Great
Britain the Queen of nations. His fidelity to the one was as
Universal as his faithfulness to the other. He felt, when he
married England’s Queen, that he had also wedded the Queen’s
England ; and that ho could not fulfil his matrimonial vows to
the former, without nourishing and cherishing the latter. And
how faithfully he discharged his duties to each was seen in the
unmeasured grief of both. The Queen’s grief was the nation’s
grief. The Queen’s loss was the nation’s loss ; and the widows
mingled their tears in the common grave of mutual bereave-
ment, The Prince was every man’s friend—aye, the poor man’s
friend. It was a beautiful .sight to see the great Prince, who
might have indulged in all the gorgeous splendours and luxuri-
ous pleasures of Court life, coming out from the noble and the
great, and taking the Prince of Wales with him to Ragged
schools, thereby teaching the King (to be) that there must bo
the sacrifice of self indulgence to discharge the high responsi-
bilities of kingship, and that one of his first duties to a great
nation will be to look after and promote the well-being of the
poorer classes of society. Indeed, Albert the Good took a deep
interest in everything that was good, and humanizing, and
elevating. His model dwellings for the poor —his palaces for
the industrial emulation of all nations —proclaimed how uni-
versal and individual were his sympathies. While scheming
the welfare of all nations by a collection of the sciences and
industry of the whole civilized world, he at the same time thinks
of the English poor, and builds for them a model palace. Who
of us that went to see the neat dwellings for the poor, after
leaving the great temple of arts, could help admiring the grasp
of that intellect which, amidst a thousand sumptuous thoughts,
could think; of the labourer in his foeted, incommodious, and un-
ventilated dwelling. We revert to all this to aggravate the
crime of the man who dared to lift his murderous hand against
a son of one to whom we owe so much—whose memory we so
fondly cherish—and from whose good works we are still gather-
ing fruit. Gentlemen, let our execration of the execrable deed
derive its pathos from the memory of the just.
“ Those who loved me living:, when I die
Still fondly keep some cherished memory.”


These, gentlemen, by their good example—by their virtuous
life—by their kindliness to all—by their broad sympathies with
our common humanity, were the friends of those who, by revolt,
are the greatest enemies to themselves.
“ There is,” says the Sydney Morning Herald, Jan. 21,
1868, “in these colonies, a large reservoir of loyalty long pent
up. The recollections of the Queen’s reign are all such as to
enhance the claims of her office. The noble career of Prince
Albert —perhaps the most perfect seen in a palace of modem
times—has made his memory an object of affectionate venera-
tion. He possessed all the solid qualities which compose the
sum total of human excellence: and the names of Albert and
Victoria are everywhere * household words.’ The colonies
have had few opportunities to exhibit their love, but it was
welling up in the hearts of multitudes, and these demonstra-
tions in honour of Prince Alfred are its overflow. We wanted
a chance of shouting ‘ God save the Queen,’ —not as a national
song, but as a spontaneous invocation. There are some people
who say it is all sham —they always do. If anybody goes to
church, they say it is hypocrisy—to be seen and see. If any
one gives money in a good cause, it is ostentation. If any one
shows the least sympathy with ought but beer, beef, and money
bags, they say it is bosh. They believe neither patriotism in
man, nor virtue in woman. They would sell the statue of
Apollo to metal a pig-stye, and scrape a ‘ Raphael’ for colouring
its walls. The divine idea —the soul of things—that which ani-
mates with celestial fire —the light of the eye —the music of the
voice—the grace of the step —all that cannot be bought and
ticketed like a prize ox, is, in their opinion, * tom-foolery.’ We
do not think these are worth notice or reply, except to put them
down. Is it worth nothing to warm up the whole population
with one generous sentiment—to awaken their sense of unity
with their own nation—to train the young in some ideas supe-
rior to colonial smartness, and sensuous, not to say sensual
pleasures; to gratify that more than one-half of the population
whose chief joys of childhood are those which imagination
draws from the sights and scenes of nature and society ? The
impressions of a grand sight remain on the mind for an age,
clear and distinct as the scenes of yesterday. Out of the


thousands of children present to witness the festivities, some
will be talking of these days as among the most bright and
beautiful of life, when all who have provided its gratifications
for them are gone to the grave.
“ The spirit of loyalty is deeply implanted in the human soul,
and it is natural to man to give his confidence and admiration to
those whom he deems to deserve it. This is a grand resource
of government, without which the dignity which arrays itself
about the throne cannot long subsist. If the Queen were
nothing more than any other woman in the eyes of her people,
and the influence of her name confined to the letter of her laws,
those laws would be far less powerful, and her authority less
permanent. This is the universal result of all those experi-
ments which have attempted to make government a matter of
mechanical force and logical arrangement. The first agitation
shows the want of this cementing power of love, and everything
falls to pieces. Because it is so (because our Queen is the
most popular Queen —the best Queen that ever filled the Eng-
lish throne—because she has won, not only our devoted loyalty,
but our deepest love and highest admiration)—the profoundest
statesman and the school girl take pleasure in the happy conflu-
ence and loyal exclamations of the people. They leave the
cynics and such like growlers to grind their teeth and bite their
nails. In this temper we receive Prince Alfred. “ His mother
does know he’s out,” and with a mother’s heart, follow him in
his travels, and with a mother’s eye. All he says worthy of his
rank, all that resembles his father in him, all our expression of
good-will, all we do for his and her sake will cheer her widow-
hood and send rays of comfort through her tears.”
Hot only has her Majesty been intensely gratified, by the
loyal and magnificent reception of her illustrious son, but the
whole nation has been touched by the unbounded expressions
of loyalty. It is known to them that as soon as the Prince
arrived at any of the Australian colonies, that business and
politics were immediately suspended, and the people gave
themselves up to enthusiastic and loyal rejoicings. “ Hothing
Was thought of, nothing was cared for but the sailor Duke, the
Queen’s own son, whose presence amongst them fairly turned
the heads of all classes of people with excitement.” Are they


not now talking about such processions, such a profuse
display of flags, such firing of cannons, such acclamations,
such banquets and balls, such illuminations and fireworks, &c.
“It is very pleasant,” say they, “to hear of this strong and
even tumultuous pulsation of loyalty to the Crown, and of
devoted attachment to the person and family of the Queen, and
welfare of the old country, which makes itself thus conspicuous
on the other side of the globe. It suggests no end of cheerful
reflections and bright anticipations. One exults in seeing
that where our countrymen settle they not only cause “ the
wilderness to rejoice and blossom as a rose,” but carry with
them, also, all the reminiscences, the sentiments, the sympathies,
the habits, and the aspirations which make them proud of their
connection with the home they or their fathers tearfully left
behind them. As their shouts of welcome to the Duke are
wafted over the ocean to us, they stir our blood and make it
course through our veins all the more kindlily and blithely
towards our distant kith and kin. They are music to our
hearts. It is, no doubt, a spontaneous outpouring of affection
for their and our beloved sovereign. By them as by us, her
most gracious Majesty is regarded as an illustrious impersona-
tion of the virtues which give to domestic life its beauty and its
worth. It was of these, even more, perhaps, than of her
queenly attributes and glories, that the Royal Captain was
looked upon as a representative ; and it was to the private not
less than to the public claims which the sovereign has
established upon the regard of her subjects that our Australian
brethren delighted to offer homage. The Duke of Edinburgh—
youthful, unaffected, generous, and courageous, was in their
sight, fresh from the Royal Home; and their hearts leaped to
recognise, through the son, all the qualities which they
venerated in the mother.—This, no doubt, gave to their welcome
its effervescent enthusiasm.
But there was more than this. The Prince stood amongst
them as the representative of British institutions, which few of
them have ceased to respect. By these institutions they have
been disciplined to a love of order, and have been trained to
freedom. From these they have derived the invaluable benefit
of self-government, and have imbibed that spirit of independence


which, is the best inheritance of a young nation. Never since
the day when they were admitted to the privilege of ruling
their own affairs, have our Australian colonies entertained even
a wish to snap the tics which bind them to the mother
country. They venerate her traditions. They preserve her
customs. Thev speak her language. They glory in her litera-
ture. They enjoy her protection. They cherish an affectionate
remembrance of her neople. England and the institutions
which have made England what she is, was impersonated in the
son of her beloved Queen, and his greetings were to them the
warm greetings of the far-off old land.—No wonder that for the
time being, they forgot everything else, that they might do
honour to the representative of their still remembered home.
All the associations called up in their minds by the appearance of
the young Duke in their midst, would help to swell the stream
of their patriotic delight.” Indeed, from the Times, Home News,
and other papers, we learn that the people at home are delighted
beyond description by the loyalty of the Australian colonies.
And in spite of Fenians, and the dastardly outrage on the
Eoyal Captain they are loyal—as loyal as any of her Britanic
Majesty’s subjects in any of her vast dominions. We were
eye-witnesses of that loyalty on the arrival of the Prince both in
Melbourne, Sydney, and elsewhere, and the demonstrations
were, to one fresh from the old country, overwhelming: tears of
glad excitement mingled with our joy. The sun never shone
upon a more loyal people than the people of Australasia. We
are English Australians, and the poles cannot separate us from
the England of our birth, our sympathy, our friends, our Queen,
and our country’s weal. No never!
“ England, with all thy faults I love thee still.
My country! while yet a nook is left
Where English names and manners may be found.
Shall be constrained to love thee.”
’A local paper, (the Cornwall Chronicle, March 18), says ;
“ Those murderous shots have more than cancelled all the costly
loyal demonstrations which marked the progress of the Eoyal
visitor, and which Australian colonists had good ground to be
justly proud.” What, gentlemen, shall the unstinted liberality,
the magnificent hospitality, the enthusiastic loyalty of these
English —these Protestant colonics be cancelled by the un-


English, «w-Protestant and fiendish act of a traitor —a Fenian ?
—I trow not. Is your hospitality to a friend—an esteemed
friend, damaged by the bushman who dares to bail him
up ? Certainly not. The Prince and his worthy mother have
too much good sense to condemn the loyalty of the multitude
for the disloyalty of the few.
Loyalty is still the same,
Whether it win or lose the game ;
True as the dial to the sun.
Although it be'not shined upon.
Shall this vile, this horrid, this dastardly, this treacherous,
this demoniacal, this hellish act of a coward—a ruffian—a fiend,
libel our devotion, and disparage our loyalty to England’s
Queen —to Australia’s Queen ? ISTo, no, no, no ! Much as we
lament—much as we deplore—much as we abhor the act of the
wicked traitor, and much as we sympathise with the young and
amiable, and inoffensive Duke, we cannot but hope that out of
this evil good will come. By this sad, sad event an opportunity
has been afforded for such a sudden outburst of almost
universal and unmitigated indignation that must have made the
Fenians turn pale, and all other enemies of her Majesty quail.
It has given another aspect to Australia’s attachment to the
British throne, and now we have seen what it would be in the
trial hour.
The National Anthem has been baptized in tears of
sorrowing sympathy, and sung with thousands and tens of
thousands of praying lips. Was it ever sung so prayerfully
before this untoward event ? It did one’s heart good to hear
how they sung it again, and again, at the indignation meeting at
Hobart Town.


CHAPTER VI.
The Launceston Inviguation Meeting.
SYMPATHY.
A sympathy unusual joined their loves—
Like twining streams both from one fountain fell.
The meeting at Launceston was everything that could he
wished; it was large in its attendance ; loyal—unmistakably
loyal iu its spirit; and loud—enthusiastically loud in its acccla-
mations.
There was no equivocation—no “ mental reservation” in any
of the speakers. The chairman (his worship the Mayor), in a
speech worthy of a true Briton, said : —“ Let us hope that it
was the act of an individual; but if on investigation and
enquiry it was found that there did exist such an organisation,
it was the duty of every right-minded and straightforward man
to exterminate it.” Yes, Mr Mayor, “ every right-minded man”
must contemn a conspiracy which works out its ends by murder,
and abhor all organisations—secret societies—that would presume
to insult the majesty of law, lessen the dignity of government,
lower the authority of the throne, prejudice the sovereignty of
our beloved Sovereign Lady Queen Yictoria, disturb the
harmony of good-will, and the peace of society. We would
exterminate every society that would demoralize the loyalty of
the British people, and steal away their hearts to respect the
broken sceptre of a dying king, on the crumbling throne of a
disfranchised despotism,—of a departing dynasty. We would
expatriate the villain, or the villains who wilfully and wickedly
added one sorrow to the already sorrow-stricken heart of our
incomparable Queen, whose womanly career, spite of all the vile
slanders of all the “ Tomahawks” in the world, is above all
reproach.
“ No might nor greatness in mortality
.Can censure ’scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes: what king so strong
Can tie the gall up iu the iluuderows tongue.”
Yes. we would banish the miscreant to earth’s remotest


bounds, that should dare to move his tongue against our
virtuous Queen, or lift a finger against any of that family which
has been honoured with such beautiful parents and bright
examples, as “Albert the Good,” and Yictoria, the “ Queen of
Queens.” The sinner, who shot the orphan, wounded the widow,
and insulted the memory of th e father.
W. G. Sams, Esq., did not sound his trumpet quite so
loud as his worship, nor so long as Mr Bartley. There appeared
some little embarrassment of thought, or utterance—probably
emotional, for it was an imposing concourse of people to address
.and a grave occasion on which to speak. Mr Sams assumed to
be, and, no doubt was, the competent oracle for the people’s
loyalty. Had he been a little less studied—(those pothering
reporters, they set us thinking about Johnson’s etymology, and
Murray’s syntax, and Walker’s prosody; and Sheridan’s
orthoepy)—and gone right at his resolution, and stuck to the text
of sympathy without referring to the ‘ seals of office,’ &c., &c., it
would have been more in keeping with the feelings of the people.
But of course, every allowance must be made, and considerable
privileges granted to gentlemen, who, as public officers, have
rendered important services to the community, Of Mr. Sams’s
loyalty there can be no doubt, and of his ability to put that
loyalty into forms of sound speech, there cannot be two opinions ;
but, we should have been more pleased with his address if the
dear one at home —the mother, —had occupied more of his
thoughts ; for we cannot but look at the deeply wounded mother
through her wounded son : and with her sensitive, tender,
delicate, sympathetic nature, and comparative loneliness, that
wound might be far more serious to her than to him. O, that we
could stanch it with the oil of joy. We will pray that the King
of Kings may accompany the intelligence, and as the electric
flash from the wire strikes her ear and penetrates her soul, she
may drop into the everlasting arms and feel surrounded still
with God. O, when we think of her domestic sorrow, of her
political troubles, of her own personal danger—this makes our
sympathy intensely anxious and prayerful. ,
T. B. Bartley, Esq., eloquently denounced the atrocious
attempt to kill the Eoyal son of Victoria, and vehemently
threatened Fcnianism with Tasmanian vengeance and condign


punishment. His gesticulations, and his fistic demonstrations
on the rail of the platform were as eloquent as his words. la
the course of his address, ho said: —“ It had been reported that
that dastardly act had arisen from an organisation. Let them
hope that that was not so; but, if it were so, the sooner that
organisation was exterminated the better. It must be put down
by the right hand of every man. Depend upon it, should
Fenianism or any other such association ever attempt to raise its
serpent head here, Tasmanians would crush it! Every man in
this colony, whether English, Irish, or Scotch, Homan Catholic,
Episcopalian, or Dissenter, all stand on equal ground ; but let
any sect or section, not satisfied with equal rights, try to
dominate over the other, and the inhabitants of Tasmania would
not have it.” That is the kind of manliness, that every man
will lift his hat and politely bow respect to. There is a
frankness, a noble unsophisticated genuineness about this
style of speaking that fills one, with admiration. Had
all the men in Launceston* who profess to be loyal
uttered their voices with that deep bass devotion
to civil order, and social rights, methinks the Fenians,
if there are any, would feel in a foreign land and make up their
mind to emigrate as quickly as possible. What in the world do
they want here P What is their object? That is the question.
A very important question for the consideration of the
authorities. That they are in the colonies is a fact. Then the
question is, what do they want? Is it “ Ireland for the Irish.”
That can’t be settled here. Was it to have been Canada for the
Fenians ? Do they really want “ Stevens” to be his Excellency
in Victoria, and “Huberts” to bo Governor of Hew South
Wales ? I hope I may never live to see the day when beings so
regardless of human life shall possess, in this or any other
country, more political power than they do now. I hope so for
their own sake; for the holy, just and good God, will bring upon
them his terrible judgment and requite them according to their
deeds. In vain shall they think to hide their deeds of darkness
in the delusive permissions of the confessional: the man who
permits another to sin, and pardons the sin he permits is a mon-
strous sinner in the sight of that God whose thundering
utterances against sin made Moses, and the mountain on which
he stood, quake. The man who permits sin, is ft greater sinner


than the permitted sinner, because the latter acts under the
strong delusion that sacramental efficacy will cover the guilty
deed; and in hell he opens his eyes to the cursed lie in his
right hand, and curses the instrument that deceived his soul to
endless ruin. Have the Fenians no sense, no knowledge, no
conscience, no fear of God before their eyes, no apprehensions of
death, no thoughts of the judgment day, of the horrors of eternal
damnation ? I speak in love to their souls—O that I could save
them.
The address of John Crookc s, Esq., was worthy of a loyal
and loving spirit—of a good and great heart; the expression of
his face indicated that the utterances of his lips were the feel-
ings of his soul. His loyalty was not an official or municipal
abstract forced upon him by circumstances, or dictated by
emoluments; but a living spring and a breathing entity,
rich in the thoughts that breathe and words, that burn.
Mr. Crookes’s devotion 1o the Queen was as clear as the
light, and as beautiful as the summer sun that shed his beams
upon his uncovered brows.
“We, too, are friends to loyalty ; we love
The Queen, who loves the law, respects her bounds.
And reigns content within them.”
W. S. Button, Esq., delivered his solid thoughts in a
concise, clear, emphatic, and puritanical style, and the estimable
character of the Prince was commended to the vast assembly in
good, sound, Saxon English. The impromptu aspirations for
the Duke, his royal mother, and illustrious house, fell upon
our ear like sweet music, and we flung our loyalty into the
chorus of applause that made the heavens ring and echo again
with our good wishes for our good Queen and all the members
of her family.
Addresses to her Majesty and His Eoyal Highness w r ere
moved, in a neat speech, by Isaac Sherwin, Esq., and seconded
in a brief but loyal manner by James Eobertson, Esq., and
adopted by the great congregation amid rounds of deafening
cheers. Altogether it was a scene of enthusiastic loyalty, with-
out the sign of the least discension. Had there been a disentient
his disloyalty would have imperilled his safety. It was highly
gratifying to witness how fondly the people cherished their love
bf their country and their Queen.


Gentlemen, these are the friends—the real friends of the
Fenians. If all the loyal hearted were to speak after this
manner, and act out their speaking, Fenianism would be scowled
out of existence. What business has Fenianism here ? No
section of society is oppressed. No cause of complaint ought
to be heard here.
The men who would seduce me into revolt, danger, and
death, are not my friends. The men who would absolve me
from the guilt of conspiracy, treason, aud assassination are not
my friends. The man who deceives me into the crime that
damns me out of this world into the next, before my time, is
not my friend. Those who allowed the lot to fall upon o‘Farrell
to assassinate the young Prince, were not his friends ; because
they must have known that such a deed would bring speedy
retribution upon the criminal. Those are my friends whose
example is worthy of imitation —who would deter me from mak-
ing haste to do wickedly—who would warn me of the awful
chasm at my feet—who would whisper in my ear “ after that
the judgment!”
“ The friendships of the world are oft
Confed’racics m vice, or leagues iu pleasure.”
CHAPTER VII.
Fenianism.
“What could I more ?
I warn’d thee—admonish’d thee: foretold
The danger, and the lurking enemy
That lay in wait.”
Fenianism is a “ Will-o’-the-Wisp,” ora “ Jack-o’-Lantem,”
arising from the ooze and the mire of political corruption; the
ignis fatuus —the liberated phosphuretted hydrogen of moral,
civil, and social depravity. Fenianism is the ghastly spectre
of “The rulers of the darkness of this world” —the ghostly
apparition of “ spiritual wickedness in high places; the
cadaverous goblin of anarchy “ speaking evil of dignities,
despising governmentsthe guilty soul of the man of the
last times—“ the man of sin the incarnation of Apollyon


from tlic republic of Hades. “Woe unto, them for they hare
gone in the way of Cain”—Jude 11. From the red man of sin
the gore of the innocents is dripping and trailing the course of
justice, whose avenging ear listens to the voice of Abel’s blood,
and smites the murderer with worse than death—with hell—
with agonies insufferable!
“ In every heart
Are sown the sparks that kindle fiery war ;
Occasion needs but fan them, and they blaze.”
There are two extremes to be avoided : exaggerating, and
underrating the Fenian movement. To exaggerate their power,
is to inspirit their energies ; to underrate their strength, is to
disarm the public. Newspapers should exercise a careful vigi-
lance over this matter, that they may give a true report —a
report well authenticated; there is very great fear of their,
being made the unconscious instruments of serving the cause
they desire to repress by the false reports of Fenian agents.*
Why should Fenians lurk here? In these colonies our
interests are mutual. Englishmen, Irishmen, and Scotchmen,
and all men, are under the same government, enjoy
the same immunities, and claim the same protection.
Old national feuds should be forgotten, and all national
distinctions buried in the grave of oblivion; and every man
should treat his neighbour, not as an Englishman or an Irish-
man, but as a Tasmanian. We should regard ourselves as
Tasmanians, and cultivate good will and good feelings towards
each other, and seek, by all means, to advance the welfare of
the colony; and therefore no wicked conspiracies should bo
* We most sincerely hope that the assertions in the Launceston Times
“ Home Letter,” March 27, are literally and strictly correct“ There arc
some,” says that letter, “who would Insinuate that Fenianism lurks In our
midst. We repudiate the foul insinuation unhesitatingly; the expressions of
loyalty are unanimous.” We are, indeed, highly favoured, if, while other
colonies are infected, we enjoy perfect immunity from that fell disease which,
like a plague from hell, is redolent with death. Surely the people in this
country are more enlightened, and better informed, and wiser in their genera-
tion than to sympathise with the murderous atrocities of Fenians against
innocent and unoffending individuals. But one is really puzzled to reconcile
the statement of the “Home Letter” in question with those in the Launceston
Times , March 23 :—“ We have been in the habit," says their leader of that date,
“of hearing persons express open sympathy with the Fenian cause, and we
have heard of Fenian agents being in the colonies; yet no efforts have been
made to stop such avowals, or towards the arrest of any who may be the autho-
rised agents of a foul, cowardly, and treasonable conspiracy. We must have
action, decided action, until we have rooted out all traitors from these
colonies.” We would not for one moment suspect the integrity of the writer,
nor throw the shadow of a shade of doubt over his declared loyalty, but,
really, the above is a most extraordinary admission. Non liquet. We will,
for charity’s sake, accept the text of the “ Home Letter” until we have palpa-
ble and reliable evidenep to the contrary, viz,—that “no Fenianism lurks in
our midst.”


tolerated for one moment. From all the Tasmanian papers wc
have seen, and from all the speeches we have read, we gather
that the popular feeling is decidedly and unanimously against
Fenianism, and therefore if it should ever be dev eloped it must
issue in disaster to those who shall be silly enough to espouse
its wicked cause, and join its rebellions. I speak in deepest con-
cern for the Fenians, if there are any, that I might save them from
deeds of violence, from wronging their own souls by bringing upon
themselves swift destruction. "What good has o‘Farrell done to
himself, to the conspiracy of which he is a member—to society ?
What cause would have been served if the dastardly aim had been
fatal P No good has been done by the act of o‘Farrell, no good
would have been accomplished, no creature under heaven would
have been benefitted if the shot had taken deadly effect. If any
argument favours o‘Farrell’s insanity—it is the insanity—the
silliness —the madness of the act itself. To conspire against the
young Prince’s life was a most unaccountable conspiracy.
Let me beseech you, when drawn into temptation, never to
conspire against any man’s life, for there is no earthly tribunal—
no ecclesiastical institution under heaven that can absolve —that
can pardon the soul from blood-guiltiness. Let me beseech you by
thedeathless value of your immortal souls; bythe terrors of death;
by the solemn decisions of the day of judgment; by the love of
God, to ponder that old Hebrew, time-long, and world-wide
axiom, that “ none can forgive sins, but God alone” —Luke, v. 21.
And how emphatically He reserves this sublime prerogative to
himself. *• I even Inot I and somebody else “ I even I
am he that blotteth out thy trangressions.”—lsaiah, xliii. 25.
To whom is the Lord’s Prayer addressed ? By whom do we ask
to be delivered from evil ? From whom do we seek our daily
bread ? To that source only, are we to go for the forgiveness of
sins. He who taught us to say “ Our Father”—also taught us to
ask “ Our Father,” against whom we have sinned, to “ forgive us
our trespasses.” And, “if we confess our sins” to Him against
whom we have sinned, “ He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” (1. John i., 9.)
Man has no power to negociate with man for sins against God.
No man bas power to interpose between the murderer and the
throne. None can save him but the Sovereign lawgiver. And,


if tlxis be true in human affairs —if only, the person off mi Jed can
forgive the offence—how much more true is it that “none can
forgive sins, but God alone.” I write thus because the assumed
powers of the confessional hold out inducements to sin, and
vetos the enormity of sin. It lessens the magnitude of sin by
giving man the power to forgive it—to forgive it in its most
atrocious forms. It increases the multitude of sin by impressing
the sinner with the terrible delusion that it can be disposed
of, and dispensed with by confession to a fellow sinner. To
absolve assassins and make martyrs of murderers —is the
perfection of spiritual wickedness. But what saith the Most
High God : “ Murderers shall have their part in the lake which
burnetii with fire and brimstone.” To kill our fellow men is
to imitate the devil who was a murderer from the beginning.
“These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumphs die; like fire and powder.
Which as they meet consume.”
“ 0 Lord our God, who upholdest and governest all things
in heaven and earth, receive our humble prayers, with our
hearty thanksgiving, for Thy mercy in sparing the life of Thy
servant Prince Alfred, and frustrating the wickedness that
sought his death; and so together with him bless the Queen,
the Prince of Wales, the Princess of Wales, and all the Eoyal
Family, that they all ever trusting in Thy goodness, protected by
Thy power, and crowned with Thy gracious and endless favour,
may continue before Thee in health, peace, joy, and honour, and
may live long and happy lives upon earth, and after death
obtain everlasting life and glory in the kingdom of heaven, by
the merits and mediation of Christ Jesus our Saviour, who, with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, liveth and reigneth ever one
God, world without end. Amen.”
“ Most gracious God, who hast set Thy servant Victoria,
our Queen, upon the throne of her ancestors, we most humbly
beseech Thee to protect her on the same from all the dangers to
which she may be exposed. Hide her from the gathering
together of the froward, and from the insurrection of wicked
doers ; do Thou weaken the hands, blast the designs, and defeat
the enterprises of all her enemies, that no secret conspiracies
nor open violences may disquiet her reign; but that, being
safely kept under the shadow of Thy wing, and supported by
Thy power, she may triumph over all opposition ; that so the
world may acknowledge Thee to be her defender and mighty
deliverer in all difficulties and adversities, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.”
J. S. V. Turner, Printer, Brisbane-street, Launceston,
