

Final Report
SECRET
POST-WAR PROBLEMS
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT • PRODUCTION




FEDDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 7
Assigned to
Address
Copy No. I.OJO
Date of issue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. Anything contained in this report must only be
communicated to approved and accredited executives of Government
departments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or
accessories for His Majesty* s Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information in
this report which may only be of interest to those specialising on
the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Part a
special coloured page has been provided which sets out as shortly
as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned with policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our output,
and to investigate certain technical problems and new developments
'in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned with those
aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ours, and with
promising technical developments. No emphasis has been laid on
points where the Mission consider that British production methods
or technical development are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook*s Building,
4-0 Stratton Street, W.l.
June, 194-3*


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL
CONCLUSIONS OP THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
4 ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
M 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIEMENT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
M 7 POST-WAR PROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each Part. The Parts in a
section are lettered A, B, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the Part. The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
3.12 " " twelfth " " ” 3
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessaiy to
quote the Section and Part, and in the text, at the beginning of •
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example: *
3A - 2.03 indicates Section 3, Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
AC - 5.12 indicates Section 4, Part C, Chapter 5, twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
" 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
” 3 Broad policy conclusions
M 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
" 2 Army Air Force
" 3 Navy Department
n 4 War Production Board
M 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
” 6 Office of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Engineering departments
w 3 Factory layout
M 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
M 3 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
H 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
" 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
" 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
” 9 Curtiss Wright
M 10 Other aircraft firms
" 11 Data on American airframe factories
*' 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LATOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Special applications of lofting
w 3 Economy of floor space
M 4 Conveyors
" 3 Drop hammer
" 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
" 8 Stretcher
H 9 Special tools
w 10 Faraum rolls
” 11 Rivet sorting
" 12 Finishing and painting
M 13 Extrusion manipulation
M 14 Pipe bending
” 15 G-lenn Martin skin stretching process
w 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Povuder metallurgy
M 18 Riveting
" 19 Spot welding
u 20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
" 21 Hell arc welding
" 22 Cycleweld


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Scope and organisation of engineering departments
M 3 Weight analysis
" 4 Factors and design requirements
,s 3 American stressing technique
** 6 Aerodynamic design
H 7 Aerodynamic controls
M 8 Stressed skin construction
M 9 Pressure cabins
H 10 Undercarriage design
'* 11 Materials
" 12 Processes
" 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
** 2 Description of new North American P.31
M 3 Descritpion of Curtiss P.60
” 4 Description of Bell P.63
M 5 Description of Douglas A.26
6 The Boeing B. 29 and Consolidated B. 32
M 7 Current fighters in production
M 8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
10 Wooden aircraft
" 11 Flying boats
w 12 Tailless aircraft
w 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTING
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
” 2 Technical summary
M 3 Layout procedure
M 4 Alternative reproduction processes
” 3 Camera procedure
** 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
M 2 Technical summary
" 3 Fuel tanks - American practice
M 4 Hose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
" 2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
n 4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical review of American engine developments
" 3 Propeller design
** 4 Power plant policy and installation
” 5 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
H 2 Technical summary
H 3 Methods of absorbing engine power
" 4 Speed control
" 5 Relative merits of testing plant and methods
" 6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL AND OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Fuel
" 3 Oil
SECTION 3 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING-
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Summary and conclusions
n 3 Principles underlying American methods
" 4 American wiring practice
" 3 Maintenance and repair aspect
" 6 Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice
M 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
M 8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
«
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Conclusions
H 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
w 4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
” 5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
" 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
” 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
M 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Aircraft instruments
N 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
” 4 Equipment
” 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
M 7 Review of technique
M 8 Equipment ordered for M.A*P.
M 9 Application to British development


PART E - IN STKUMHNTAT I ON OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
” 4 Outline of installations
” 3 Organisation *
M 6 Equipment
n 7 Review of technique
H 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
PART A - ENGINEERING STARE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Economical, use of present aircraft engineering
staff
3 American publications and engineering propaganda
" 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of
drawing office staff etc.
M 5 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration
and define duties
” 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Technical manuals for part time study
” 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
" 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
” 5 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased research equipment in Britain
M 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
M 5 American wind tunnels
H 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBLEMS
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
M 2 Training aircraft


POST WAR PROBLEMS .
CHAPTER 1 - REVIEW OF THE CIVIL AVIATION POSITION IN AMERICA.
Item 1.01 General
• ” 1.02 Administration
’* 1.03 Civil airlines
” 1.0A Military air transport
” 1.05 Transport types
” 1.06 Future of air transport
” 1.07 Recommendations
CHAPTER 2 - TRAINING AIRCRAFT




CHAPTER 1 - REVIEW OF THE CIVIL AVIATION POSITION IN AMERICA.
7-I*ol General. The Mission were asked to take special note of civil aircraft
developments in America, and every available opportunity was taken to
review this subject. Talks were had with Government authorities responsible
for administering civil aviation, with representatives of the industry
interested in civil types and with the executives, flying and repair
personnel of the Airlines, and every endeavour was made to weigh up the
attention being devoted to civil aeronautics in America at the present time.
Sir Roy Fedden took the opportunity of discussing this whole question
with a number of his personal friends in aviation, and received considerable
help from them in forming an opinion of how matters stood.
It is unnecessary in these short notes to go into the state of affairs in
regard to civil aviation in the North American continent before the United
States were involved in the world war. For some years prior to war, it has
been clear that every initiative has been shown in civil aviation by the
Government, the operating companies and the industry. The network of
Airlines that were operating in the United States in peace time, and the
background and general experience which had been built up over a period of
years, was greater and more extensive than that-of any other country.
In spite of the fact that civil aviation has been organised on a
larger and more stabilised basis in America than in any other country,
nevertheless, at the time of Pearl Harbour, December 1941, there were only
350 large air liners operated by the different American companies. While
it is clear that civil aviation everywhere will be expanded to a far greater
degree after the war, this figure gives some idea of the quantity of machines
that will be employed throughout the world, and it is believed this number
will be considerably less than is commonly thought to be the case.
7-I*o2 Administration. Throughout the war to date, civil aeronautics administra-
tion in America has remained under civilian control within the Department of
Commerce. The Secretary of War was given special authorisation to direct
the administration in the best interests of the war effort as necessary,
but up to date that authorisation has not been used.
•
The Civil Aeronautics Board, which issues Certificates of Convenience
and Necessity, sets Mail Rates, establishes Safety Regulations, etc., has
of course remained independent.
Since the outbreak of war, approximately 160 of the 350 transport
aircraft owned by the Airlines have been transferred, either to the Army
or to the Allies of the United States. Some of these machines are being
operated by their former owners, under contract to the Air Transport
Command.
It will thus be seen that civil aviation matters are receiving much
care and consideration during war time, and great strides have been made
during the last two years. The Civil Aeronautics Board under the Vice-
Chairmanship of Dr. Edward Warner is doing an important war time job with
a staff of 300, and the department of Commerce for Aeronautics, the C.A.A.,
under Mr. Burden has a staff of 9,000, and is implementing the policy
decisions laid down by the Civil Aeronautics Board and dealing with the
day to day problems of the many civil aerodromes throughout the American
continent. Under this regime more than 500 airports are being built or
improved. The whole of the transport aircraft output is under their
supervision. Tens of thousands of Army and Navy personnel are being
trained and many thousands of high schools have adopted their plan of
technical education. The air traffic in the United States has been
trebled since 1940 and 85/o of it is military. Under the C-A.A. organisation
450 weather reporting stations keep pilots informed over a 55,000 mile
teletype system. The accompanying chart shows Mr. Burden* s organisation.




7-1*03 Civil Airlines. In addition to the initiative and drive being shown by
the Army and Navy authorities on many new prototypes for military purposes,
America has enough engineering and development staff to be tackling new
and important transport types which will come to fruition in two to three
years’ time. It will, therefore, be seen that the whole of the civilian
and air transport side of aviation in America is on a progressive basis.
The office organisation and repair departments of the civil operating
companies are still in full operation and working under great pressure
because they have got to carry a greater volume of passengers with lesser
staff, but they are absolutely up to date and on a fully organised basis.
The offices of the main companies, such as the Pan American, American
Airways, etc., have large staffs of executive engineers in well organised
and up to date premises. They are in teletype contact all over the
continent and are dealing with all the policy and managerial questions of
their companies.. They have Project Officers for the review of current
types and investigation of fresh designs, complete statistical departments
and a general organisation and background which is impressive and has
taken many years to build up. Their repair depots for the overhaul of
aircraft, engines, propellers and all equipment are excellent and equal,
in regard to their equipment and ability to carry out major overhaul work,
to doing any Job as efficiently as the main contractors.
A typical example of the experience being gained by the major
aircraft companies on such matters, is that the Consolidated Company, San
Diego, have an air line operating between America and Australia employing
something like 70 pilots and over 400 ground staff. Several transport
type Liberators leave every week for Australia, this being in
order to keep contact with the Australian authorities in regard to the
maintenance of spares, personnel, etc., for the large fleet qf Consolidated
aircraft operating in the Japanese theatre of war.
7-1.04 Military Air Transport. With their wider American experience of what
aerial transport means, it is only natural that they have appreciated more
quickly than ourselves the necessity for large numbers of transports in a
war of movement all over the world. In addition to this they were all set
for transport production, whereas we were so hard put to it to keep the
deliveries of military aircraft going that we could not think of transport
machines in 1940 and 1941* The American Air Forces have a large fleet of
transport aircraft in production; some 12,800 of these aircraft are on
order, and the output was of the order of 150 per month in January last,
and will be up to 500 per month by the end of this year and 700 per month
by the middle of 1944* These numbers do not include the smaller transport
machines of 14>000 lbs. or less, of which there will be, in addition, some
200 per month coming out by the end of this year.
These figures are quoted in order to show the scale and extent of
transport development and production f acilities in America at the present
time, and when the figure of 350 for the whole air fleet in the United
States in 1941* as quoted above, is considered, it will be realised how
this compares with their manufacturing potential by the middle of next
year.
Travelling as the Mission did in two military aircraft, they came
down at various military aerodromes, and were able to see the extent to
which transport aircraft are used. These machines are doing a lot of
varied transport work in mnerica, North Africa and in the Pacific, so that
on established civil types like the D.C.3* the Curtiss Commando and the
D.C.4* a great volume of additional experience is being built up. Large
forces of trained ground personnel for these machines are being created,
and in a few months’ time there will be a far reaching organisation with
background and experience on a scale which has never been envisaged before
7-1.05 Transport Types. One of the latest types under construction is the
Lockheed Constellation; the Mission were fortunate in being in Los
Angeles at the time of this machine’s early flights and in being able to
inspect it with the design executives at Lockheed. To give some idea of


what a modem 100,000 lb. civil air transport takes to design and construct
in America, the machine has been under design and development for three and
a half years prior to its first flight, has had over 700 men on its design
at one time (there were 500 on it at the time the Mission were at the
Lockheed factory) and some 1,700,000 drawing office hours have been
expended upon it. The machine is being completely tooled for series
production, 263 are on order and regular production will commence early in
1%4.
There are six main civil transports in series production as well as
an interesting new all steel machine made by Budd. The tabulation below
gives some details of the most important transport and freight machines in
production, with their main characteristics, the number on order and the
approximate delivery at the time the Mission were in America.
TTPICAL 3TAHDABDISBD AMERICAN TRANSPORT A HtEISHT MACHINES IN PRODUCTION
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS.
NAMB AND
TYPE
NO.
ON
OHDffi
s&mr
PRESENT
RATE OF
DELIVER!
MONTH
ALL
UP
i WEIGHT
LBS.
SPAN
feet
WING
loading
IBS/
sa. FT.
ENGINES
NO. A
TYPE
CREW
NORMAL
SEAT I1G
CAPACITY
OR FREIGHT
LOAD
GOOD
AVERAGE
RANGE
ABIES
normal
CRUISING
aptr>Tt
M.P.H.
REMARKS
T/Y-VTKggn
LODESTAR
c.6o
1000
27
17,500
65.7
31.8
2
9 qyis
Wright
1820
3
14
1290
209
A high spaed feeder line machine.De-
sign about fire yra.old. Original
troubles eliminated. Good type
but obsolescent.
DOUGLAS
DC3-C47
FREIGHTER
6400
111
26,000
95
26.4
2
14 qyl:
PAW
1830
3
18
U90
170
The beat known and proved air liner
in the world. Obaolescent, but very
sound and good for several years.
Highly developed.
29,000
29.4
3160 LB.
3200
170
0UKTIS3
COMMANDO
C.46
FREIGHTER
0200
24
45,000
106
33.1
2
18 cyl:
? A W.
2800
3
30
2no
199
The most up-to-date twin engine air
liner. New type American type of
construction. On border-line for
two engines. A good Job with
considerable life.
50,000
36.8
8480 IB.
3750
160
DOUGLAS
DC4
SmiASTEE
C54-
772
4-
£2,000
117-5
42.3
4
14 cyl:
? A W.
2000
5
2S
♦6580 IB.
2500
192
First class machines Subject of
much development. Trunk route but
not transatlantic.
CURTISS
caravan
C76
FREIGHTER
2600
26,145
108.2
16.75
2
14 cyl!
P *
1830
CM
15
♦ 1350 IB-
700
150
Interesting attempt at employing
wooden construction. Good power
driven glider for freight carrying
in outlying districts.
34,000
21.8
2000 LB.
2500
150
LOCKHEED
CONST ELLAT ION
C.69B.
FREIGHTER
260
86,000
123
52.0
4
18 oyls
Wright
3350
5
60
♦1560 LB.
1500
262
Interesting new design. Many new
features. High performance refined
machine. Somewhat overpowered and
possibly extravagant. Good future.
Possible transatlantic development
type.
96,000
58.0
10,000 IB.
3500
205
C&feoHDAT'S
LIB J* AT OR
SEFRESS C-87
FREIGHTER
100
10
52,500
no
50.1
4
14 cyl:
PAW.
1830
EXH.
TURBO.
5
20
3300
200
Good freighter. A great deal of
experience behind this machine in
its military form, the Liberates-.
59.230
56.5
402(3
TT75
zuu
Stated to be going to be marketed
after the war at a moat
competitive figure.
Jigging and tooling of these transports is on a most extensive scale and
in line with quality motor car production. A great deal of attention has
been given to the design of these machines from the point of view of
servicing and accessibility, and in this respect they are on a different
basis to the American military aircraft. The breakdown of the design of
these machines is still good, although not as complete as for American
military aircraft, but they are considerably more accessible and able to
be readily serviced.
7-1* 06 Future of Air Transport. From these remarks the magnitude of the
American war time air transport will be seen, and in what a strong
position the American nation will be as regards air transport after the
war.
Another aspect in connection with civil aviation that the Mission has
noted while in America, is the vital necessity of putting our future
relations with America in respect to civil aviation on a frank and open
basis. While the Mission were on the West Coast, some unfortunate
statements on civil aviation policy, which had appeared in the British
press, were reprinted in detail and commented on widely; while appreciating
the tendency of the American press in certain isolated quarters to interpret
things in a biased way or to inspire opposition to England, the Mission
would urge the necessity for care and moderation in any views expressed at
the present time by this country on civil aviation.
These facts in regard to the background, organisation and production
of American transport aircraft must be faced up to; in the opinion of the
Mission, British air transport will have to use certain types of American
machines immediately after the war until such time as there is the
opportunity to design and develop new types in this country.


The Mission would, however go so far as to say that the design and
production of new civil aircraft are two of the least important problems
to be tackled. The thing to do is to get the main structure of British
civil aviation on a proper basis in this country, and in a form that it
will be respected and collaborated with by the stronger and better
established American counterpart.
One thing that caused the Mission such profound concern, was that
Great Britain has so little to show as a counterpart to the excellent
organisation of all the various civil transport set ups, and the staff and
work of Dr. Warner and Mr. Burden. Such organisations are, in the Mission*s
view, more difficult of accomplishment than purely the design and making of
modem civil aircraft which the Mission feel we have the ability to under-
take successfully when we have the time.
The Mission is of the opinion that America is in a similar position to
this country as regards power plant for large long distance air transport.
There is no British or American engine which is anything like what is
required for this purpose, and it is believed that this matter should be
tackled promptly in this country as soon as ever it is possible. We have
the necessary knowledge and ability to make engines of this sort, though
in smaller quantities than the Americans can, and we feel no doubt in our
minds that this can be tackled satisfactorily.
The several friends of the Mission, who were most helpful, recommended
that an early effort should be made to send over a small committee of
suitable people, with the necessary technical knowledge and authority to
come to a proper working agreement with America on civil aviation policy
before the war is over.
In other parts of this report reference has been made to the profound
importance aviation has assumed in America. It is becoming essentially a
part of the American nation, and it is not an exaggeration to say that it
will be an important factor in the peace of the world, and therefore the
Mission are most desirous to see a proper understanding arrived at on this
vital question before the Axis Powers are crushed.
7-1.07 Re commendations. The Mission* s recommendations are therefore as follows,
and in the following order of priority: -
(i) Confer quickly with our Dominions and find out their views in
regard to coming to satisfactory arrangements with America
for a post-war civil aircraft policy.
- (ii) Send over a carefully selected Mission of technicians and
experts with full authority to settle a proper civil aviation
policy with America.
(iii) Set up an authority in this country with suitable staff to
prepare to operate civil aviation and to perform duties
similar to those of Dr. Warner and Mr. Burden, but on a scale
comparable with our country's needs. Place in the hands of
this authority the power to negotiate with America and the
Dominions, and to formulate and carry out our civil aviation
policy.
(iv) Make what conversions are possible of certain of our existing
military aircraft for inland routes.
(v) As soon as is possible, select a suitable firm or group of firms
and get them going on a new and large, but not too large, high
powered transport machine, of the order of 150,000 lbs., and a
suitable power plant to meet civil aircraft requirements.


CHAPTER 2 - TRAINING AIRCRAFT . / '' J J 2—
7-2.01 The subject of training equipment, aircraft, engines and accessories
was not included in the Mission’s terms of reference, but in the special
circumstances of the tour a few comments would not seem to be out of place.
For the greater portion of their tour the Mission flew in two Army
Lockheed Lodestars, and in the west landed at training aerodromes and had
the opportunity of inspecting American service training centres and
machines.
The Mission also visited a number of plants making training aircraft,
mainly with the object of studying the methods of production and special
forms of construction# Certain members of the Mission also visited engine
and accessory plants where training equipment was in series manufacture.
The Mission were impressed with the magnitude and scale of output of
machines and their equipment at present being manufactured in the
United States* It must, of course, be appreciated that this equipment is
not only being used in America but also in our Dominions. Although the
output is indeed formidable, even more impressive was the quality and
technique of the considerable range of training aircraft which were in
production.
Apart from such well known types as the North American Harvard, there
is a considerable range of Army and Navy trainers incorporating thoroughly
modern and up to date aircraft technique.
The Mission especially noted twin engine aircraft, such as the Boeing,
Curtiss-Wright, Cessna and Beechcraft, some of which are modem types with
all metal stressed skin construction, and are well laid out machines with
good dying qualities, relatively high performance, modem engines and
instruments and variable pitch propellers. Certain of these aircraft are
provided with up to date braking and flap systems, and afford their pilots
an excellent preparatory training before getting on to modem military
aircraft.
The Mission. were impressed with the technique and quality of manufacture
in regard to cylinder head construction, barrel finning, crankshaft layout
etc. on such engines as the Kinner, Iycoming and Ranger training models.
Yftiile fully appreciating the sterling service that British types of
trainers have given and are still giving to the war effort, there is no
question that these machines have become out of date, and after the sight
of such an imposing array of American trainers, it is suggested that
providing an up to date range of training machines for British requirements,
as a post-war policy, will form quite an important item for our peace time
aircraft factory activities. Adaptation of existing types of military engines
and aircraft for training purposes, simply because there is a large number
about, is tempting after our enormous war-time expenditure but is not
necessarily the best policy. Some time before the end of the war a suitable
Mission should be sent out to study carefully American trainers, with the
idea of compiling the necessary information so that a proper range of new
training machines employing the best experience and technique, and not
merely post-war adaptations, should be planned for part of our post-war
aircraft effort.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




