

THE UNIVERSITY OF A DELAIDE,
FIRST
COMMENCEMENT.
MAY 2nd, 1877.
J. Williams, Printer and Stationer, 54, King William-st.
1 577- s 77-




THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE,
FIRST
COMMENCEMENT.
MAY 2nd, 1877.
giMaih:
J. Williams, Printer and Stationer, 54. King William-st.
1877.


THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE.
COMMENCEMENT.
WEDNESDAY, 2nd MAY, 1877.
A meeting of the Council to confer Degrees ad eundem gradum
on the Graduates of Universities recognised by that of Adelaide,
who had signified their intention of accepting such Degrees in
order to constitute the Senate, was held in public in the Town
Hall, Adelaide, on Wednesday, May 2. Graduates were admitted
by ticket, and took their seats before the general public were
admitted. The majority of the Graduates wore academic costume,
and the room presented a brilliant and imposing appearance
when all were assembled.
The following was the Programme :
A Public Meeting to confer Degrees ad eundem gradum on
the Graduates of Universities recognised by that of Adelaide,
who have signified their intention of accepting such Degrees
in order to constitute the Senate, will be held in the Town Hall,
Adelaide, on Wednesday, 2nd May, 1877, at 3 p.m.
The meeting will be presided over by the Chancellor, who
will confer the Degrees.
The platform will be reserved for His Excellency, the
Governor, and Suite, the Council of the University, and the
Professors; but all persons who are to receive Degrees will
The account of the meeting has been adapted (by permission) from the South Australian
Advertiser of May 6th. »■)
*


remain in the body of the Hall until summoned to the platform
to receive their Degrees.
The Graduates are requested to be in the Cloak Room in
the Town Hall not later than 2.40 p.m., and to pass thence
through the Town Hall into the Refreshment Room, where the
Senate Committee will arrange them in the prescribed order.
The two foremost rows of chairs will be reserved exclusively for
Graduates, each of whom will receive, along with a copy of this
Programme, an Admission Ticket, bearing the number of the
chair reserved for him. To prevent confusion, it is particularly
requested that each Graduate will occupy the chair bearing the
number corresponding with that on his Ticket, and bring with
him his Ticket, which must be presented to the Usher at the
door on entering the Hall.
Any Graduate who does not receive his Ticket with the
Programme, is requested to apply at once for it to the Registrar,
It is requested that all Graduates who can do so, will appear
in the Academic costume proper to their respective Degrees;
but those who do not possess such costume are net required to
procure it. Morning dress will be worn.
Along with his own Admission Ticket each Graduate will
receive a Ticket which will admit two ladies. Five rows (3, 4,5,
6, and 7) of seats will be reserved for the holders of these
Tickets.
The remainder of the Hall and the Gallery will be open to
the public.
The Chancellor will deliver an Address.
The Degrees will then be conferred in the numerical order
appearing in the annexed list; but the Graduates will be pre-
sented to the Chancellor in groups, as hereinafter explained.
The order of precedence will be as follows:
First—Doctors of Medicine.
Second—Masters of Arts.
Third—Bachelors of Laws.
Fourth—Bachelors of Medicine.
Fifth—Bachelors of Arts.


The Graduates, having assembled in the Refreshment Room,
will leave it in the reverse of the foregoing order:—the Bachelors
of Arts, proceeding across the Hall, will occupy the chairs
nearest the Northern wall; next them will be the Bachelors of
Medicine; next them the Bachelors of Laws; next them the
Masters of Arts; and the last to leave the Refreshment Room
will be the Doctors of Medicine, who will find their seats next
the Southern wall.
The Universities in the British Dominions have been
ranged first, and Foreign Universities after them. The several
Universities composing each class have been ranged in chrono-
logical order, according to the respective dates at which they
were established, and the precedence of Graduates of the same
grade in each University in the annexed list has been determined
by the respective dates of their Degrees.
The Graduates will be summoned in groups to ascend the
dais, where the Rev. the Dean of the Professorial Board will
(as prescribed by the Statutes) present them severally to the
Chancellor. Thus the two Graduates, Nos. 2 and 3, from St.
Andrews (see the annexed list) will first ascend the dais together ,
be presented to the Chancellor, and admitted to their Degrees.
As they leave the dais the two Graduates of Glasgow will together
succeed to their places ; next the two from Aberdeen ; next the
group of seven from Edinburgh; next the quartett from London;
and so on.
A similar order will be adopted by the Masters of Arts, the
Bachelors of Laws, the Bachelors of Medicine, and those of
Arts.
Each Graduate, on leaving the dais, will resume his seat.
As the formation of the Senate is of great importance, it is
hoped that each Graduate will use his best exertions to be present
on Wednesday, 2nd May, not later than 2.40 p.m.
WILLIAM BARLOW,
Registrar.
Adelaide, April 21st, 1877.


MASTER OF ARTS.
Name - Parent University.
1
] Short, Bight Rev. Augustus
| A.D, 1826
| Oxford
DOCTORS OF
MEDICINE.
2
Addison, G-eorge
A.D. 1858
St. Andrew’s
j Ascend Da
3
Seabrook. Thomas Edward Fraser
1861
1 together
4
Duncan* Handasyde
1831
Glasgow i ,,
5
G-ardner, William
1876
“ \
6
Whittell, Horatio Thomas
1858
Aberdeen ) „
7
G-osse, Charles
1875
“
8
Kelly, Alexander Charles
1832
Edinburgh
9
Macintosh, James Sutherland
1838
“ 1
10
G-ething, Robert
1847
“ 1
11
Todman, James
1852
“
12
Paterson, Alexander Stuart
1857
“ i
13
Deane, Charles Maslen
1862
“ 1
14
Rawlings, Joseph Henry ...
1866
“ ;
15
Jackson, James
1866
London \
16
Thomas, John Davies
1871
“ 1
17
Smith, Arthur William
1872
“ r
18
Cockburn, John A.
1874
“ )
19
Gunson, John Michael
1867
Heidelberg
20
Gosse, William
1870
“ i
21
Renner, Frederick Emil
1847
Jena
22
Engelhart, August Friedrich Gottfreid...
1870
Giessen |
23
Esau, Charles Friedrich Herman
1851
Gottingen 1
24
Neubauer, Max Friedrich
1873
Munich j
MASTERS OF ARTS.
24a
Dendy, Rev. Arthur
A.D.1851
Oxford
25
Marry at, Venerable Charles
1853
“ i
26
Poole, Rev. Henry J
1856
27
Howell, Rev. Edward Tucker
1860
“
28
Williams, Rev. Francis
1860
“ >
29
West-Erskine, Wm. Alexander Erskine...
1864
30
Webb, Rev. Robert Bennett
1869
« 1
31
Sharp, Rev. William Hey
1871
« /
31A
Charlesworth, T. William
1845
Cambridge
32
Sells, Rev. Alfred
1847
“ j
33
Farr, Rev. George Henry
1853
34
Burtt, Thomas
1855
“ 1
35
Field, Rev. Thomas
1857
“ j
36
Dove, Venerable George
1859
“
37
Read, Rev. Henry
1859
«
>
38
Stuckey, Joseph James
1864
a
09
Baker, Honorable Richard Chaffey
1865
((
40
Stirling, Edward Charles
1872
41
Bakewell, John Warren
1874
“
42
Ayers, Frederic
1875
43
Lamb, Horace
1875
“
44
Poole, Rev. Frederic Slaney
1875
“ )
45
MacBean, Rev. John ...-
1832
Aberdeen
46
Carr. Rev. Whitmore
1848
Dublin
47
Fletcher, Rev. William Roby
1856
London ) ,,
48
Mead Rev. Silas
1859'
“ \
49
Mucke, Carl Wilhelm Ludwig
1847
Jena
BACHELORS
OF LAWS.
50
Stirling, John Lancelot
A.D. 1871
Cambridge )
51
Hawker, Edward William
1873
“ s
52
Palmer, Hamilton Charles
1851
London
53
Von Treuer, Adolph
1844
Dorpat
GRADUATES ON WHOM DEGREES AD EUNDEM GRADUM
ARE TO BE CONFERRED.


BACHELORS OF MEDICINE.
Name- ParentUnllSy. Por6nt University.
54
Forsyth, Alexander
a.d. 1872
Aberdeen
55
Nesbitt, William Peel
1873
Edinburgh |
Ascend Dais
56
Way, Edward Willis
1871
together
57
Magarey, Sylvanus James ... < ...
BACHELORS
1873
OF ARTS.
Melbourne
68 i Holcombe, Frederick
A.D. 1859
Oxford
59
Morse, Rev. Charles William
1860
Cambridge )
“ 1
60
NanMvell, John Thomas
1871
61
Woods, Rev. John Crawford
1843
Edinburgh
62
Labatt, George Augustus
1839
Dublin \
63
McOullagh, William G-eorge
1854
64
Barlow, William ...
1855
a f
65
Corvan, Rev. James Hamilton
1865
u >
“
66
Labatt, Edward
1870
« i
67
Hocter, Rev. John Francis
1871
« y
68
Leonard, James
1849
London I
69
Hartley, John Anderson
'1868
70
Chappie, Frederic
1870
“ (
u
71
Churchward, Samuel
1873
“
72
73
Glover, Ralph Francis
Weld, Octavius
1869
1856
Queen’s University of Ireland
Toronto
73A
Spicer, Edward Clark
1877
Melbourne
degrees to be conferred IN absentia.
BACHELOR OF LAWS.
74 | Jefleris, Rev. James | a.D. 1866 | London
BACHELOR OF ARTS.
76 | Boothby, William Robinson | A.D. 1860 | London
The undermentioned members of the Council of the
University were present at the meeting:—
The Chancellor
The Vice-Chancellor
The Treasurer
The Rev. W. P. Wells
The Hon. A. Hay
The Hon. W. Everard
W. A. E. West-Erskme, Esq.,
M.A.
J. M. Gunson, Esq., M.D.
J. A. Hartley, Esq.
A. von Treuer, Esq.
The Hon. R, D. Ross, M.P.
The Rev. James Lyall
Charles Todd, Esq., C.M.G.
Horatio T. Whittell, Esq., M.D.
J. Warren Bakewell, Esq., M.A.
Arthur Hardy, Esq., M.P.
N.B.—Four members of the Council were absent. Of
these The Right Rev. C. A. Reynolds, D.D., the Honorable Sir
W. Milne, and W. R. Boothby, Esq., were out of the Province,
and a professional engagement prevented Dr. Campbell from
attending.


The Chancellor (The Right Rev. Dr. Short, Lord Bishop
of Adelaide) occupied the chair, and was supported by His
Excellency the Governor (Sir W. W. Cairns, K.C.M.G.), the Vice-
Chancellor (the Hon. S. J. Way, Chief Justice of South Aus-
tralia), the Chief Secretary (the Hon. Sir Henry Ayers, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C., Treasurer of the University), the Attorney-General (Hon.
J. C. Bray), the Commissioner of Crown Lands (Hon. John Carr),
the Minister of Agriculture and Education (Hon. E. Ward), His
Worship the Mayor of Adelaide (C. Peacock, Esq.), Professors
Davidson, Tate, and Read (Dean of the Professorial Board),
and T. Worsnop, Esq. (Town Clerk).
At 3 o’clock His Excellency (Visitor of the University)
entered the Hall, the Band playing the National Anthem. His
Excellency, who was accompanied by his Private Secretary
(W. R. Wingfield, Esq.) and Aide-de-Camp (Captain Haggard),
was conducted to the platform by the Chancellor, Vice-
Chancellor, and other members of the Council.
THE CHANCELLOR THEN DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING ADDRESS:—
We are assembled to-day formally to admit to a like status in
the University of this City and Colony those of our fellow-
citizens who, in British or Foreign Universities of recognised
repute, have attained the distinction of a Degree in Literature or
Science.
In this act, simple as it may appear (though important in
our young community), we pretend not so much to confer honor
as to claim for ourselves a twofold advantage ; first, the inaugu-
ration of the Senate, as a constituent element of the University
Government; secondly, the enrolment or admission of the
University of Adelaide to membership in the great Republic of
Letters.
With regard to the former of these, in days like the present,
when all classes seem to be fired with ambition to share in the
advantages of the “ higher education,” it is satisfactory to find
so many residents in this Colony who have gone through, with


credit to themselves, the course of study prescribed in the
Universities of Europe for the cultivation of the intellect.
Seventy-nine names have been placed on the University Roll of
persons desirous to be registered Graduated Members of the
University of Adelaide. If we may judge by the statistics
furnished respecting the University of Sydney, where not one in
ten thousand at present seeks to enter as a Student, we have
threefold the number of Graduates in proportion to the popula-
tion willing to belong to ours.
The Republic of Letters in which we now claim to be a
part, is no high sounding name “ signifying nothing.” Wide as
the world, it is the commonwealth of Genius ; the domain of
Intellect; the abode of Science, Art, and Literature ; the home
of Poetry and Fiction ; the birthplace of Liberty and Order;
the sanctuary of Truth and Natural Law.
Deep in the gloom of the Middle Ages we must delve for
the matrix of that palace of gold now beautifying the earth.
When the barbarian invaders of the Western Roman Empire
had laid in ruin the seats of Greek and Roman Learning; when
gross darkness brooded on the intellect of Europe, let it not be
forgotten that in the monastery and cloister, and among the
clerical order, what remained of Literature and mental cultivation
found a home. It was there in silence, and the leisure of the
cell, that Learning kept burning the sacred fire; preserved by
skilful manuscripts not only the Sacred Scriptures, but the
Classic Authors. As the learned monk or ecclesiastic passed
from land to land, an accepted guest in the houses of the
Brotherhood in Gaul or Spain or the distant Britain, there sprung
up, as from a seed sown by his infrequent visit, that community
of feeling which distinguishes men of letters from the world of
business, and makes them one by the freemasonry of common
tastes and mutual respect.
It is to the credit of the Great Charles, or Charlemagne,
that his Imperial Power was used by him to foster the cause of
Education and Letters, in which noble work we may be proud


to think that he was greatly aided by that renowned Englishman,
Alenin of York.
Brought up in the Cathedral School of York, of which he
became the celebrated Master, we find Alenin, a.d., 790, at the
Court of Charlemagne, instructing that Monarch in Rhetoric,
Dialectics, and Astronomy. Under his influence, throughout
the vast dominions of Charles, monasteries arose as places of
Education. Though designed for training more especially a
learned Clergy, the young nobles, following the example of their
Monarch, sought in them the “ higher Education.” Among the
more celebrated of these establishments was St. Martin’s of
Tours, whither Alcuin retired, as age and infirmities increased
upon him. Still continuing to follow his favorite occupation of
teaching, he died on Whitsunday, the 19th of May, 804. I have
been careful to note this great leader in the education of his time,
because the present age, proud of its progress in Natural Science,
is prone to forget how much Education owed to the Monastery and
Churchmen of those days. Frofn the Monastery and Cathedral
School, the sole abode of Peace and Order and Literature, issued
the instructors and civilisers of an unlettered military feudal
nobility. Very many, though not all, the teachers of those ages
were of the clerical order. Under them, celebrated schools rose
up in various cities. Numbers flocked to hear the more renowned
lecturers, who took the title of Rectors of their Scholars. Among
these schools, that of Paris acquired the foremost place. With an
increasing number of scholars and rectors of different languages
and nationalities, much rivalry ensued, and a governing body,
under a common head, was found an absolute necessity. These
different bodies at length, for their mutual benefit and protection,
coalesced into a University, over which a common Rector, now
called Chancellor, was elected, and thus the great University of
Paris, a.d. 1206, completed its organization, and became inde-
pendent of the Royal Authority. Philip Augustus even found it
expedient to grant the students immunity from the jurisdiction of
the Royal Courts.
It is not necessary to follow the history of their institution.


Suffice it to say, that as they increased in number and importance,
so the great Republic of Letters enlarged its borders, and now
forms what may be called the United States of Learning, both in
the Old and New World.
But we should altogether mistake the influence and character
of the Universities which formed the Republic of Letters in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, if we imagined that the present
Learned Bodies of Europe and America inherited the status or
powers which the former wielded. The Art of Printing, and
the diffusion of Literature, of ihe highest class, and in the
cheapest form, have levelled the barriers which separated the
professed scholar from the non-educated world. There is now
no monopoly of cultivated intellectual Power. All who can
read and have leisure time may, like the simple mason, Hugh
Miller, or the translator of Juvenal, W. Gifford, the cobbler, or
that still greater son of Crispin, the shoemaker Carey, the
Oriental Linguist and Missionary of Serampore, or Bunyan,
the son of a tinker —rise to eminence in the Republic of Letters.
In mediaeval times, on the contrary, manuscripts were precious
and books were costly. Accordingly, they only who could reach
the great seats of learning—Paris, Padua, Salerno —were able to
drink at the fountain-head of the Muses, and become the wonder
of Europe for their deep and varied lore,
Mark too, how Knowledge was Power. While the autocracy
of Kings and Popes was in the ascendant, there was no third
Power which could act as a “daysman” between them, and lay
his hand upon both, save the Scholar or the Jurist. Accordingly
from the seats of learning, and protected by the privileges of their
University, some writer like Erasmus, or Buchanan, or Rabelais,
satirized the delinquencies of the Monk, or Crowned woman’s
frailty, so vindicating the honor of his country and of Humanity.
Even in politico-religious questions the voices of the Uni-
versities exercised a powerful influence. Need I instance the
case of the Divorce of Queen Catharine. Even against the Papacy,
Henry VIII. was fain to avail himself of their aid. To their voice
indeed, under God, we may attribute* the determination of the


king to repudiate the widow of his brother, Prince Arthur; and
by his marrying the mother of our Protestant Queen Elizabeth, the
independence of our National Church was eventually secured.
It is not in these days that crowned Monarchs or their Ministers
appeal to Universities on questions which concern the comity of
nations. It is to the moral sense or conscience of their people
or the Christian world. Nor would the united voice of all the
Universities of the world possess half the power which the opinion
of a free nation, expressed in her public and national assemblies,
has upon the policy of the country.
What then is the part which the Universities have to play in
the drama of modern human life ? They find still most honor-
able and beneficial employment in directing the studies and forming
the character of the governing classes of every Christian country.
They help to elevate the middle class to higher civilization, the
result of a more intellectual education. They afibrd quiet retreats
for the students of Literature and the theoretical parts of Science
and Philosophy. Finally, they award Literary and Scientific
Honors.
In the Republic of Letters they officially recognize and stamp
the public estimation on the leaders of thought and action in all
nations. The Poet, the Orator, the Statesman, the great Judge
or Jurist, the Philanthropist, the Votary of Science, the Philosopher,
the Linguist or Traveller, the successful Explorer, the Military or
Naval Hero, the foreign Satrap, the Literary Noble or Scholar,
disdains not to accept the honorary distinction of incorporation
with these learned Institutions; and if we too are able hereafter
to follow in the brilliant career of Learning and Philosophy which
they have opened to guide us on our way, so that the compliment
of an eundem Degree in The University of Adelaide may here-
after be deemed not without value, then the citizens of Adelaide
and South Australia will not regret the event of to-day, nor think
that in listening to the reminiscences which I have invoked, you
have spent a wasted hour, or that I have made too great a demand
upon your time and patience.


The Vice-Chancellor (the Chief Justice) then rose and
said—My Lord, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen—lt
has been arranged that the Degrees to be granted by The Uni-
versity of Adelaide to-day shall be conferred in the order of pre-
cedence adopted in British Universities ; and that as to Degrees
of the same rank, Graduates from British Universities shall be
admitted first and Graduates from Foreign Uuiversities next, the
Universities of each class following in the order of their foun-
dation. But it was felt by the Council of the University that
there was one exception which ought to be made in the order of
precedence to which I have referred. It was felt that His
Lordship’s position as the official head of the University—not to
speak of the distinction he has brought to the office, and of the
valuable services he has rendered in it —(applause)—it was felt
that it was due to His Lordship’s position and to his general
character that the first Degree of The University of Adelaide
should be conferred upon its Chancellor. (Applause.) I find
that this resolution of The University Council meets with the
approbation of this audience, and I believe its decision will be
confirmed by the general body of the public outside. His
Lordship is an old colonist of more than 30 years’ standing, and
he has shown himself equal to any possible task that can be
imposed on him ; yet I venture to think it would be rather a
singular task for him to confer a Degree upon himself. (Laughter.)
Therefore I have the duty—and I esteem it a high honor as
well —as Vice-Chancellor of the University and as spokesman
of its Council, to confer on the Chancellor the ad eundem Degree
of Master of Arts in The University of Adelaide. My Lord,
we all feel that you do honor to the University in accepting that
Degree. You have referred to the proceedings of to-day as
being the admission of The University of Adelaide into the
great Republic of Letters, and into what you term the United
States of Learning. I hope you will allow me to add that in its
first Graduate it is in the true line of Academical succession.
(Applause.) In the person of its Chancellor and first Gra-
duate the University of Adelaide is united to the most


ancient foundations for Learning in England —(applause)—
to Westminster School, which he entered as a scholar in
1809, to the venerable University of Oxford, in which he
graduated with distinction as first-class in classics in 1823, and
as Master of Arts in 1826, that is, 51 years ago, and in which he
was afterwards successively public examiner, select preacher, and
Bampton lecturer, and from which, in the year 1847, on the occasion
of his leaving for South Australia, he received the well-deserved
distinction of Doctor of Divinity. (Applause.) And, Ladies
and Gentlemen, I am sure we all hope that His Lordship will
long stand at the head of the Graduates of the University of
Adelaide. (Applause.) There is one circumstance to which
I hope His Lordship will excuse me for alluding—it is, that during
his residence in Oxford in the years 1828 and 1829, among the
students who attended his terminal lectures, who read right
through Thucydides with His Lordship, was one of the most
illustrious of the long line of statesmen, orators, and scholars
who have gone forth from the University of Oxford. If we
want a proof of the advantages of a University training one
cannot select a more signal example than His Lordship’s distin-
tinguished pupil, William Ewart Gladstone. (Applause.) And
if we want another example I do not know that I can refer
to a better one than to His Lordship, who at the distance of
nearly 70 years from the commencement of the long academical
career in which he is to-day to take another step, has been able
to turn aside from the pressing duties of his episcopal office,
while his Synod is in full session, for the preparation and delivery
of the able and vigorous and eloquent address we have just heard
—an address into which His Lordship has thrown so much of
what I may call youthful energy and enthusiasm. (Applause.)
And now by virtue of the authority committed to me, I admit
your Lordship to the rank and privileges of a Master of Arts in
The University of Adelaide. (Applause.) •
His Excellency then shook hands with His Lordship, as
did also the Vice-Chancellor.
His Lordship said —Your Excellency, Mr. Vice-Chancellor,


Ladies and Gentlemen—l am sure you will believe me when
I say I accept the honor which you have conferred upon me with
thankfulness. (Applause.) To end a career of 30 years as a
scholar, a clergyman, and a member of this community with this
token of appreciation is a matter of the deepest satisfaction, and
I think I' can promise that during the remainder of my brief life
—for who at 74 can expect anything but a precarious existence—l
will do all in my power to facilitate the success of this Institution
towards the advancement of which we have taken another step this
day. (Applause.) I shall ever remember, as one of the happiest
events of my life, that I have lived to see the colony of South
Australia rise to that step when there is a demand for a higher
culture in literature, science, and art. (Applause.) It is a great
gratification to me, not personally but as Chancellor of this
University, to see the deep interest of the public in this Institu-
tion. On the day of its inauguration this room was filled to its
fullest extent, and to-day, although in the midst of business, we
see a large congregation of citizens to accept, welcome, and
applaud our endeavors which have so far succeeded, as to enable
us to inaugurate the Senate of the University. From this, time,
or at least as soon as His Excellency has ordered it to be
gazetted, the Senate will be completed. And from now, for
our success in the incubation of this precious egg, we are sure
we may claim your sympathy. If we have made mistakes we ask
your pardon, but we have always labored to the best of our
ability, and to-day thank you for your acceptance and approval
of our past labor. (Applause.)
The Dean of the Professorial Board (Professor Read,
M.A.) then presented the various graduates, except Drs. Addison,
Macintosh, Jackson, and Forsyth, who were unable to attend the
meeting, and the Hon. R. C. Baker, who did not present himself
(see pages 6 and 7), to the Chancellor, who conferred upon each
the ad eundem Degree.
Upon the presentation of the name of the Rev. J. Jefferis
by the Dean there were cheers.
The Chancellor said—l think Ido not mistake those


cheers when I say they were given as approving of the action of
the Council in admitting the Rev. Mr. Jefferis to the Senate of
the University. I could have wished that this gentleman had
been present, and in his absence I think it but right to testify to
the great zeal, ability, and generosity with which Mr. Jefferis
fostered the early stages of our University. Therefore, by virtue of
the authority conferred upon me, I admit the Rev. James Jefferis,
in his absence, to the rank and privileges of Bachelor of Laws in
The University of Adelaide. (Applause.)
Upon the presentation of the name of Wm. Robinson
Boothby
The Chancellor said—ln the absence of the Sheriff I have
much pleasure in admitting him to the rank and privileges of
Bachelor of Arts in The University of Adelaide, thereby com-
pleting the roll of British and Foreign Graduates, which now
I trust will form the roll of the Senate of The University of
Adelaide. (Cheers.)
The Chancellor —And now, my friends, there is one duty
remaining to me to perform with mingled feelings of satisfaction
and regret. I feel gratified at His Excellency’s kindness in
attending on this occasion to witness—and to witness, I believe,
with real satisfaction—the progress of the educational institutions
of this thriving colony in the inauguration of the Senate of The
University of Adelaide; but if Ido not mistake the feeling of
this assembly, or that of my fellow-colonists out of doors, it is
with much regret that we know of His Excellency’s departure.
(Applause.) A feeling of regret—aye, and I may say more—au
incipient attachment for him has been engendered in our hearts
during His Excellency’s short stay amongst us, and it is with
regret we feel that so soon by reason of the state of his health it
will be necessary for him to retire from that distinguished position
which in her wisdom and kindness our Gracious Queen conferred
upon him. (Applause.) Allow me, Your Excellency, to thank
you for your attendance on this occasion, and to express my
fervent hope that by your retirement for a time from the heavy
duties and responsibilities of your high office you may be restored


to such a measure of health as to enable you to serve in this or
some other part of the British Empire in the high office of a
Colonial Governor—(applause)—and with the same success and
with as much satisfaction to those under you as has characterised
your presidency in this Colony. (Applause.) I ask all present
to show their feelings of loyalty and respect to the Queen’s
Representative by giving three hearty cheers.
Three cheers having been given,
His Excellency said—Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Vice-Chan-
cellor, and Council of The University of Adelaide—To-day I have
reluctantly taken a silent part in your proceedings, for a reason
of which you are aware. But if God wills it, it may be otherwise
a year hence. In the meantime accept my thankful acknowledg-
ment, and count upon my interest in the good work now begun.
(Applause.)
Three cheers were given for the Chancellor.
There being no further public business, the Chancellor
said —Dissolvimus hanc convocationem.
