

United &erfei« Institute,
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
LECTURE XXXII.
FRIDAY, sth JULY, 181*5.
The Hon. Sir John Lackey, K.C.M.Gh, President of the Legislative
Council, Chairman.
THE AUSTRALIAN HORSE TRADE
AND ITS DEVELOPMENT FOR MILITARY AND DOMESTIC
PURPOSES.
RICHARD EOUSE, Esq.
[ Communications to be addressed — Hon. Sec., St. Jcimes’ Chambers,
166, King-street, Sydney. ]
3aa 1 — 95-6 A




LECTURE XXXII.
FRIDAY, m JULY, 1895.
/13SSS P |S |i|
The Hon. Sir JOHN LACKEY, K.C.M.G., President of the
Legislative Council, Chairman.
The Australian Horse Trade and its Development for
Military and Domestic Purposes.
By Richard Rouse, Esq
The Chairman : "We have met this evening for the purpose of hearing an
address from Mr. Eichard Rouse, of “ Guntawang,” upon the subject of the
“ Australian Horse Trade, and its development for Military and Domestic
purposes.” I may say that this meeting has been organised under the aus-
pices of the United Service Institution of New South Wales, and Major-
General Hutton, I am glad to say, has had a great deal to do with it, and
has taken a lively interest in horse breeding since he has been in the Colony.
I have been in communication with him and am very much impressed with
the. interest he has shown in the subject, and his desire to see this industrv
revived. Some of us recollect very well the period when the export of
horses from this Colony was a very important one, and when it was a verv
valuable adjunct to people engaged in pastoral and farming pursuits, and 1
do not. see why it should not become so again. We have all the facilities,
soil, climate, and other conditions for producing as fine a horse as any in the
world, and 'w e can produce it at less expense than can be done anywhere
else. Ido not see why the export of horses from this Colony should not be
resumed and become a very valuable industry. I remember very well when
the Indian Government had a depot near Sydney at which they used to
purchase remounts, and finer horses could not be seen in the world, for
symmetry,.bone and muscle, than those comprised in some of the earlier ship-
ments. Prices were, however, reduced to such a low figure that the farmers
who used to produce horses ceased breeding them, and the trade dwindled
away, and has only within the last few years begun to revive. see
every day shipments of live cattle, and I do not see why we should not be
able to ship horses from this Colony. If some inducement were given
to us, horses could be produced here at from £ls to £l6 per head, which
would be. worth 60 guineas in England. What a valuable adjunct to
country life ! I hope that this meeting, which is called together for the
purpose I have mentioned, will be the means of initiating this trade


again. Ido not wish to anticipate the address which Mr. House is about
to make, for I know of no man Avho has had so much experience as he.
Some of the best horses that have appeared on the turf of New South
Wales were produced by the lecturer’s father, and I am sure that Mr.
House, w r ith his life-long experience, will deliver a lecture this evening
that will be of interest to the public.
Mr. House : Mr. Chairman, Major-General Hutton, and gentlemen, —I
appear before you this evening to try, as well as I can, to place my ideas on
the question of horse-breeding before this meeting. I accepted the task,
little thinking what difficulty there was attached to it. I feel, however, that
as one of the oldest breeders of horses in the Colony, I ought to have some-
thing to say to you on the subject ; but the difference between practical
expedience and attempting to explain practical experience is so very great,
that if I fall short of your expectations, I hope you will make every allow-
ance. Eor a long time past our horses have decreased in value, and I will
endeavour to give my idea how horses ought to be bred ; and if bred in the
way that I shall put before you, there should be no difficulty in securing a
market, and New South Wales, as a horse-producing country, once again
getting into the same position that she Avas in at the first half of the present
century.
At the request of Major-General Hutton, I have much pleasure in reading
a paper this evening on the production of horses for domestic purposes,
and I trust that my remarks may bring forth a discussion on this important
subject which will be productive of some good to all concerned. When we
are looking round for industries which are likely to give an adequate return
for capital, the subject which I have selected presents itself very forcibly,
believing, as I do, that the breeding of useful horses has, to a certain extent,
been lost sight of.
In the early part of this century, when really good horses were a positive
necessity, there were a number of very high class sires imported to New
South Wales, from which our forefathers produced a class of horse necessary
for the requirements of the time, and we are constantly reminded by some
of our older people of the splendid qualities shown by the animal of those
days; but for various reasons, no longer (in proportion to our population)
do we produce the number of good horses as of yore. You will naturally
ask, why is this the case ? and the reasons are numberless. In the first
instance, the original importations Avere of the highest quality, and Avitli the
consecutive use of first-class sires, various studs of mares were kept at a
high standard of excellence. In the early fifties the discovery of gold to a
large extent made horse breeders careless. The high price ot cattle and
sheep, together with the increased of wool, caused a falling off in the
production of stock, which took longer to mature. Hence a depreciation in
the value of horses occurred. At that time, when our own market Avas
supplied, there Avas no further sale at paying prices ; but now, being in touch
with all parts of the world at a reasonable rate for transmission, I think that
our market for high-class horses is practically unlimited.


I venture to give my opinion how horses of this class are to be produced,
having made a practical study of this particular branch of breeding, and also
gathered much more from the experience of others older than myself, whose
example many would do well to follow. To my mind the only two distinct
breeds to be used which will fetch one to the summit of his ambition in this
respect are the English thoroughbred, and the Yorkshire coach-horse, or
* Cleveland Bay. The two latter breeds, under different names, are virtually
one and the same. That it is absolutely impossible to get a number of hi"h-
class horses without the introduction of strong blood, no one with anv
experience can deny, and the best sire for the purpose is the Yorkshire
coach-horse. I yield to no one in my admiration of the thoroughbred in his
place; but in the selection of this horse for useful stud purposes the breeder
must be careful that he secures a class of horse fit for the purpose—not one
of your speedy, six-furlong type, capable only of making very fast time with
a feather-weight, but one with bone, substance, and endurance, fit to carry
weight, and possessed of a good temper. As a studmaster I would not breed
from a really bad tempered horse, even though he was the best looking
animal in the land. Many people suffer disappointment through the direct
union of a thoroughbred and a coach horse, the result not being equal to sire
or dam ; but the reason is this : no matter how good the sire may be there
must be certain qualities in the dam, namely, a prepotency of blood, which
will cause her to breed fairly good stock to any good stallion, and the better
the sire so much better the result must be. As a proof of this assertion I
have always found that no matter how good the stock might be from other
sires, I could always breed a stud horse from one of my own mares which
produced better stock than the horse that got him. I would commend this
idea to all breeders, feeling sure that the constant introduction of all sorts
of animals into our studs is simply ruination.
I am glad to know that there is an inclination ad the present time to make
more use of the Yorkshire coach-horse and Cleveland Bay by some of our
stud-masters. I believe that Mr. Philip Charley, of Belmont, near Rich-
mond, has imported a number of horses of this class. These I have not
seen, but Mr. J. B. Bettington, of Brindley Park, has two imported horses
one bred by Mr. Burdett Coutts, at the noted Brookfield Stud, Highgate
Road, London; the other (bred by Mr. M. Radsdale, Danby, Yorkshire), a
Yorkshire horse. These sires, if judiciously used, will be of immense benefit
to the Colony generally, and both horses are, I believe, at the service of the
public. I have stock by both these horses, which are of great promise, so
much so that I was induced to rent one of these sires for last season.
Some may ask : How far are we to go with the Yorkshire horse P I sav,
have as much or as little of him as your judgment may dictate, but simply
breed for the market, and stick to him in order to secure substance and
action. If breeding for the Indian market for army purposes, you would
not require as much coach-horse blood as if producing carriage horses. In
1864 I bought a sire well known by name to the public, Yorkshire Hero,
imported by one of our best judges, Mr. Seath, of Windsor. But such an
aversion existed to this horse, apparently a new class to the people of those


times, that his owner could not get the public to patronise him, and thus the
animal was almost a dead letter to his master. But I never had any cause
to regret my purchase; in fact, I could not breed a sufficient number of
horses by this sire to satisfy the demand. At any rate, he left me a number
of mares from which I was able to breed either hackneys or harness horses
ot the right sort. Mr. Bettington’s importations are the only animals I have
yet seen equal in appearance to my old favourite Yorkshire Hero. There is an-
other matter with regard to the breeding of horses that all breeding mares
should be worked either in saddle or harness. By so doing, you discover the
good and also the indifferent qualities they possess. Hence you are in a better
position to cull your stud when the mares have been fairly tried. If like pro-
duces like, a mare which does not reproduce herself in her good qualities had
better be discarded. Again, a well trained and cultivated animal imparts to
her progeny an inherent propensity which the untrained animal in a great
measure fails to effect. All horse-breeders should use their mares for all
domestic purposes, and put the geldings on the market. . If a mare meets
with an accident which incapacitates her from work, she is relegated to the
stud to fulfil her destiny, whilst your crippled gelding is useless.
The very worst class of sire in my opinion is an xlmerican trotting horse.
I do not know how he is bred, but as a stud horse produces a/very nonde-
script animal. Bred only for the purpose of trotting a mile or two in very
fast time, he is incapable of any sustained effort, therefore he cannot possibly
produce stock suitable for hard work. At the risk of incurring the displeasure
of the admirers of the “American trotter,” I strongly advise all breeders to
carefully eschew the cross of such a horse. 1 have arrived at this conclusion,
having sent a number of my best mares to two of the supposed best horses
sent to this country, only to breed mongrels, all of which I disposed of as
soon as fit for market, the result being a pecuniary loss.
We cannot make horse-breeders by Act of Parliament, but we can consider-
ably help them to further exertions by imposing a tax on stallions. Some
Avill say that in so doing you are interfering with the liberty of the subject,
and in" a country like this, which is to be absolutely freetrade, such an idea is
not admissible. But if one travels round the country and sees the rubbish
permitted to do duty as stallions, I am sure there is only one conclusion to
arrive at, and that is a tax on such horses. Last spring there was a horse
parade in the town of Mudgee, a district once celebrated for the number of
good horses which it produced. Something like fifty horses of all sorts were
exhibited, and with the exception of half a dozen not one of the remainder,
in mv opinion, Avas worth £lO as a stud horse. These animals travel the
district, leaving a mark Avhich nothing but time or legislation can effect.
There is no country better adapted for horse-breeding than our own.
Climate, soil, and all other conditions are everything to be desired. All we
want is more people to take up the cause in a systematic way, and our farmers
could contribute to this industry with benefit to themselves. If our farmers
bred from the Yorkshire coach-horse they would raise a class of mare fit for
all agricultural purposes, and these mares, mated with a high-class blood
horse, would produce stock fit for use. It would further be economical, as


the farmer does not lose the service of the mare during the time which
she is carrying the foal, and also there is another advantage, viz., the training
of the foal from an early period. In this suggestion lam borne out by the
fact that in other days, when the United Kingdom of Great Britain produced
largely in agriculture, most of the work on farms was done with horses of
this class, and coach and carriage horses no longer fit for hard metal roads
were relegated to the plough.
In my remarks this evening I have not alluded to our little friend the
Arab, although I am well aware of his value in a certain way, but he is not
the horse to introduce directly into any stud and exjrnct good results from
the first cross. The special value of Arab blood is that it imparts courage
and good feet, two highly necessary qualifications, but, as against this, you
breed a number of small and undersized animals, for which there is no
market. I had stock sired by two Arabs, imported by Mr. A. A. Hangar,
of Baroona, good, but too small. I bred from several of the mares with
great success when mated with a horse bred in my own stud, but put to an
Arab cross since the result was anything but good.
Major-General liutton, in a lecture delivered in August last, describes
the animal necessary for military purposes, viz.: —
Ist—Heavy cavalry horse, of bone, quality, and power, 16 hands.
2nd —The light cavalry horse, of good body and good quality, 15T to
15‘3 hands.
3rd —The artillery horse, of power and activity, 15'2 to 16 hands.
4th—The transport horse, of bone and power, 15 - 2 hands.
Such horses as these can easily be produced by the use of the Yorkshire
coach-horse, for no matter how careful you may be in the selection of mares
and sires, you will always breed some animals lower set than others, although
the substanqe is there all the same.
If my ideas as set forth were carried out, after a time we should most
certainly be able to supply the Indian market for army purposes, and
furthermore we should have the English market as well.
There is a great demand in England for the highest class carriage-horse,
and with this advantage, that you can sell at a good figure. We are now
sending cattle and sheep to London, and there is np reason why we should
not ship horses in large numbers. Mr. Burdett Coutts has created a large
establishment within a few miles of the centre of London, where he trains
(from the time they are yearlings) a large number of horses for harness and
hackney purposes, and obtains very high prices. Why should we not do the
same here ? Food is cheap, and no hard winters to contend with, like thev
have in England. I have met several men who have seen this horse-breeding
establishment of Mr. Coutts, notably mv friend Mr. J. B. Bettington, and if
he is present this evening I should like to hear an expression from him on
this notable stud. I think that if any of our stud-masters visit the old
country that they certainly should visit the Brookfield stud.
In concluding these few remarks I. have to apologise for any shortcomings.
I have approached this subject with a great amount of diffidence, knowing
full well that I could not have selected any question upon which there is a


greater diversity of opinion than horse-breeding; but I am anxious to have
the opinions of men who I see in this room, who may know more about
horse-breeding than I do. 1 simply give my practical experience for what it
is worth. I have never bred from fads or prejudice. I have tried trotters,
Arabs, and cross-bred horses, and have come to’ the conclusion that the high-
class pure Yorkshire coach-horse, and your carefully-selected thoroughbred
judiciously used, is the only way you can produce horses for all useful and
domestic purposes.
Discussion.
Major-General Hutton, C. 8., A.D.C., Commanding KS.W. Forces:
As President of the Council of the United Service Institution of ISew
South Wales, I venture to he the first to address this large and influential
meeting. I have first, in the name of the members of the Institution, to
tliank Sir John Lackey for kindly taking the chair on the present occasion,
and. further, to express our appreciation for the honor all you gentlemen
have done the Institution in responding to their invitation by being
present this evening. The Council of the Institution, in asking the
lecturer, Mr. House, to do them the honor of delivering his excellent and
able lecture upon a subject which it is well known to the whole Colony he is
so thoroughly and practically conversant with, desired to bring the question
of horses, and the development of the horse trade, prominently before the
public of Hew South Wales. Our Council thought that the United Service
Institution afforded common ground upon which they might ask on the one
hand the authorities of the Agricultural Society, and upon the other the
leading authorities of the Jockey Club, to combine with breeders of horses
and other experts on the subject, to discuss how best, to improve the
existing breed of Australian horses, with a view to developing an important
and national industry. I need hardly remind the audience that upon the
quality of their horses must largely depend the efficiency of any Military
Force. This may be taken as especially applicable to such troops as
Australia seems especially designed by nature to put into the field, as an
Australian is par excellence a horseman. I feel that some excuse is
required of me as an explanation why I venture before an audience such as
the present to give expression to some remarks and proposals with reference
to the development of the trade in horses in the Colony of Hew South
Wales and in Australia generally. It has been my privilege to have raised
and commanded many mounted corps, and to have led several of them in four
successive campaigns. These corps hav r e been improvised and mounted upon
every description of horse which in late years it has been given to. the
British soldier to ride: Cossack horses from the Don ; Arab horses from
Egypt, Asia Minor, Syria, and Arabia Petroea ; barbs from Tripoli; horses
from South Africa, from South America, and from Canada; and finally,
the more familiar British troop horse. It was, further, my good fortune
as President of a Eemount Committee, during one of the Egyptian
campaigns, to purchase, in addition to the requirements of my own corps,
verv large numbers of horses in the Levant and elsewhere. It is, therefore,


with some practical knowledge o£ the military requirements as regards horses
that I venture the following remarks: —The British Cavalry Troop horse,
stable-fed and stable-reared, is well known by men of campaigning
experience to be ill-adapted to the hardships and sufferings of campaigning.
Their shortcomings in this respect were well known to the late able
President of the Be mount Committee in Great Britain, Major-General
Kavenhill, one of the best judges of horses in England ; and he repeatedly
pressed this fact upon the Military authorities in England. The price given
being from £35 for the Transport horse to £65 for the Household Cavalry
Troop horse, yet so difficult is it found to procure horses of a suitable
quality for these varying sums, that a large proportion of three-year-olds are
purchased besides the regulation four-year-olds. The same difficulty in pro-
curing an adequate number of horses for remount purposes is similarly
experienced among the Continental nations of Europe; and it is with difficulty
that, even in times of peace, the necessary supply for maintaining the peace
establishments of cavalry and artillery in the European armies are procured.
Nearly every European nation,but notably Austria, have Government breeding
establishments in order to meet this deficiency, which are maintained at great
cost. It is a well-known fact that there is no more expensive method of
supplying an army -with horses than by means of Government breeding
establishments. Practical experience taught us this in India, the hot
climate of which is besides well known to be detrimental to breeding-
horses in any considerable numbers. Eor horse-breeding, the climate, soil,
and the grass of Europe cannot compare with the advantages which we
possess here in Australia. The Americans in Kentucky, Montana, and in
portions of Colorado, and the South Americans in the plains of the Argentine
Bepublic, can alone, of foreign countries, compete with Australia in those
climatic and physical advantages Avhich are requisite for producing the best
classes of horses. In Australia w r e have all the climatic conditions, the soil,
and the grass, which stamp this continent for a horse-breeding country. The
very sporting instincts of our countrymen upon, this continent and their
love of horseflesh are sufficient guarantee for success in this great national
industry. Yet, in spite of these advantages, and in spite of a great and
lucrative market open to us in Europe, the trade in horses from this country
to Europe is practically nothing, and to India, in proportion to that huge
country and to this continent, inconsiderable. By the genius of our pre-
decessors our trade in frozen meat to Europe has developed by leaps and
bounds, and the magnitude of the future no man can say. Yet that Aus-
tralia should become the great horse-producing nation of the world, and
that she should supply the scanty and ill-supplied market of Europe with
the requisite class of horses, seems so far to have escaped the notice of our
commercial speculators. Eor my non-military hearers I will now enumerate
the various classes of military horses, with their equivalents in domestic use.
1. Heavy cavalry horse, of bone, of quality, and power, 16 hands high,
which may be reckoned to equal the weight-carrying hunter up to 16
stone, or the high-class carriage or coach horse. This horse should
weigh not less than 1,250 lb.


2. Light cavalry horse, of good body and good quality, 15'2 hands, to
equal the light-weight hunter up to 14 stone, or as hack or lighter
description of carriage horse. This horse should weigh at least
1,100 lb.
3. Artillery horse of power and activity, 152 to 16 hands, to equal the
best class of draught horse.
4. Transport horse, of bone and power, 15*2 hands, to equal a-horse for
general draught work.
I might mention that, with reference to the weight which all cavalry
horses must carry, the cavalry of European nations ride as follows : —
France ... ... ... 17i to 21 stone.
Germany ... ... ... to 20 stone.
Austria ... ... ... 21 stone.
Eussia ... ... ... 18 to 20 stone.
Italy ... ... ... ... 17f to stone.
United States ... ... 16 stone.
England ... ... ... 19| stone.
I need hardly point out that in the opinion of most practical soldiers
the cavalry horses of all European nations are grossly over-weighted.
I have given an estimate of the weight of each description of cavalry
horse upon the American method, which is computed upon the well-
known fact that a horse can carry with advantage 5‘67 only of its own
weight. I will now ask you to consider where it is possible to procure
horses of the type I have named in considerable quantities. India, from
its climate, is unsuitable for breeding horses. Bouth Africa can only
boast a small, and, at present, insignificant breed of horses. A well-known
writer upon horse-breeding recently stated in a lecture given by him that
“ the breeding of horses has fallen into such neglect in that country,
which is admirably suitable for the purpose, that even the single Cavalry
Regiment there—the 11th Hussars —cannot obtain sufficient remounts from
local sources at an average of £4O a piece.” South America, with it bound-
less plains bordering the Plate, the Paraguay, and the Parana Rivers, so far
only produces for the most part small and ill-bred horses. At the termina-
tion of the 1870 campaign the French Light Cavalry were mounted upon
horses procured from the Argentine Republic, in consequence of the impossi-
bility of suitable remounts not being procurable in Europe. The attempt was
abandoned after a short trial, as it was found that the horses were ill-shaped
and still worse tempered. The United States of America can, and undoubtedly
does, breed a good class of horse, many of which find their way to the English
market. Such horses have to be transported by rail long distances, and sub-
sequently subjected to eight or nine days boisterous passage across the
Atlantic. Canada also produces horses ; but a country which has six months
deep snow can hardly be expected to compete as a horse-producing country
with Australia. In Europe, Russia in spite of its rigorous climate produces
fine horses, few of which, however, find their way to an English or Western
European market. Of all European nations, the Austrian Government have
taken the lead as regards State aid to the development, breeding, and trade


in horses. A very large sum is yearly expended by the Austrian Govern-
ment in breeding high-class Government stallions for stud purposes; and
the breed of horses has improved and has enormously increased during the
last five and twenty years. Austro-llungary now not only supplies her own
army but has a large surplus available for export. In spite of these advan-
tages, the Hungarian horse, wiry, strong, and well-bred as he is, is compara-
tively small, deficient in speed, and unable to carry heavy weights. More-
over, our Military Attache at Vienna states in his report upon this very sub-
ject, that the “ conditions of Hungary are not favourable for horse-breeding.”
It is to England that all foreign nations look to supply their wants for
the best class of horses, and the horse fairs of Ireland, Ballinasloe, and
others, teem with remount agents of foreign nations. The Americans, at any
rate, are fully alive to the remunerative conditions of the horse market in
Ireland; and a noted breeder of horses from Colorado told me, when coming
from America five years ago, that in the previous year he had run 350 of his
best horses into Ireland, where, after having been handled, trimmed, and
schooled upon some grass farms in the Wexford Mountains, they were sub-
sequently sold as Irish hunters at Ballinasloe fair. From the foregoing
remarks, I have endeavoured to direct your attention to what I conceive to
be a valuable and lucrative trade in the near future. You here in Australia
should be able to place your horses in the English market, or some centrally
situated European market at such a price that should enable you at least,
with your climatic advantages, to undersell the Canadian and American
breeder. Unfortunately there exists now in Australia comparatively little
demand for the class of horses which command the highest prices in the
European market. Enclosures and wire-fencing have rendered the well-bred
high-class horse for use on our stations unnecessary. Similarly, railways
and other facilities of communication have driven the better class of coach
horses out of the field. It is, therefore, very evident that unless a market
for your horses of the higher and better classes is not created elsewhere the
Australian horse will slowly but surely continue to deteriorate, and the name
which by a past generation has been earned for good horses, as well as for
good horsemanship, will pass away. I have already urged upon the Govern-
ment, and in so doing have the concurrence of all Australian authorities
whom I have consulted, the following proposals :
1. A tax on, and registration of, stallions, with periodical inspection by
Government Veterinary Surgeons.
2. The establishment of a Remount Purchasing Agency in this Colony
for the Imperial and Indian Governments.
I feel sure that you will agree with me in thinking it is most important
that breeders should have constantly before them the class of horses which
will command the best and readiest market. In my judgment, this would be
best insured by the establishment of an agency such as I have described ; and
I am inclined" to think that if the New South Wales Government would
approach the Indian Government and the Imperial Government at home
with a proposal of the kind, and with the offer of a Government grant of
land for the purpose, little difficulty would be thrown in the way. I trust


the time may not be far distant when Australia will supply Europe with horses
upon the same scale, and with benefit to the producer and consumer that she
now supplies frozen meat. It is most undoubted that a grand field for com-
mercial enterprise is open to her. In conclusion, I must thank you all for a
patient hearing, and trust that you will accept my sincere apologies if, in
my anxiety to assist in developing an important national industry, I have
too long trespassed upon your time.
The Hon. W. R. Campbell, M L.C.: I must say that I disagree with a
good deal that Mr. Eouse has said about preferring a Yorkshire-bred horse
for a sire to a thoroughbred for general work, such as remounts for India and
for military purposes. I won’t go so far as to say that nothing can beat a
thoroughbred for every kind of work, but take him all round he is the best
to reproduce his kind. I hear it stated to-night that a tax should be put on
indifferent stallions to prevent weeds being bred from ; but that won’t help
us, for who is to judge what is the right animal to cross, with the proper mare
to produce a weight carrier, or an animal fit for fast and heavy work like
drawing a gun ? A cart-horse can jump anything that comes in his way if
you give him his time, but put him above his pace and he will tumble over a
toothpick. So you ride your crossbred to hounds, principally because you
can’t afford a thoroughbred ; but he is never in the first flight, because
directly you put the pace on and pinch him down he comes. Take the
Yorkshire-Hero class for example: in harness they are excellent, but they
would never make a first-class cavalry horse, where speed and stamina is
required, and possibly on scant feed. England produces the very best of
this stock, they are a special class, but no one would choose such a horse to
beget hunters or a cavalry remount. You will find —I am sure General
Hutton can confirm this remark—that a crossbred will be a failure under such
conditions compared with a thoroughbred. You must feed an underbred
well to get any useful work out of him, but a thoroughbred will go till he
drops under most circumstances, at least that is my experience. There are
men here to-night who can endorse my contention. The Hon. T. H. Smith,
of Gordon Brook, has bred horses for years of the purest blood, that will
race with the fleetest, carry a 16-stone man to hounds, and with size and
substance sufficient to draw the largest and easiest barouche with style and
comfort, and will carry a stockman all day after cattle on just the grass they
pick up. The Hon. Mr. Hangar, has he not bred a Gibraltar ? the best
horse of his year at Randwick and Elemington ; and I can say without fear
of contradiction that if you saw him harnessed to the heaviest ’bus in
town he would not appear too small for the work —not to mention a Chester
or many others we all know of. A sire such as this would produce an
animal from almost any mare, that would be swift and handsome enough for
a charger or the cheeriest galloper that ever carried an order, or to rattle a
field-gun along at a pace that would knock a Yorkshire class of horse out of
time in less than half a day. Mr. J. E. Smith too, of Tucka Tucka, on the
Mclntyre Eiver, rears on the natural grasses horses with pedigrees going
back to Eclipse, most of them by Gozo, an imported thoroughbred. Anyone
visiting Eandwick, Elemington, or any of the principal courses of Australia,


will see them win over all distances, on the flat or over sticks ; and as far as
appearances go, look big enough to carry the heaviest man (a Chaplin, say)
who rides to hounds in England to the front, either in the shires or through
the heaviest counties, fields ahead of a Yorkshire-Hero class of animal. So
sure as we begin to breed from crossbred sires for not only horses, but cattle
and sheep too, so surely will our herds deteriorate, and we shall be at oui'
wits end to discover how to get back to the old breeds.
Colonel Robeuts, C.M.G-., Military Secretary: Mr. Rouse has given a
very able and concise lecture. lam glad to say as far as my experience is
concerned, I am decidedly in favour of the old style of Yorkshire horse.
The remarks of the Major-General that he has addressed with regard to the
difficulties that arise with the armies of Europe, and also with our own
particular army, rests with what we may call provisions for the horse. I think
if there is one country in the world where the horse is brought up on hard fare,
viz.: grass feed, this is the country to which every horse-breeding establish-
ment should turn, because the young horses are reared on next to nothing,
and turned out without any ostensible means of forage ; and owing to this
feed, they do better than the stable-fed horse. The General has also referred
to the question of breeding establishments, and I do not think it is out of
the memory of many of us, that several gentlemen came to the Colony for
the purpose of establishing breeding studs. I think General Williams was
one of the last, and went nearly as far as anyone could in ascertaining how
far it was possible for the British or Indian Government to establish a farm
here. He went very carefully into the matter, and unfortunately so far as
he could find out, it was not iikely to pay. But if this strict law of imposing
a tax on stallions is to be foreshadowed, and this is not a new idea, having
been suggested by many well-known breeders, it should be a very heavy tax
on these stallions, and we shall be able to get a very high-class horse for
domestic purposes, and possibly for purposes of defence. It will be well
within the memory of some of us that when the Expedition started for the
Soudan, we were suddenly called upon to purchase horses, and we purchased
horses here to the number of about 300, at an average price of £2O per
head. If we could purchase these horses at from £lB to £2O per head at a
pinch —and they were very gladly received by the Imperial Government
later on—l think it is possible that if a careful supervision of breeding is
established here —I mean by this careful supervision of breeding, that no
weed of a stallion shall be allowed to go and distribute progeny all over the
country, and if we have a real strong and grass-fed .horse —because a grass-
fed horse will pick up a living where another one could not exist; if this is
carried out the Australian horse will rise not only in value in the old country,
and in our own army, but other countries will look to here for stout-bred
horses. I leave further discussion now for my lay-brethren, and I also hope
some of my military brothers will give us their experiences about the very
best class of horses to be got for our purposes.
The Hon. H. C. Dangab, M.L.C.: I should hardly have ventured to
intrude myself for one moment if it had not been for some remarks made by
my worthy friend Mr. Campbell with regard to his enthusiasm about the


thoroughbred horse. I hope you will hear with me for a moment or two
until I have said that I think the whole of the community are undoubtedly
indebted to our friend Major-General Hutton for the immense interest he
has taken in the matter ot horse-breeding. Ido not like flattering a man to
his face, but I say that in taking the interest that Major-General Hutton
has in the production of a good horse in this country, he has shed honour
upon himself, and imposed great obligation upon us, because I think he has
gone out of his way to strike out a new industry in this Colony, and the
people of New South Wales will be utterly wanting in enterprise, if they
do not act on the information which he has so wisely and freely given them
as to the production of the horse best suited for commercial purposes. Mr.
House at the outset of his remarks made some reference to the difficulty of
finding any opening for enterprise in these days, and I am sure that all
present will appreciate the force of those remarks. It seems, to me that in
these times the curse of enterprise is over-production. But both Mr. House
and Major-General Hutton have told you in the plainest language, that we
possess facilities for producing horses in this Colony which few other places
in the world possess; and it only remains for us to direct that enterprise in
such a way as to not only redound for the benefit of mankind, but also for
our own pecuniary advantage. As most people are aware, my horse-breeding
has been of a very modest character ; but I candidly confess I am in
favour of the thoroughbred horse, and nothing can exceed my admiration
for horses of this class. I do not wonder at the enthusiasm of my friend
Mr. House for Yorkshire Hero, for 1 have seen several of his progeny,
and finer horses I have never seen. I have often expressed the opinion that,
if I had been a younger man, I should send to Ireland for some of the Irish
hunting mares, but after the experience of my friend Major-General Hutton,
I think I shall consider twice about the policy of sending to Ireland for
horses at all. But Sir John and gentlemen, there is one question which has
not been touched upon by any who have spoken here to-night, and that is
with regard to the exact means of obtaining the animal to which Major-
General Hutton has alluded, and which I take to be the most profitable,
and about the best animal that can be produced for general purposes, viz.,
the heavy cavalry horse. Some time ago I dispersed in this Colony un-
doubtedly the finest stud of Suffolk Punch horses that ever had any existence
in Australia. There was nothing to approach them for excellence, so far as
that particular breed of horses was concerned. I may say that in my opinion
the Suffolk Punch mare is a better animal than the Y orkshire coach breed in
being the most easily obtainable of those classes of mares necessary for the
production of the horse alluded to by Major-General Hutton. We have an
excellent class of draught mare in this country, and, thanks to my dear old
brother, an excellent lot of Suffolk Punch mares. The putting of a good
thoroughbred horse on to a Suffolk Punch mare gives a desirable and satis-
factory result. Time has not permitted us to see exactly what the continu-
ance of this may be. The difficulty out here is to obtain a class of mares
which can be kept up without in-crossing, and to breed and preserve sires
of that particular character. But there is one remarkable character about


this cross with the Suffolk Punch mare, and it is this : the true colour of the
Suffolk Punch is without exception a chestnut, but in the thoroughbred cross
with a Suffolk mare the progeny usually take after the colour of the sire.
Where uniformity of colour is a cavalry consideration this may become
material in the selling value. In the absence of a uniform character
of the heavy active mare, the Suffolk Punch mare is, in my opinion, the best
animal to put to the thoroughbred. That is an opinion I have formed
after considerable thought on the subject. The difficulty that confronts
horse-breeders in this Colony is in obtaining a sufficient number of mares
for producing that particular animal which the Major-General alluded to as
the best class you can get, viz., the heavy cavalry horse. I think you will
agree with me when I say the heavy cavalry horse is fit for almost any
purpose. You can trust him to do anything that a horse maybe fairly asked
to perform. I took a few notes whilst those who preceded me were speaking,
but as the subject opens up a vast area for discussion, I will not trespass
upon your time. Two or three gentlemen have alluded to the taxation of
stallions ; and I am quite sure of this, that unless somebody at an early date
imposes some tax upon stallions, there will be very small hope of our
attaining that desideratum to which Mr. Rouse alluded to when he talked about
maintaining any particular breed of horses. There is no system or form
about the breeding of horses in this Colony, except in the case of the
thoroughbred. I have been connected with the Jockey Club here for over
twenty-five years, and I confess, with extreme regret, that I do not think the
breed of racehorses has improved in this Colony one bit. lam sorry, and I say
it with the greatest regret, that I think the racehorse has rather retrograded
than progressed so far as stability is concerned. Is this to be wondered at
when we have race meetings on almost every Saturday throughout the year,
and the bglk of the races for only sor 6 furlongs ? Whilst in England I
was much struck with the size and stability of their racehorses. The year-
lings submitted at Newmarket, and the general appearance of the horses I
saw, were superior, so far as size was concerned, to the Australian racehorse.
I may say that the same remarks apply to almost every class of horse that I
saw in England. I now come to a most significant fact. While in conversation
with the job-master who supplied me with horses in London, he gave me the
assurance that the best class of horses in England, especially that class to
which my friend Mr. Rouse alluded just now, viz., tbe Yorkshire Hero
horse, were going to the bad, that France, Germany, and Russia were
buying up all the best mares in England, and he expressed regret that the
breed and number of these horses were steadily diminishing. If these facts
are true they are significant facts for Australia. Of course, with the facili-
ties with which horse-breeding can be carried on here, if we are in a position
to produce the best animals, we shall find people coming here from all over
the world to buy these horses. With the advantages that Major-General
Hutton has pointed out, with the facilities with which horses may be bred
here, I have only to repeat that it will be a shame and a disgrace upon the
horse breeders of this Colony if they do not apply their brains and their
money to establish studs to breed this particular kind of horse. A few


weeks ago I sent a trial shipment of five horses to India. I admit that they
were not first-class animals by any means. They were sent under favourable
circumstances, nothing particular happened to them, they had a good
passage, and they were landed in India in good condition. In a few words
the average net price of these horses returned to me was about what I
could have got for them at Camperdown. I mention this fact not as a dis-
couragement, because, as I have already said, these horses were not of a very
high character, and yet they were a fair specimen of the average kind of
horse produced now in this Colony. This is one of the facts to which
Mr. House and Major-General Hutton alluded to, and is, perhaps, one
of the discouraging circumstances which prevents the breeding of suitable
horses for exportation. But lam quite sure of this, that if I had sent the
heavy cavalry horse, or the Yorkshire Hero horse, instead of getting the
Camperdown price, I should have got those remunerative prices which we used
to get about fifty or sixty years ago, and which you cannot get in these days
except for exceptionally good animals. These facts ought to afford encourage-
ment to horse breeders to strike out a line for themselves. But get the mares,
and I think you will be able to produce fine useful saleable specimens in any
desired quantity.
The Hon. G-. 11. Cox, in moving a vote of thanks to the lecturer for his
able and practical address, said that the Australian horse was gradually
deteriorating year by year, and he thoroughly agreed with what. Mr. House
had said.
The Chaikmax : I do not think that any hard and fast rules can be laid
down with regard to breeding. The value of a thoroughbred horse altogether
depends upon his character. A good thoroughbred with a sound constitu-
tion and character, is capable of producing the best class of horse in the
world. We require an animal with strength and endurance, and the prin-
ciple to act upon is to secure good strong mares and put them to strong
thoroughbred horses.
Mr. House, in reply: Keferring to the remarks made by Mr. Hangar with
regard to what the London job-master told him ; it was for this very reason
that Mr. Burdett-Coutts commenced his stud, which I believe is one of the
most complete establishments in London. He is making it pay, and intends
to bring back to Great Britain the very horse that I have advocated.
Sydney Charles Potter, Government Printer. —ii-96




JAfp
fcu3Uo
pi S l A
l\cc^




