

QfuTToH
T
\ ApMUDWW
TftlldE
f
A&s&6lN£^
<s*l^
yo K,Ks's
f&HiHyJlS*' *
/r , ?<■.
i /]
Bkbbmlw


f


F |Uq~7U
The Adjahdurah Tribe of Aborigines on
Yorke’s Peninsula: some of their Early
Customs and Traditions.
By T. M. Sutton,
Superintendent Point Pearce Aboriginal Mission Station.
(Read Jidy 29 th, 1887.)
It is very difficult to get reliable information as to the past
history of the aborigines. The tendency is to mix it up with the
semi-civilised life Ihey have led since the Europeans have been
here. Many even of the oldest have forgotten all about it. My
plan has been to get the first information from two old men or
women, then try two more, get their views on the same subject,
and submit it all to the old people together and a couple of young
men. Some of the latter do not like all the past customs to be
known.
The name of the tribe on Yorke’s Peninsula is Adjahdurah, or
my people. Adjah means my or mine, as adjah-coojmunya my
son, adjah lanna my daughter. One individual of the tribe would
be called Durah. The general name of a native of any trible is
Nepoh. The tribe was also divided into four local divisions, viz.,
Koornarrah (north), Winderah (east), Dilpah (south), Warree
(west). Each local division had its own totems, viz., ghardie
(emu), durantoo (red kangaroo), coynbinya (butter fish), coolallah
(salmon). I only give these totems as a sample; there were
numbers of others. Men and women of the same totems were
allowed to marry. I have never heard of any other tribe where
this was allowed. I would not accept it at first, until the king-
told me that he married a ghardie, he being a ghardie himself, his
grandfather also married a ghardie. A woman takes her husband’s
totem at marriage. They were not allowed to marry blood
relations under pain of death. First cousins are considered equal
to brothers and sisters; foster children were treated as their own.
Betrothal took place in infancy, and the marriage ceremony after
circumcision and other rites performed on the male. At this
ceremony blood being extracted from the candidate he was obliged
to drink some. A humming instrument was used to warn all but
the initiated away. No one was allowed to see this instrument
under pain of death, unless they were initiated.


Of course this was long ago, the ancient stringency having
grown entirely obsolete. The old king made one, and used it in my
presence. lam not aware that this privilege has been extended
to any other white man in this colony.
The Victorian natives have a similar instrument, and the same
rules are observed concerning it. 1 have heard of a gentleman in
that colony being allowed to see it, but he had to be initiated first.
Without this initiation 1 have been allowed to see both. There is
very little difference in the construction, none at all in the noise
they make.
Cannibalism was unknown in this tribe, neither did they extract
the kidney fat from their enemies, as was the custom of some ot
the Australian tribes. Being cut off from other tribes very little
was known of war, consequently their weapons were few. The
tribe was ruled over by a king, with head men selected from each
of the local divisions alluded to above. The kingship was
hereditary. The last king, who died recently, spoke of his grand-
father as occupying that position when he was a boy.
The following legend as to the origin of the tribe was told me
by one of the natives who received it from his father, he being
noted for his good memory. The story was also corroborated by
the king.
The father of the tribe, who was a giant, lived on Wauraltee
Island, where he had always resided, and where he was ultimately
buried. He had a brother in whom was vested power almost
equal to his own. This brother travelled about. Once in his
wanderings down the Peninsula he met a man belonging to another
race, whether black or white “ deponent sayeth not.” They had a
fight. The latter was speared, and his bowels gushed out. His
conquerer then cut him into halves, the severance taking place
just below the arms, and the upper portion he transformed into a
bat (majaja). The bat he dispatched with a message to the
conquered one’s people who were camped on the beach. He
returned and desired the conquerer to go to their camp for a con-
sultation. This he refused to do, but waited until night, and stole
upon them while they slept, setting fire to their camp, and burning
them all to death. The wind arose and blew their ashes away,
which turned into seabirds. These are the present shags, pelicans,
gulls, &c. Previous to this the sea water was fresh. The mark
of the cut in the bat they say can be seen now. The natives will
on no consideration kill them. A spider, it is said, made the
islands. They seem to have no idea how the main land came into
existence.
They believed in a Supreme Beirg, and in the soul’s existence
after death. When any one dies belonging to Koornarrah (north),
the soul goes away in that direction, and vice versa. The body
used to be kept for several days after death, and the doctor of the
tribe would lie beside it, and profess to hold communication with


the departed soul, from which source he pretended to receive the
secrets of his art. Of course this doctor was a great humbug.
He would put stones and other things into his mouth, and suck
the seat of pain, then eject them, pretending he had extracted
them from the patient’s body. The name a person had while
living was never mentioned after death. Even amongst the
present generation this rule is now observed. A. man would never
speak to his mother-in-law; if he wished to give her anything he
would look another way, and pass it to her with both hands.
Brothers and first cousins would not hold direct conversation with
each other. Certain rules were observed in the division of food,
which perhaps would not be interesting to go into at present. It
is a mistake to suppose that corrobories were got up merely for
dancing and noise. They had a great significance in olden times.
In seasons of drought they had rain corrobories, so likewise when
kangaroos and emus were scarce they had kangaroo and emu
corrobories, &c. A man called the ghureldrie (I suppose
analogous to the poet Laureate of England) made and sang the
songs. Pie was a very important personage on these occasions.
Messages were sent from place to place by notches cut in a waddie,
rolled in the skin of an animal. I was the bearer of a stick
message once from a native on the station to another on Wauraltee.
Island. I was told afterwards the purport of this message. It
was not sent in the orthodox way by being wrapped in a skin, so
I saw the notches, and learned their meaning. No grasstrees
growing on Yorke Peninsula, it was difficult for the natives in
olden times to get fire. The king has told me that he and others
would travel to the Murray to get it when they had lost the fire,
and were never molested by the natives there. ’The natives
belonging to this tribe had only words to express numbers up to
five, viz,, arrigo (one), bulli (two), mungree (three), bulli bulli
(four), yfrrabali (five). Some of the northern natives have only
words to express four. Papee is father; adgaah is mother;
doomalah, grandfather; coojmunya, son ; lanna, daughter; cabbie,
water (it is cowie in the north); bardoh, meat; miah, bread—
this won! 1 signify in olden times food of any sort except meat.


The Parkengees, or Aboriginal Tribes on
the Darling River.
S. Newland, Esq., J.P.
(Read September 29th, 1887.)
The subject of this paper is one that not only interests us as a
people, but it appeals to our sympathies as individuals since we
cannot but admit that our happy prosperous lot in these bright
colonies is purchased at the cost of the welfare, nay, even the lives
of the possessors of the soil. It is pathetic to be thrown among
the aboriginals and note how they wither away when brought into
contact with the people of our race. It seems to make little
difference how kindly they are treated, how well clothed or fed ;
they cannot breathe the same air as the white man and live. As they
are evidently doomed to a rapid extinction it is of importance to
posterity that, before it is too late, reliable information should be
obtained of their manners, customs, and lives. That this is con-
sidered a sacred duty by this honorable Society is peculiarly
gratifying to all true colonists whose avocations or position have
interested them in the race we are displacing. I may add that,
while congratulating the Society upon what it has already accom-
plished, I also feel it a distinguished honor to be allowed to
contribute in some slight measure to-night to the result of its
researches.
A few years ago the aboriginals of the Upper Darling were
comparatively numerous ; now they, in common with other tribes
wherever the European has settled, have nearly passed away.
This has been brought about by no epidemic, nor the use of
intoxicants, or cold, or hunger ; none of these have had much to do
with it. I can vouch for their being well fed and clothed, and for
years spirits were almost entirely kept from them ; yet they died
off, the old and young, the strong and weakly alike, sometimes
with startling suddenness, at others by a wasting sickness of a few
days, weeks, or months. On the Upper Darling the blacks, though
divided into tribes, spoke the same language and were friendly.
They call the river the Parka, and themselves the Parkengees.
The tribal name of those 1 shall particularly treat of was Wam-
pangee. The back country natives to the east of the river were


the Barrengees, at enmity with the Wampangees. They spoke a
different language to the Darling blacks, but the same as those of
the Lachlan, with whom they were friendly. In some respects
their habits were different. They had a separate camp fire for
each family, and I think more frequently practised polygamy, one
wife often being a mere child. The tribe to the west of the
Darling, up the Paroo to the Queensland border, spoke the lan-
guage of the Parkengees, and intermarried with them. Just over
the twenty-ninth parallel, being the boundary line between
N.S.W. and Qeensland, was a rival tribe with a distinct language.
At one time they struggled hard for their country alike against
white or black who crossed the boundary line. Further to the
south again, was another tribe at war with all three last-mentioned
people, and known to them as Pernowries ; these practised the rite
of circumcision, or something of a similar nature. All these abo-
riginals used the same kind of weapons and hunted in the same
way, though the inhabitants of the Darling were much the finer
race and more expert in the water, while some of the back
country natives could not swim at all. I have now given a general
sketch of the aboriginal inhabitants of the country, but it is
with those living on the River Darling itself I have to treat on this
occasion.
The Wampangees were divided into two families or sects,
named Keelparas and Muckwarras, which intermarried, but a
Keelpana could not marry a Keelparra or a Muckwarra a
Muckwarra. A brother had the right of giving away his sister,
which he usually did with a view to his own matrimonial
interests. They were in this way promised when quite children,
and in the event of the death of the claimant his nearest of kin
became possessed of his rights. A brother had also a right to
his deceased brother’s wife. I knew a rather remarkable case
of this kind, which strongly proved that “ love will still be lord of
all.” One of two brothers had died, leaving a fine young widow,
who was claimed by the survivor, known as “ Old Manum,” in
accordance with tribal custom. His claim was allowed by the
tribe, but the young woman had bestowed her affections upon
a young fellow and would have nought of “Manum.” In
vain was the by no means gentle persuasion of the waddy tried—
her constancy was unshaken. As a general arbiter the dispute was
frequently submitted to me, and, I must acknowledge, on one
occasion my sense of the justice of the old man’s claim, according
to aboriginal law, outweighed my sympathy for the cause of true
love, and I consented to his administering a little mild correction,
which the old villian assured me would be quite sufficient. A
sight of the victim after was enough. I made “ Manum ” relin-
quish his courtship and title to the young woman, but this result
was not brought about until after years of persistence on the part
of the claimant, and quarrels among the members of the family


and tribe. No doubt, prior to the possession of the country by
the whites, the matter would have been promptly settled by the
death of the young lover.
“ The blessings of civilisation” to them must always have
appeared a questionable benefit. Before the advent of the “ Boree”
(a term signifying whiteman or devil, so plainly expressing their
opinion of usj, they were numerous and happy r . The river supplied
abundance of fish and water fowl, as well as immense quantities of
“parper” on the low lands after the subsidence of floods. The
sandhill country was equally prolific after rain, and from both
plains and highlands the roots of the wild geranium and other
plants were collected, cooked, and after being trampled into a pulp
in their coolamans (a wooden basin made out of the elbows of
hollow box limbs), were kneaded into large balls and kept for
future use. “ Parper ”is a term applied to many kinds of grass
or herb seed. It was collected by the lubras and children, put
into bags or skins and ground between two stones when re-
quired. One large flat stone was laid on the ground, some seed
put upon it and a smaller stone worked round with the hands,
water occasionally being added; when finished it had much the
appearance of our gruel. Nor should it be forgotten that
during the floods the water-fowl laid eggs in countless numbers
in bush, grass, or hollow limbs of the trees.
They have always represented themselves to me as comparatively
free from disease; they emphatically deny having known some of
the most loathsome complaints common to civilised nations, such
as syphilis. To me their life for a people having no ambition, no
aspiration for anything higher, appears rational and happy. Bark
canoes stripped from the box or gum trees served as an easy mode
of transport. Their nets, made of a kind of flax or rush, enabled
them to catch large quantities of ducks. These are stretched
across streams, or even the river itself when sufficiently low, from
convenient trees on each side, or, failing them, from forked poles.
A rope run through the meshes on one edge of the net supported
it, after the fashion of a tennis net. One end of the rope was
made fast on one side the stream, then passed over the bough of a
tree or pole about 12ft. high, and across the water to another
similar tree or pole, and then tied to a stick lightly thrust in the
ground, the net thus being suspended immediately over the centre
of the stream. If there was no cover, a few bushes were stuck up
in the soil and one or two blacks stationed behind them, while
others beat down or up the stream, unless the ducks were flying of
their own accord, as is usually the case morning and evening. As
the birds approach the net the watchers there fling high in the air
above them pieces of bark, at the same time uttering a shrill
whistle, in imitation of the cry of the hawk. The flight of ducks,
possibly flying above the hanging net, dart down to escape their
supposed enemy, and, their momentum being too great to turn,


trike it with sufficient force to draw the stick, and the falling net
envelopes them. One of the natives immediately rushes in, and,
wringing their necks one by one, flings them on shore. This is
quickly done, and the net drawn up ready for the next flight of
the birds. In the old days bronze-winged pigeons and other birds
were caught in a similar way, by the net being stretched across a
narrow glade in thick timber, down which they were in the habit
of flying to water. The emu is caught by the Riverine blacks in
somewhat the same way as wild animals are trapped in other-
countries, only, instead of a pit at the end of the lane, a noose is
used. In the river districts of New South Wales there used to be
great numbers of V-shaped enclosures if that term can be applied
where the large end is open. At the narrow end a lane was made,
where the nooses were hung. The fences of these erections were
of the most flimsy character, formed of sticks and bushes, over or
through which the birds could easily have escaped; but the silly
creatures, when once driven in the funnel-shaped entrance by the
blacks, always followed the fences to the apex and the fatal noose.
Another mode is, taking advantage of their curiosity, to entice them
sufficiently near for killing by spear, waddy, or boomerang. They
can be brought quite close up by sitting or lying down and making
peculiar sounds, or fluttering a rag or ribbon. I have not only
frequently seen it done, but have done it myself; and occasionally
known them come up to a camp without any effort being made to
attract them. On the Finke the aboriginals used to practice
another method of capturing them - by poisoning small water-
holes. During my late visit to the north a blackfellow showed me
a bush, the leaves of which they used for the purpose; it was the
only one of the kind I saw in my travels, or, indeed, have ever
seen. 1 may add, I brought a specimen down, and it is now,
with many others, in the possession of the Secretary to the Trans-
continental Railway Commission. I believe a few bullocks were
poisoned by drinking on one occasion from a waterhole prepared
in this way for emus by the aboriginals. On the Darling, water-
hens (Kerkalees) are caught in small nets at the outlet of a funnel-
shaped enclosure, similar in shape to that used for emus, but made
of small bushes or grass.
For catching fish a smaller net than that used for birds was
stretched across a small creek emptying a lake or billabong. As
the river falls a considerable current is created, down which the
fish are forced into the net. In this way great numbers were
caught. When the water back from the river became low, large
quantities were obtained by driving them into shallow pens made
of mud. There were also permanent stone pens formed on reefs
across the Darling, now known as the “ Fisheries”; these were an
obstacle to navigation when the river was low, and have been
destroyed by the captains and owners of the steamboats, or in
some cases allowed to fall into disrepair by the natives themselves.


In the old days, while the stream continued low, great camps of
blacks collected at these places for the purpose of obtaining
fish. When first seen by the whites there were quite elaborate
systems of pens, opening one into another, so that once in,
there was little chance of the fish escaping before they were
caught or speared. Another common and highly interesting mode
of taking fish was spearing them; not the same way as that we
are so familiar with, as illustrated by the figure in the canoe at the
Exhibition, but by diving. Before this can be successfully carried
on the water must be clear. The “ muddy” Darling, as it is some-
times called, has a milky appearance until it is tolerably low, when
it becomes quite clear, and later somewhat brackish. The black
men then assemble on the bank of a deep hole with spears made
of light rod-iron ; before they had iron they weighted wood, so as
not to be buoyant in the water. A fire is kindled, and, if the time
is winter, the operators rub themselves from head to foot with grease
to keep out the cold. Then with spear in hand the native glides
into the water and swims noiselessly into the deep part; then turning
with his feet down, and hands held above his head, the swimmer
sinks down, looking up at the light, and when he sees a fish he
rarely fails to transfix it. The first thing the observer then beholds
is a fish on the end of a perpendicular spear, then a black poll
followed by its attendant form, but scarcely a ripple on the water
and certainly no splash. The fish is thrown or taken on shore, and
the sport gone on with, apparently without a sign of fatigue in
those engaged in it.
The builder rats are killed in a very simple but ingenious man-
ner. The rats build houses, or rather large heaps of sticks, in
which they live. Sometimes these are five or six feet high, and
from one of these colonies (for many rats may inhabit a single
heap) several paths radiate in different directions. I was once
with a number of blacks out hunting when a colony was dis-
covered. Immediately every spare garment was in request, a
blanket was laid across one path, a coat another, a hat or a waist-
coat, anything or everything (until most of the party stood in
nature’s simple garb) were placed over the rest, each having a kind
of opening left on the side facing the rats’ house. With waddy or
stick in hand one or tw r o of the hunters was stationed at each
garment, with instructions to strike the instant a rat entered
the opening left for him. I was told he would only linger
for a moment, and that prompt action was imperative. The
dwelling was then fired, and just when I had come to the
conclusion that there was not a rat in it, or else he pre-
ferred certain death by cremation to a fair prospect of escape
from at least one waddy, out came a streak of lightning along
the path to my hat, followed by another, and another. The
state of that hat attested how I struck, there could be no
doubt of that, even my aboriginal censors did not question it—


they only complained of the promptness of the blows. Anyhow
there were no rats under my pile, but several under those of the
others. For promptness of action under such circumstances I
have ever since believed the aboriginal excels the European.
Their power of tracking is simply marvellous; they will tell you
the track of each horse on the station. They can follow a snake
or a rat. It has even been said the most skilled can track a mus-
quito. I have often known them to follow a small mob of lost
sheep through the tracks of others, when to my eyes one as closely
resembled the other as grains of wheat. But I remember seeing
a blackboy once puzzled; every track he had previously seen he
knew the creature that made it. We were on our return to the
river from an excursion out back, when we came across the trail
of a one-legged man with a crutch. For miles the boy followed
silently wondering, and then asked me if it was made by a
“ debble debble ” ? Nor could he be quite re-assured until he saw
the man and the crutch.
Among the tribes I have mentioned, the custom of making
a youth into a young man is performed with some ceremony. The
actors must be decked out with ochre, and feathers, opossum fur
string, &c. A front tooth is literally knocked out in the following
way: The hero or the victim, which ever he may be considered,
is laid flat on his back and held so. The operator then holds the
edge of a boomerang, or similar instrument to the tooth, and
strikes it with stone or waddy, until it comes out. The youth
must bear the pain without a sign, or be considered “ toolucha ”
cowardly. When the rites are over the young man wound round with
the opposum fur cord,is started off by himself, unless some other has
been initiated, in which case they can go together, away from the
sight of women. They may be fed sometimes by the men, but so
far as I know they have to depend upon themselves. At any rate
:hey frequently appealed to me during the night for food. In
about a fortnight they returned to the tribe without any particular
notice. At the age of puberty the girls were kept from the sight
of the men for a few days, during which time their bodies were
wound about with coils of opossum fur repeatedly crossed over
the breasts. They, however, Avere merely kept in a “yapra”
(wurley), near with some female relatives, and not sent away as
the young men were.
“ Making rain” is a secret performance, neither the women nor
strangers being allowed to be present. A particular kind of stone
is required, a lot of grey hair from an old man’s beard, some
blood drawn from their own veins, and they frequently take a great
deal. It is caught in a coolaman, a wooden vessel as previously
described, and the whole, stone, hair, and blood mixed together
and wrapped up, is sunk in a deep water bole in the river with
many signs, much palaver and gesticulation. I have never seen
the ceremony, but it has frequently been described to me. During


severe droughts I used to protest that the Wampangees were no
good at making rain, but their faith never wavered. It was
simply a question of time. If it came before they had gone
through the ceremony they would declare it had been made by
other blacks. According to them rain never fell without the exercise
of aboriginal power, and, but for them, the white man, his cattle and
his sheep, would perish miserably. lam inclined to believe that
this was intended during some of the great droughts, when they
mads no attempts to bring rain, but their object was, in their opinion,
defeated by the rival tribes making it. They were always acute
enough to wriggle round a question. I remember once an old fellow,
who afterwards assumed royal authority, being importuned to make
rain by a drover waiting for a downpour before starting with fat
stock to market. A £5-note was offered for rain within a given
time. It must have been a great temptation for the old savage, as
he certainly never had so much money in his aboriginal life, but
he was equal to the occasion, and pushing it aside with a gesture
of contempt, he exclaimed, “ Bale mine wantum your money, Mr.
Newland givem mine plenty,” which, by-the-by, he did not
ordinarily consider the case, for a more insatiable old villain I
never knew.
The native doctors have many modes of alleviating suffering ;
some very simple and effective. That of applying the heated
leaves of plants to the parts of the body affected is certainly bene-
ficial, operating much the same as our hot fomentations and the
application of hot flannels. I have seen the eucalyptus leaves used
in this way with apparently very good effect. But in the so-called
doctor’s craft there is much humbug and imposture. The patient
must be streaked over with lines of paint in a grotesque manner.
The practice of sucking various articles from the suffering part is
common to many tribes of the Australian aboriginals, as well as
North American Indians and the Zulus of South Africa. I have
seen the practitioner apparently draw out a bullock’s tooth, the
bottom of a tumbler, apiece of the jawbone of a sheep, fragments of
pitcher, &c. It was useless to denounce him as an imposter, as the
patient declared he or she felt the thing going from them, and the
pain was relieved. They did not then require any more of the white -
man’s castor oil, but a pot of jam would expedite the cure. Some-
times the things extracted were buried, at others carefully kept as
relics of the skill of the operator. Sicknesses of this nature were
generally attributed to some blackfellow having a grudge against
the invalid and “ making a bone.” This is done by cutting and
shaping a bone in a peculiar way, which gives its possessor the
power of striking with disease any one he chooses. One of the
same people is often accused of doing this, and even glorying in it,
though his life may be frequently threatened by his terrified
tribesmen.


On one occasion an old warrior, like a modern Don Quixote, had
a hard straggle with a whirlwind, which are very frequent on the
Darling in the summer months, but this was an extraordinarily strong
one. It came slowly across a flat towards the station, twisting boughs
off the trees and taking bushes and grass up in a column of dust.
Then appeared Don Quixote in full war panoply, paint, weapons,
and feathers. He placed himself near the store, the building most
menaced by the foe, and danced, stamped, and gesticulated in a
perfect frenzy of heroism and excitement. Nearer came the whirl-
wind and Avilder grew the dance, the stamping, and the gestures.
It caught hold of some empty cases piled up at one corner of the
store, and flung them about; but it Avas the last attack. The
warrior stood his ground, the building Avas saved! I had witnessed
the Avhole thing, and Avell remember the triumphant smile Avith
Avhich the exhausted A r eteran came to claim his reAvard. This old
man had many of the characteristics of the famous Don, his sim-
plicity, conscientiousness, and heroism. As a people, I belieA r e
them by no means wanting in courage ; indeed, I neA r er knew but
one coAvard among them, and he Avas abject enough not even to be
ashamed of it. They could use their Aveapons Avith admirable skill,
and protect themselves under a shield possibly Gin. Avide by 2ft.
long. On many occasions I have been supplied Avith numerous
Aveapons, and told to aim them at a Avarrior Avho simply defended
himself Avith a shield in one hand and a waddy in the other, I
might rain spears, Avaddies, or boomerangs at each apparently
unprotected portion of his body, that narrow strip of Avood ever
interposed Avhere danger threatened. At a game of that sort you
at first naturally feel that your opponent appears so exposed that
you fear you cannot help hurting him, but after a bit you warm
into exasperation at the ease Avith Avhich your efforts are foiled,
and pitch compunction to the Avinds in your frantic attempts to
drop that grinning black demon behind his miraculous shield.
But it is no use, and Avhen your store of missiles has been three or
four times over collected and expended, as Avell as every available
stone, you realise this, and retire feeling that only for the invention
of gunpowder colonisation Avould be attended Avith greater diffi-
culties than you have hitherto supposed.
They are by no means devoid of humor. I recollect one night
there being a great row in the camp, and, out of patience at last,
going out and handcuffing the principal offender to a post. In the
morning, from my room, I could see the prisoner lying‘apparently
fast asleep in his blanket. After a Avhile, thinking he might be
set at liberty, I Avent out, and there lay my handcuffs on the top of
a figure enveloped in the blanket. He had slipped his hands out
directly I left and, providing a dummy representative, rejoined his
companions in their camp, Avho thought it a great joke. All tribes,
so far as I know, hold to the old barbaric lavv, “ an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth.” Several instances of this came under my


observation. A young woman (Nongo) was killed by her husband
(Mallee) in a barbarous manner. He at once bolted up the river
for another tribe. A party of four was immediately sent after to
kill him. All were relatives of the murdered woman; one, her
brother, was a cripple, but, having the right of the first blow, he
accompanied them. They tracked him up for three days, and
then killed him. Another case. A blackfellow struck his lubra
a sudden blow with a waddy quite in the ordinary way, and
killed her. He offered his bent head to the avenging kinsman
to be struck as hard as ho pleased. According to aboriginal
law, this was considered to be all the justice that the case
demanded, A furious blow was administered sufficient to kill a
bullock, and the law was satisfied. Long-standing quarrels were also
frequently settled in this way by the injurer bowing his head to
the smiter. I never heard of these blows ending fatally, though
certainly given with a will; but if they did the skull fractured
would probably be held more in fault than the operator.
It has frequently been asserted that they practise cannibalism;
but this, I believe, is in no sense true. They have to me invari-
ably expressed the greatest detestation of the idea. They, how-
ever, do practice infanticide, and justify it on various grounds.
The mother is too young, or not strong enough, or has not suffi-
cient milk ; but the usual excuse given to me —and I have known
several instances of babies being killed—has been that they were
deformed or imperfect in some way. There can be no doubt that
a crippled child was not allowed to live; that is, if crippled at birth.
It must be admitted that there was much sound philosophy in such
a course in a people of roving habits. Apart from considerations
of the deterioration of the race, there was the sterner obligation of
self-interest, as each helpless creature increased the difficulty of
moving, besides being another mouth to feed. If not destroyed at
the birth they became too much attached to them subsequently to
do it.
At the death of any member of the tribe, the camp was moved at
once. This custom renders it almost useless to build permanent huts
for them. The body, almost before the last breath was drawn, was
doubled up into as small a compass as possible, and buried imme-
diately, in many cases much attention being afterwards paid to
keeping the grave neat. Great respect was paid to the old men,
and many delicacies were exclusively reserved for them, princi-
pally of animals, birds, reptiles, or fish that were not easily pro-
curable. The most esteemed of these the young men, women, and
children were not allowed to eat. The wild turkey was one of
these; hut as the blacks decreased, and these creatures could be
obtained more easily by the white man’s appliances, their arbitrary
laws were relaxed. They were very fond of fat, frequently eating
to surfeit of it, particularly when a bullock was slaughtered, as well
as profusely anointing themselves with it. Yet nothing would


induce them to touch pork in any shape. Whence came this remark-
able antipathy I was never able to learn. Besides their implicit
belief in evil spirits, they also believed that many deep holes in
the river were haunted by a big snake called “Niche.” In these
holes they would not bathe or fish, and, on one occasion, when two
white children were drowning, and might have been saved by some
lubras who were present, they ran away, screaming “Niche!”
There are many different kinds of corroborees; some for both
men and women, and others in which the men alone take part.
If the women join, they generally stand some distance behind the
men when dancing, and do not come prominently into the light.
Occasionally the “ hummer” is used, but not frequently; probably
because it is considered too sacred to be seen by women or young
men. When used it is taken out beyond the circle of light, so
that, though the sound can be heard, it is impossible to see how it
is produced. There is no doubt some of the corroborees terminate
in a wild orgy, when practices are indulged in that our canons of
morality by no means sanction. Like our own songs and music,
some are lasting favorites with them, others are composed, tried,
and Quickly forgotten ; and this is not to be wondered at, for
they sometimes consist of but a few words of utter absurdity.
It has been asserted that the aboriginals of Australia have no.
traditions, but that is not quite correct, as a rather remarkable
instance coming under my own notice shows. R io the west of the
River Darling is the Mount McPherson Range, on parts of which
are hollow rocks or small caves, said by the blacks to be haunted
by evil spirits they called the “ Mullas.” In the early days they
would not sleep near these rocks on any account. They describe
these “ Mullas ” as once a living people at deadly enmity with their
ancestors, waging perpetual war, and that now they are dead their
spirits yet roam at night searching for some solitary defenceless
Parkengee to strike with sickness. Often when I have been
camped with them they have heard at night the demons scream
“Yahoo.” Of course I could not hear it, but that was easily
explained. The “ Mullas” did not want me, it was the Parkengees
they pursued with such persistent hate and revenge. So strong
was this fear that they often declared they had been struck with
illness by these nocturnal foes. They describe the “ Mullas ”as
having been low of stature, broad, and immensely strong, with very
long arms reaching nearly to their feet; but their most striking
peculiarity was a sharp broad bone like the blade of an axe growing
just above each elbow. With this they fought, striking back with
the force of a kick from a horse. Though always much interested
in their tales about these Mullas, I almost doubted if they really
believed they had ever actually lived, until on one occasion when
camped with some blacks not far from the range they showed me
in a depression, scooped out on the top of a soft sandhill by the
wind, a number of helmets shaped not unlike a traditional dunce’s


cap, made of (copiga) gypsum. Altogether there were some
dozens of these, many of them whole, many more in fragments.
They were apparently made to put on the head, yet were too small
for any ordinary human being. Up to now I have never been able
to conjecture what could be their possible use—what they could
have been made for. I tried them on my own head, as well as on
the blacks, but they were not nearly large enough to fit any but a
child. Some were quite 2ft. long, others less, and all hollow. I
may state here that this “ copiga” is the same material the river
tribes use to cover their head with when in mourning, as well as
smear their bodies, but they in no way make anything of the kind
such as I saw on that sandhill. Much interested, I inquired if the
blacks could give me any explanation, and was then told that there
perished at the hands of their forefathers the whole Mulla tribe of
hunger and thirst. They were completely surrounded, and in their
last extremity those helmets were made to cool their burning heads.
This was the revenge of the Parkengees for the wrongs of years,
and since that deed of slaughter the spirits of the Mullas had
haunted them and struck them with sickness when away from the
camp fire or alone. They added that a few miles away to the west
was hidden the skeleton of a Mulla which they could show me. I
was interested and sanguine enough to go with them, and we
searched high and low, but without avail; that treasure, for such
it would have been, I never saw. Another disappointment awaited
me, for when sometime afterwards I went with a cart for the copiga
helmets not one could be found. The blacks denied having taken
them, but this they were sure to do, as I had ordered them°not to
touch one. No doubt for some superstitious reasons they had
hidden them away; I never was able to discover where.
They also tell the story of a great calamity that befell the back
country tribe with which they intermarried. In a fearful drought
when nearly all the waters failed, the tribe in question collected
upon the Perie Springs, situated in the Mount McPherson Range,
about fifty miles from the Darling, some disease came among them
and more than half of the tribe perished. They generally attributed
this to the malevolence of the “ debble, debble,” as usual, but one
of the most intelligent told me he thought it was caused by the
bad water. He showed me the spot that tradition pointed out as
the site of the camp where nearly the whole of his people died,
leaving them ever since but a remnant of their old numbers.
From what he said it probably occurred two or three generations
before the country was settled by the whites.
It has been suggested that this sickness was smallpox, as traces
of it are to be found among them ; but at this distance of time it is
impossible to determine. They also would be likely to confound
smallpox with a skin disease they are much affected with, very
dissimilar in its more serious aspect, but sufficiently resembling it
to render worthless any diagnosis we can make.


Of a future state they give many accounts, but I will now only
attempt to relate one.
Old “ Barpoo ” was looked upon as a great scoundrel by the
whites, consequently he was almost an outlaw, scarcely tolerated
on any station. He refused to shepherd, he declined to cut wood,
or draw water, or in any way to bow to the “ Borees” rule. With
his own people, however, he possessed boundless influence; they
both feared and venerated him; some of them even believed he
had actually visited their heaven, and he told them it was in this
wise. When he was young there lived a very old man who was
Barpoo’s instructor in their native lore. He could cure all
diseases, as well as cause them, and when he died his powers
descended to his disciple. Shortly before his death he told Barpoo
that after he was dead he was to cut a piece of flesh out of his
thigh and eat it. This he did and immediately fell into a sleep in
which his spirit flew away beyond the sky. There he saw the
blackmail’s goddess in the form of a woman embodying all the
charms the aboriginal covets. She received him with much
kindness and showed him all the abundance of the joys prepared
for his people, game of all kinds, plants, fruits, and fish, so that
existence was a perpetual round of ease and feasting. The
goddess conferred her favors upon the chosen of her followers,
but there were also numerous lesser female divinities to welcome
all. When this was narrated I inquired if the white man could
not enter there, but I received a most emphatic narta (no). In no
other instance have I heard the spirit watching over them described
as a female, but the future immortal hunting grounds are always
the same; there they hunt, fish, and surrender themselves to the
voluptuous joys so bountifully provided, and there the hated
“ Boree ” has no place, and I don’t think we can wonder at it
when we consider what their experience of us has been.
Their language is a poor one, as evinced by the repetition of
the same word in counting; for instance, “ barcoola ” means two,
and for six they have only the same word three times repeated, or
eight, four times. Also in their laments the one word “ wimperi”
is sang over and over again. When it comes to abuse and vitu-
peration their vocabulary is sufficiently extensive, and it is
questionable if the proverbial fishwife of our race could hold her
own against her untutored sister in this respect.
The various tribes had their own country clearly defined, and
that, again, was sub-divided among the individuals. It would appear
that this might lead to confusion and disputes; but each bend in
river or creek was named, as well as every hill, plain, or the
smallest water, so that, once knowing these names, there was little
difficulty in fixing a boundary or identifying a place. It is really
surprising how the country of the Upper Darling is mapped out by
them in this way, or rather was, when the aboriginal lords held
sway. We have looked upon them with the lofty superiority of


our race, but the historical student will find far more in their
laws and customs admirably adapted to their manner of life and
the conditions surrounding them than is generally supposed.
I have endeavored, in compliance with the wish of several
members of the Society, to prepare a vocabulary of the language
of the tribe dealt with to-night, but I find my recollection is
imperfect—circumstances may admit of some important omissions
being supplied later. I have now simply to hope that the subject
matter of this paper may prove of some service to the Society in
its career of practical philanthropy.
VOCABULARY OF ABORIGINALS OF THE UPPER DARLING.
S. Newland, Esq., J.P.
Names of
Tribes
Upper River Darling Tribe
East Back Country Tribe
"West Back Country Tribe
River Blacks generally
One sect or family of the Wampangee Tribe
Other sect or family of the Wampangee Tribe
A Keelparra must marry a Muckwarra and vice versa
Wampangee.
Barrengee.
Pernowies.
Parkengees.
Keelparra.
Muckwarra.
Parkengees,
Wampangee Tribe.
English.
Parkengees,
Wampangee Tribe.
English.
Moon
Rain .
Heat.
Cold .
Stone .
Water
Tree ..
Canoe
Club .
Camp, hut, or house
Day
wycluca
muckra
buchee
yackie
curnoo
noco
yerra
coonica
pooltheroo
nulanlula
yapra
kylpo
Month
Country
Day after to-morrow
To-morrow
Rock or stone..
flood
Wind
River.
Dog
Codfish.
Very bony fish on
rivers
munna
kera
carrawambina
wambina
kemoo
thulpa
yerto
parka
mungee
perndoo
| namba


Vocabulary of the Aboriginals of the Upper Barling —continued.
Parkengees,
Wampangee Tribe.
Parkengees,
Wampangee Tribe.
English.
English.
Snake
Crow
Egg or insect
Wood duck..
Waterhen ...
Turkey
Water spirit (in
form of snake)..
Ant
Lizard
Devil .
Blacks or aborigi-
nal
Sprits of dead (foes
they believe
haunt them) ~.
Yell of evil spirit.
Dead
Dead or stinking..
Clothing
Hot
Woman
White man
Father ....
Mother
Husband
Wife....
Companion, friend
Hair of head ....
Head
Hand
Eye .
Teeth.
Ear ..
Foot.
Nose.
Hair.
Blood
Leg
Stomach
Sleep ...
Bread or flour..
Grass seed
Dear or darling .
thooroo
wohka or wanco
pertie
quanalie
kerkillie
tickera
| niche
monie
perndee
horee
| wimhudgea
mullas
yahoo
hooka
hooka-hooka
cumhie
buchie
mallie
nongo
horee
ambie
mummuckie
mallie
nongo
perlo
cumbagi
terto-woolkie
terto
murra
meckie
unthee
urie
tenna
mindolie
woolkie
jinky-jinkie
yelco
bingee
boompapa
munnoo
parper
gori
wimberi
milca
winja
pungari
Gypsum
Wood dish
One
Three
Four
Five.
Six ..
Seven
Eight
Nine
Twenty
Little ..
Great ..
Small
Good.
Bad .
Seeing
No ...
Posterior
Swim.,.
Presently or di
rectly .
Underdone
Make haste
Run
Gammon
Other or another.
Afraid
Angry .
Track .
I or me
You or thou.
This
There
Here .
Where
Big ..
Hungry
Very..
Truly
Thirst
copija (the lime
of which is used
for mourning)
coolaman
necha
harcoola
barcoola necha
2 barcoolas
yenlamurra
3 barcoolas
( 3 barcoolas and
( 1 necha
4 barcoolas
( 4 barcoolas and
\ 1 necha
murraola
murraola tenabla
kichilka
coombudgea
narrangie
halara
toolucha
pommie
narta
curluma
weirca
una
| byle yarda
mucky
hurra
hurra heri
pulya culyera
parakigea
carra
mooyah
ooyah
mundoowie
uppa
imba
enoo
ethroo
akee
Wingera
werto
micki
weelkucka
murree
murreeta
weechel


The Nullabor Plains and the West Boundary
of the Province.
W. H. Tietkens, F.R.G.S.
(Read November sth, 18870
At present but little is known of the country adjoining the
western boundary of this province, and with the view of inviting
inquiry and renewing our interest therein, a few remarks upon
such parts that have been visited may not be without interest.
Commencing, then, at Eucla. We know perfectly well that after
passing through the belt of scrub-covered country that skirts this
part of the southern seaboard the traveller enters upon the
Nullabor Plains. Roughly speaking these plains may be said to
lie between the 127° and 132° of east longitude, or about 250
miles in an east and west direction, so that a large part of their
area is contained in West Australia. Many travellers have pur-
sued a northerly course from different parts of the south coast
with the view of crossing these plains, but I do not think their real
extent to the northward has ever been determined, for in latitude
29° 34' they were crossed by the expedition which was fitted out by
Sir Thomas Elder, G.C.M.G., in 1875, and it may be remembered
that Giles, who was in command, when returning to his depot at
Ouldabinna from the Boundary Dam, travelled on the edge of
extensive plains that lay to the southward, so that I think it will
be found that the Oldea Sandrange divides the plains into two
sections. We might ask where this range begins to the eastwards?
whether it be a continuation of the granites of the Gawler Range,
or whether it starts from the Warburton Range or Mount Finke
—certainly no one can say where it ends to the west. It was visited
by Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, the Government geologist, in 1885. He
travelled through it, from the Water, in a northerly direction,
and to the plains beyond. He advances the opinion that it is a
granite formation covered with sand, and this is verified by
the fact that to the eastward of Oldea Water there are many
outcrops of granite, such as Wynbring, Mobing, Chimpering,
Pidinga, and many others, although the latter place may be said to
be on the southern slope of the range, and on the edge of the
plain. At each of these places the granite outcrop forms into
hollows, where water will always be found after rains. They are
* Spelt “ Youldah Water ” in accompanying map


surrounded by a few hundred acres of richly-grassed land, and
it may be observed that, with the exception of Madina, which is on
its northern slope, no granite outcrop will be found west of Oldea
Water; and it seems worthy of remark that this, the only permanent
water for many miles in any direction, seems to be at that part of
the range where, so far as surface indications go, the granites end
and the limestone begins. The range at this point is about 500 ft,
above the level of the plain, and can be seen a considerable
distance from the south, I have always been much impressed
with the value of these plains for pastoral purposes; and, in
1877, when in England, my representations of their value led
capitalists there to direct me to take up suitable country and sink
for water with the view to settlement; and I would wish to say
that the credit of endeavoring to open up the country north of
the Oldea Sandrange is due to the liberality of Mr. Louis Leisler
and Mr. Bauman, of Glasgow, and that later on it was supple-
mented by the spirited enterprise of Mr. Philip Levi, of this city.
While engaged upon this undertaking, occasional opportunities
offered of examining the country to the west and north-west of
the Leisler Hills, where there is a large extent of valuable pastoral
country, with a very extensive surface clay formation eminently
adapted for the construction of reservoirs with large catchment
areas. And, in the hope of finding suitable sites for wells, I
followed the Oldea Sandrange in a north-west direction for
sixty miles from Oldea without finding any perceptible change
of country, except that the limestone is more frequently found
on the surface. Upon one of these journeys, when returning to
Oldea, I kept as near as possible to the south foot of the range,
the mulga scrub though Avell grassed being almost impenetrable ;
these occasionally give place to more open country, with low lime-
stone ridges, on which grow oaks and sandalwood. The depres-
sions form into dry salt pans, around which fossil shells of various
kinds will be found embedded in the limestone, and also strewn
loose on the surface; from these I collected some very large
spirals, which I forwarded to the Rev. J. E. Tenison Woods, of
Sydney.
On this particular journey 1 was agreeably suprised to find well-
grassed flats with a good clay surface, and at a place called Kyd-
yening, with such appliances as I then had, I put down a small
tank in a very retentive clay, and drained the water from the
adjacent claypans into it; these clay deposits will be found ex-
tremely valuable in the future. Returning then to the Nullabor
Plains, I think that in no known part of Australia will so large an
extent of country be found where there never can have been any
native population. The blacks on the south coast have no idea
of anything that may be beyond their territory to the northward,
and I believe it requires some persuasion to induce them to accom-
pany a party travelling in that direction. Mr. J. W. Jones, the


Conservator of Water, in the diary of his travels across these
plains in 1880, mentions some little difficulty that he met with of
this kind.
The boundary line (the 129° of longitude) was crossed by Giles’s
expedition in 1875, in about latitude 29° 20', where there were
abundant evidences of a native population, for, in a water-channel
that emptied itself into a salt lagoon, a dam had been constructed
by the natives, which when full would hold some 4,000 gallons of
water, so that, though not showing on the surface, there must be
a good retentive clay deposit beneath. At this point the country
consists of undulating limestone, covered with mulga, sandal-
wood, oak, and rnallee, with occasional porcupine sandhills, the
hollows being generally fairly well grassed. Similar country
extends toward the west for eighty or one hundred miles, when
it again opens out into extensive plains, reaching in west,
north, and south directions to the horizon, and I think that to
the south they continue uninterruptedly to the coast. The expe-
dition was travelling across the plains for four and a half days
before it arrived at their western edge. Of course we can form
no idea how far they may extend to the north. The plains in this
latitude maintain much the same character as they do to the south,
the grasses and herbage being similar. Perhaps it was an un-
usually good season when the party crossed, for the long line of
camels left a trodden track behind them in many places as there
would be if they had passed through a cornfield. The telegraph
line is laid across their southern extremity, and as these plains
are attracting the attention of English capitalists, there seems a
probability that in the near future they will be traversed by a line
of railway from the westward. Water has been obtained by the
Water Conservation Department, and every mile so gained to the
northward will be valuable towards reaching a change of forma-
tion where water may be obtained at a shallower depth, and it is
a pity the department cannot put more of their boring appliances
there. The report of the agriculturalists who, under instructions
from the Commissioner of Crown Lands, have just returned from
this country, confirms the opinions expressed by earlier travellers,
viz., that it is eminently adapted in every way for pastoral pur-
poses, and probably for the growth of cereals. And I think the
climate, soil, and rainfall will compare favorably with that of the
northern areas, or any part of Riverina, and we may hope that
before many years have passed this long-neglected but valuable
part of the colony will receive more attention.
Continuing a northward course, on the 129° meridian, the next
point we arrive at that has been visited is the Tomkinson Ranges,
in latitude 26° 18'. I think these ranges offer a much larger extent
of valuable pastoral country than either the Musgrave or the Mann
Ranges, as they abound in waters that cannot be considered
other than permanent; and it is, as far as we know, one of the


most interesting parts of the province boundary. The ranges, I
think, are more detached than those to the eastward, and open out
into broad, well-defined valleys, well clothed with many varieties
of grass and herbage. Leaving the Tomkinson, and travelling
northward for ninety miles, the Petermann Ranges will be reached,
largely composed of ironstone at their eastern extremity, with
occasional outcrops of metamorphic rocks. They have not the
imposing appearance of the Tomkinson, hut extensive areas of
well-grassed land will he met with. They were visited by Giles’s
expedition in 1874, and it should be remembered that he had but a
very light equipment, with horses only, and it being the height of
summer he was not in a position to wander far from known waters
with safety, but he seems to have had no difficulty when in these
ranges. Of the country to be met with north of the Petermann
Ranges nothing is known until we reach latitude 22° 20', where
it was crossed by the expedition under Colonel Warburton in
1873, where he found a salt lake country and high sandstone cliffs,
and the Mary Springs near the boundary. Further to the south-
ward he seems to have met with a barren and inhospitable country
that prompted him to try a more northerly course.
In 1856, Gregory crossed this meridian in latitude 18° 20', when,
following up Sturt’s Creek, he describes it as a low, level, grassy
country, subject to inundation. On this expedition he was
accompanied by the Baron Sir Ferd. von Mueller, and they
returned to the settlements with much valuable information of the
unknown interior. The next known point to the north on the
boundary line is in latitude 17°, where it was crossed by the
expedition under Alexander Forrest, of West Australia, in August,
1879. At this point he met with the Negri River, running to the
Avestward, with well-grassed country on either bank. Forrest
expressed his opinion that this river joined the Ord about
ten (10) miles to the AvestAvard, but time Avould not permit him to
folloAv either to any distance. He reports the Ord River as a
magnificent stream twenty chains Avide and running strong, Avith
good feed upon its banks. Continuing northAvard to latitude 15°,
we arrive at the seacoast, between which and the Ord River I
imagine the country must noAV be pretty Avell knoAvn.
We have thus roughly passed over the country from the south
to the north coast on the 129° meridian, and ha\-e found many
points of value and interest. BetAveen these there are gaps of
over 200 miles in extent, and Ave may infer that these unknoAvn
distances contain features and tracts of country of which it is
desirable to know something, and Avhich Ave hope may offer induce-
ments for future settlement, and that the gold-bearing formation
of the Kimberley may extend further to the southwards than Ave
are aAvare.


A
''if
The discussion which followed the reading of the foregoing paper
was chiefly on the Nullabor Plains country; the soil was reported
to be light and friable, overlying crystalline limestone, but too
porous for holding water, so that for purposes of settlement it
would be necessary to construct cement tanks.
The average annual rainfall was estimated at about ten inches.
Land snails are to be found on the plains and northwards to the
top of the Tomkinson Range. The height of this range is not
known, but it has a more imposing appearance than the Mount
Lofty Range, which may be owing to its being more precipitous.
The rainfall at the various stations on the coast, as published by
the Government Astronomer, &c., Mr. Todd, C.M.G., in his annual
reports from 1879 to 1886, is shown as follows :
1879. iB6O. 1881. 1882. 1883. 1884. 1885. 1886.
Eucla 11-03 8-55 8-25 12-125 8*27 10-20 9-99 11-09
Yalata 8-75
Fowler’s Bay .. 12-21 9-65 9-16
Streaky 8ay.... 13-08 15-48 9-48
14-46 13-81 14-06 12-21 10-27
13-615 14-58 12-37 12-16 10-63
18-87 19-52 14-48 16-11 11-69




■ ' 'V
■
.
.
' - ■ .. 'I { M Vv ’■ , i': ‘ ! ’. ; ■- ' t 'v‘ ’ '
’ ■ ■ ' ’ ' ' " ' ; ' - '• ,'V ' ' ■
: ' •; -■ ■■ ■ ■ ' . . ■■ ■ 1 ■■ .
: : ... \ . ■ > , > ' ' 1 ■ ■
■
/ '‘v , '
1
