

STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
VIA PANAMA.
i ■'/ ' . ■ v. V . : |
I -I
Intorporattb bir Klonal Charter.
CONTENTS.
MAP OF THE ROUTE.
PROSPECTUS - Page 3
EXTRACT FROM PARLIAMENTARY INTELLIGENCE - '•>
PANAMA RAILROAD, AND SPEEDY COMPLETION 10
GOLD LYING IDLE II
ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA AND PACIFIC TRADE 12
FAILURE OF CAPE OF GOOD HOPE ROUTE TO AUSTRALIA, from
I |
“Sydney Morning Herald May 31 - - . - - - - 35
LATE RETURN TO PADDLE-WHEEL PROPULSION - 31)
STEAM COMMUNICATION, “Argus," Melbourne, May. 2l - - - 46
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS M
DIRECT STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY, from the “Argus,"
Melbourne, May 13 Hfc
•. v
' * *
: J


MAP SHOWING THE
ROUTE of the AUSTRALIAN DIRECT STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY VIA PANAMA
Incorporated by Royal (liarlei: OHkes.Gli.Moorgalc Street.
Tfo K 15Ho Is.') RO H )5 00 715 0 O 15
Ofat/u/fa fa’\ y/fiu'y r M[M
To/si/ /< fA7 J/t five Yrvm /ru/fa/M frM/fa/j
120 105
London EilwarcL Stanford ,
,0 Cross.


C|e Australian gimt
Steam Ualriptkii Comptnj.
VIA PANAMA.
INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER,
o
f
Beariko Date 24tii June, 1853.
SJtbcrtbg tljc |Tialrililg of |nbihibual is ipmiteb to tbc
Ibferal of tbit
CAPITAL
£1,000,000, in 40,000 Shares of £25 each.
WITH POWER TO INCREASE THE SAME.
DEPOSIT £2 PER SHARE.
PRINTED BY SMITH, ELDER, & CO„ 6ft, CORNHILL. LONDON.
M.DCCC.LTII.


Brrcctors.
Chairman, pro tem.—Sir JOHN CAMPBELL, K.C.H., 10, Harley Street, Cavendish
Square, Director of the National Provincial Bank of England.
JOHN CARNAC MORRIS, Esq,, F.R.S., late of the E.I. Company’s Service, 10, Mansfield
Street, Portland Place.
CHRISTOPHER R. M. TALBOT, Esq., M.P., 3, Cavendish Square, and Morgan*, Glamor-
gan, Chairman of the South Wales Railway.
ROBERT A. HEATH, Esq., of the Firm of Heath & Co., 31, Old Jewry.
Captain THOMAS BULKELEY, Clewer Lodge, Windsor, Director of the Great Western
and South Wales Railways.
GEORGE HERRING, Esq., 12, Old Broad Street, of the Firm of G. & A. Herring & Co.
GEORGE CLIVE, Esq., 20, Eaton Square, Director of the Commercial Bank of London.
Captain A. S. HAMOND, R.N., Freshwater, Isle of Wight.
HENRY SIMONDS, Esq., Reading, Director of the Great Western and South Wales Railways.
JOSEPH UNDERWOOD, Esq., Eastcheap, Director of the Commercial Bank of London.
WILLIAM FANNING, Esq., 10, Gloucester Gardens, Hyde Park.
JOHN JACKSON, Esq., late of the East India Company’s Service.
Captain J. C. HOSEASON, R.N., 7, Stafford Street, Albemarle Street.
GEORGE BARBER, Esq,, 50, Mark Lane, of the Firm of Barber & Barker, Director of
the Melbourne Dock and Railway Company.
JAMES J. MACINTYRE, Esq., Sydenham Park, late Merchant in Sydney.
With power to add to their number.
Ilkerfors of |(airfital Jopartnwnt.
Captain ANDREW SHAPE HAMOND, R.N.
Captain JOHN COCHRANE HOSEASON, R.N.
fionsnlting (Baginxcr.
ALEXANDER GORDON, Esq., Member Inst. C. E., 22, Fliidycr Street, Whitehall.
junkers.
Messrs. PRESCOTT, GROTE, CAVE, & CAVE, Threadneeille Street,
The COMMERCIAL BANK OF LONDON, Lothbury, and Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.
(fountrjj §}aulitrs.
The NATIONAL PROVINCIAL BANK OF ENGLAND.
Solidtors.
Messrs. MAPLES, MAPLES, & PEARSE, Frederick’s Place, Old Jewry.
Messrs. MULLENS, MARSHALL, & DANIELL, 3, Lombard Street.
Messrs. ROBINS & BARBER, 29, Threadneedlo Street.
Socrttarg.
HENRY FOREMAN, Esq.
OFFICES; 62, MOOKGATE STREET.


|) rosprctus.
Her Majesty in Council having granted a Royal Charter
of Incorporation, the Directors feel it a duty promptly to
bring into effective operation the means which they believe
best calculated to insure the most direct and expeditious
communication with Australia, —and thereby to satisfy a
requirement of great and growing mgency.
The route proposed, viz.—the direct line connecting
England with Australia, and crossing the Isthmus of Panama,
may be considered as divided into three stages —the At-
lantic passage, —the transit across the Isthmus, —and the
Pacific passage —to Sydney and Melbourne alternately;
coaling at Otaheite or other convenient station. On the
first—it is unnecessary to dwell; of the second—all dif-
ficulties are in process of speedy removal by the line of
Railway now approaching its completion,* with attendant
accommodation of suitable hotels, at both extremes; and the
third—favored as it is with the smoothest seas, with moderate
winds, a pleasant temperature, and the absence of adverse
currents, may indisputably be described as presenting the
most unobjectionable navigation in the world.
* The time of transit across the Isthmus by rail will probably not exceed
two hours.


The Dix'ectors, therefore, availing themselves of the long
practical experience of Captains A. S. Hamond, R.N., and
J. Cochrane Hoseason, R.N., —who, for several years,
have held command of Steam Ships on the Pacific, New
Zealand, and Australian Stations, and of whose published
opinions, the soundness has been fully confirmed by recent
results, adopt this course, as combining the essential ad-
vantages of speed, of comfort, of economy, of safety; reserv-
ing however, the power to avail themselves of any more
desirable line of transit across any other section of Central
America which time may possibly develop.
The speed and regularity with which paddle-wheel
steamers—on the Cunard and Collins’ lines—have per-
formed their passages across the turbulent seas of the North
Atlantic, having established a conviction that this mode
of propulsion is best calculated for long voyages, at high
velocity,—it is proposed to employ paddle-wheel steamers of
about 3,000 tons, with commensurate engine power,—com-
bining all well established improvements—in reference to
machinery, uniformity of size, proportions, and cabin accom-
modation.
The vessels will proceed at stated periods from Milford
Haven to Aspinwall (Navy Bay), on the Atlantic side of
the Isthmus; from whence passengers and cargo will be
conveyed by railway to Panama, on the Pacific side—and
there re-embarked for Australia, —accomplishing the whole
distance, to or from, —in about fifty-five days. The Di-
rectors, after the most deliberate consideration, have decided
that Milford Haven, as the port of departure, promises
advantages which few other ports can supply; viz. the safest
anchorage—entrance and exit at all times —facilities of
repair—supply of most suitable coals—and easy com-
munication by rail, with London, Manchester, and all the
Manufacturing Districts.
It is thought unnecessary to dwell on the great extension


of general traffic, wherever proper facilities of intercourse
by steam have been afforded; it may, however, be briefly
stated, —that the produce of gold during the year 1852, in
the Colony of Victoria alone, amounted to over £18,000,000,
with every prospect of a continuous increase, exclusive of
the produce of New South Wales, which forms a large
addition to this vast amount; that, during the months
January, February, March, and April last, the specie
transmitted across the Isthmus*— from Peru and Chili,
from the W estern Coast of Mexico, and from California —
amounting to 20,410,796 dollars, exceeding £4,000,000
sterling;—and that the passenger traffic by the same route
and for the same period, amounted to 10,568 persons,—
irrespective of those conveyed by the San Juan de Nicaragua
line. It may be, moreover, observed, that this extent of
traffic, however great, affords no adequate idea of the vast
trade which will arise to feed this line, when in full opera-
tion, —with all the important advantages of a completed
Railway, and of a systematic conduct of business.
Large additions to this vast traffic must necessarily flow
from the increasing intercourse between North America and
the Australian Colonies, —facilitated as such intercourse is
by the powerful lines of steamers already established between
the United States and the Isthmus of Panama in the North
Atlantic, —and between California and Panama in the North
Pacific. The augmented line of Steamers, also, employed
by “ The Pacific Steam Navigation ” Company between
* “ The Panama Railroad.—The Board declaring a dividend of 5 per cent,
for the year, ending 30th June, 1853, and reserving a considerable balance—
reported to the stockholders that the road is finished and in full operation—
a distance of 23 miles—full one-half the whole length—and that a further
length of eight miles will be in operation so soon as the Bridge across the
Chagres River can be placed on the Stone Piers which are now completed.
“ They pledge themselves not to remit their exertions to bring the whole
road to a speedy completion.”— New York Herald, July 27, 1853.


Valparaiso and Panama must considerably swell the stream.
These great results stand in perfect independence of a line,
projected, which will in all probability, at no distant period,
connect California and China; —and likewise, of traffic, the
natural result of conveyance of passengers and valuable mer-
thandize diverted from old and circuitous routes.
The Directors derive great encouragement from the know-
ledge that the objects of this Company are favored with the
high approval of British Merchants in general. Many of
the most eminent London houses have strongly expressed
their approbation;—and the following document fully attests
the spirit in which the enterprize is regarded by several
influential and distinguished Manchester firms.
“ We, the undersigned, being desirous of encouraging the establishment of a
“ line of First Class Steam Packets, offering increased facilities and advantages
“ for the transit of passengers and goods to and from Australia and the
“ different important States in the Pacific Ocean, and being deeply impressed
“ with the advantages of the route by the way of the Isthmus of Panama, since
“ the establishment of the railroad at that place connecting the two oceans, —
“ hereby signify our approval of the projected British and Australian Direct
“ Screw Steam Packet Company,*—for the purpose'of carrying out the line of
“ communication to those parts in the most efficient manner.”
Signed—R. GLADSTONE and Co.
Signed -HENRY B. JACKSON.
HORROCKS, JACSON and Co.
ROBERT SMITH and Co.
R. I. FARBRIDGE and Co.
B. LIEBERT.
ROBERT GARDNER.
SAMUEL MENDEL.
PRESCOTT, BROTHERS and Co.
THOS. CARDWELL and Co.
OSWALD STEVENSON and Co.
J. A. TURNER and Co.
ROBT.BARBOUR and BROTHERS.
JOHN PENDER and Co.
GEORGE FRASER, SON and Co.
As indicative of the approval of the Australian authori-
ties ami community, they have much satisfaction in adding
the following extract of a letter received from Stuart Alex-
ander Donaldson, Esq., Member of the Legislative Council
* The title assumed by this Company previous to the decision that the
Paddle Wheel should be adopted as the motive power.


of the Colony of New South Wales, dated “Sydney, 22nd
November, 1852.”
“In my place in Council, I have ever been a warm public advocate for
“ the advantages of steam, and all I have ever said lias gained tenfold fores
“ since the stupendous gold discovery; add moreover, I have lately advo-
“ cated this very Panama line, —and I carried on the 28th of August, by a
“ unanimous vote of the Council, a public grant of £6OOO a year to the
“ first Company which shall bring Sydney within a course of post of 120
“ days with London. My original idea was all for Panama, but I general-
“ ized the motion to obtain unanimity;—and, that Panama will first claim
“ the bonus, I feel quite sure. The gold will go by the quickest boats. The
“ quantity of gold to be produced in 1853 and 1854 no human being can
“ tell; it is at present nearly at the rate of £20,000,000 a year. I assure
“ you I feel the greatest interest in your success, and great confidence that
“ your line will pay.”
The unsatisfactory state of the present communication
with the Australian Colonies, coupled with the strong feel-
ing prevalent in favour of the Panama route,* —points to
this as the only means left of establishing the shortest possi-
ble period of communication; and the Directors, from the
demonstrations and experience of the nautical members of
their board, —from the assurances of the most successful
shipbuilders and engineers,'—and from arrangements formed
at Panama, entertain no doubt that the passage can be
accomplished in the time stated, —and that the course of
post can be safely and regularly reduced to about 120 days,
—including the intervals between arrival and departure
of the Mails.
In conclusion, the Directors observe, that this Company,
not burdened with unsuitable ships, nor constrained to adopt
unproductive deviations, may confidently anticipate the
ultimate command of the Postal Service. They feel assured
* “Melbourne, April, 1853. —Hitherto the communication by Steamers,
via the Cape of Good Hope, instead of proving a boon to the Colonies, has
been a serious detriment to business. We are anxiously looking—with our
eastern neighbours, for the establishment of the Panama line.”— Times, 4th
July, 1853.


that, after arranging moderate rates for passengers, specie,
and freight,—an ample margin for working charges,
insurance, and repairs,—and also a reserved fund for the
replacement of ships and machinery,—they are justified in
believing that THIS TRUNK LINE promises to realize a
most remunerative dividend.
Application for Shares to be made to the Secretary, at the
Company’s Offices, 62, Moorgate Street; to the Brokers;
or to the Agents of the National Provincial Bank of England.
July, 1853.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR SHARES.
To the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
Via Panama.
incorporated bt royal charter.
I request you will allot me Shares, or
any less number of Shares, of £25 each, in the Company, and I
engage to accept the Shares so allotted to me, and to pay the
deposit of £2 per Share thereon, in such manner, and at such
time and place as shall be appointed by the Directors of the
Company for that purpose. And I further engage to execute a
Deed of Subscription to the said Company, binding myself to
accept and pay for the Shares allotted to me, and also to execute
the Deed or Deeds of Settlement of the Company.
Dated this day of 1853.
Letters and Notices to me may be sent by post, addressed: —
Residence
Profession or Trade
Reference


EXTRACT FROM
PARLIAMENTARY INTELLIGENCE.
Times —July 23rd, 1853.
Lord HOTHAM, with reference to a charter understood
to have been recently given to the Austi’alian Direct Steam
Navigation Company, asked the President of the Board of
Trade if he would have any objection to lay on the table
such information as would enable the public to know the
grounds on which he had proceeded in granting the charter?
Mr. CXRDWELL was glad the noble lord had put this
question, because it showed that very great vigilance would
be directed towards the subject of granting limited liability
by the Board of Trade. With reference to the particular
case to which he had referred, he could assure his noble
friend that he had acted entirely in uniformity with prece-
dent in granting the charter. Considering the charters
granted to other companies, and seeing that the objects of
this company were unexceptionable in principle, it was im-
possible that he could refuse the application in this instance.


PANAMA RAILROAD.
EXTRACT FROM
“ New York Herald; 1 July. 27th , 1853.
The Panama Railroad Company, upon the recent decla-
ration of a dividend, made the annexed statement of receipts
and operating expenditures for the year ending June 30th
1853:
PANAMA RAILROAD.
The receipts from passengers, mails, freight, and treasure,
during the six months—estimating the month of June (the
actual amount of which is not yet received) at $.30,000 —
amount to the sum of $235,616 65
Besides a balance remaining on hand, from previous earnings, of 24,987 33
$260,003 98
The expenses incurred for transporting the mails by mules, &c.,
have been 34,260 15
Leaving $226,343 86
The ascertained expenses of running the trains, while employed
in the above service, have been at the rate of $3 per mile for
11,040 miles 55,200 00-
Leaving the net earnings of the road $171,343 86
The whole amount of stock issued to this date—including
bonds convertible into stock—amounts to $2,194,062; and
from the above balance of earnings on hand, the board have
declared a dividend of five per cent, thereon, amounting to 109,703 10
Leaving the net earnings, less the dividend $61,440 76
Due government of New Granada, as per contract, three per
cent, on amount of dividend 3,291 09
Which leaves a surplus of $58,149 67
The outstanding bonds of the company on the Ist July
inst., amounted to ,8808,000, on which day the interest for


six months, $28,280, was payable. The Board report to
the stockholders that the road is finished, and in operation,
from the Atlantic to the crossing of the Chagres river at
Barbacoas, a distance of twenty-three miles; and about
eight miles more will be in operation as soon as the super-
structure of the bridge can be placed across the Chagres
river, on the stone piers, which are now completed. The
Board regret that many unforeseen obstacles have delayed
the completion of the road, and while they assure the stock-
holders that they have used every effort in their power to
push the road to its present state of forwardness, they pledge
themselves not to remit their exertions to bring the whole
road to a speedy completion.
GOLD LYING IDLE.
“ Argus Melbourn e, May 21
« This will give some idea of the singular disproportion
existing here between money capital, and the means of invest-
ment. Nearly six millions of pounds sterling—a larger sum
than the average ‘Rest ’of the Bank of England —are still
hying idle in the local hanks. These amounts are chiefly
made up of the deposits of large numbers of successful
diggers. The principal and almost the only natural outlet
for all this money is the public land, and yet this has
hitherto been insanely withheld by the Executive. The
natural consequence is the waste of large sums which
cannot find investment, and a prevalence of drunkenness
which it is frightful to contemplate. ”


EXTRACT FROM
THE MERCHANTS MAGAZINE,
For September , 1853.
The Panama Steam Route to Australia, and the
Pacific Trade.
The increasing popularity of the Isthmus route for com-
munication with Australia, both at home and in the colonies;
the speed, safety, and regularity with which the passages
have already been made across the Pacific to South
American ports, and the many failures and delays which
have arisen on the Cape and Indian routes, all confirm the
views we have ever entertained that the Panama line must
eventually become the great highway from Europe and
America to Australia and New Zealand, and stamp it as
the one that ought certainly to be adopted for correspondence
and gold, as well as for passengers and light freight. This
route will tend to the greater encouragement of British
enterprise, and the better protection of British interest in
the Pacific; and when the advantages of the line are fully
developed, her Majesty’s Government will doubtless see the
necessity, upon public grounds, of making a reasonable grant
for the conveyance of the Australian mails.
Throughout the entire range of this route across the vast
Pacific ocean, both going and returning, between Panama,
New Zealand, and Sydney, fine weather, smooth seas, and


a pleasant temperature almost everywhere prevail; and the
trade winds, generally speaking, blow with such gentle force
and constant regularity, that the seaman acquainted with
them is enabled, even at the present time, to shape his
course from port to port with certainty and confidence;
thereby enabling him, even without the advantage of steam,
to calculate upon his arrival with accuracy and precision.
In estimating the advantages of establishing a fine of
steam communication to New South Wales by the Panama
route, the important point must not be overlooked, of its
being a resource in the event of any interruption of our
communication with India by the Isthmus of Suez; a point,
indeed, which we consider ought to form matter of the
highest consideration.
The distance by this line is likewise an object. It is
shorter than that by any of the others, being only 12,690
miles.
The Legislature of New South Wales, on the 28th of
• August last year, carried by an unanimous vote of the
Council, a public grant of £6OOO to the first Company which
shall bring Sydney within a course of post of one hundred
and twenty days with London, and there is no doubt
Panama will first claim the bonus.
The gold discoveries on the shores of the Pacific coming
upon us almost simultaneously with a great extension of
our steam navigation to that quarter of the globe, have
created a vast commercial traffic, and an emigration, or trade
in labour, probably unparalleled in the history of the world.
The tendency of commerce between two countries is always
to equalize prices; but the length of the voyage in sailing
vessels, though a small impediment for goods traffic, is a
serious one with passengers and emigrants. The vast


steam-ships in preparation for the Australian and Pacific,
trade will remedy this difficulty, and the rapidity of com-
munication, as well as its regularity, will almost bridge the
ocean, and render Australia more accessible from this
country than America was within the remembrance of the
present generation. This combination of steam and gold
promises to work a change of a most astounding character
in all the countries of the Antipodes, and those watered by
the Pacific ocean. Already we hear of Chinese, by the
thousands, emigrating to, and settling in, California, and as
they come from a land more densely populated even than
Ireland, and where the scramble for subsistence is almost
equally great among the labouring classes, what may not
be expected from such an unlimited source to supply a
demand without limit for the labour of those who are
desirous of working for the golden treasures.
Thus there appears every indication of a large population,
a vast trade of rapid communication springing up in a
hitherto almost unoccupied region of the globe, the result
of which, whether viewed in a natural or religious point of
view, will have a most important bearing on the future
history of the world.
It is sometimes alleged that among passengers sickness
prevails to a greater extent in crowded steamers than in
sailing vessels, and the recent mortality on board the Royal
Mail steamers from the West Indies is urged as proof of the
assertion; but the facts, as regards emigration to California
by steam, contradict this opinion, even though the difficulties
of climate and travel over the Isthmus in a tropical sun are
included in the inquiry. A recent number of the “ Alta
California,” a San Francisco paper, has the following obser-
vations :


“It does seem a little strange that the travelling com-
munity, with a host of indisputable facts staring them in
the face, should for the sake of economising a few dollars,
jeopardise health and life in the manner passengers leaving
for or coming to this country sometimes do. The horrible
details which have been published concerning the troubles,
sufferings, and miseries of the hundreds who have trusted their
chances to and from this port, on the Pacific coast, should bo a
sufficient warning to make any sensible man pause and con-
sider before he acts. We have been led to make some research
concerning the mortality on board steamers and sailing vessels
that have arrived at this port, and for that purpose have
procured official information on the subject, which will be of
interest. The following table shows the number of passen-
gers and deaths on board steam-ships and sailing vessels
arriving at this port from Panama, from the Ist March to
the Ist September, 1852: —
Steamers on the Panama Route.
Passengers. Deaths. Average passengers. Average deaths. Per cent.
9,790 . . 43 . . 9,828 . . 43 . . 43-100
Sailing Vessels, Panama Route.
Passengers. Deaths. Average passengers. Average deaths. Per cent.
3,468 . . 178 . . 3,720 , . 190 , . 51-10
3,720 . . 190 , . 51-10
“From the above statement it will be seen that the
mortality on board of the Panama steamers is one death for
every two hundred and thirty passengers, whilst that in the
sailing vessels is one in every twenty. This is an awful
difference, to be sure! The per centage in the steamers is
forty-three one-hundredths, whilst that in the sailing vessels


is 51-10 per cent! Even were the mortality the same in both
classes of vessels, the great loss of time, the troubles, miseries,
and sufferings of those who made long passages, are of
themselves sufficient to create an overwhelming balance in
favour of the steamers.”
There is every probability of the Panama railroad
being completed, as promised, by the end of the present year.
A number of steam lines, in addition to those already in
operation, will by that time converge at the Isthmus, and
swell the tide of population already pouring over it.
Aspinwall (Navy Bay) is at present the terminus of two
lines of first-class steamers from New York; one from New
Orleans; the new Cunard Line from Liverpool via New York;
the Royal Mail Steam Ship line direct from Southampton; the
new British line from New York via Savannah, Bermuda,
and Jamaica. In addition to these, a French company
under the auspices of the Government, are building a
number of steamers, to run between Southampton and
Aspinwall, to connect with other lines from Panama to
Australia, making no less than nine lines of first-class
steamers, centring on the Atlantic side of the Isthmus.
' O
From Panama now radiate a line of steamers to Valparaiso;
two lines to San Francisco, and two more are contemplated
to Australia, making five in all. The Isthmus of Panama
alone then, will, by the time the railroad is completed, be the
converging point of fourteen lines of steamers. Looking a
a little further north, we perceive already two lines—one
from New York, another from New Orleans—terminating
at San Juan del Norte, and a third running from San Juan
del Sud to San Francisco. Still further north we come to
the Tehuantepec route, which is at last to be opened, and
upon both sides of which a line of steamers will at an early


day be put. And yet higher up, the pioneer steamer of a
new line has made her first trip on the Mescala route, and
another line on the Pacific side is promised to connect with
it. Thus the narrow portion of the American continent is,
or in a little while will be, the route over which will pour
the immigration brought by twenty one distinct lines of
steamers,
The London Athencewm, in a late article upon this subject,
declares that “ the line from England to Australia, by way
of the Cape of Good Hope, is fit only for convicts, mid-
shipmen, and colonial office dispatches.” How distasteful it
is for those who live in the midst of electric telegraphs,
express trains, and fast steamers, to find the longest line and
the stormiest and most dangerous seas on the globe, selected
for the Australian mail steamers to encounter, when a safe,
direct, and easy route has long been pointed out to the
English Government.
Let us ask what available commercial communications
are opened to New South Wales by the steamship adopting
the Cape route? Positively none! But supposing that the
route from Southampton to Chagres was performed by the
West Indian mail steamers, or the Direct Australian, and
the distance from Panama to Sydney by another steam line,
the scheme would comprehend widely-spreading Atlantic and
Pacific communications, and mails, treasure, merchandize,
and passenger traffic, in which the following places would
be included:—The United States of America, the British
colonies of Jamaica, Demerara, Trinidad, Tobago, St.
Vincent, Barbadoes, Grenada, St. Lucia, Dominica, Antigua,
Montserrat, Nevis, St Kitt’s, and Tortola; the Danish
Islands St Thomas and St Croix; the French Antilles,
Guadaloupe, Martinique, &c.; the colony of Cayenne, and


Dutch Guiana; Mexico, Mobile, Havannah, St. Jago de
Cuba, Hayti, Bermuda, the Bahamas, Honduras, Porto
Rico, San Juan del Sud, Nicaragua, Carthagena, Santa
Martha, LaGuayra, Chagres, Panama, the Pacific Ports of
Chili, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, California, and Oregon, Tahiti,
and New Zealand. This list will show how extensive and
comprehensive is the field open for steam enterprise in con-
nexion with New South Wales; and when compared with
the unprofitable Cape route, will exhibit the causes which
now produce the vexations and anomalous results of our
first arrangements for steam communication with England.
The Australasian Pacific Mail Steam-Packet Company
was provisionally registered in May, last year; its proposed
capital being £250,000, in 12,500 shares of £2O each, with
a deposit of £2 per share. Calls have since been made, which
have made the amount paid £l2. It was announced with
a strong provisional committee of twenty-four members,
including four directors of the Royal Mail Steam-packet
Company, four of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company,
Mr. Willis the New Zealand ship owner, and several well-
known and influential merchants and others connected with
Australia.
This company proposes to conduct its operations by means
of first-class iron vessels, maintaining a monthly communi-
cation between Panama and Sydney (touching at the Society
Islands and New Zealand), in connexion with the vessels of
the Royal Mail Steam Company, the Pacific Steam Naviga-
tion Company, and the United States Mail Steam-packet
Company running between California and Panama. The
Australasian Pacific Company have now five screw steamers
from 1,550 to 1,660 tons, and of 300 horse auxiliary power
respectively. The first of these, the Kangaroo, to be com-


manded by Captain Johnson, R.N., is expected to be ready
for sea about the end of September. The others, the Emu,
Menura, Dinornis, and Black Swan, are approaching com-
pletion.
Mr. Alexander Currie, one of the directors, left for
Australia in April, to make the preliminary arrangements
at Melbourne, Sydney, and New Zealand. At Panama the
company’s business will be managed by the Pacific Steam
Navigation Company, with whom an agreement has been
entered into for that purpose. The following extracts are
from the company’s prospectus: —
“ The important ports of Launceston, Hobarton, Mel-
bourne, and Adelaide, are already enjoying the full benefits
of a regular steam communication with Sydney; and care
will be taken to co-operate with those steam companies
already on the different stations, so as to secure to this com-
pany the full advantages of that connection.
“ Passengers from England will reach Chagres by the
vessels of the Royal Mail Steam-Packet Company in nineteen
days. By the time that the operations of this company are
matured, the Railway across the Isthmus, now in course of
construction, will be so far completed as to admit of the
transit from sea to sea being made, without risk or fatigue,
in a few hours. For the passengers across the Pacific, every
care will be taken to provide suitable vessels and machinery
well adapted for attaining a high degree of speed, so as to
ensure the quickest practicable communication, which will be
much facilitated by the moderate character of the winds
prevailing in the Pacific Ocean.
“ Assuming an average of nine knots an hour (a rate
of speed which, under the circumstances, may fairly be
expected), the run will be accomplished in about thirty-eight


days; making an aggregate of about fifty-eight days from
Southampton to Sydney.
* By the adoption of the Panama route, New Zealand and
the whole of the Australian colonies will be brought into
direct and rapid communication, not only with the mother
country and Europe, but also with the United States,
Central and South America, California, and the South Sea
Islands. It has been clearly shown, in evidence before
the Select Committee of 1851, that the extent of trade and
shipping between those places and the colonies is at present
very considerable, and greatly on the increase—far exceeding
in importance to the colonies, that of the trade and shipping
with India and China.
“ The Panama route is the only one that embraces a rapid
mail service between the mother country and New Zealand,
and this not only without detriment, but with great ad-
vantage to the Australian colonies. There is, as has been
satisfactorily established before the Select Committee, an
important and rapidly increasing commercial intercourse
between New Zealand and Australia, As no arrangement
appears to have been made for the transmission, under
contract, of the mails to and from New Zealand, it is
reasonable to expect that when the company is in a position
to negociate, a subsidy will at once be granted to it by the
Government, for the regular conveyance of those mails.”
The vessels of this company propose, we believe, to call
at Auckland on their outward voyage, and return from
Sydney through Cook’s Straits, calling at Wellington or
Nelson.
The route on the map divides itself into four stages: the
first, from Milford Haven to Navy Bay, on the Atlantic
side of the Isthmus of Panama—the distance to be run is


4552 nautical miles; the second, the passage across the
Isthmus by rail to the town of Panama, on the Pacific side
—a distance of only forty-six miles; the third, thence to
Otaheite, one of the finest and most densely populated islands
in those seas, distant 4448 miles; and lastly, to Sydney
or Melbourne (alternately), a further stage of about 3351
nautical miles; making a gross total from England to Aus-
tralia of 12,437 nautical miles.
As the steamers on this line of route are specially favoured
by the winds for three-fourths of the passage, the steamers,
being properly masted, will be able to carry a press of
canvass, which will not only accelerate their speed, but
economise their fuel, and render the use of but two out of
their four boilers necessary. By means of condensers fitted
in the paddle-boxes of these boats, the Australian Direct
Company expect to be able to obtain six tons of fresh water
a day, a great convenience and comfort for passengers on a
long voyage.
As sources of profit, it may be stated that the traffic in
specie and passengers, with light and valuable merchandise,
by this route, is sure to be very great, if speed and regularity
can be depended upon. As an instance, the Harbinger, the
first of the General Screw Company’s steamers, now on her
way home, has shipped at Melbourne alone 112,747 ounces
of gold, beside what she brings from Sydney, merely upon
the reputation of a fair passage out of seventy-five days.
When we consider that the produce of gold in Victoria alone,
during the past year, was to the value of eighteen millions
sterling, exclusive of that obtained in New South Wales,
which forms a large addition to this amount; that the number
of passengers who came home by the expensive overland
route, via India, and by the Cape of Good Hope, was very


Population
Annual
Revenue,
Imports.
Exports.
Total Trade.
New South Wales
South Australia. .
190.000
58.000
200.000
73,200
4,700
20.000
560,432
185,982
1,596,801
152,668
10,000
46,826
1,313,589
471,556
4,044,000
900,000
28,535
222,077
1,135,944
485,951
7,452,000
800,000
26,156
44,215
2,449,533
957,507
11,496,000
1,700,000
54,691
266,292
Van Dieman’sLand
Western Australia
New Zealand . . .
considerable; that the colonies of Van Dienian’s Land, South
Australia, and New Zealand will all be feeders to this line
of steamers, besides the various Pacific ports of America,
we obtain an idea of the prospects of return. In the first
four months of 1853, the value of specie transmitted across
the Isthmus from Peru and Chili, from the western coast
of America, and from California, was nearly five millions
sterling, beside what was shipped by men of war and other
channels, and the passenger traffic by the same route and
for the same period amounted to 10,568 persons, irrespective
of those conveyed by the Nicaragua line.
The number, extent, and value of the Australian colonies,
as a field for steam navigation, may be estimated from the
following statement, and the rapid progress of these settle-
ments ftdly justifies the reasonable expectations of the
promoters of the Direct Australian Steam Company:—
POPULATION, EE VENUE, &c.
The existing British and American lines of steamers,
runnine north and south from Panama, which have been
O J
so remunerative to the shareholders, must all swell the traffic
of this grand trunk line.
The Pacific Steam Navigation Company of Liverpool, a
British Joint-Stock Association, running boats twice a month
from Valparaiso to Panama, has paid 12 per cent, to its


shareholders, and in July last divided 355., with a further
bonus of 18.14! on every £SO share.
The profits realized by the proprietors of the American
boats running from San Francisco to Panama, are reported
to have been exceedingly large. It is notorious that by that
line Messrs. Howard and Aspinwall, in the few years since
the discovery of the golden regions of California, have cleared
immense fortunes; and by the same means, and in the same
time, Mr. Vanderbilt has been enabled to visit Europe with
a party of friends, on a pleasure trip, in a magnificent steam
yacht, of greater tonnage and more superb fittings than any
possessed by our European sovereigns. The steamers for
San Juan and Chagres have frequently taken 500 passengers
each from New York.
The amount of bullion annually transported across the
Isthmus exceeds seventy-two millions of dollars (nearly
£15,000,000). The average amount received monthly at
Panama by the Royal British Mail Company’s steamers, and
which is derived chiefly from Chili and Peru, is about one
million dollars extra. That brought from California by the
United States Pacific Mail Company’s and other steamers, is
about five millions per month. This includes the shipments
of bullion and gold dust for both the United States and the
various ports of Europe. It is estimated that the goods
shipped from the Atlantic ports and conveyed across the
Isthmus, average in value 500,000 dollars per month. These
shipments are made from the United States, West Indies,
Atlantic, South America, and various European ports.
The amount of goods from the Pacific ports, across this
route to the Atlantic, is comparatively small, and will
probably continue so until the further improvement of the
facilities of transportation, or the completion of the Panama
Railroad.


We have frequently hitherto (says the Panama Star,
June 18th), called attention to the importance of the trade
on this coast, and it appears to us strange that a matter of
so much interest to the commerce of Panama should have
been so long neglected.
It is gratifying to learn that at length the subject has
met with some attention; we are assured from a reliable
scource, that a wealthy and well known firm of this city
has already ordered out a suitable steamer for the trade,
with all possible dispatch.
Hitherto the trade of the interior and coast with Panama
has been limited very materially, from the fact that no
facilities of transportation have existed between the various
points, beyond the slow and uncertain communication carried
on by a few rotten old canoes, and ten or twelve miserably
constructed and unsafe schooners.
Notwithstanding this, it is astonishing how the traffic
between this place and the ports within a hundred leagues
of Panama has increased within the last three years,
especially when it is borne hi mind that the trade has
always been left in the hands of the natives, who have
neither the enterprise nor knowledge to extend it, even
sufficiently to meet the actual necessities of the country.
We know several persons engaged in this trade who have
made large sums of money, and we are convinced, from
personal experience, that if a steamer suited for the trade
is placed upon the route, she will in a very short tune return
large profits to the owner.
Within three hundred miles of Panama there are no less
than eleven ports, all of which are doing a prosperous trade,
and most of which would very soon, under favourable
circumstances, treble or quadruple their commerce. The


majority of these ports, or the towns immediately con-
nected with them, contain from three to four thousand
inhabitants, and there are numerous villages in the neigh-
bourhood which are also well populated, and which have no
other market than Panama in which to dispose of their
produce and cattle, or to procure their supplies. At the pre-
sent time there are no vessels sufficiently large to convey
cattle or lumber, thus preventing the possibility of opening
a large lumber trade, which might otherwise be efficaciously
carried on, and compelling the owners of cattle to send
their large droves to this market overland, a distance of
nearly five hundred miles, occasioning them considerable
loss and detention, and rendering the animals almost unfit
for use on their arrival here.
The principal cargoes procurable along the coast consist
of rice, sugar, salt, corn, coffee, sarsaparilla, cocoa-nuts,
chocolate, dried beef, vegetables, hogs, mules, poultry,
cattle, &c., besides which a large traffic might be carried
on in lumber, hides, pearl shells, India rubber, dye woods,
and other articles which abound along the coast, if enter-
prising men, with capital, were to direct their attention to the
business.
The opening of a steam communication with the neigh-
bouring coast is also a matter in which the Government
should interest itself.
The present mode of transporting mails by land, which
now occupies ten or twelve days, might be done in one or
two days, by steam, and thus give great facilities to the
Government, more especially during times of disturbances,
for transporting troops or important dispatches to various
points along the coast.
The projectors of the Australian Direct Steam Navigation
Company, state that the speed and regularity with which


paddle-wheel steamers—on the Cunard and Collins lines—
have performed their passage across the turbulent seas of the
North Atlantic, having established a conviction that this
mode of propulsion is best calculated for long voyages at high
velocity, it is proposed to employ paddle-wheel steamers of
about 3,000 tons, with commensurate engine power, com-
bining all the established improvements in reference to
machinery, uniformity of size, proportions, and cabin ac-
commodation.
The vessels will proceed at stated periods from Milford
Haven to Aspinwall, on the Atlantic side of the Isthmus;
from whence passengers and cargo will be conveyed by rail-
way to Panama, on the Pacific side, and thence re-embarked
for Australia, accomplishing the whole distance, to or from,
in about 55 days. The directors, after the most deliberate
consideration, have decided that Milford Haven, as the port
of departure, promises advantages which few other ports can
supply; viz., the safest anchorage, entrance and exit at all
times, facilities of repair, supply of most suitable coals, and
easy communication by rail with London, Manchester, and
all the manufacturing districts.
We do not know what the present views of the Austra-
lian Direct Company may be, but we think they will find it
to their interest to coal at Jamaica, where they will meet
with greater facilities, and experience less delays, than at
Aspinwall, and the distance is run in 50 hours. The United
States steam ships find it useful to make Kingston their coal-
ing station, and the run from New York to Jamaica is fre-
quently accomplished in five days.
No arrangements seem to have been made for touching at
New Zealand by this company, but Auckland would form a
most convenient port, and a necessary point for the trans-
mission and dispatch of mails for those islands.


On the Pacific coast the Americans have now thirty-seven
ocean steamers, and thirteen ordinary steamers, whose aggre-
gate tonnage is 34,986 tons; of these, three are high pressure
and the others low pressure boats. The passengers conveyed
by them in the year ending July 1,1851, were 79,207. As
we believe very little is known in this country of the
American steamers engaged in this trade, we may furnish
the following information: —
Of the American steamers sailing between New York and
the West Indies, one of the most important communications
between the former port and Havanna is established by the
“ United States Steam-Ship Company.” By virtue of the
law of Congress, contracting for carrying the mails, the
steamers of this company are commanded by officers ot the
United States’ Navy. Of the steamers of this line plying
between New York and New Orleans, embracing the
alternate voyages of those ships, the aggregate tonnage is
4,800. The steam-ship United States, in her trips from New
York to Aspinwall, touches at Kingston, Jamaica. Jhe
Pacific Mail Steam-Ship Company, which, in connection with
the United States Mail Steam-Ship Company, carries the
American mails to California and Oregon, was established
in 1848. It numbers at present fourteen steamers, built at
New York, with an aggregate of 15,536 tons.
In the transportation of the mails, the United States Mail
Steam-Ship Company on the Atlantic side, connects with the
Pacific Company. This line, established in 1848, by Mr.
Law, of New York, comprises nine ships now, on the service,
with one recently launched, and not yet placed on the line.
They register in the aggregate 19,600 tons. The steamers
of this line are dispatched from New York and New Orleans
for Aspinwall twice a month.


The Nicaragua Accessory Transit Company was esta-
blished in 1850, by Mr. Vanderbilt, of New York, and ho re-
ceives 20 per cent, of the profits of the company. This line,
forming; a communication between New York and San Juan
del Norte on the Atlantic, and between San Juan del Sur
and San Francisco on the Pacific, is composed .of ten
steamers, with an aggregate of 18,000 tons. Of these, two
sail from New York twice a month for San Juan del Norte,
and five are plying on the Pacific side.
The New York and San Francisco Steam-Ship Company
comprises four steamers, with an aggregate of 7,400 tons;
the United States, 1,500 tons, and another; the Winfield
Scott, 2,100 tons, and the Cortes, 1,500 tons, plying between
Panama and San Francisco. They are equally divided
upon the Pacific and the Atlantic side. All of these vessels
were built in New York.
The Empire City line was established in 1848, and is
composed of three steamers, of an aggregate of 6,800 tons.
The Empire City and the Crescent City were the pioneers
of this line, and were two of the first steamers engaged in
the California trade.
From the foregoing estimate of the California steam-ships
in connection with the port of New York, it will be seen
that the number of steamers engaged in that trade is forty-
one, including four ships of Law’s Line, which were formerly
engaged in the California trade, but which now run between
New York, New Orleans, and Havanna, viz., the Empire
City, Crescent City, Cherokee, and Falcon. The aggregate
tonnage of these forty-one ships is 67,336. is not
all; there are ten American steamers plying between San
Francisco and Stockton. There are ten also, plying between
San Francisco and Sacramento. The latter arc, for the


most part, of a larger size than those on the San Joaquin
river, and make the trip of 120 miles in from seven to eight
hours. In the elegance of their accommodations, and the
luxuries of their larder, they might compare favourably
with any passenger vessels in the world. There are ten
other steamers plying from Sacramento to different places
above that city. One year ago, there was but one steam-
boat in Oregon, the Columbia; now there are eleven steam-
boats of different kinds running in the Columbia and
Willamette rivers, not including the Pacific steamers. Sea
Gull and Columbia, running between Oregon and Califor-
nia. At this rate of progress the United States will soon
be mistress of the Pacific. American steam-ship lines will,
in a few years, be running from San Francisco to Australia,
China, and the East Indies.
Several fine American steamers, crowded with passengers,
have recently left San Francisco and Panama, for Australian
ports. An extensive and remunerative trade is also now
carried on between the Sandwich Islands and California.
A monthly communication is at present kept up by the
ships of the British Pacific Steam Navigation Company,
between Panama and Valparaiso, touching at the inter-
mediate Chilian, Bolivian, Peruvian, and New Granadian
ports. According to the table of sailings approved by the
Admiralty, these boats leave Panama on the 15th and 30th
of every month, touching at Buenaventura, Payta, Callao,
Islay, Arica, Cobija, Caldera, and Coquimbo, arriving at
Valparaiso on the Ist and 16th of each month. The steamers
stay at Valparaiso about six days, and then return by the
same route to Panama, leaving Valparaiso on the 7th and
23rd of every month, and reaching Panama on the 4th and
19th. The stoppages of the packet at Callao are about


four and a half days, both out and home, but at the other
ports the stoppages are only from one to six hours, just
sufficient to allow the embarking and disembarking of mails
and passengers. The average speed of these packets, as
required by the Admiralty, is 10* knots an hour.
The company have recently added four new steamers to
their line ; the Santiago of 1,000 tons, the Lima, the Quito,
and the Bogota, each of 1,100 tons and 400 horse power.
It is a very important circumstance that the days of
arrival and departure of the British steamers to the South,
and the United States mail to California and the Atlantic
States, are not so arranged as to prevent the great delay
(often ten or twelve days) of the United States Southern
mail that now takes place. The British Southern mail
steamers arrive at Panama with the greatest punctuality on
the 4th and 19th of every month, and if the days of sailing
of the United States mail from Aspinwall were changed to
the 7th and 22nd, the South American correspondence
could invariably be forwarded.
By a new arrangement of the British steamers, one of
their boats is to call at Guayaquil once a month.
Slowly, yet surely, Panama progresses towards that high
position which it is inevitably her destiny to fulfil. As the
trade of the Pacific becomes every day more important—as
new markets are opened along its shores, and among its
islands, to the enterprise of the merchant and the producer,
as the use of steam advances daily as an auxiliary to
commerce—so rises the importance of Panama in the eyes
of the world, and its value becomes every day more and
more apparent. The wonderful discoveries of gold in
California, and more lately still, tire abundance of that
metal in Australia, have directed the eyes of all mankind to


tiie narrow Isthmus that separates the two oceans, and
forces the seamen to encounter the delays and dangers of a
Cape Horn or a Cape of Good Hope passage. A ship canal
must be the inevitable result of this increasing trade. The
genius of the man of science, the money of the capitalist, the
strong arm of the labourer, must combine and give the
world this desideratum. In the meantime the Panama Rail-
road will go far to remove difficulties and disadvantages
that now exist, and when it is completed, a few hours will
bring the traveller from the Atlantic to the placid shore of
the Pacific. An American company also, aware of the advan-
tages to be derived by communication with Australia, via
Panama, has projected a line of steamers to connect with that
port, and on the 15th of this month the first boat, the Golden
Age, leaves for Australia, and from thence sails for Panama.
We cannot do better than reproduce a portion of an
article upon the subject, from the Sydney Empire of the
18th of September last. It is as follows:
“For this route we have always contended, and how
any other should have obtained the preference for the
transport of our mails, is to us a matter of astonishment,
seeing that the voyage is about 1,500 miles shorter than
that by the Cape of Good Hope, and about 1000 miles
less than the course through Torres Straits. All other
considerations, of some importance in navigation, such as
smooth water, favourable winds and currents, are also in its
favour; and now that the railway across the Isthmus, from
the new town of Aspinwall (which is to supersede Chagres)
to Panama is approching its completion, it requires no great
power of foresight to predict that this is the future mail
route of the Australian colonies.”


“ Sydney, by the Panama route, is the nearest point to
Europe, being distant only 12,690 miles. (Adelaide, via
Singapore and Batavia, is about the same distance as to
measured miles, but not in respect of time, owing to the
many stoppages necessary in that line). Melbourne, by the
Panama route, is 13,240 miles from London, so also is
George Town, Van Diemen’s Land. By no other line could
the important colony of Victoria, and that of Van Diemen’s
Land, be brought so speedily and safely in connection with
the mother country. The route via the Cape is to Adelaide
12,800 miles, and to Melbourne and Van Diemen’s Land
13,350 miles. Adelaide is the only gainer (except the
unimportant colony of Swan River), by the Cape and Indian
route, while Now South Wales, Victoria, and Van Diemen’s
Land, which comprise a population of nearly 400,000, and
which furnish an export (including gold) of nearly
£14,000,000 sterling annually, are placed by that line at a
great disadvantage. As regards postal communication, we
are satisfied that by the Panama route the mails would be
delivered in Adelaide a week, at least, sooner than, by the
Cape or Indian lines. But then that city would not be the
first and last point in the steamer’s programme. This we
cannot help, but as the home Government are sure to
maintain the slow and useless line, our South Australian
friends will, until the contract is out, have all the advantages
resulting from this arrangement of the Cape and Indian
steamers. Meanwhile we in Sydney and our friends in
Melbourne, must, in connection with Van Dieman’s Land,
insist upon steam, via Panama, as our nearest, safest, and
most pleasant, as well as commercially advantageous route
to Europe.
“ If the Australasian Pacific Mail Steam-Packet Company


is managed by men wisely discerning the times—if the
steamers be of the first class as to speed and size—if the
arrangements as to the first and second class cabins be duly
considered and adapted to Jhe comfort and purses of the
middle classes—and if, in addition, they furnish accommoda-
tion for steerage passengers, equal to that found in most
sailing vessels, we are satisfied that the company will bo as
profitable in a commercial point of view as it will be bene-
ficial to the highest and best interests of the Australian
colonies.”
But it is not only to Australia that the Panama route to
the United States or Europe offers such great advantages.
India, China, Japan, the rich islands of the Pacific Ocean,
where vast fields of commercial enterprise lie as yet un-
opened, all these must be brought into immediate connection
with the western world, by means of steam in the Pacific
and the Isthmus of Panama,
It is coming slowly, but, as we before said, surely.
Nothing can prevent it—no opposition line can endanger it—
no rival route can compare with it; it is one of those inevi-
table destinies, that, as far as human observation can pene-
trate into time, or man can venture to predict, must occur;
and events every day tend more and more to confirm and
develop it.


Table of distances from various principal ports to points on
the Isthmus and neighbouring places :—
ATLANTIC SIDE. • ,
Miles.
Liverpool to New York 3,120
Southampton to St. Thomas’s 3,660
St. Thomas’s to Chagres 1,100
New York to Jamaica 1,627
„ „ Chagres 2,100
Jamaica to Chagres 550
„ „ the Chiriqui Lagoon 570
New York to Havanna 1,200
Havanna to New Orleans 630
„ „ Vera Cruz 310
„ „ St Juan de Nicaragua, or Grey Town 900
Chagres to Ditto ditto 240
Milford Haven to Navy Bay 4,552
PACIFIC SIDE.
St Francisco to Panama 3,300
Canton to Panama 9,200
Panama to Sydney by New Zealand 8,000
„ „ Melbourne direct, via Otaheite 7,839
Panama to Otaheite 4,488
Otaheite to Sydney or Melbourne, about 3,351
„ „ New Zealand 2,400
New Zealand to Port Phillip, or Yan Diemen’s-Land 1,500


THE PANAMA ROUTE.
From “ Sydney Morning Herald ,” 31st May, 1853.
The time is rapidly approaching when there is every
prospect of steam communication bringing Sydney and
Plymouth within fifty days transit of each other. The
present lines of steam communication have hitherto failed
in materially reducing the time for the conveyance of mails
and passengers between these two places. The “ Harbinger”
and the “ Chusan,” it is true, made quick passages, but they
have been the exceptions to the steamers that have reached
this colony, via the Cape of Good Hope; in almost all other
instances of direct steam communication, the sailing clippers
have performed the voyage as quickly as the postal steamers.
It is therefore a matter of congratulation to the colony, that
additional facilities are about to be afforded by a Company
formed in London, for “the establishment of a direct and
more expeditious line than any that at present exists, via the
Isthmus of Panama,”
The Company to which we allude is the Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company, recently formed in
London, with a proposal to raise a capital of £1,000,000
in 40,000 shares of £25 each. A single glance at the
names of the Directors is a sufficient assurance to the
public that the project is a sound one, and with a Charter of
Incorporation limiting the liability of the Shareholders to the
amount subscribed, there can be little doubt, considering the


immense importance of rapid transit, and daily increasing
prosperity of the Australasian Colonies, that the Panama line
must, and will, monopolize a large share of steam communi-
cation. But this is not all—the Company have secured as
Director of the nautical department. Captain A. S. Hamond,
R.N. (who commanded a steam vessel in H.M.S. in the
Pacific for many years), and who in a letter addressed to the
Times, so far back as the 28th November, 1850, in writing
of the Panama line, speaks of it in such glowing terms, that
we cannot refrain from quoting his own words:
“ Throughout the entire range of this route across the vast
Pacific Ocean, both going and returning between Panama, New
Zealand, and Sydney, fine weather, smooth seas, and a pleasant
temperature, almost everywhere prevail ; and the trade winds,
generally speaking, blow with such gentle force and constant
regularity, that the seamen acquainted with them, is enabled,
even at the present time, to shape his course from port to port,
with certainty and confidence ; thereby enabling him, even
without the advantage of steam, to calculate upon his arrival
with accuracy and precision.
“ In looking upon the advantages of establishing a line of steam
communication to New South Wales by the Panama route, the
important point must not be overlooked of its being a resource
in the event of any interruption to our communication with India
by the Isthmus of Suez ; a point, indeed, which I consider ought
to form matter of the highest consideration. The distance by
this line is likewise a consideration. It is shorter than that by
any of the others, viz., 12,960 miles.”
There is also a circumstance connected with this Company
which must not he overlooked. The Directors, have, we are
informed, reserved 12,000 of the Shares for allotment
equally between this colony and Victoria, so that if the
intentions of the projectors are carried out, the colonists
may benefit by the emoluments to be derived by steam
communication between the two countries, and with the pre-
sent reduced rate of interest and plethora of Capital here, the


Prospectus offers a new, and with every probability, a safe
investment for our capital and increasing wealth.
Besides the Prospectus put forth by the Directors of the
Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company, they have
issued a brochure of their reasons why a charter of incor-
poration should he granted to the Company; in this pam-
phlet they make out a very strong case for the establish-
ment of steam communication by Panama. They have
shown that whilst the transit between Great Britain and
Australia cannot he accomplished by the Red Sea and
Torres Straits under 75 days, that by the Red Sea and
to the westward of Australia in nearly the same time, and
that by the Cape of Good Hope in 63 days, and that by the
Isthmus of Panama may, and they sincerely believe will, be
performed in 50 days or thereabouts. It is no use mincing
matters; the route by the Cape of Good Hope has had a
trial, and must be regarded as a failure, and this is attri-
butable to the very causes urged by Captain Hamond in the
letter from which we have quoted:
“ The principal, and indeed, only objections to it I know of,
are the high seas and boisterous weather, which are the almost
constant attendants upon those high latitudes between the Cape
of Good Hope and Sydney. The gales of wind, nearly without
any variation throughout the year, from N. W. to S. W., renders
the return passage between those ports a matter of very great
uncertainty, and prove a source of exceeding discomfort to
everybody on board ; while in spite of the finest vessels, and
best nautical skill, they further cause frequent delays and irregu-
larities in the voyage. ”
The contrast between the route by the Cape and that by
Panama is most striking: for whilst on the one hand the
vessel sails on smooth water, on the other, at certain seasons
of the year, she is sure on the return voyage to encounter a
succession of gales.
With our increasing prosperity, the only surprise is that


Australian capitalists have not forestalled the intentions of this
Company. The Directors state, that in their opinion, the
present is the time for action. If England does not take the
matter up in earnest, other countries will do so; “competition
is all fair, hut it would he a matter of deep regret, nay, we
might almost add, disgrace, if such a splendid line, with such
overpowering advantages as it undoubtedly possesses, should
he monopolized by foreigners. , The far-sighted Americans
established a line of steamers as fast as they could be con-
structed, and placed them on the line between New York,
New Orleans, and Chagres, despatching an equal number to
take up the remainder of the route in the Pacific to San
Francisco, and in spite of all the difficulties and hardships
attendant on the transit of the Isthmus, both at Panama and
San Juan de Nicaragua, when no facilities existed (as they
do at present) for crossing, the steamers were crowded with
passengers, and the proprietors were amply repaid for their
foresight and prudent calculation.”
If brilliant prospects have been opened by the steam
communication between New York and San Francisco, (and
it can hardly be supposed but that it is a lucrative under-
taking, or it would not be continued,) what may we not
expect in the way of returns from the Australian Direct
Steam Navigation Company, if properly managed, and
prudently conducted. To this colony we repeat, it is
of the utmost importance that we should possess a direct
and rapid communication with England. Our products,
our wealth, our increasing importance, our imports and
exports, demand it; the press in England is warm on
the subject, and the Times, in commenting on the Com-
pany’s Prospectus, states in reference to the Panama route,
“ Its convenience and safety, as well as its facilities for speed,
have long been urged by almost all parties interested in
the welfare of the colonies, and every attempt to develope its
capabilities will be regarded with favourable anticipations.”


From “ The Artizanof September 1853,
ENTITLED
THE LATE RETURN TO PADDLE-WHEEL
PROPULSION.
To the Editor of The Abtxzan.
Sir, —How far my remarks on the comparative merits of
screw and paddle-wheel propulsion may have contributed to
the adoption of the paddle-wheel, in preference to the screw,
by the “ Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company,”
lately chartered, I cannot say, as I had no knowledge of
such a company being formed, until I saw it publicly an-
nounced since my last communication; and I congratulate
the directors of this company in the prospects open to them,
by giving up the uncertainty of transit to Australia for a
more clearly defined and regular intercourse, which every
day’s experience proves to be of increasing value to England.
There can be no doubt, that the prudent course adopted
by this company will be the precursor of a better system of
communication with the east than we have yet been favoured
with; and, if steam navigation to those seas be not esta-
blished on .the same unerring principle by other trading
companies, the “Australian Direct Steam Navigation Com-
pany ” may safely defy all chance of successful competition.
The “ Great Britain ” has done much to solve the capa-
bilities of the screw; and we cannot but regret the deplor-


able losses which its failure has inflicted on the shareholders
of the “Australian Royal Mail Steam Navigation Company,”
as shown by their report, published in the Times of the 16 th
instant, coupled with the defective construction of those
vessels, of which they so bitterly complain.
Should the company be continued, it is proposed to have
a new class of vessel, “ clipper-built ships, fully rigged, with
auxiliary steam power to such a moderate extent as will enable
them to make way during the prevalence of calms and contrary
winds, yet without interfering so much with the stowage of
cargo and accommodation for passengers as have been hitherto
the case in the vessels already dispatched to Australia.”
The Melbourne is now laid up in the East India Import
Dock, as a useless vessel; and the Adelaide has reached
Sydney, as stated in the Times of the 15 th instant, in a dan-
gerous condition, unfit, as stated by the Sydney report, to
return to England, without being first sent to India, to un-
dergo extensive repairs; fully corroborating the truth of my
remarks in your last number, as the natural results of her
“ wave-line ” construction, selected by her builder. She left
Plymouth on the 3rd of January, and reached Sidney on
the 21st of May, making the passage in 139 days; but the
ships which are proposed to supersede her by the new direc-
tors of the company, are expected to make the passage in
“from 60 to 70 days.”
“Look before you leap!” is full of valuable meaning; and,
as the report admits that they have so ruinously leaped
before they looked, with all due deference to the directors,
who are perfectly unknown to me, I will take the liberty to
suggest the propriety of considering how far it is desirable
to use auxiliary steam, when “ clipper-built ships,” without it,
are known to make the passage in a little over 7 0 days; and.


further, if it will not be quite as profitable to employ power-
ful steam tugs, in the calm latitudes between Madeira and
the Cape, with lighter and a more capacious class of ships
than those proposed in the new regulations.
The difference in the average time in crossing the Atlan-
tic, between the screw and the paddle-wheel, being about
four days, and the distance to South Australia being about
four times that to New York, from England, under the
most favourable circumstances for an auxiliary screw ship,
she must be beaten about sixteen days; and sixteen days
will at least make £1,600 in favour of the paddle-wheel.
The American clipper ship Sovereign of the Seas has chal-
lenged all steam vessels now on the line; and the Great
o
Britain has offered to return a part of the freight money if
she does not make the passage in sixty-five days.
Under her present fittings, it is possible the Great Britain
may make a chance passage hi the time, or in seventy days;
and she takes out passengers and cargo which will give
a gross return, by her own showing, of £20,354. Her
expenses will be about £l5O per day=£lo,soo; leaving
£9,850 in the way of business. If fitted with paddle-
wheels, with side lever engines of 900 instead of 500 horse
power, and her daily expenses, including every thing, are
£180=£9,900 for fifty-five days, she will clear £10,454,
or £604 above the screw; or, in other words, she would
make £10,454 in fifty-five days with the paddle-wheel, in-
stead of £9,850 in seventy days by the screw. But, as a
paddle-wheel steamer, she would command a higher rate of
passage money and freight, in consequence of the certainty
of her time; and, if we add to this the carriage of the mail,
we have a right to expect that her average profits would be
about £1,500 above that of the screw per voyage to Austra-


lia, with considerably less expenses in port; and it has been
remarked, seeing that the proprietors of the Great Britain
spare no trouble or expense in their endeavours to make her
answer some good purpose, that they will bring her back to
a paddle-wheel steamer, as first intended, she having been
fitted with the screw, at “ the suggestions of that superior
man, Mr. Brunei.”
Although I do not profess to have more than an ordinary
knowledge of mathematics, still I know enough to help my
judgment in investigating the comparative merits of screw
and paddle-wheel propulsion; and I am quite at a loss to
discover on what grounds the screw could be expected to
produce the same satisfactory results as the latter, as it
respects speed ; indeed, I very much question if it was ever
seriously anticipated; however, we have had ample experience
of late, to determine the fact in favour of the paddle-wheel,
without wasting any more time and money in useless con-
troversy. The instant steam was applied, as a motive
power, to drive the paddle-wheel, its real advantages and
disadvantages were clearly developed; but the irregularity
of the dip of paddles produced results which it became
necessary to control; and, most unfortunately for the interest
of steam navigation, a wrong road was taken. Instead of
retaining the most effective form for propulsion which the
common radiated wheel had substantiated, its disadvantages
when too deeply or too lightly immersed, were attempted,
as was explained in my former letters, to he overcome by
changing the position of the floats, instead of raising and
depressing the wheel, to meet the variations which were
constantly taking place in the vessel’s immersion line; and
in England, for the last twenty years, a determination seems
to have been made to force nature to conform to mechanical


contrivances, at variance with the necessities of the case;
but this is readily accounted for by the influence which
party combination holds in connection witli all things with
which the public are not sufficiently acquainted to keep in
check.
The feathering wheel, about the best of those contrivances,
in its primitive state, was too fragile to perform its duty, and
was soon abandoned by the Admiralty, and those who had
adopted it. It has again been adopted, in its new form, in
the mercantile, but not in the royal navy, but could not be
retained, its expensive and destructive tendency having com-
pelled the Royal West India Mail Packet Company to give
it up; and the Peninsular and Oriental Company have also
abandoned it, and with it, pro tern., the paddle-wheel, in
favour of the screw; but it is presumed they will revert to
the paddle-wheel, or give up their route to India and Aus-
tralia by way of the Cape. As to the General Screw Com-
pany’s vessels to India and Australia, it is very probable
that they may continue the use of the screw for some time;
having so many vessels, what they lose by long voyages they
may make up, in part, by the profits on shorter lines; but
this must have an end, if the Australian Direct Steam Na-
vigation Company succeed with their paddle-wheel steamers,
as so confidently expected they will.
The daily increasing prosperity of the shipping interest
will, for some time to come, open a field for speculative no-
tions, and it is very possible that the preposterous ships of
the Eastern Steam Navigation Company may have some
chance of repaying a portion of the money expended, or
proposed to be expended, in this extraordinary undertaking;
but the day must come when the true value of steam navi-
gation will be tested by the profit side of the question, and,


if experience teaches anything, it teaches us to look for it on
the side of moderately constructed vessels, propelled by
paddle wheels, and not in ships of 12,000 tons. I have ob-
served, for many years past, with what facility the public
are drawn into delusive speculations, by men having had no
personal experience of the subjects which they profess to
understand; and it is much to be regretted that, in mari-
time affairs, this sort of thing has been too successful. The
sea is not to he mastered by men who merely know salt-
water by the taste of it, and this we are beginning to dis-
cover ; and it must be a source of general satisfaction to the
shareholders of the Australian Direct Steam Navigation
Company, just started, that they have some real salt-water
sailors in the directory, gentlemen who have had much
experience at sea, and who have also had the command of
steam ships in the Pacific quite long enough to give them
ample opportunity of deciding in favour of the paddle-wheel.
They also are strangers to me, still I cannot but feel pleased
at their selection to discharge duties such as experienced
nautical men are best fitted for; and it gives a guarantee to
this public undertaking which will not be undervalued by
the real friends of maritime improvement
It is a move in the right line, and that at a time when se-
veral trading companies seem at a loss how to sustain their
credit with the public, in connection with steam; and, if my
humble efforts have contributed in the slightest degree to
encourage the spirit of improvement which is gradually
working its way in the shipping interest, on which we must
continue to depend, as a commercial and maritime country,
I feel that I have discharged a duty incumbent on all who
have the power so to contribute; and humbly hope that the
example given by this company to make our transit to


Australia and the East more certain, and, consequently,
more profitable, will soon produce the beneficial results
which have been long looked for by those who invest their
money in such undertakings.
I remain Sir,
Your obedient humble servant.
John Poad Drank,
London, August 1 6th, 1853. Naval Architect.
P.S.—By the Morning Herald of the 17 th instant, it will
be seen that the Marco Polo, clipper sailing ship, has again
made her passage from Liverpool to Melbourne in 77 days.
Her previous passage from Liverpool to Melbourne was made
in 68 days, and her return passage in 75 days, which I have
before noticed.
By the Times of August 19th, the “ General Screw Com-
pany’s” steam ship Harbinger is stated to have reached
Southampton from Port Phillip in 88 days, being the same
as the Great Britain's last return, and which was considered
a very successful passage for a screw ship. The voyages to
Australia by good sailing vessels are now very regular as to
time; and paddle-wheel steamers will be much more so,
their average voyages about 55 days, very favourable
voyages 50. J. P. D.


“ Argus" Melbourne , May 21.
Steam Communication.
We were glad to observe that our representations re-
specting the “death-ship” Ticonderago, and the other vessels
which have furnished a more than usually large list of
casualties, excited great attention in England, and caused
measures to be adopted to prevent the recurrence of such
frightful catastrophes. We should be equally glad if our
complaints now should awaken English sympathy towards
the colony, for the mischiefs it has suffered from its steam
communication. We say mischiefs, although it may appear
very strange that we now have to denounce as an evil, what
we formerly prayed for as one of the greatest possible
benefits that could be conferred upon us.
But the voyage of the miserable steamer Adelaide, just
completed, has been so disastrous to Australia, as to compel
us to acknowledge that steam communication itself, if
conducted upon the principles hitherto adopted by the Aus-
tralian Steam Navigation Company, would be a positive
evil of great magnitude to these colonies. The proceedings
of that company have been unfortunate from the commence-
ment; and have grown worse at each successive step.
Every one of its steamers has made a wretched voyage,
each outdoing its predecessor. The Australian proved
itself a somewhat worse sailer than an ordinary sailing-
vessel; the Sydney proved itself worse than the Australian;


the Melbourne proved itself very much worse than the
Sydney; and the Adelaide caps the climax by proving
itself immeasurably inferior even to the Melbourne.
To show the steadily-increasing nautical sins of this
mismanaged fleet, we may refer to a letter from one of
passenger-victims by the Adelaide. He shows that the first,
the Australian, took forty-four days to reach the Cape; the
second, the Sydney, took fifty-four days; the third, the
Melbourne, took seventy-five days; while the fourth, the
Adelaide took seventy-seven days. With a steadily-descend-
ing scale like this, is it too much to wonder whether the
fifth will ever reach this port at all?
Even while these remarks are in course of preparation,
we are apprised through the agengy of the other companies,
whose steamers Hellespont by the Cape route, and Shanghae
from Singapore, are dashing side by side up to Hobson’s Bay,
that once more the Australian is found to be all wrong.
She has started for Australia forsooth, and put back “leaky.”
Her precise kind of disarrangement does not appear to be
clearly known, but we find it somewhat quaintly described
in our latest English paper, as a “ defect which admits the
sea into the ship, but does not allow it to escape again,”—
a peculiarity which, to our non-nautical ears, seems to
indicate about as inconvenient a complaint as any sea-going
vessel could be troubled with.
The preposterous length of the voyage is a minor evil, in
comparison with the anxiety occasioned by the dread of ship-
wreck, which haunted this community for weeks, in the case
of the last two steamers. We were almost on the point of
giving up the Adelaide for lost, when the lumbering old
hulk was reported at last to have rolled into Adelaide. And
if she did not suffer shipwreck, it certainly is not the fault
of the Company; for the narrative of the voyage plainly
shows that every reasonable precaution to ensure it was
carefully taken before she was sent out. The whole case


exhibits a scandalous amount of mis-management, which
should not be permitted to pass uninvestigated. All this is
the more provoking when it is considered that these very
steamers carry the most valuable freights that could be
placed in them. Thus, the Australian took home something
near half-a-million sterling in gold-dust alone; and the
Adelaide brings out about £300,000 sterling in specie.
Surely such treasures as these are worth being consigned to
sea-worthy vessels.
The miscliiefs inflicted on the mercantile community here
by the detention of the Adelaide, and the fears for her
safety, have been intolerable. Mails have been postponed—
goods have arrived before the advices or bills of lading had
come to hand—correspondence has been confused, and busi-
ness transactions have been utterly deranged. It is most
provoking to think that a steamer holding the Government
mail contract, and for which the mails have been kept back
for several weeks, should leave London on the 11th Decem-
ber, and arrive in Port Philip on the 11th May following'—
a period of five months precisely I—while a steamer belong-
ing to another company, which started two months and five
days after her, should yet be able to arrive twenty days
before her. In fact, if anything could render more ridiculous
the lumbering movements of our hitherto principal line, it
would be the manner in which their vessels have been
literally danced round by the Harbinger, the Chusan, the
Formosa, and other steamers of better managed companies.
We sincerely hope that this last experiment of the Australian
Steam Navigation Company will either be the termination
of its blundering proceedings, or that some other company
will quietly take the lead, and shelve the first-formed com-
pany altogether.
We may be thought to be too severe in our remarks upon
this subject. But no such opinion would be Held by any
one who had seen the irritation, annoyance, fear, and incon-


venience to which this whole community has been for
months exposed, hy the delays to which we have alluded.
No one could blame us, who saw, as we saw, this much-
vaunted Adelaide crawling up our harbour, at a rate of
something like three knots an hour, throwing up little jets
of momentary smoke, as if the sight of the anchorage cheered
her on to the reckless expenditure of another scuttle-full of
coals; and who felt, as we felt, at the thought that this was
Great Britain’s mode of postal communication with her
richest colony.




OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“ Morning HeraldJulg 29.
A company lias been formed for the purpose of construct-
ing a direct line connecting England with Australia, and
crossing the Isthmus of Panama, which, according to their
statement, may be considered as divided into three stages—
the Atlantic passage, the transit across the Isthmus, and the
Pacific passage —to Sydney and Melbourne alternately; coal-
hni at Otaheite or other convenient station. On the first, it
is unnecessary to dwell; of the second, all difficulties are
in process of speedy removal by the lino of railway now
approaching its completion, with attendant accommodation of
suitable hotels, at both extremes; and the third, favoured
as it is with the smoothest seas, with moderate winds, a
pleasant temperature, and the absence of adverse currents,
may indisputably bo described as presenting the most unob-
jectionable navigation in the world.


“ Sun" July 29 th.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company, via
Panama, has placed its Prospectus before the public, having
obtained a charter. The capital is fixed at a million sterling,
and the advantages of the Panama route have been too
generally admitted to require enforcement at this day. As
regards the parties who are to control the enterprise, and
especially the marine superintendents, they offer a fair
guarantee to the public for the avoidance of the errors com-
mitted in other undertakings, and presuming the requisite
capital is obtained to give the enterprise a good start, there
is little doubt, under efficient management, of an adequate
return.
“ United Service Gazette July 30.
Steam to Australia, via Panama.
At length the project, so long contemplated, of opening a
direct communication with Australia, by the Atlantic and
Pacific, across the Isthmus of Panama, is on the eve of
realization. The company started for this great purpose
has been formed, and obtained its charter only a month ago.
Its board of management has been established, with all the
ordinary staff of engineers, nautical directors, bankers, so-
licitors, &c.; and we recognise among them the names of
gentlemen which are at once a guarantee for the success
and integrity of the scheme. Several of them are directors
of other and most fortunate companies, and the chairman
is identified with the greatest commercial triumph of mo-
dern times—the establishment of the Peninsular and Oriental
Company.


The route which the new steam association proposes to
take is the most calculated to effect a speedy passage of any
that as yet been suggested to the public. Milford Haven is
to be the starting point in England, for reasons good, and
paddle-wheel steamers will be employed, “ because that mode
of propulsion is best calculated for long voyages.” Fifty-
five days, it is computed, will be the time required for the
voyage. The prospects of profit from the freight of specie
alone are brilliant; much is also promised from the growing
traffic between the western coast of America and the Aus-
tralian Colonies, and there can be little doubt that, as the
Railway across the Isthmus of Panama will speedily be
completed, most persons proceeding to Australia will give
the route a preference. Thus, from passage-money alone, a
very large revenue will be drawn. We confess we look
with unusual hopefulness upon the prospects of the com-
pany, and hold it our duty to afford it every encourage-
ment in our power.
“ Expositor July 30.
The Australian Dieect Steam Navigation Company.
The interest which we have expressed in the various
plans proposed for crossing the Isthmus of Panama, natu-
rally lead us to notice the formation of the Australian Direct
Steam Navigation Company; under monetary and profes-
sional directions and management which seem likely to
carry out this great object, on a scale calculated to ensure
rapid and regular passages.
The capital proposed for the company is £1,000,000,
divided into 40,000 shares of £25 each. The directors


propose to take the passage by the Isthmus of Panama. At
present they will use the railway for their goods and pas-
sengers. They expect that the line will soon be completed,
and that the time thus occupied by passengers, in crossing
from the Atlantic to the Pacific will not exceed two hours.
The promoters of the Company will make Milford Haven then-
port of departure from this side, and the new town and port
of Aspinwall, Navy Bay, their port on the Isthmus. They
give a preference to paddle-wheel steamers of 3,000 tons
burden, or thereby, from the experience of the Collins and
Cunard lines to and from the United States. The decision
is probably correct in the Atlantic, although, in regularity
the steam ships from Glasgow and Liverpool to New York
and Philadelphia cannot be surpassed.
The company will necessarily require two lines of
steamers; and the Pacific is, we believe, well adapted to
screw steaming. The screw admits a free use of the sailing
qualities of the ship, and with the regular trade winds of the
Pacific, progress could be made without getting up steam.
The large quantities of coal used hitherto on steamers have
operated against long voyages. This drawback is severely
experienced in the Australian trade; and the frequent
failures of the mail steamers are particularly attributed to
that circumstance, which will be more partially felt in the
Pacific than in the passage out and in from the Isthmus.
For that reason the promoters will probably hold the
adoption of paddles or screws on their Pacific vessels an
open question. The point may ultimately bo decided in
connexion with the interoceanic water communication. We
have no doubt that the comparatively limited canalization
required by the Atrato will enable the projectors of that
route to open a waterway for ships and steamers of any
magnitude now afloat; and in that case the Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company will save transshipment.
These points of detail will be arranged with great facility


hereafter; and, in the meantime, we rejoice to learn that a
company will ultimately be established, which will place
vessels of sufficient power and tonnage on this route.
Failure would be disgraceful to the mechanical science of the
country, because there will be no failure of business. The
Australians, in the course of a few years, will be numbered
by millions; and they will form the wealthiest community
on the earth. They can and will pay for quick transmis-
sion; and the company will have an annually increasing
number of through passengers. Any country furnishes
passengers paying high fares, not in proportion to the num-
ber of its inhabitants, but of the means in their possession,
and the Australians are not soon in danger of finding their
means defective. The colony will always have a large
number of persons desirous to pass rapidly between their
new country and this land.
The through traffic is not, however, more important than
what may be regarded, on this long voyage, as the inci-
dental passengers. All persons passing from California and
the western coasts of the Pacific to this country will prefer
the route which this company proposes to occupy. Passen-
gers from Mexico, and from the South American ports on
the eastern coast, will probably take this route. Many of
our readers, from our numerous references to New Granada,
may suppose that we ascribe too much importance to this
republic; but we are convinced that long ei’e twenty years
have come and gone, it will contain a numerous and highly
prosperous population of emigrants from this country, from
Belgium, and Germany; who will form direct and good
customers for a company of this nature, both in goods and
in passage-money. Even at present, New Granada has two
and a half millions of inhabitants, who communicate with
Europe by the West India mail steamers; and the new
company will probably improve the conveyances, and thus
share the trade. Upon the whole, we do not know a better


line on the globe than the promoters of this company seek
to occupy, or one more likely to be profitable.
It is impossible to fix any limit to the probable traffic by
this route, which must annually increase; and, as at the
present moment more steamers than exist could be profitably
employed on the North American routes, and goods are for-
warded by ballot for preference of transmission, so, very
soon, we anticipate that more steamers will be required on
the Australian direct route than this company have yet cal-
culated for; but the mechanical resources of the country are
competent to meet any demand that may be made on them.
“ Britannia July 30.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company, via
Panama, appears at a moment most favourable to its pros-
pects, and moM advantageous to the public. After all the
cry that has been made about steam communication to Aus-
tralia, we are actually now sending our letters by sailing
vessels, solely from the inefficiency of those steam-ship com-
panies who originally had the mail contract to our anti-
podean colonies. The truth is, the steam companies now in
operation mistook their line. They sought to make the
whole voyage by sea, instead of taking the direct line to the
Isthmus of Panama, there transshipping passengers and cargo
by the railway, and then steaming in an equally direct
course from Panama to Sydney. If any one will take a
map and draw a strait line from London to Sydney, he will
find that it will pass a very little to the north of the Isthmus
of Panama, and that a deviation, hardly worth mentioning,
will enable a couple of steamers, by the aid of the Panama
Railway, to solve the Australian letter problem, which has
heretofore puzzled our steam companies. As nearly con-
nected with Australia, we wish this company every success.


“Morning Advertiser July 30.
Among the various projects for increasing the facilities
of transit from one part of the world to another, which have
been brought before the public for some time past, there is
none which promises to prove a greater benefit to her Majesty’s
subjects than the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Com-
pany, via Panama, which has just received a charter from
government. The high social and mercantile standing of
the gentlemen under whose auspices the scheme is brought
out, is the best guarantee which could be desired for its bond
fide character.
“ Journal of Commerce July 30.
Australia in Fifty-Five Days.
We are glad to observe that a very direct, and, for so
long a journey, a very desirable route is about to be esta-
blished by a newly-formed company, called the Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company, the particulars of which
will be found in our advertising columns of to-day. The
route is very easily described, and must indisputably be the
most convenient and the shortest by which that distant
colony can be reached. It is divided into three portions;
the first, by paddle-wheel steamers, from Milford Haven,
or some other western port in the kingdom, to Aspinwall or
Navy Bay, on the Atlantic side of the Isthmus of Panama,
the transit across which, by railway, may be accomplished
in two or three hours, when the passengers will be trans-
shipped into steamers on the Pacific side of ,thc Isthmus,
which will go alternately to Sydney and Melbourne. It is


impossible to conceive anything more direct than this route
will be, and must, we think, for those to whom a trifling
additional expense is no object, supersede every other existing
route to the golden region of the antipodes. It is calculated
that the entire journey may be accomplished in fifty-five
days. It is truly astonishing that Australia, which used to
be a voyage of from ten to twelve months, may shortly be
reached in less than two months. Yet there can be no doubt
that it is perfectly feasible by the plan proposed. We
expect that in a very short time the colonists of Australia
will think no more of taking a run home to England for
O O
a few months, to transact then’ business, than British and
American merchants now do of passing between Liverpool
and New Yoi’k. By this line the passage round the Cape
of Good Hope or Cape Horn, so much dreaded by timid
voyagers, and certainly not without reason, will be avoided,
as well as the delay of stopping to coal two or three times
on the passage. All that is required, to put the line into
immediate operation, is the completion of the railroad across
the Isthmus, which the prospectus states is nearly finished.
“ Manchester Courier July 30.
The Panama Route to Atjsteaeia.
The length and uncertainty of the passage to Australia
by way of the Cape is proving a very serious detriment to
business, and this being so, there is some singularity about
the continued use of the line, when one so much readier
can be adopted, bringing England within one hundred and
twenty days of Port Jackson. Describing most direct the
passage between the two countries upon a map, it will be
seen that the route is nearly as straight as a bird will fly;


from Milford Haven to Navy Bay, on this side of the
Isthmus of Panama is 4552 miles, to cross the Isthmus to
Panama is reckoned as 46 miles, and thence in a straight
course to Sydney over the North Pacific Ocean, by way of
the Society Islands, is 7839 miles, making the entire distance
12,437 miles. The only obstacle to the immediate occu-
pation of the route is a neck of land to be crossed, connecting
the two Americas, and that is soon to be removed by the
Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company throwing a
railway across the intervening space. An important pro-
spectus from that Company will lie found amongst our
advertisements, and we refer our commercial readers to it.
“ A ustralian and New Zealand Gazette July 30.
Another competitor for the Pacific route to Australia has
appeared in the “ Australian Direct Steam Navigation Com-
pany,” which has just received a charter of incorporation.
The object of the Company is to communicate, via Panama,
with Sydney and Melbourne alternately, calling at Tahiti for
fuel, &c. It is proposed to adopt paddle in place of screw
steamers; and to make Milford Haven the point of departure
from England, the distance between that port and the
Isthmus of Panama being the shortest practicable. The
Company give fifty-five days as their calculation as to the
time requisite for effecting an Australian passage. Judging
from the statistics set forth in the Company’s prospectus,
that during the past year 10,568 passengers crossed the
Isthmus of Panama—and that this number, whenever the
route has become established, will vastly increase—there
will bo no lack of employment for as many vessels as are
likely to be laid on. The passage of the Isthmus of Panama


by railway—now nearly completed—is spoken of in the
prospectus as not to occupy more than a couple of hours; but
the union of the Atlantic and Pacific will not be thoroughly
effected till the junction be formed by a ship canal, which
will give transit, no matter in what space of time, to the
noble steamers of rival companies and nations, which will
thus connect the ends of the earth together, without the
prosaic operation of unshipping and reshipping freight
“ HerapatKs Railway Journal" July 30.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
A royal charter has been granted to this Company; it
bears date the 24th June last. Thus the liability of share-
holders is limited to the amount of shares they hold. This
is a concession of great value to the Company, since it will
inspire confidence in the, public to freely take and well hold
the shares. The public are habitually cautious, and do not
like to meddle with undertakings in which the liability is
unlimited. It is true that the shares of companies of un-
limited liability are held by the public, but it is generally
by those members of the public more speculative than others;
and the public are paid for the risk they run by the shares
taking a lower stand in the market. The shares of an un-
limited-liability company can be bought to pay a higher rate
of interest than those of companies with limited liability.
Investors are always willing to pay for security. A charter
affords security; therefore the property of this Company
is much more valuable in the eyes of the public now that it
has obtained a charter. Mr. Cardwell appears to have
had no doubt as to the claims this Company has upon the


consideration of Government, for lie said in the House, as
reported by the “Times,” July 23rd, “Seeing that the
objects of this Company were unexceptionable in principle,
it was impossible that he could refuse the application ” of this
Company for a charter.
The only question that a shareholder need trouble himself
with now is, will the Company “ pay ? ” —he is rid of the
bugbear of “ liability.” The charter obtained has perfectly
smoothed the Company’s path in that respect, and un-
doubtedly that is a great thing accomplished.
Will the Company pay ? The scheme is great, powerfully
supported, and it is to carry a traffic well known to be exten-
sive—in which the capacity to enlarge is immeasurable.
We all know that the traffic between England and Australia
is great, and vastly on the increase. It is probable that the
traffic will grow with the facilities afforded for communica-
tion ; that this Company will have quite enough traffic from
that which it creates, without diverting from existing chan-
nels. Whether this be'so or not, it can scarcely be doubted,
that, affording as it will such splendid facilities for conduct-
ing traffic to and from Australia, it will have a large traffic.
It starts its vessels from Milford Haven, and runs in the first
place to Navy Bay; then the Isthmus of Panama is crossed
by railway in two hours; and on the Pacific side there is
another line of the vessels of the Company to run direct
to Sydney and Melbourne. The route is—lst, across the
Atlantic from Milford Haven to Panama; 2nd, across the
Isthmus by railway; 3rd, across the Pacific from Panama
to Sydney, &c. Milford Haven is a splendid port, and
readily reached by railways to London, Manchester, &c.
The Company say they can regularly perform the journey
to Sydney in 120 days. If so, they are entitled to a bonus
of £6,000 a year, granted by the Legislative Council of
New South Wales, to “the first Company which shall bring
Sydney within a course of post of 120 days with London.”


The directors have no doubt their Company will be that
Company. The bonus would not only be a direct pecuniary
benefit to it, but it would so popularize its route as to com-
mand the cream of the traffic.
The Company is promoted by gentlemen of long practical
experience in steam navigation, and supported by directors
of the Great Western and South Wales Railways, and also
a representative of the Melbourne Dock and Railway Com-
pany.
“ llerapath's Railway Journal August 6.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
In the short article in our last (page 793) it was stated
the journey to Sydney would be performed by this Company
in 120 days. We meant the journey there and hade, for the
Company propose to perform the voyage there in 55 days,
and back in 55 days, making 110 for the journey—to Aus-
tralia and back —allowing a margin of 10 days for answering
letters.
The plans of the Company are such that there appears to
be no doubt they will easily and regularly accomplish the
work, and if so there are the best reasons for believing that
the business of the Company will be exceedingly large and
highly remunerative.


“ Manchester Examiner July 30.
Australia Direct, via Panama.
A company lias just been incorporated, with limited
liability, for the establishment of steam navigation to Aus-
tralia direct, via Panama. From Milford Haven to Navy
Bay (4,552 miles), across the Isthmus to Panama (46 miles)
by railway, and then from Panama to Otaheite (4,488
miles), and finally to Sydney (3,351 miles further), will
complete the passage. The projects of the Company have
been highly approved by many of the most eminent London
mercantile houses; and fifteen influential Manchester firms
have signed their names to a document significative of
their approbation. Full particulars will be found in an
advertisement which occupies another part of this paper.
“ Atlas” July 30.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company,
via Panama.
This Company appeared before the public some months
back, and having now obtained a royal charter of incorpora-
tion re-appears with an extended plan of operation. Their
present design is to form a direct line of communication
between this country and our Australian colonies by two sets
of paddle-wheel steamers —their superiority for punctuality
and reliance over the screw propellers having been suffi-
ciently proved—of 3,000 tons burthen; one set to start from
the south-westernmost point of Wales, Milford Haven, to
Aspinwall (Navy Bay) on the Atlantic side, where the
passengers and cargo are to be disembarked and conveyed


across the Isthmus by the railway which is now in course of
formation to Panama, on the Pacific side, whence the other
set of steamers are to convey them to Otaheite, to coal, and
thence direct to Sydney. The distance being, altogether—
the railroad across the Isthmus, 46 miles, included—about
12,450 miles, which the directors calculate, upon data on
which they have reason to rely, can be accomplished in about
fifty-five days; this estimate does not appear to be overrated,
as it is under the average of ten miles an hour, including
stoppages and coaling. Milford Haven has been selected for
the starting point, as easy of entrance and exit, and good
anchorage can be relied upon at all times, besides other
advantages, such as facilities for repairs, its nearness to
suitable coal mines, and its ready communication by railroad
with the metropolis and the manufacturing districts. The
prospectus does not state at what intervals the directors con-
template starting their ships; probably the frequency would
depend on the requirement; and when it is borne in mind
that no less than 12 vessels, of an aggregate tonnage of 5,977,
left the port of London last week, and even more the week
before, besides vessels from other parts in England and
Scotland, it is evident that the traffic is enormous; but the
ships of this Company will be better adapted for passengers
than for the- conveyance of cargo, the unshipping of which
and loading and unloading on the railroad, and then re-
shipping again, will cause a delay which will seriously
detract from the saving of time otherwise effected. The
capital of the Company is to be 1,000,000?. in 40,000 shares
of 25 1, each, deposit 21. per share.


“ Daily News," August 1.
It is announced that a charter of incorporation has been
granted to the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Com-
pany, the prospectus of which was issued some months ago;
and the directors are accordingly devoting their attention to
the effective carrying out of their useful project. It will he
remembered that the route proposed to be adopted is that
by the Isthmus of Panama, and an anticipation is expressed
that by this route communication with our Australian
Colonies will be effected in 55 days. The proposed capital
of the Company is large, amounting to one million sterling,
in 40,000 shares of 251. each.
“ Times " August 2.
A charter having been obtained by the Australian Direct
Steam Company, via Panama, they have again issued their
prospectus, and, inasmuch as the predictions put forth for
several years past by those best acquainted with the naviga-
tion of the Pacific, as to the superiority of that route, have
since been confirmed by dearly-bought experience in other
directions, it may be hoped that the mercantile public will
at length unite in carrying it out. The proposed capital of
the company is £1,000,000, in shares of £25 each, and the
vessels to. be employed are paddle-wheel steamers of about
3,000 tons; the estimated time for the entire passage from
Milford Haven to Australia being 55 days. Whether after the
recent triumphs of the screw propeller, it may not be found
advisable still to substitute that method for the paddle, or
whether Nicaragua will not be found a far preferable point


of transit for English emigrants than Panama, are questions
which may he open for modification, either before the com-
mencement, or at any future stage of the undertaking, but its
success must depend entirely on the number of passengers
and letters, and the amount of bullion that can be obtained
on freight, all of which will be dependent on the speed that
can be accomplished. Heavy freight, so long as the crossing
the Isthmus shall involve the necessity of transshipment, can
never be conveyed except by the old ocean route. That
these, however, will supply large profits, if the ships be con-
structed solely with the view to them, is scarcely a matter for
doubt. At all events, complete practical evidence of the
opinion entertained by the Americans on the subject is about
to be furnished by the sailing of the Golden Age from New
York on the 15th instant. This steamer has been fitted
expressly for the trade, and has accommodation for 1,200 pas-
sengers; the intention being that she shall make regular
trips between Panama and Sydney. If the United States’
capitalists, who are satisfied with no return in ventures of
this kind short of 10 per cent, and who have the best
acquaintance with the capabilities of the route, think the
undertaking a promising one, there seems no reason for hesi-
tation on the part of the speculators in this country. It is in
fact a disgrace, after so much money has been wasted on
abortive projects, to see the line, which has all along been
believed to be the only true one, first opened up by foreign
competitors, whose interest in it is only indirect. This
result, however, was pointed out as inevitable, even before the
report of Lord Jocelyn’s committee, two years back, and is in
a great degree owing to the discouragement to wholesome
enterprise consequent upon the power then so injuriously
wielded by the Government through the mail-contract
system.


“ British Banner ” August 3
Steam to Australia.
We have laboured hard in our vocation to comfort the
multitudes of parents and friends at home, relative to the
subject of the postal communication with Australia. We
have frequently assured them, that, without fail, the thing
would right itself, and that the blunders of the Government
would, in due season, be rectified by individual enterprise.
We are happy now to he able to report, that the prediction
is being verified. We have, as our readers are aware, been
accustomed to reason in this way; the distance between
Liverpool and New York is 3,000 miles; the distance
between the remotest point of Australia and England about
15,000 miles; consequently, we have only to multiply the
smaller number by five to equal the two passages. Now
both lines of steamers between New York and Liverpool,
complete their runs with all the regularity of the railway
from Euston square to Lancaster; and the inference there-
fore is, that five Atlantic passages, and one voyage to the
Pacific, are equal quantities; and that nothing hut fuel
would he wanting to enable the vessels of the Cunard and
Collins lines to reach Melbourne in fifty-five days. The
inference is so simple, and so thoroughly based on common
sense, as to exclude all reasoning. There is even an ad-
vantage on the side of the inference. The Atlantic is the
region of frequent and terrible storms, things unknown,
after passing the Bay of Biscay, on the way to Australia,
which navigators designate the “ ladies’ voyage.” The con-
clusion, therefore, to which common sense would lead, is
that it is simply needful to procure vessels of equal work-
ing power to those of the American liners, and to secure
for them a proper supply of fuel.
What was with us argument, is in the way of becoming
fact. A company has been incorporated by royal charter,


entitled the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
The statement of this enlightened body of capitalists and
scientific men entirely agrees with the view we have just
been laying down. It is proposed to cross Panama, on
which a railway is almost complete, by which passengers
may cross the Isthmus in the brief space of two hours. This
is one of the noblest achievements of modem science. The
Pacific and Atlantic will thus be bound up in a mercantile
matrimonial union, the results of which, to human kind, it
is impossible to foretel or foresee.
It is proposed to substitute the paddle-wheel steamers,
such as those on the lines of Cunard and of Collins, instead
of the screw. The result of experience hitherto has, we
think, been comparatively favourable to the screw; but
certainly if the paddle-wheel has wrought so powerfully and
satifactorily in the tempestuous seas of the North Atlantic, it
will answer every purpose in the Pacific; and it may be
more favourable to the attainment of high velocities in
vessels of 3,000 tons burthen, which it is contemplated shall
be the minimum burthen of the ships to be employed by
the new company. The Conclusion at which they have
arrived is precisely that which, on various occasions, we
have set forth, —that the passage will be completed from
the nearest point in England, to Melbourne, in about fifty-
five days. It is intended to start from Milford Haven,
since that port of departure promises advantages which few
other ports can supply—safe anchorage, entrance and de-
parture at all times—facilities of repair—supply of most
suitable coals—an easy communication by rail with London,
Manchester, and all the manufacturing districts. It is not
doubted that the line will forthwith be remunerating. The
company thus reason well in their prospectus. It is thought
unnecessary to dwell on the great extension of general
traffic, wherever proper facilities of intercourse by steam
have been afforded; it may however, be briefly stated, —


that the produce of gold during the year 1852, in the Colony
of Victoria alone, amounted to over £18,000,000, with
every prospect of a continuous increase, exclusive of the
produce of New South Wales, which forms a large addition
to this vast amount; that during the months January,
February, March, and April last, the specie transmitted
across the Isthmus—from Peru and Chili, from the western
coast of Mexico, and from California—amounted to
20,410,796 dollars, exceeding £4,000,000 sterling; and that
the passenger traffic, by the same route, and for the same
period, amounted to 10,568 persons, irrespective of those
conveyed by the San Juan de Nicaragua line. It may be
moreover observed, that this extent of traffic, however great,
affords no adequate idea of the vast trade which will arise
to feed this line, when in full operation, with all the impor-
tant advantages of a completed railway, and of a systematic
conduct of business.
It is believed that should this company succeed to realize
their own conceptions, they will secure the postal communi-
cation. Of this there camiot of course be a doubt. The
effect of the establishment of a fifty-five or sixty days
passage, will be great beyond all calculation, in furthering
the interests, not only of emigration, but of general com-
merce. But this may correctly enough be considered the
trunk line. Such is the view of the projectors; and that
trunk will, at an early day, become connected with many
branches. When the idea shall have been realized, the time
at present consumed will be on an average reduced by 50
per cent. At the outside, the post can go and return in the
space of one hundred and twenty daj's. These words will
inspire with new life multitudes at home, and multitudes
abroad! It will be a virtual bringing the mother-country
and the colonies one half nearer each other.
The company has started under the best auspices; and
we consider that there can be no doubt of obtaining general
favour.


“ Pembrokeshire Herald , and General Advertiser
August 4.
Milford Haven to Australia.
We have just received a “Prospectus” of the “Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company,” iucorpprated by royal
charter, in which it is proposed to establish a direct line of
communication between England and Australia, via Panama,
“ The route proposed may he considered as divided into three
stages —the Atlantic passage—the transit across the Isthmus
—and the Pacific passage. On the first it is unnecessary to
dwell; of the second all difficulties are in process of speedy
removal by the line of railway now approaching completion,
with attendant accommodation of suitable hotels at both
extremes; and the third, favoured as it is with the smoothest
seas, with moderate winds, a pleasant temperature, and the
absence of adverse currents, may indisputably be described
as presenting the most unobjectionable navigation in the
world.” It is estimated that the whole distance to or from
Australia will be accomplished in about fifty-five days. It is
further proposed that the steamers to he employed should he
3,000 tons; and it is with no little satisfaction we inform our
readers, that the directors, “ after the most deliberate considera-
tion,” have decided that Milford Haven, as the port of depar-
ture, promises advantages which few other ports can supply,
viz., —the safest anchorage —entrance and exit at all times—
facilities of repair—supply of most suitable coals—and easy
communication by rail with London, Manchester, and all the
manufacturing districts. It is impossible, we believe, to over-
estimate the importance of this decision. The directors,
whose names are a guarantee of the bond fide character of
the scheme, entertain the most sanguine expectations of its
success; and it appears to us that the data on which their
expectations are founded are indisputably sound. It may be


as well to lay them before our readers, as stated in the pro-
spectus; —“ That the produce of gold during the year 1852,
in the Colony of Victoria alone, amounted to £18,000,000,
with every prospect of a continuous increase, exclusive of
the product of New South Wales, which forms a large
addition to this vast amount; that during the months Janu-
ary, February, March, and April last, the specie transmitted
across the Isthmus, from Peru and Chili, from the Western
Coast of Mexico, and from California, amounted to 20,410,796
dollars; and that the passenger traffic by the same route,
and for the same period, amounted to 10,568 persons, irre-
spective of those conveyed by the San Juan de Nicaragua
line. It may, moreover, be observed that this extent of
traffic, however great, affords no adequate idea of the vast
trade which will arise to feed this line when in full operation,
with all the important advantages of a completed railway,
and of a systematic conduct of business. Large additions
to this vast traffic must necessarily flow from the increasing
intercourse between North America and the Australian Co-
lonies, facilitated as such intercourse is by the powerful lines
of steamers already established between the United States
and the Isthmus of Panama in the North Atlantic, and
between California and Panama in the North Pacific. The
augmented line of steamers also employed by the Pacific
Steam Navigation Company between Valparaiso and Panama
must considerably swell the stream.” We are further assured
that many of the most eminent London Houses have strongly
expressed their approbation, and are desirous of giving every
encouragement to the scheme, so that the Company are fully
justified in expressing their conviction that the proposed line
of communication “ promises to realize a most remunerative
dividend.” Our readers will observe that the choice of Mil-
ford Haven, as a port of departure, has not been hastily
adopted, but “ after the most mature deliberation,” so that
we have the strongest assurance that whenever the line of


communication is opened, and we fully anticipate that a
short period only will elapse before it is, Milford Haven will
be honoured with the distinction of sending forth the first
steamer on the projected route. We may reasonably conclude
that this will he hut a commencement of a traffic in our unri-
valled haven which at no very distant period will vie with the
most extensive in the kingdom. Its numerous advantages so
long allowed to remain undeveloped will soon be made mani-
fest; and it cannot, we think, be doubted that the same
reasons which have induced the directors of the “ Australian
Steam Navigation Company” to select Milford Haven, in
preference to any other, as the starting point of their magnifi-
cent ships, will lead others to adopt the same course. “ The
safest anchorage—entrance and exit at all times —facilities of
repair—supply of most suitable coal,” (our anthracite coal has
been proved to be well suited for steamers,) “and easy railway
communication with London, Manchester, and all the manu-
facturing districts,” present a combination of advantages
which cannot be overlooked by men of sound judgment and
enterprise. There can be no doubt that the extension of
railway communication to the shores of Milford Haven has
been the immediate cause of its superiority being acknow-
ledged. As long as it presented no other features than
a mere harbour of refuge, and situate in a district isolated
from the rest of the kingdom, in itself affording but
little encouragement for the speculator and capitalist, its
natural capacity, however great, necessarily remained un-
developed ; this obstacle being removed, and a communi-
cation being opened into the very heart of the kingdom,
affording facilities for conveying the productions of dis-
tricts rich in every description of wealth to its shores, it is
impossible that its superior claims could any longer be un-
acknowledged. Whilst, therefore, we may congratulate those
who are more immediately connected with the prosperity of the
harbour with the prospect which is note opening upon them.


of its becoming the depot of a most extensive and jlourishing
trade; we may, at the same time, point to this as a most
encouraging feature in the expectations of the shareholders
in the South Wales Railway. It is of course to the establish-
ment of an extensive foreign trade with the port of Milford,
that the projectors of the South Wales line mainly look for a
remunerative dividend, and it must he highly satisfactory to
them to find that the hopes they held out to the public to embark
in the undertaking have every appearance of being realized.
“ Carmarthen Journal August 5.
Milfoed Haven.—The Austkaxian Packet Station.
The many advantages of Milford Haven over every other
port of Great Britain, are now universally admitted. It
would be superfluous to enumerate them, or even to trace
the slow and still unwilling testimony necessarily given to
its superiority. Through prejudice and interests of a class
of men who have large investments in docks and wharves
in other ports, the public mind has been diverted from the
consideration of this Haven, for if it had long ago commanded
the attention it now receives, it would by this time have
equalled in importance the principal ports of this country.
As the railway approaches the shores of the Haven, much
astonishment is expressed that this unrivalled port should
have been so long neglected and its peculiar advantages
overlooked. It seems all at once to have attained notoriety;
consequently it engrosses a large share in every project to
facilitate communication with foreign countries. The changes
in 'every part of the world affect, indeed, in many cases, alter
our commercial relationship to other nations. The prosperity
of one country, it is now readily admitted, depends upon


others; for the more extensive our commerce is, and the
more intimately we are connected by the ties of civilization
to other nations, the greater is the impulse given to every-
thing that tends to the prosperity and happiness of a people.
Such is unquestionably the case, and the deep conviction of
it that prevails in every quarter of the globe foreshadows a
future of undisturbed peace and prosperity.
At no very distant period opportunities will present them-
selves for recurring to this subject in connexion with Milford
Haven, and entering fully into it, for at present our object is
simply to direct attention to the project for making this port
an Australian Packet Station. The Australian Direct Steam
Navigation Company has obtained a lioyal Charter of Incor-
poration, and the directors have determined to “ bring into
effective operation the means best calculated to insure the
most direct and expeditious communication with Australia.”
There can be no doubt that Australia promises to be a place
of vast importance to Britain, not only on account of the gold
it produces, but because of the large tracts of land that will
soon be brought under cultivation, and the commercial mag-
nitude It must inevitably reach. It is therefore of primary
importance that rapid and easy communication should be
provided, and this the Australian Direct Steam Navigation
Company engages to supply. If any one will look at a map
he cannot fail to be struck with the directness of the route
from Milford to Panama, and thence to Sydney. The line
of railway across the Isthmus is now approaching comple-
tion, and when that is done, the time of transit across it will
not exceed two hours. Australia will thus be reached in
fifty-five days. This company will surely meet with the
support it seeks.
A great point of local interest is that Milford is to be the
port of departure. We quote the following clause from the
prospectus:
“ The Vessels will proceed at stated periods from Milford


Haven to Aspinwall (Navy Bay) on the Atlantic side of the
Isthmus; from whence passengers and cargo will be con-
veyed by railway to Panama, on the Pacific side, —and there
re-embarked, for Australia, —accomplishing the whole dis-
tance, to or from,—in about fifty-five days. The directors,
after the most deliberate consideration, have decided that
Milford Haven, as the port of departure, promises advantages
which few other ports can supply; viz. the safest anchorage
—entrance and exit at all times —facilities of repair—supply
of most suitable coals—and easy communication by rail,
with London, Manchester, and all the manufacturing dis-
tricts.”
We cannot pursue this subject at any greater length at
present, but we shall return to it again. We make the
following extract from the Times of Tuesday last:—See
page 65, August 2.
“ Nautical Standard August 6.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company,
via Panama.
We rejoice to find that there is at length a probability of the
important transit between this country and Australia being
relieved from the incubus with which successive blunders
and bad management have succeeded in involving it, and
that ample means and enlightened experience are about to
be enlisted in behalf of this most important line of traffic.
The route projected by this Company is a direct line con-
necting England with Australia, and crossing the Isthmus
of Panama, In order to do this it is proposed to build
suitable hotels at the extremities of the railway connecting
the two oceans, and to anticipate all difficulties as far as is
practicable, by giving to the new line of the projected rail-


way all the advantages and facilities which European ex-
perience can furnish. All who are acquainted with the
naval accomplishments of Captain John Cochrane Hoseason,
will congratulate the directory in having selected so com-
petent and intelligent an officer for advice and assistance in
this great and important undertaking.
We understand that a rival Company, originating we
believe in Liverpool, is engaged in building a fleet to run on
the same line, pledging itself to the adoption of the screw.
Our limited information does not enable us to offer any
opinion upon the latter project, but we have reason to
believe that neither wealth nor energy will be wanting on
the part of either Company to test the respective merits of
the screw and paddle-wheel.
“ Bristol Mercury , and General Advertiser Any. 6.
Direct Route to Australia.
In our advertising columns will be seen the announcement
of a new company, whose object is of national importance
and utility, being no less than the establishment of a com-
munication between England and Australia, by which the
distance to Sydney is reduced to less than 12,500 miles.
The map of the proposed route has been submitted to us,
and it exhibits an almost direct line between the two points,
proceeding from Milford Haven to Panama, thence by rail
across the Isthmus, and thence direct to Sydney. We have
said the starting point is to be from Milford Haven, but we
can discern no advantages in that port which are not equally
possessed by Bristol, with the single exception of sufficient
dock accommodation at low water. Should the plan for the
Poitshead Docks be carried out, it may not yet be too late
to bring this noble company to our doors, and it is needless
to enlarge upon the value to Bristol of a traffic whereby the


most flourishing Australian ports would be brought within
fifty-five days of us. By carrying this to Milford a serious
blow would doubtless be struck at the Bristol trade. To
avoid this if possible we earnestly recommend our merchants
and shippers to be on the alert, and endeavour to secure the
advantages of a company, which promises to fulfil all the
requirements of our now gigantic trade with the Antipodes.
“ Court Journal August 6.
The daily increasing importance of our Australian posses-
sions renders a speedy communication between the two
countries of the greatest consequence, and we therefore see
with satisfaction the realization of the plans of the Austra-
lian Direct Steam Navigation Company, which, by availing
itself of the railroad across Panama, is enabled to perform
the distance in a considerably shorter period than by the
present circuitous route.
“ Globe” August 8.
The Panama Railroad Company, in its recent half-
yearly report for the year ending 30th June, states the net
earnings of the road to have been $171,344, out of which
a dividend of 5 per cent, was declared, leaving a balance of
£'61,440, from which 3 per cent, on the amount of dividend
(as per contract) was paid to the government of New Granada,
thus leaving a surplus in hand of £(58,149. The road is
finished, and in operation from the Atlantic to the crossing
of the Chagres River at Barbacoas, a distance of twenty-
three miles; and about eight miles more will be in operation
as soon as the superstructure of the bridge can be placed
across the Chagres River on the stone piers, which are now
completed.


“ Cambrian August 12.
The Ausxealian Dieect Steam Navigation Company.
We are informed that, at a meeting of the Llanelly
Chamber of Commerce, held on Wednesday evening last,
J. P. Luckraft, Esq., R.N., in the chair, “ the propriety of
addressing the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Com-
pany from Milford Haven via Panama, in approval of their
undertaking, ” was considered, and resolutions were passed
unanimously, directing an address to he prepared and for-
warded to the Board of Directors, expressive of the high
opinion entertained by the chamber of the project, from
their selection of Milford Haven as a terminus, which
stands unrivalled in its qualification as a port for safety of
access and anchorage, and proximity to steam coals, and the
best description of anthracite.
Under all considerations, the opinion of the meeting ap-
peared to be strongly indicative of the great probability of
success which would attend the scheme, and the advantages
that would follow its establishment. And, impressed as we
are with the vast and important results that must arise to
the mineral and landed interests of South Wales especially,
we are almost unable to realize in idea the gigantic strides
towards improvement and increased value this hitherto
almost neglected corner of Great Britain must rapidly take.
We shall within a few years find Milford the great en-
trepot of the largest steamers afloat. One company are now
building for Milford ships of 3,000 tons burden. The Aus-
tralian Direct Steam Company intend to lay on their flotilla
of ocean monsters. And how many more will follow in
their wake time alone can say. The South Wales Railway,
that is daily improving in its traffic and its receipts, will have
its endless trains of goods and merchandize from all parts
of the globe to the metropolis of the world. A Manchester


and Milford Haven line—now on the carpet —will speedily
give life and energy to the Vale of Tivy and the shores of
Cardigan, and hurry from Milford the merchandize of the
world to the vast and endless workshops and factories of
Great Britain. South Wales that has lain dormant so lone,
is shortly destined to wake up, and her coal-fields and her
minerals will, ere long, scarce contain the teeming popula-
tion that industry and energy will set on to work them.
Rejoicing as we do at all times to observe enterprise and
spirit in those especially of our own locality, we are proud
of the onward step taken by Llanelly as regards “ The Aus-
tralian Direct Steam Company.” We consider the step is
one in the right direction, and it strongly deserves to he fol-
lowed by every town in South Wales, and by none more
than our own chief towns of Glamorganshire. When the
railway has been fully opened to Milford Haven (which we
learn is now being pushed on with unabated ardour), and
when these monsters of the deep shall have reached that
port for their cargoes and their coals, how great will be the
bustle and stir, and activity exhibited in Swansea, Neath,
Aberdare, Merthyr, Cardiff, Newport, and also in Loughor,
Llanelly, and Pembrey. Then will the coal fields of Glamor-
ganshire and Carmarthenshire move like things of life; and
all arising from the opening of the South Wales Railway,
and the establishment of two steam-packet companies at
Milford. The genius of Brunei, and the determination,
foresight, and wealth properly directed, of C. R, M. Talbot,
Esq., claim our highest thanks. These two men, we hesi-
tate not to say, have done almost more for South Wales than
all the men combined who ever preceded them. Ought we
not therefore, to support these gentlemen and their proposed
schemes ? Heartily do we wish success to the “ Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company.”


“ Carmarthen Journal August 12.
In commenting upon the current events of the day, it
gives us a large amount of unalloyed pleasure to turn for a
moment from the all-engrossing and knotty point of the war
or peace question—the protracted simulations of the Czar of
Russia and the equally hesitating and protracted diplomacy
of the Quadruple Alliance—which, by the way, may not yet
he finally brought to an issue without bloodshed—to the
more agreeable task of recording the advance and rise of our
o o
own native soil. We refer with very great pleasure to the
Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company, whose pro-
spectus will be found at full "length in our columns. In our
last week’s impression we referred at considerable length to
this subject, and we did so from a knowledge of the advan-
tages that are likely to result from the scheme, and this
week we continue our remarks.
The prospectus fully explains the object and intentions of
the Company, viz:—to bring Australia within fifty-five days
of Milford Haven, and well do we recollect the first meeting
that was held in our Guildhall for the purpose of promoting
the South Wales Railway—well do we remember the able
and inspiriting speeches of Mr. Russell and other members
of the deputation charged with making known to the in-
habitants of secluded Wales the advantages of a railway.
The subject, though new, was taken up with enthusiasm,
such as is seldom exhibited in cautious Welshmen. But
events followed in two years that had well nigh scattered all
our bright hopes and dreams of future greatness —the panic
that shook to their centres some of the first mercantile firms
of the world—that spread its desolating effects to the Bay of
Cardigan and the trade of Port Talbot—fhat sent terror and
alarm to the hearts of thousands of our fellow countrymen


in Wales, and stopped the progress, and nearly broke the
back of that railway company to which we are now indebted.
The South Wales Railway was about to be engulphed
within the jaws of the Great Western, whether for good or
ill we say not; hut its name and its local influence, and most
probably its quick development would have been lost for
ever, and we should hardly have now been enjoying the
facilities we possess, had not Providence decreed otherwise.
A wealthy commoner, to whom Wales owes a debt, deep and
lasting,—Mr. Talbot of Margam Park—whose interest and
whose duty as a wealthy landowner, induced him to do so—
stepped into the breach, and boldly upheld the interests of
the South Wales Railway Company, and ever since that date
he has laboured hard to promote the success and welfare of
several important undertakings and public companies for the
benefit of South Wales. Amongst the first, he promoted the
building of what appeared then —only twelve months ago —
chimerical monster steamers of 10,000 tons burden, and these
are now actually being built. But the last, “ The Australian
Direct Steam Navigation Company,” into which he puts the
weight of his knowledge and his name, which will open up
the valleys of Wales to the traffic of the world—which
will make Milford the great emporium of the trade and
commerce of the globe, connected as it will be with the
metropolis and all the south and west of England by the
South Wales Railway, and with Manchester and the great
northern establishments and cities, by other lines of rail
which are now being projected. This company we repeat is
the crowning climax of our wishes, and most heartily do we
send it forth, wishing it God speed; while in a commercial
point of view we are of the opinion that it will repay an
excellent rate of interest for the capital proposed to be in-
vested.


• “ Illustrated London News” August 13.
Route of the
Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
On the next page is an accurate chart of the route pro-
posed to be taken by the Australian Direct Steam Navigation
Company—a company which has just received a Royal char-
ter of incorporation. Our object in giving this map is to
afford as wide a circulation as possible to a Company whose
objects, to use the emphatic words of the President of the
Board of Trade, are so “unexceptionable in principle” that
it was impossible he could refuse the application for a charter,
and which we consider ourselves one of the most efficient and
magnificent projects yet brought before the public with a
view to connect the mother country with her rising Colonies
in Australia. The repeated failures, vi& Singapore and the
Cape of Good Hope, extending the duration of the voyage
to double that anticipated by Government, and the annoyance
and disarrangement of business caused by these frequent
suspensions of postal communication, renders this Company’s
scheme a boon, not only to the merchant, but to all who have
friends or relations in the Australian lands. The more we
reflect on the astonishing discovery of gold, 'and its results,
the more we feel convinced that both the Government and
the merchants of England should come forward with a liberal
hand to support an enterprise of such vast importance as this
to the nation at large. Few undertakings, we believe, will
be found more lucrative to the shareholders, as few are so
truly national; and, as our object has been to make our-
selves conversant with facts, we shall, as succinctly as possible,
analyse the advantages of this route as regards ease, comfort,
and rapidity of communication, and also the probabilities of
its returning a handsome dividend to the shareholders. And
in the observations we make we shall confine ourselves as


lar as possible to facts, the correctness of which can easily be
tested by our readers.
The chart divides the route into four stages: —The first
from Milford Haven to Navy Bay, on the Atlantic side of
the Isthmus of Panama—the distance to be run is 4552
nautical miles; the second, the passage across the Isthmus, by
rail, to the town of Panama, on the Pacific side—a distance
of only 46 miles; the third, thence to Otaheite, one of the
finest and most densely-populated islands in those seas, dis-
tant 4488 miles; and lastly to Sydney or Melbourne (alter-
nately)—a further stage of about 3351 nautical miles:
making a grand total from England to Australia of 12,437
nautical miles. The entire route —favoured by the smoothest
seas, with moderate winds, a pleasant temperature, and the
absence of adverse currents —presents without question, the
most unobjectionable navigation in the world.
The very designation of this Company, the Australian
“ Direct,” marks in an emphatic manner the nature of the
seas to be passed over; for no adverse weather has to be
encountered, in the entire route, of sufficient duration and
strength to impede the velocity of paddle-wheel vessels of
3000 tons burden—the size of the vessels proposed to be
used by this Company (with proportionate horse-power), or
to cause their divergence from their track.
Although it is not intended to lay aside steaming for the
entire voyage, to secure rapidity of communication and
punctuality of arrival at the several stations, yet, as the
Direct Australian Line is especially favoured by the winds
for more than three-fourths of the voyage, all the steamers
constructed for this Company will be efficiently masted; and
from this arrangement an enormous saving of fuel is antici-
pated, as the steamers will, whilst running with a fair wind,
use but two of their four boilers, and yet obtain the same
maximum speed as a steamer miaided by canvass could from
the use of four boilers and a double consumption of fuel;


thus steaming and sailing through these favourable latitudes,
will save fuel, and effect a great economy in that most ex-
pensive part of the engine-room equipments —the boilers.
Another still more important object will he obtained from a
due economy in the expenditure of the fuel; for every ton
carried unnecessarily displaces cargo, for the rapid transit of
which across these seas the merchant is content to pay a com-
paratively high rate of freight.
One other important feature of the intentions of the direc-
tors of this Steam Company ought not to be passed over, as
it is very important, where large numbers of passengers are
proposed to be conveyed in a vessel, and this the paddle-
wheel mode of progression enables them to offer, viz. an
unlimited supply of fresh water; for each paddle-wheel will
be fitted with two condensers inside the paddle-boxes, for
turning; salt water into fresh; the condensation of the steam
being effected by placing two flat pieces of iron a quarter
of an inch or so apart, and exposing a large cooling surface.
The steam is conveyed by one pipe from the steam chest
to these condensers, and another carries the steam so con-
densed into tanks. The simple revolution of the paddle-
wheels throwing the cool water against those condensers will
enable more than six tons a day to be obtained from the two
paddle-boxes of vessels of the size contemplated, viz. of 3000
tons burthen; and this too, without any appreciable increase
in the expenditure of fuel.
The prospectus states that which all the world knows to
be true, “ that the produce of gold from the Colony of
Victoria alone is over £18,000,000 annually; with every
prospect of a continuous increase, exclusive of the produce of
New South Wales, which forms a large addition to this vast
amount” It will, therefore, remain for us simply to call
attention to the dividends which the British and American
steamers running to the Isthmus of Panama, upon the south
and north-west coasts of Panama, are obtaining—and which


lines must be feeders of this great trunk line —to prove how
remunerative the project is likely to be.
The (British) Pacific Steam Navigation Company, now
long established, and which company run their boats bi-
monthly from Valparaiso to Panama, have given twelve per
cent to their shareholders; and but last month paid £1 15s.
on every £5O share, and a bonus of £lB 14s. on every £5O
share. The profits realized by the American proprietors
on their lines from California to Panama are exceedingly
large. It is notorious that, by that line, Messrs. Howland
and Aspinwall, in the short time which has elapsed since
the discovery of the golden region of California, have cleared
immense fortunes; and by the same means, and in the same
time, Mr. Vauderbildt has been enabled to visit Europe in
a steam-yacht of greater tonnage and more superb appoint-
ment than the steam-yacht of any European Sovereign.
We, therefore, see no reason to doubt the immense success
of the Australian Direct Company, having golden colonies
for its destination, and golden lands on either hand as its
tributaries.
“ Liverpool Journal August 13.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
Milford Haven.
In the course of the discussion, in Committee of Supply,
in the House of Commons, on the estimate for the Post-office
Steam-packet Service, Mr. John Macgregor asked which of
the routes to Australia was to be selected for the convey-
ance of government mails; and the answer given by Mr.
Cow per, the Lord of the Treasury, charged with the conduct
of the estimate, was, that the government had not made up


its mind, but was going to wait to see the results of the
several experiments now making; the intention being to
adopt, finally, that route on which private enterprize ex-
perienced, literally, in the long run, the greatest amount of
success. At present, the mails are sent different routes—
one month via Singapore, and another month by the Cape of
Good Hope—and, of course, the new Company forming in
London under the name of the Australian Direct Steam
Navigation Company, purposing a line which would cross,
by rail, Panama, will have its proper chance:—paddle-
wheel steamers traversing the Atlantic and the Pacific; the
steamers to be of 3000 tons; and the calculation being that
fifty-five days will complete the communication. Of the
prospects or merits of this Company we do not at present
wish to speak, although we cannot fail to feel some con-
fidence in the undertaking from the emphatic approval and
support which liave been proffered to it by several of our
most eminent Liverpool firms. For the moment, we have
only to call attention to the unexpected choice of a port
of departure from this country made by the Company, viz.,
Milford Haven ; and on that point, the following memoran-
dum, which represents the whole case, will be found very
interesting:—
You will observe that Milford Haven is one of the finest
ports in the world, easy of entrance or exit, at all times of
tide, either by night or day; possesses the advantage of
a naval arsenal for repairs; and the government are very
desirous of making Milford Haven a mercantile port, from
its great magnitude not interfering with the naval yards in
any way; and they are also desirous to develop the mineral
and coal resources of Wales. The railroad will be opened
within nine miles of Milford in a week or two, and two
branches of it are to be carried to different parts of the town
by the South Wales Railroad Company. The Great West-
ern and South Wales Railway directors back this company,


and they will cheapen the traffic over their own lines, and
others with which they have connexion. Coal will he many
shillings a ton cheaper in Milford Haven than in any other
port in England, and the South Wales Railway directors
will reduce the cost of its transit to as great an extent as
possible. Milford Haven being the most windward port in
England, the steamers will get away with a fair wind at
once, when blowing from the westward or north-westward.
The Manchester people are going to run a direct railroad to
Milford Haven; the present line is as far as Hereford (as
you will see by looking to Bradshaw's Guide), and it can
easily be extended to meet the South Wales Railroad. The
distance from London to Milford Haven is about the same
as from London to Plymouth; but Milford Haven is close
to all the manufacturing districts, also to Bristol and Ireland.
The advantage of this route is manifest, for directly the
steamers get into the tropics the sea is smooth, so that it
will not impede in any way vessels of the magnitude of 3000
tons burthen. The largest steamers can lay alongside the
wharf at Navy Bay, in the Isthmus of Panama, and unload
on to the railroad, and forty-six miles is about the distance
across to the town of Panama.
In less than two years, under the active and energetic minds
of the Americans, the town of Navy Bay has sprung up
from only three houses to 1500, the present number. Coal
will, from the proximity to America and England, always
be reasonable, with good management, at Navy Bay. The
run from Milford Haven to Navy Bay is 4552 miles; and
nearly the entire route through a favourable sea, water
smooth, and wind never strong. From Panama to Otaheite
the sea is the finest and the smoothest in the world, with a fair
wind both ways; the distance 4488 miles. From Otaheite
to Port Jackson, Sydney, is 3351 miles; all these latitudes
extremely favourable for steaming, especially for large
vessels propelled by the paddle-wheel; the great advantage


of the size and mode of propulsion is, that it enables the
steam-boats to return by the same route, as they will have
sufficient power to face any winds to be met with in these
beautiful seas. Screw-propellers will have to make a great
circuit, and will not be able to avail themselves of the faci-
lities of a coaling depot in a direct line, as they arc not able
to face even the light winds on the return voyage from
Sydney to Otaheite. The steam-vessels are intended to run
to Sydney and Melbourne alternately; the total distance
from England to Australia, as you will see by the chart I
send you, is 12,437 miles, and the line as straight as a crow
flies.
“ Argiis,” Melbourne, May 13.
Direct Steam Navigation Company.
In another column will be found the prospectus of a
company proposing to bring us within fifty-five days’ com-
munication with the mother country. In times like these,
when so many, and some so inefficient schemes for the
attainment of this great desideratum, are on the tapis, that
undertaking which promises to carry out most surely and
efficiently the object in view should be the one most warmly
supported by the colonists at large. We perceive that this
company desires to enlist in its favor the co-operation of
the colonists, by setting apart a large number of shares for
appropriation in the colonies, which will render it the only
company which has thus identified its interest with the
Australian public.
The route chosen by the Directors is one which has
been looked upon by many practical men as that best
adapted to carry out the great object in view, that of the


speediest and safest ti’ansit. The weather in crossing the
Great Pacific Ocean being almost universally fine, and
the equable temperature of the latitude kept during the
voyage, avoiding, as it does, the storms and cold encoun-
tered in rounding the Capes of the Horn and Good Hope,
and the heads of the torrid zone in the Indian voyage, are
much more conducive to the health and comfort of the
traveller. The time occupied in crossing the Isthmus by
land is almost directly to be reduced to a few hours in a
railway carriage, and it being intended that steamers belong-
ing to the Company shall be in readiness on the other
shore, not the slightest delay would be incurred; while, at
no remote period, we may look to a ship canal, and thus
be enabled without any disembarkation, to finish the voyage
in the same vessel.
In a commercial point of view, surely the trade and
importance of the colonies now imperatively demand the
speediest and most direct communication that can be ac-
complished; and more than that, they will be fully equal
to support in a highly remunerative manner their own dis-
tinct and especial line. In addition to this, the project
before us is a noble one in a national point of view, as it
will add another powerful steam arm to the service of
Great Britain and her colonies, besides keeping the earnings
of such a vast undertaking in the hands of Australia and
the Mother Country, instead of allowing, as would undoubt-
edly otherwise be the case, this powerful steam navy to be
adopted by our American neighbours, strengthening and
enriching them at the same time.
For the honour of the old country and the Australian
colonies, as well as for its great commercial interests, we
trust such an enterprise as the present will receive the sup-
port it deserves from the public.
In the Times of the 14th of January, we perceive that
this Company is noticed in very favourable terms, and the


Board of Directors is said to consist of persons both of
nautical and mercantile experience, connected with the trade
of Central America, Australia, and the East; and they
calcxdate, that by this x’oute, coaling at some convenient
station in the Pacific, the entire passage, from England to
Sydney, may be regularly accomplished within fifty days.
“Norfolk Mercury August 20.
A Speedy Communication with Australia.
We have elsewhere adverted to the continuous employ-
ment which the demands of Australia would furnish for the
industry of the English people, if her mines continued pro-
ductive, and the demands of her population increased in the
same proportion they had done during the last year. We
also pointed to the supei’ior advantages this country possessed
in the almost exclusive privilege she enjoys in her exporta-
tion to Australia. By an Australian circular, inserted in
our third page, it will be seen that hop necessities, as well as
her consumption, are enormous, while her gold fields are
again becoming equally, if not more prolific. Now if any
one thing more than another could render the trade between
England and Austx’alia greater and more prosperous than
hitherto, it is a more rapid communication. With this view,
for some time, a railroad has been in the course of construc-
tion across the Isthmus of Panama; and, it has so far
progressed towards completion, that only 16 miles out of 46,
the distance between Navy Bay and Panama, remains to be
completed. Two officers of the navy, both of whom our
readers will recognise as being connected with this county —


Capt. A. S. Hamond (a sou of Sir Graham Eden Hamond,)
and Capt. Hoseason (son of the late Mr. Hoseason) —who
are well acquainted with the Pacific, and with the capabili-
ties the advantages of a direct communication would give,
with several eminent firms connected with the commerce
between this country and Australia, have obtained a Royal
Charter for carrying out a communication, via the Panama
railroad, direct to Sydney. The facilities which this line
afford for shortening and rendering a now tedious and
somewhat dangerous passage round the Cape not only more
agreeable and less dangerous, appears upon the face of the
project to make its success not only feasible, but certain.
At this particular moment, such an enterprise is most impor-
tant, and most valuable to this country; and it not only will,
but must be carried out: for in its success, looking at the
position both of England and of the Colony, how many great
interests are involved? In the transition which we are
passing through, from restriction to what must become an
universal system of unrestricted commerce, and to the com-
pletion of which the gold produce of Australia is still an
absolute necessity, the power of rapid intercommunication is
vital, to give us the power to maintain the superiority the
principles of free trade have enabled us to gain in the foreign
markets, through our • means to produce cheap, and, at the
same time, superior articles of manufacture. From Australia
we require not only her gold, but her wool, and her hides,
and her tallow; but the latter seem to be overshadowed by
the greater attraction of her gold fields. Let, however,
direct steam navigation and the present system of large
vessels get into play, and we shall discover Australia to be
the golden region in more senses than one, for then we shall
find her prosperity the means of an employment, which will
demand and bring into play all the industrious energies of
the working bees of England, and become a source of an
almost immeasureable mine of wealth to all classes. The


Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company is, therefore,
one of the most valuable of the many projects which have been
made to connect England with those portions of the New
World which have of late years become the source of interest
and of industry to England, and will be found to form one of
the most important links in the wondrous chain of changes,
which are now at work to meet the wants of the rapidly
multiplying inhabitants of the earth. Every one who looks
at the map will at once feel, that the accomplishment of the
Panama route is of equal, if not of almost greater moment,
than any public project which has been lately proposed.
At Navy Bay and Panama, the American line of steamers
from Philadelphia, and New York, and Canada on the one
side, and San Francisco on the other, will rendezvous, and
add their quota to the freight for Sydney and Melbourne,
while another British line of steamers from Valparaiso and
the coast of South America will aid in rendering this pro-
ject one of the grandest of the gigantic strides of this won-
derful age. Viewing it as immensely vital to the progression
of the system which has gained for England her present
commercial superiority, we are glad to hear that the Com-
pany have already taken such steps as will enable them to
commence the communication at the same time that the
Panama railroad will be open for traffic. Perhaps there
never was any project which so much required a more than
usually rapid completion than our communications with
Australia; and as the Company, composed as it is of
merchants, whose means of information are of the best kind,
must be well aware of the value of bringing into play the
resources' of Australia, they will scarcely suffer the grass to
grow under their feet, in a project of such importance to
all the interests of the British Empire.


“Australian and New Zealand Gazette Aug. 20.
Steamebs.
The same dissatisfaction still continues, which Sydney has
already so loudly expressed in reference to the unsuccessful
passages made by the mail steamers after the welcome arri-
val of the first pioneer, the Chusan , in August last. The
A.R.M.S. Company’s steam ship the Adelaide, announced to
sail from London on the 15th of December last, has not yet
arrived at this the principal port of its destination. She
carries a large Australian mail, but the news has been long
anticipated by fast-sailing merchant ships of the regular
Australian line, and by the S.S.S. Company’s steam ship the
Harbinger which (not oppressed with the prestige of a govern-
ment mail contract), performed what may be called a supple-
mental route from Southampton to Sydney, via the Cape of
Good Hope and Melbourne, in 62 days, including detentions
at the latter ports.
When the question of ocean steam facilities first arose
between SjMney and London, it was thought that they could
only be brought into existence through the intervention ot
the Government, more especially as they did not then attract
the attention of private speculation; but now, since the
discovery of our seemingly inexhaustible gold mines, the
interests of both Government and individuals have wonder-
fully and immeasurably increased; and, under the influences
of these incentives, and with political and social energies
stimulated into action beyond all former precedent in this
fresh field of enterprise, it has become a question under what
auspices, of Government or individuals, rapid and punctual
means of oceanic steam communication between Australia
and Europe are to be accomplished; nor does it seem easy
even to those calculating and intelligent minds that have


been directed to this question, to over-estimate its importance,
or to increase the full results which must flow from the
perfect achievement of the great design which it involves.
Without further reference, in this summary, to the imperfect
arrangements which the Home Government has yet effected
by means of the Cape and Suez routes, we will reiterate the
opinion so often expressed through the columns of this jour-
nal, that the importance of securing an alternative line, the
western one by the Isthmus of the Americas, cannot much
longer he treated as a mere theory; and, therefore, the solid
establishment of such an undertaking as that of the Austra-
lian Direct Steam Navigation Company, via Panama, (whose
prospectus, as published in the London Times of January 14,
we on Thursday transferred to the columns of this journal)
is regarded in Sydney with the utmost anxiety.
“ Morning Advertiser August 29.
We most cordially congratulate our countrymen on the
prospect which is opening in every direction, of the means
of transit by sea and land, from this country to all parts of
the world, with which it is desirable that we should hold
speedy and constant intercourse. We believe it is essential
to the development of our destinies as a race, and, at the
same time, to the progress of intelligence, of free institutions,
and the social improvement of other countries, that England
should carry her influence into every nation near and distant,
and while extending her commerce, be at the same time the
medium through which the highest advantages should flow
to those distant people with whom that commerce is main-
tained.
It is highly gratifying to contemplate the great works
which are now in operation for the purposes to which we


have just adverted, and to anticipate the advantages which,
in a very few years, will he placed at the disposal of the pub-
lic, and by means of which travellers will he able to take a
run through Europe in as little time as is now required for
the pedestrian to traverse the Isle of Wight. He may run
and see his friends in India, stopping at Constantinople and
Khorsabad on his way to the great trunk line connecting
Calcutta with the Himalayan mountains.
One of the most remarkable illustrations of the manner
in which the commercial spirit of this country adapts itself
to the requirements of the age is furnished by the plan con-
necting London with Australia in fifty-five days. We have
noticed in our columns the announcement of a company
formed for tills purpose, and which, if it were not for the
great respectability of its direction, and for the fact that it
has obtained a royal charter, would appear to be the dream
of some cjever visionary, who proposed to fly about the
world, instead of adopting the old-fashioned method of
traversing the ground and ploughing its waters.
There is to be a direct line connecting England with
Australia, and dividing the whole distance into three stages.
First, there is the Atlantic passage in steamers of about
three thousand tons, running from Milford Haven to the
Isthmus of Panama, where the passengers are to find suit-
able hotel accommodation; that is, if they deem it worth
while to be at the trouble of putting up at this side the
Isthmus, for there is now a railway across it in course of
formation, by means of which the passengers will reach the
Pacific in about two hours. Then the traveller will embark
again on the seas of that mild ocean, which obtained its name
from its pacific character, and just as we stop now on our jour-
ney to supply the engine with more fuel and the boiler with
more water, so the Pacific voyage will be performed to Sydney
and Melbourne, “coaling at Otaheite or other convenient
station.” Thus, as soon as the arrangements are completed.


there will be inducements to voyagers to gratify their
curiosity by getting into the southern hemisphere, and some
of the poor emigrants who are now off to the diggings may
be able, in a few years, to invite their relations to visit them
in their rich and elegant homes.
Most important to our commerce is such an attempt to
open a direct communication between the mother country
and the golden regions, to which multitudes are repairing.
The stimulus which will be given to our commerce, by
opening this high road, along which to send out the manu-
factures of this country, and to receive back again the
millions of wealth which are now flowing from those
auriferous regions, it is scarcely possible to estimate. We
contemplate this commercial road-making beetwen England
and the territory being occupied by so many of her sons,
with the more interest, on account of the admirable moral
influence which it is calculated to exercise. The emigrant
will scarcely feel himself cut off from home, and will hardly
get away from its moral influences, when that home may be
reached in fifty or sixty days, and perhaps less. The facility
of communication with old England will make the colony
almost, like a part of the mother country, and the social link
will become, perhaps, the strongest bond of political union.
“ London Mail."
New Eea of Steam Navigation.
We have copied from a contemporary an article regarding
the Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company, because
we also feel interested in the success of a scheme which
seems to be the most important among the nautical under-


takings of the year. The importance of the great steam
routes on the ocean is not exceeded by that of the steam
routes on land. The punctuality of the Cunard Line from
Liverpool to New York is almost equal now to that of the
London and North Western Railway, with its continuances
from Aberdeen to the metropolis. We calculate upon receiv-
ing letters from Bombay, Calcutta, or Madras, with nearly
all the certainty of communications from Dublin or Galway.
We have to thank the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navi-
gation Company for the surprising regularity of the Indian
mails, and they are spreading out vast branches in the Indian
Ocean, which must be productive to the public and profitable
to themselves. Two lines have not hitherto yielded fully to
the power of steam. The South African and the Australian
lines have not to this date reflected any credit upon our
engineers; and the United States’ capitalists promise to place
the fix’st steamer on the line from Panama over the 1 acific,
to our own golden colony. The chief obstacle to be sur-
mounted in ocean steam navigation is the weight of fuel
requisite at the commencement of a long voyage. Even on
the run from Liverpool to New York, the last half of the
passage is made far more rapidly than the first, because the
ship is lighter on the water by all the coals consumed by
the way. This obstacle is necessarily increased when the
voyage is longer, and coaling stations cannot be conveniently
established. For this reason, the paper from which we
quote, connected with mechanical pursuits, and imbued with
the opinions of mechanical persons, recommends the screw
propeller, if not for the Atlantic, certainly for the Pacific
passage. Captain Hoseason, R.N., who is one of the more
active promoters of the Australian Direct Steam Navigation
Company, adheres, however, to the paddle-wheels, with
experience hitherto in his favour. The Cunard Line, which
is in reality a Glasgow line, chiefly owned in that city, by
gentlemen who have watched the progress of steam naviga-


tion from its infancy on their noble river, adhere to the
paddle-wheel. Their steamers have made the best voyages
on the ocean, and not only the most rapid, but the most
punctual. Their example, therefore, may be followed with
confidence, sustained as it is by the practice of their great
rivals in the Collins’ Line; and by that also of the Royal West
India Mail Company in all their successful ships. The
directors of the new company are thus justified in the
adoption of this mode of propulsion upon the route which
they have determined to pursue. That route is the best in
the world now open to a new company. The Atlantic por-
tion of the voyage forms rather more than one-third, and
the Pacific slightly under two-thirds. The navigation of
the Atlantic is variable; but this company have the better,
or in other words, the more pleasant and quiet portion of
that ocean. The Pacific generally justifies its name, and is
oftener “still,” like an inland lake or tarn; and the company
will have the larger portion of their work among its balmy
breezes, over its quiet waters.
In the meantime a transshipment must take place at the
Isthmus of Panama, but the passage is already short; and
the completion of the railway will bring it down to two
hours. In a few years the intersection of the Isthmus by
a canal will be completed, and steamers will load at Sydney
quays, or on the Yarra Yarra, to deliver in the Mersey or
the Thames.
The character of the route might allure passengers to the
vessels when they were built, but would not tempt capitalists
to invest money in the scheme if other inducements were
not offered. The latter are not confined to the through
route, although that has its termini in the richest state in
the world, and its wealthiest colony. We cannot yet
estimate the intercourse that must soon exist between
Australia and Britain. The wealth of the colony will be
spread over many individuals; and thus afford, to a well


conducted line of ocean steamers, the occupation of their
berths by persons who can pay for them. The nature of
the traffic in bullion and goods is equally promising. Bank-
ers and merchants will pay handsomely for freight of gold
in—and cutlery, jewellery, or silks out—by a sure and rapid
conveyance. The mere interest on bullion for the time of
transmission, that would be economized, on a fifty-five days’
average passage, will pay a handsome dividend on all the
capital necessary for this company. The enterprise does not
depend exclusively upon the through traffic, great though that
must be, for it will be richly supported by the British and
California business, and have a great share of the large and
remunerative trade between this country, Valparaiso, and all
the coasts of Chili and Peru; while streams of goods and
passengers from Brazilian ports on the south, and Mexican
ports on the north, will converge upon the company’s depot,
in the new city, on the Eastern coast of Panama, meeting
there to swell their freight list; and the entire trade of New
Grenada with Europe seems secure for this company, who will
reap a rich return from a line of steamers which should be
one of the best and the most numerous sailing out of a British
port. We believe that shares in the company have been
applied for, in large numbers, by a wealthy class, who
want a permanent and safe investment. The enterprise is
indebted for its present favourable position to its intrin-
sic merits, and energy of Captain Hamond and Captain
Hoseason, and the gentlemen who have been associated with
them in promoting its success.


“ Expositor August 27.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation Company.
The advices from Australia by the Harbinger tend to in-
crease the feeling in favor of this Company, by showing its
necessity more clearly than before. The Harbinger brought
a mail of 450,000 letters, which are said to have produced
a revenue of £30,000 to the post-office. The calculation
gives an average of Is. 4d. each. The Harbinger was
within five days of three months on the voyage from Mel-
bourne, and carried gold in value for half a million sterling.
The Australian Direct Steam Navigation will be enabled to
reduce this voyage in time by nearly one-third. The
advantages of three weeks on a mail containing 450,000
letters must be obvious to any person. The mere gratifica-
tion of their early delivery would repay an effort. The
saving of interest on £.500,000 worth of bullion for three
weeks, is equal, at 4 per cent., to £l,lOO. The mercantile
and social letters would have been worth one penny each
of additional postage at three weeks earlier, or to £1875.
The interest on the cargo, not bullion, and on the the specie
in passengers’ luggage and purses, would probably amount to
£525. We have not heard the value of the general cargo
stated; and can, therefore, only make a rough estimate. The
time of the 70 passengers would probably average in value
£lO per week; but say £5, which they would have given,
and we have a sum of £1,050. The gross savings which
will be effected are a freight equal to that of the Harbinger.
The Direct Steam Navigation Company, taking the voyages
of the latter at sixty days each from Melbourne, would
therefore be £4,550, not in favour" of the shareholders, but
of the public, and showing their interest in the formation of
this Company, and its success.


“ Australian New Zealand Gazette August 20.
The Harbinger brings 130,000 ounces of gold, of the
value of £520,000. Her passengers are said to have some
£40,000 more. Her mail is the largest one brought from
the colonies, hut is not so late as that brought by the over-
land mail.
The quantity of gold shipped from Melbourne during the
present year, was, up to the latest date, 980,258 oz., or up-
wards of forty tons, of the English value of four millions.
The amount brought by the last weekly escort, was 30,966
oz., but it was estimated that at least 100,000 oz. per week
were being raised from the mines, a large portion of which
was retained by the miners, who considered that they were
no gainers by disposing of it in Melbourne. This hoarding
system has caused an apparent decrease in the yield, and the
supply is insufficient for the demands for shipment, so that
gold has gone up in the market, and was selling at 775. per
ounce. The yield of the four first months of the present
year was 689,429 oz., against 240,363 oz., the yield of the
corresponding months of last year; being an increase of
449,066 oz., or 187 per cent, over the produce of the same
period last year. The produce of the two months pre-
ceding May 15, was 248,552 oz. This, however, was the
escort produce alone, the quantity actually raised must he
much larger, as the number of diggers was vastly increased;
the winter was setting in, and the facilities for mining were
everywhere great and abundant.


“Morning Advertiser September 1 <6th.
We have given elsewhere an extract from an interesting
article in the Sydney Morning Herald, from which it will he
seen how much importance the colonists of Australia attach
to the effort which is being made to establish a more ex-
peditious communication between themselves and the mother
country. Never shall we derive from the gold fields of
Australia, and from the various other sources of wealth
contained in that vast colony, the full amount of benefit
which it is fitted to yield to this country, until we have
established the quickest possible communications between
the old country and the new.
That great offset from the English stock demands the
consideration of this country, and no proper means should
be neglected whereby the links of connexion should be pre-
served and increased. There is now in Australia no aliena-
tion from the parent country. The colonists are, in the
largest proportion, emigrants from Great Britian, who have
carried out with them the love of their country, and who
will always be prepared to revert to their native soil with
the fondest recollections, and to teach their children to do
so after them. The great danger of alienation arises from
distance, and the length of time in voyaging from one scene
to the other. The most effectual way in which to guard
ao-ainst the evil threatened from this source, is to use the
O 9
means which are offered for shortening the route, and
bringing the two within about fifty days’ sail of each other.
We observe that the Sydney Herald expresses itself, as
we have already done, in favour of the Panama route as the
only one which can meet the requirements of that colony,


while the people of Melbourne, and of every part of Aus-
tralia, participate in the delight with which they contemplate
the trunk line which is to run from Milford, in nearly a
right line, to Sydney. It is one of those many interesting
combinations of events which occur in the history of Provi-
dence, that, just at the time when Australia has become so
attractive to us, and England so important to the Australian
colonist, there should he formed a railway to connect the
Atlantic with the Pacific, and enabling voyagers between
the two countries to complete the transit in seven weeks.
Apart from the length of time hitherto consumed in the
voyage, a great difficulty has arisen from the passage round
the Cape of Good Hope, between which and Sydney the pas-
senger has to encounter “ high seas and boisterous weather;
gales of wind, nearly without any variation, from north-west
to south-west, rendering the return passage a matter of very
great uncertainty, and proving a source of exceeding dis-
comfort to every one on board.” By virtue of the Panama
route, the passenger steps into the train at Paddington (or
rather, we hope, before long in Farringdon Street), runs to
Milford Haven, where he goes on board a steamer of 3,000
tons, and makes his way to the hotel on this side the Isthmus,
whence by rail in two hours he reaches the Pacific, over
whose smooth waters he makes his way to his destination.
We anticipate the highest advantages from the opening up
of this direct line, and most cordially wish success to those
by whom it has been undertaken.






