

Joh n Lang sford
A Biography
W. A. Langsford,




THE LIFE
OF
MR. JOHN LANGSFORD,
FIFTY YEARS A LOCAL PREACHER AND CLASS LEADER
IN THE WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH.
WITH
Extracts from his Diary
BY HIS SON.
Rev. W. ALFRED LANGSFORD,
Of the South Australia Wesleyan Conference.
Adelaide S.A.
WESLEYAN BOOK DEPOT, KING WILLIAM STREET.
1895.




JOHN LANGSFORD.


ADELAIDE, B.A.
PEI.VTKD BY HT7BBRY AND
WArMOCTH STREET.




ILLUSTRATIONS.
I’AGE
Thu Late ilii. John Laxosford v.
Norwood Weslevan Cm-ROH (Ekectkd 1850) . . 83
Norwood Wesi.evan Church (Erhcihi) 1878) . . 57


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Preface xi.
CHAPTER I.
Parentage. Conversion. Beginnings of Usefulness 1
CHAPTER 11.
Call to the Ministry. Matrimonial Engagement.
His Mother’s Death. Blighted Hopes . . 9
CHAPTER 111.
Crisis in Life. Remotes to London. Marriage.
Returns to Alphington . . . . . .17
CHAPTER IV.
Leaves England. Arrival in Adelaide. Norwood
Church. State Grant ...... 2.1
CHAPTER V.
Victorian Goldfields. Revivals. Australasian
Conference of 1862 ...... 87


CHAPTER VI. PAO *
Removes to Adelaide. Returns to Norwood.
JraiusK of Methodism. Rev. Wir. Taylor . 43
CHAPTER YIP
Diary Discontinued. Summary. Illness. Closing
Scenes. Death . 59
Concluding Remarks ....... 77
A PAPER.
“The Bible and its Use’' 89
■SERMONS.
Rest fob the Weary 97
“ I ah Jesus ” 103
My Father's House . 107
The Sealing of Believers 11l
Facts Stated and Inferences Deduced . . . 115
The Holiest 119
Christian Perfection 123
The Friendship of Clod and its Advantages . . 127
The Christian’s Life and Death 131


PREFACE.
Loxu centuries ago it was written : “Of making many books
there is no end.” That statement could be made with much
greater emphasis in our own time. There has never been a
period in the world’s history when books of all sorts and
conditions have been so rapidly multiplied as at present. It
has always occurred to me that no book should be published
unless there is some worthy motive or real justification for so
doing. The sordid condition of pecuniary advantage is a
reason which may powerfully appeal to a great number of
writers, but it will be quite secondary with those who are
inspired by the highest motives.
The following story is not in any sense written for the
sake of what the world would call “gain.” It is, however,
undertaken with at least two objects in view—Firstly, the
glory of Cod ; and, in the next place, that what is acknow-
ledged by so many to have been a noble type of Christian
life may not by death be obliterated from the memory, but in
order that that life may bear its testimony to generations yet
unborn.
After my father had passed away from earth, each
member of his family met on every hand with spontaneous
expressions of the deepest respect for his memory and highly
eulogistic references to his Christian character and long and


earnest labors in the cause of Christ. These testimonies were
naturally received with pleasure, hut always with devout
gratitude that Almighty God had enabled him for so many
years to witness a good confession.
It was not known, even to all the members of his family,
that he had for very many years kept a diary, in which from
time to time he recorded his Christian experience, as well as
interesting incidents of a public as well as of a more private
character. When his friends were informed of it, many of
them at once suggested that it would he advisable to preserve
the main facts and incidents of his life in a permanent form.
This idea did not originate in my own mind ; and when it was
first suggested, 1 found some difficulty in coming to a con-
clusion on the subject. When, however, I found that there
was a general agreement of opinion in favor of it, and was
impressed with the thought of the good it might effect, I
willingly yielded to the suggestion.
The members of my father’s family unitedly joined in
requesting me to undertake the work—a duty which I then
felt, and which I still feel, very unworthy to perform. I have
the profoundest respect and most loving veneration for my
father’s memory, and I have been deeply concerned lest its
lustre should pale through my incapacity.
It does sometimes happen (as in my ease) that a son is
called upon to he his father’s biographer, and under such
circumstances the thought must ever be present to the mind :
“He was my father.” Whilst at times this thought hampers,
it seems at others to give permission for perfect liberty of
expression. In the following pages I have endeavored to give
a connected and consecutive history so far as the materials to
hand would permit. It is, perhaps, an impossible thing to


put the lights and shadows of Christian
form so as to be accurately understood. A man’s
ences are oftentimes indescribable, and they have to remain,
recorded only in God’s “Book of Remembrance” and in the
individual’s own consciousness. My father wrote a great deal
in reference to his daily religious experience, and I have
endeavored to give a true and faithful record of what he
realised. In several instances I have quoted his own words.
It will be found that facts in connection with the Nor-
wood Church and Circuit are very frequently referred to.
This could not well be avoided. His own life was very
largely influenced by what was transpiring in the Church.
He could truthfully exclaim with the Psalmist; “Lord, I
have loved the habitation of Thy house, and the place where
Thine honor dwelleth.” He had a zeal for God’s house, and
for God’s cause ; and it was quite natural that he should make
frequent references to the varied experiences though which it
passed.
The pioneers of Methodism in South Australia are fast
passing away, and therefore some brief references to incidents
which transpired many years ago will no doubt be welcomed.
Already we are beginning to exclaim, with an emphasis which
becomes more definite year by year : “ The fathers, where are
they ? And the prophets, do they live for ever ? ” In all our
circuits it would be possible to gather information testifying
to the self-sacrificing toil and unstinted devotion of those who,
in the early days, often amidst great difficulties and frequent
discouragements, “ bore the burden and heat of the day.” To
them we are indebted most deeply, and their memories are
cherished in various parts of the colony with profoundest re-
spect. Many of them “ rest from their labors, and their works
follow them.” They are reaping their own reward above,


and we are enjoying the fruit of their zealous efforts below.
Methodism in South Australia has ever been honored with
wise administrators, both among her ministers and laymen,
and, as a result, her foundations have been well and truly
laid, so that, without undue exultation, we can say concerning
our Zion : “ Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces ;
that ye may tell it to the generation following.”
It would have been possible to have greatly extended
this memoir by the addition of many more extracts from the
diaries, as well as by my own reflections on those which are
given ; but this seemed to me to be hardly necessary. My
father’s experience was wonderfully even and regular, so that
it appeared to me the better plan to note his testimony at the
crises of his history, and to allow' the reader to indulge in his
own reflections. In addition to his diaries, my father also
left scores of manuscripts of sermons, which at different
periods in his life had been prepared and delivered by him.
There are many wdio could bear testimony to the beneficial
results which many of them have produced. I have thought
it wise to include a few brief outlines of his sermons in this
book. They are presented here in a very incomplete and
fragmentary form, but they will present to the reader a good
idea of his method and style of preaching. The tones of
his voice—vehement and strong in its denunciation against
sin and all unrighteousness, and tender and persuasive when
pleading with the impenitent—will long be remembered by
those who were accustomed to hear him preach.
I regard it as a very great privilege and honor to have
been permitted to endeavor to perpetuate the memory of one
so profoundly esteemed and loved, and trust that my effort
may in some small degree redound to the glory and honor of
God.
W. A. L
XIV
PREFACE.


CHAPTER I.
PARENTAGE. CONVERSION. BEGINNINGS OF USEFULNESS.
«HE first John Langsford, of which, at present,
there is any record obtainable, was born on
Tp March 11, 1752. Though unable to give any
(particulars concerning his life, it is gratifying
to be able to state that, after witnessing a
good confession, and proving that the wisdom
which comes from above adds “ length of days ” to
those who lay hold upon and retain it, he fell asleep
in the month of April, in the year 1852, being one
hundred years and fifteen days old.
The second John Langsford, to whom it is
necessary to make reference here, was the son of the
above, and the father of the subject of this biography.
He was born on May 3, 1788, and after spending
many happy years in the enjoyment of the favor of
God, he passed to join the Church triumphant on
August 26, 1870, at the ripe age of eighty-two years.
B


My father was born on May 1, 1823, ia the
pretty little village of Alphington, which was situated
about a mile and a quarter from the city of Exeter,
Devon, on the Plymouth Road.
He had three brothers and three sisters, Of
these the only survivors are Mr. William Langsford,
of Adelaide, now in his eighty-second year, and Mr.
Joseph Langsforcl, of London.
Up to the time of his birth, his parents were
accustomed to attend the services of the Church of
England, but they were both without any inward
experience of the power of godliness. In the good
providence of G-od, the Wesleyan Methodists of Exeter
determined to mate an attempt to organise a mis-
sion in Alphington. They commenced holding public
preaching services in the open air, and elsewhere, and
also, as soon as possible, established a Sabbath-school.
Tery many were attracted to hear the message of
salvation brought by the Methodists, and among them
were my father’s parents. By God’s grace they were
not only hearers of the Word, but they became
soundly converted to God, His father very soon
seems to have exhibited both a desire and a qualifi-
cation for usefulness in Christian work, and was ere
long appointed Superintendent of the Sabbath-school.
In this school my father first began to receive his
serious impressions concerning God and spiritual things.
The advantages of education were not by any means so


great as they are at the present time, but he was able
to secure a good grounding in reading, writing, and
arithmetic.
For a time he worked with his father, who was
by trade a carpenter, and when he had attained the
age of fourteen years, he was bound as an apprentice
to Messrs. W. & 1). Bradley, of Exeter.
At this time he felt that he had the fear of God
before his eyes, yet he was conscious that there were
times when he fell into sin and grieved God by
breaking His righteous laws. As a lad he regularly
attended the services of the sanctuary, and made the
acquaintance of many pious, God-fearing people.
At the Conference of 1839 the Rev. Joseph Wood
was appointed as the superintendent minister of the
Exeter Circuit. He was a man wholly devoted to his
Master’s service, and was “in labors more abundant.”
The intense zeal and earnestness manifested by Mr.
Wood may bo gathered from the following account of
one Sabbath-day’s work as performed by him, and
this is not to be regarded as at all exceptional:—
Sunday, May 31, 1810.—“ I was appointed at
Topsham were the work has long been in a most
discouraging state. Although well aware that my
efforts are nothing but as God may be pleased to use
them, I resolved to do all I could, and to expect the
promise of the Father. I therefore preached without


door on the quay, at 9.30 o’clock, from ‘ Come, for
all things are now ready.’ I then went to the chapel,
and preached at 10.30 from Psalm v. 3. Yisited a
sick man, and preached again in the chapel, at 2.30,
from Revelation ii. 4,5, and baptized a child. At
4 o’clock, I preached in the street in the centre of
the town from the latter part of the Apostles’ Creed,
‘ I believe in the Holy Ghost,’ etc. At 5.30 I
preached on board a vessel to a great number who
stood on the deck and on the quay from Luke v. 3.
I then gave out a hymn, and sang through the streets
to the chapel, where I again preached, at 6.30, from
Proverbs xxiii. 26. After this, I held a prayer
meeting, and exhorted, and as one soul, who was
convinced at the out-door service in the morning,
was in distress, we stayed, and again lifted up our
hearts, and the Lord spake her sins forgiven. Glory
for ever to His holy name.”
Under the preaching of Mr. Wood many of my
father’s companions were aroused and alarmed on
account of their souls. “ They yielded themselves to
Christ, and were made happy in God, and then began
to talk with and pray for me.” At the conclusion
of one of the services Mr. Wood shook hands with the
people as they separated. “He asked me if I loved
God, and I answered ‘No,’ and then began to weep
1 The humble, contrite tears
Which from repentance flow.’
Then they knelt down together, and a few friends


who had remained commenced to pray and wrestle
with God. After a while, hope appeared, and then
faith ; and that proved to be—
‘ The happy hour when from above
Ho first received the pledge of love.’”
He was now about sixteen years of age.
On the following day it appeared as if he had
entered upon a new era in life, a new world seemed
opened to his gaze. The scene around him was
changed ; and there was a great change within. He
felt a condition of mind and soul to which he was
unable to give expression a heaven-born feeling.
He at once joined the Church, and became a member
of a class conducted by his master, Mr. W. Bradley.
Although during this period he often consciously
realized the Divine presence and blessing, he did not
feel that inward delight in religion which he soon
after experienced. He was, however, early called
upon to exercise his gifts in the Sabbath School.
But soon after entering upon this work he was called
away, in pursuance of his daily occupation, to reside
at Torquay.
This led to a severance for a time from his
many friends, and especially from those companions
who had commenced with him to run the heavenly
race. He was, however, under Divine guidance, and
so found a lodging in the home of a zealous class
leader and local preacher. Under this roof he received
great encouragement, and seemed to make considerable
5
CONVERSION.


progress in the things of God, enjoying the power of
religion as he had not done before.
It was during his residence at Torquay that he
seems to have first felt a desire to speak for God.
He frequently studied Benson’s Commentary to which
he had access, and shortly afterwards commenced
to write his first sermon. Having sought Divine
direction he selected as his text the words : “If ye
love Me, keep My commandments.” His class leader
approved of his efforts, and encouraged him, promising
to take him out with him to one of his appoint-
ments. He says : —“ It was at Abbottskerswale, on
May 29, 1841, that I first stood up to call sinners to
repentance.” The manuscript of that sermon is before
me. It was written on the text above quoted. After
referring to the sorrow of heart experienced by the
Apostles at the prospect of Christ’s departure, he
speaks of the expediency of the Saviour’s going away
to prepare a place for them; to send them the
Comforter; and that, as their High Priest, he might
intercede for them. After this introduction, he
divided his subject into three parts as follows:
(i.) The object upon which we are to set our
affection.
(ii.) Assign a reason or two why we should love
God.
(iii.) How this love will manifest itself.
The written manuscript closed with a brief and very
direct application of the text.


Having thus put his hand to the plough as a
preacher of the Gospel he continued in the good
work as opportunity offered, and, on his return to
Alphington, he was in January, 1842, received as a
local preacher on trial. During the first quarter he
did not seem to realize much encouragement in his
own religious experience, neither did he feel that he
was the means of bringing much blessing to others.
Fortunately, at this juncture in his history, he
became acquainted with the Rev. William Fisher
Clark. He was a young man who evinced the deepest
concern for blood-bought souls. He had great power
in prayer, and, together, they were often richly and
abundantly blessed while praying in secret. The
following extracts are from his diary : — i; I now began
to feel what I preached, and to cry aloud, and spare
not.” “ I want more of God! I want to be wrapt up in
God! 0 that He would give me the desire of my heart!”
“I would the precious time redeem,
And longer live for this alone ;
To spend, and to be spent, for them
Who have not yet my Saviour known ;
Fully on these my mission prove,
And only breathe, to breathe Tliy love.”
“ To-day I have seen and felt my nothingness.
Through Christ I have a good hope of heaven. Christ
is my all ! lam unholy, sinful, corrupt, but He is all
I want. I look to Him, I claim salvation from God
through Him.”
“ I the chief of sinners am,
But Jesus died for me ! ”


“ The young preacher,” as he was then termed,
began to be in great request, and almost every
Sabbath found him dispensing the Word of Life. He
now felt the necessity of mental development and
improvement, and began to use his time diligently
with that object in view. His trial sermon as a local
preacher was delivered at Ide, from the text, Psalm
Ixxxiv. 11, “ For the Lord God is a sun and shield :
the Lord will give grace and glory : no good thing
will He withhold from them that walk uprightly.”
He passed his examination at the December quarterly
meeting in the year 1842, being then nineteen years
of age.


CHAPTER II.
CALL TO THE MINISTRY. MATRIMONIAL ENGAGEMENT.
HIS MOTHER’S DEATH, BLIGHTED HOPES.
■ANY even of my father’s most intimate
friends may be unaware of the fact that
for a considerable period it seemed probable
[that his way would open into the ministry
of the Wesleyan Church. It was not that
he himself evinced any great eagerness
** to assume so great a responsibility. He
ever regarded it as a most sacred calling, and that
no man, unless “truly called of God,” should take
unto himself such a holy vocation. But there were
times in his life when he felt that he had most
powerful calls in that direction. His experience of
Divine things ripened early, so that in this respect
he was qualified to act as an ensample to the flock
of God.
On December 3, 1842, he writes: “To-day,
before God who beholds my heart, I insert that I


have entered into perfect love. These words were
applied to my mind—
‘l rest upon Thy faithful word,
The servant shall be as his Lord ! ’
I can say that I do love God with all my heart.
O, the bliss of being all His own! O, the happiness
of living in Christ! Glory to God ! Praise Him ye
angels before His throne ! Magnify Him ye blood-
washed spirits ! Glorify Him ye redeemed on earth!
Bless the Lord O my soul! —
‘ He calls a worm His friend
A worm exalts to God. ’ ”
His strong attachment to Methodism as his
spiritual home may be inferred from the following
extract in reference thereto : —“ My God put Thy
hand over her, cover her with the shadow of Thy
wing, sanctify her ministers, and purify her through-
out. God speed Methodism. Amen.”
It was in the year 1842 that he, after much
prayer, entered into his matrimonial engagement.
The lady upon whom his affections were set, was
Miss Mary Ann Ware, of Exeter. She had been
for some time a member of the Society, and given evi-
dence of her attachment to Christ, and her love for
the means of grace. He made this engagement in
all sincerity, believing (what long experience after-
wards proved to be correct) that he had found a
suitable helpmeet for the pilgrimage of life. But


he little thought at the time that the step he then
took, would turn out to be one of the principal
factors iii deciding the future course of his life.
In order to qualify himself for whatever duties
God might have in store for him, he devoted his
attention to reading those works which would be
of assistance to the proper interpretation of God’s
Word, as well as helpful to his own personal experi-
ence. Ho particularly mentions as subjects of study,
Wesley on “Zeal,” and “Redeeming the time,”
“Watson’s Institutes,” and Chapman’s “Complete
Restoration of Man,”
The state of his religious experience at this
time may be understood from the following entry :
“And now, 0 my God, Thou seest my heart, Thou
knowest my desire; I am Thine; come what may,
lam on the Rook. Xow, glory be to God, Christ
is mine, and lam His. Hallelujah! O Lord, make
me more like Thee.
‘ Bury me, Saviour, in Thy grave
That I with Thee may rise.'”
In the month of December 1843, he passed
through a severe bereavement in the death of his
mother. She had been a woman of gentle, kindly
disposition. Her end was preceded by a severe
affliction, patiently borne. Still she had a desire “to
depart and to he with Christ, which is far better.”
A short time before she died he went to her bed-
side and enquired as to her spiritual condition, and


looking up, she said:—“Angels beckon me away,
and Jesus bids me come,” and shortly after this her
happy spirit passed away to God who gave it.
They all felt that they could truly say,
“ Shall we mourn to see
Our lellow-prisoner free,
Tree from doubts and griefs and fears
In the haven of the sky?
Can we weep to see the tears
Wiped for ever from her eye ?
Ho, dear companion, no,
"We gladly let thee go
From a suffering Church beneath,
To a reigning Church above.
Thou hast more than eontjnered death!
Thou art crowned with life and love,”
Her dust was laid in the Alphington churchyard,
there to await that day when the graves shall be
opened. A funeral sermon was preached in the
Alphington Chapel by the Rev. Mr. Tarr, from the
words, “ f would not have you to he ignorant, brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, even as others which have no hope.”
On May 1, 1844, my father attained his twenty-
first birthday, and at the same time ended the period
of his apprenticeship. He still, however, remained
in the same employ. He records that this was also
a memorable day for the city of Exeter, as it was
the day on which the first railway train ran there.
Soon after this he took his first journey by train to
Bristol, and he thus writes :—“This is the fastest


method of travel which man has yet invented. What
is it to the speed of an angel, God’s creation ? ”
All through the year 18+4 he seems to have
been much perplexed as to the question of offering
himself for the ministry. He had had many conver-
sations with the ministers of his circuit, and they
had given him great encouragement to look forward
to that as his providential path.
Among other extracts in reference to the matter,
I insert the following : —“ I feel convinced that I
ought to offer myself for the ministry, yet I feel my
insufficiency for so important a work. lam afraid
Ido not feel the value of souls enough. What can
I do? Jesus, 1 look to thee—
‘ I would in every step look up,
By Thy direction taught,’
1 should be happy in the work ; God knows my
soul and body should be engaged in it, but I am
afraid to venture. O Lord, open my way and
guide me.
‘ My life, my blood, I here present,
If for Thy work they may he spent.’
Last Wednesday I saw Mr. Pophan and had a
conversation with him about the ministry. He
urged me onward. I hope to see Mr. Cooke on
Monday. I still feel God’s impression on my mind.
Lord, I look to Thee. I depend on Thee. As Thou
wilt, where and when Thou wilt, I am Thine.”


On the following Monday the interview with
Mr. Cooke (above referred to) took place. He re-
ceived him kindly, and gave him great encourage-
ment and instruction, and said that lie intended to
propose him at the next March quarterly meetm?,
hut he was doubtful whether his matrimonial en-
gagement would not lie a hindrance. Still he was
advised to leave it ail with God, assured that He
would guide him aright.
On December 11 he writes:—“l have again
had a very powerful call to prepare for the
ministry.”
During all this time he found himself employed
almost every Sabbath in his own and surrounding
circuits, and his preaching was frequently accom-
panied with marked evidences of the presence and
power of the Holy Spirit. On February 11,
1845, he again writes;—“All things pertaining to
the ministry seem to open favorably. I have read
Wesley on ‘Original Sin 1 ; am now reading his
‘Appeal’ and Treffry on ‘Eternal Sonship,’” and
on March 4 he says :—“ lam perfectly at rest
as regards the Eternal Sonshiji ; I wish people would
read both sides before they condemn either.”
At the March quarterly meeting of that year
his name was brought forward to tie recommended
to the district meeting as a candidate for the
ministry. The meeting was unanimous in the
opinion that he was called to the work, but six


members of the meeting thought he had better
wait for another year. However, on the question
being put, the majority was in favor of his going
forward at once. After he heard the decision of
that meeting, he wrote;—“ O God, Thy will be
done. A sense of duty presses me onward or I
should sink and give up all hope.”
Having been spared to celebrate his twenty-
second birthday, he thus refers to his experience :
“They have been years of blessing; what might
they have been had God been strict, and had there
been no Intercessor 1 Glory to God. I have
suffered some most distressing moments, but the
joys I have felt on other occasions have greatly
exceeded them. One drop of God’s love removes
all sorrow. I have had many drops this week, and
a large one to night. Glory to His name ! All
things seem to be working as I could wish in
regard to the ministry.”
A few days after this, however, he records :
“At present my hopes of being engaged in the
work of the ministry are blighted. I saw Mr.
Cooke yesterday, and he read to me a letter which
he had received from Mr. Bunting, which contained
information to the effect that no candidate could
have any access to the Institution if under a
matrimonial engagement.”
There can be no doubt that on receipt of this
intelligence he was grievously disappointed, and for


ii time could not reconcile his mind to accept that
decision as final, but after having a long and
earnest conversation with the circuit ministers, he
felt that it would be vain for him to think of
proceeding further. Years after this, however, he
again and again felt uneasy in his mind as to
whether he had not missed his providential way.


CHAPTER III.
CRISIS IN LIFE, REMOVES TO DONDON. MAKEIAGE.
RETURNS TO ALPHINGTON.
SSwT will be readily understood that my father
QdBH now felt that he had come to an important
crisis in his life. That course, which it
appeared to him had been marked out by
Divine Providence, and to prepare himself
for which he had been for so long laboring, was
now hedged up before him. He was brought to a
standstill in the journey of life, and this was
naturally a time of severe testing to his faith. His
confidence in the guiding hand of God was, however,
still unshaken, and he came out of his trial promising
before heaven and earth to live for God.
Believing that it would be advantageous to him
in business matters, he now made up his mind to
proceed to London, whither his brother Joseph had
preceded him. On his arrival there he wrote :
c


“ What shall I render to Thee, 0 God ? I will take
the cup o£ salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Most High.
I promise Thee, O God, if Thou wilt open my way
for me, and grant me labor, I will live for Thee,
and I will spend all I get to Thy glory. So help
me God.” For some time he was out of employment.
He spent his time seeing some of the many sights
to be visited in that great metropolis.
From the first he commenced to attend the
Hinde Street Chapel, though now and again he went
to the central cathedral of Methodism in City Road.
While visiting that memorable spot, he on one
occasion “ saw the stones under which lay the dust
of some of those great men whose names will stand
engraven on the history of time for ever. I saw
a grave open for the reception of another clay
tabernacle (the Rev. John Smith), whose inmate had
fled the bounds of time aud passed into eternity, to
mingle with those in whose footsteps he had trod,
whose spirit he had breathed. 0 for his mantle!
He was the minister of consolation to my spirit
many a time. His manner of preaching was power-
fully impressive.”
During this period he had the privilege of
hearing such well-known Methodist preachers as Dr.
Dixon, Dr. Newton, Dr. Beaumont, Dr. Liefchild,
Robert Young, Joseph Sutcliffe, and Samuel Coley.
On one occasion, while listening to a sermon by Dr.


Dixon, in Great Queen Street Chapel, he felt the
power and blessing of God so unmistakably near
that, as lie returned to his lodgings, through Piccadilly,
ho could not help singing aloud the praises of God.
Tt is hardly necessary to say that he was soon at
work again as a preacher of the Gospel, and in his
diary he mentions the following as among the places
where he exercised his ministrations : Hendon,
Shepherd Market, Harlesden Green, Bayswater,
Kilburn, Salisbury Street, Kensal Green, Portland,
and H ampstead.
After he had obtained daily employment, he
found that he had to exercise constant watchfulness,
as he was surrounded by many ungodly men. He
was greatly horrified to find so much Sabbath-
breaking. On one occasion he lost his position
because he refused to work on the Sabbath Day.
He now began seriously to consider the ad-
visability of entering the holy estate of matrimony,
and on January 26, 1846, he wrote: —“I feel a deep
sense of the importance of the step I am about to
take, in marriage. I do sincerely pray God to be
my guide in the matter. 1 have made it a subject of
constant prayer that God would make our union a
happy one, blessed to ourselves, blessed to those
around us. To this end I resolve, in the presence of
God, and by His grace assisting me, I will devote all
my powers to Him. I will endeavor to live in that
heaven-born state in all sanctity and purity. I will


try to set my companion an example of holiness, of
devotedness, of meekness, of good temper, and all the
Christian graces, that we may live in peace; and
wherever our lot may be cast, I trust we shall be able
to keep our hold on Him, that at last we may meet
safely in heaven.” The marriage was celebrated in
St. George’s Church, Hanover Square, on February
11, 1846.
The following was written in his diary after he
had resided in London twelve months:—“l am lost
in wonder, love, and praise. He has done great
things for me, whereof lam glad. But lam sorry
that I have done so little towards promoting His
glory. lam vexed within myself for letting so many
opportunities pass unimproved. O, how lukewarm I
have been ! To-night I feel resolved, as much as ever
I did, to live for God. Last Sabbath, whilst sitting
under the word spoken by Bro. Whitehouse, I felt
that it came with power to my soul. I again
experienced the cleansing efficacy of the blood of
Christ. Since then I have walked in the sunshine,
lived under the beams of love Divine; I have had
blessed interviews with God.” The only other in-
cidents noted during his life in London were his
appointment as a class-leader and the birth of his
first child, which, after brightening the home for
fifteen months, returned to God who gave it.
In March, 1847, my father and mother left
London, and returned once more to Alphington. On


his twenty-fourth birthday my father thus refers to
his experience :—“ O God, Thou hast kindly spared me
to see the present memorable day. I am thankful
Thou didst bring me into being. Although bom in
sin, I bless Thee Thou didst not let mo remain in sin.
lam grateful for the unnumbered blessings which
have attended me. I might have been holier and
more useful. I trust, God being my helper, if spared
through another year to spend it more for His glory.”
On his return from London he entered into
business on his own account, and ho was greatly
helped and guided by the hand of God. He also
resumed his former position on the plan of the Exeter
Circuit. That circuit then comprehended the two
chapels in the City, viz., the .Mint and St. Sidwell’s
Chapel, and the towns of Crcditon, Topsham,
Exmouth, Budleigh-Salterton, Sidraouth, and several
other places. In January, 1818, a meeting was held
at the Mint for the purpose of seeking the blessing
of sanctification, and it was evidently a heart-searching
time. My father then solemnly confessed and thank-
fully acknowledged his experience as it regarded that
blessing. He then could say and sing:—“ Bless God,
I am His, all His—
‘ Thee I can love, and Thee alone,
With pure delight and inward bliss ;
To know Thou tak’st me for Thine own,
0 what a happiness is this ! ”’
During the early part of 1849, he was greatly
affected and impressed by the death of two young


men who had been his companions in many respects.
Both of them were local preachers and greatly
beloved. The one, William Quick, died on the
Friday morning, and the other, Henry Wood, on the
Saturday night of the same week. Henry Wood had
married one of my father’s sisters. He was a most
earnest worker in the cause of Christ. Indeed he
seems to hare toiled so constantly and energetically
as to hare undermined his constitution, and his
strength gave way under the strain. His custom
was to rise every morning at four o’clock for private,
devotion, thus to acquire strength for the duties of
the day. He preached frequently in the open air and
had to submit to great persecution. He continued
his labors until Iris health failed, and when his friends
endeavored to persuade him to take care of his body
as well as his soul, he only replied : —“Souls are per-
ishing, and it will Ire better for mo to do the work God
has assigned me to do in a short time and then resign
my post to another, than it wil 1 be for me to live forty
years as easy and as comfortable as some preachers of
the Gospel, who preach as easy and apparently as uncon-
cerned as though they never believed that the sinners to
whom they preach are really exposed to the wrath of
an offended God, and to the flames of a burning hell,
and that the Gospel offers them the only terms of
reconciliation, and points out the only way whereby
they may escape the damnation of hell.” His
sufferings during the last month of his stay on eartli
were very great, but borne with Christian fortitude.
INIy father, who was constantly in attendance upon


him, says : —“ In the morning that brother William
Quick took his departure to the mansions of light, 1
was standing by Henry’s bed. As soon as he
understood that Brother Quick was gone home, he
raised his slender arms, and stretching them to their
utmost, he clasped his hands and exclaimed (in terms
of common friendship) ; “Well done, Bill ! Well
done, happy Bill ! Happy Bill ! I shall soon follow
you.” He continued in an exceedingly happy state
until about midnight, when his spirit was released
from a suffering body. At his funeral, his remains
were carried by the local preachers, and interred in
the Dissenters’ Cemetery. My father ever looked
back with fond affection to that time, and I may
here note that, just as my eldest brother was named
John Dyer after a highly respected and devoted
class-leader at Exeter, and my youngest brother was
named Joseph Wood after my father’s spiritual
instructor, so another brother was also named Henry
Wood in memory of his brother-in-law, to whose
death I have just referred.
The events just recorded made a deep and
lasting impression upon my father’s mind, and after
a few days he writes : —“Last Saturday night I went,
as I am wont to do, to the prayer meeting.
When there, we were much drawn out to pray for
the prosperity of God’s work. God heard, and we had
faith to believe He would make bare His arm. It
was suggested that we should meet the next evening
at 5 p.m. We did so, and the .Kingdom of Heaven


suffered violence. During the preaching, God sent
home the word with power. A prayer meeting
followed, and sinners cried for mercy. Six were
saved, and several more were in great distress. O
Lord, do Thou mate me wise to win souls. Brother
John Dyer is all on fire. Bless the Lord, 0 my
soul! O God, mightily shake this city for Christ’s
sake. Amen.”


CHAPTER IV.
LEAVES ENGLAND. ARRIVAL IN ADELAIDE.
NORWOOD CHURCH. STATE CRANT.
the year 1849 my father’s attention had
TMi been frequently occupied with the advisability
or otherwise of leaving England for Australia.
S His eldest brother, with his wife and family,
J s had already gone with the stream of emigration
Y which had set in strongly in that direction.
There seemed to be a great deal of attraction in
the idea of commencing life in a new land, but to
mv father it was above all a question as to where God
in His wisdom would direct him to go. Long before
this lie had intelligently chosen the Lord to be his
God and had again and again felt and said—“ Where
He appoints, we go.” And, although at this time his
mind was much exercised as to his future, he would
be quite passive in God’s hands, and he said, “ I am
determined to stand still and see the salvation of


God. I have no will of my own. God, who now
looks at my heart, sees that I would delight to be
where He would have me to be.” In the month of
November he again writes :—" On Wednesday last I
had to come to a conclusion in regard to leaving this
country. After seeking the direction of God, and
consulting with the ministers, I resolved to go to
Adelaide, if God permit. If I am not to go, I pray
God to prevent me.” A week having passed by, he
again writes : —“ My mind is very calm about leaving
England. I believe it is God’s will, and for His
glory, or I should feel condemned. He would make
my way difficult, but at present it is quite clear.”
The following is the last entry written prior to
his departure from his native land : —“ This is the last
time I shall be permitted to insert God’s dealings with
me in this land. Nothing up to the present has in any
way prevented my going. On Tuesday night we had
a most happy and soul-reviving season. Bless God
for His abundant presence, and for the brotherly
affection manifested towards me. This week my
mind has been calmly stayed on God. I feel to-night
no condemnation. I am accepted through Christ.
Glory to His name! O Lord, Thou knowest my
heart. Thou knowest I long to live for Thee, and
Thee alone. O God, hear my vow which I now make.
If Thou dost permit me to go, I trust to be faithful
in reproving sin, and, if Thou dost permit me to land
on a distant shore, I promise to pray and preach
for Thee. 0 Lord help me ! I yield up my body


and soul to Thee, my time, energies, and all I have.
Thou hast a right to all I have, a right to dispose
of all as seemeth good to Thee. I would not question
Thy right or goodness for ever. O Lord, help me
to trust in Thee for ever. Amen.”
With such confidence in God as is here expressed,
one cannot wonder that my father, with his wife and
one child (my eldest sister, Mary Lawes Langsford),
were quite willing to commit themselves into the
hands of Him
“ Who rides upon the stormy sky
And calms the roaring sea,”
with perfect assurance.
Having paid their passage-money, they embarked
in the Sea Queen for South Australia. Having
arrived safely, the following entry appears under date
April 7, 1850 ;—“ After the lapse of nearly four
months I am again found in our own home, recording
the dealings of God towards me. I am now some
14,000 miles from the place where I last made an
entry in this book. On December 13, 1849, I left
home and the circle of my kind friends. They showed
their appreciation of my labors in the gift of £l6, as
well as by many other expressions of regard. At
Plymouth, in the Bethel, I found it good to draw
nigh to God. We weighed anchor, and set sail on
December 26. My experience during the voyage was
calm and peaceful, sometimes very happy. I regret
that I was not more useful on board. I did not pray


or take up my cross as much as I ought. On the way
out a son was born to us.” [My eldest brother, the
Rev. John Dyer Langsford,] “We sighted land at
about eleven o’clock on March 26, and next day we
oast anchor, having made the passage in twelve weeks
and three days. We had a most delightful voyage.
After landing, I soon found out my brother, and took
my wife and little ones to his house. I soon gave our
notes of removal to the Rev, D. J. Draper, who
received us very kindly. On Good Friday I was
again permitted to join in the service of God’s house,
and I felt it good to be there. On the Sabbath I
listened with delight to the Rev. T. T. N. Hull, who
is, without doubt, a man of God.” He could now
thankfully sing :
“O, the infinite cares, and temptations, and snares,
Thy hand hath conducted me through !
0 the blessings bestowed by a bountiful God,
And the mercies eternally new.”
The Rev. Mr. Hull, who was a gifted minister
of the Irish Conference, arrived in Adelaide on the
day after my father. He only travelled in the North
and South Adelaide circuits, and in 1854, removed
to Sydney. On leaving South Australia he was
presented with a purse containing £lO5, as well as
with other tokens of affection and respect. Soon after
this, owing to the death of his wife, he returned
to Ireland, where he has since occupied the most
important circuits, and still lives as a supernumerary
of that Conference.


The South Adelaide quarterly meeting was held
soon after my father’s arrival. He attended that
meeting, and sought advice from the brethren as to a
suitable place of settlement. Their advice was, that
he should proceed to some rising village, and a few
days afterwards he removed to a house in Kensington.
On the first Sabbath after their arrival in their new
home, he attended in the morning the Independent
Chapel, where a “free and faithful sermon was
preached,” and in the afternoon in their own little
room, he “ held up Christ as the Lamb of God, who
taketh away the sin of the world.” He at once
began to fulfil the promise he had made on leaving
England “to preach for God.” Soon after his arrival
he went to conduct services at the M.ontacute Mine,
walking both ways, and was greatly impressed with
the grandeur of the hills, and had sweet and sensible
communion with God by the way. An event which
made a great impression on his mind at the time, was
a fatal accident which happened to a brother local
preacher. The South Australian Register of July 20,
1851, thus records the event : —“ It is our painful duty
to record a fatal accident, which occurred yesterday, to
Mr. .Andrew Johnston, secretary of the Provincial
Mining Association, the Building and Investment
Society, and some other public companies. The
lamented gentleman was accompanying the Rev. D.
J. Draper to Norwood; when crossing the park land
they both dismounted for the purpose of tightening
the saddle-girths of their hired horses. While
doing so, Mr. Johnston remarked that the saddle


on Mr. Draper’s horse was not so good as that on the
one he rode, and proposed that they should exehange
horses, particularly as he thought his was the easiest
in his paces. Mr. Draper expressed himself content
with his horse; but Mr. J ohnston, with all the
generous warmth of his country, insisted on the
exchange, and springing hurriedly on Mr. Draper’s
horse, his hat fell off, and frightened the animal, which
ran away with him. At first Mr. Draper felt no
alarm at the circumstance, but expected every moment
to see Mr. Johnston pull in the horse and return for
his hat; but on waiting for some time he grew
anxious, mounted, and followed the direction taken
by the runaway horse which he saw, on rising an
eminence, galloping off at some distance without a
rider, and immediately after found Mr. Johnston
lying on his face in a deep rut. Mr. Draper
dismounted, and raised up his friend, who was
bleeding profusely from the mouth and nose, and
quite insensible. Two persons passing at the time in
a gig were hailed by Mr. Draper ; they paused for a
moment, and then pursued their way without taking
any further notice, Mr. Barton, who chanced to be
passing, on ascertaining the accident rode off to town
for medical assistance, but at that moment several
persons arrived from the hospital, attracted by Mr.
Draper’s voice, and conveyed Mr. Johnston to that
establishment, where the colonial surgeon and Dr.
Bayer were in attendance. Dr. Eades was sent for,
and arrived in a few minutes, when everything that
science could suggest was resorted to in vain. The


case was desperate. The unfortunate gentleman, it
was ascertained, must have pitched upon his head,
and, besides a fracture of the skull, there were other
and more fatal injuries, which rendered recovery
impossible. He gave no indication of consciousness
after he was raised from the road by Mr. Draper, and
in less than three-quarters of an hour from the time
the horse ran away the sufferer breathed his last.
Mr. Johnston was an esteemed member of the
Wesleyan congregation. He was an indefatigable
local preacher, and his name appeared in the list of
trustees placed (this week) under the foundation
stone of the new chapel, Pirie Street.”
A considerable amount of energy was now being
displayed in the matter of chapel-building, and
especially in the east of Adelaide. The Payneham
and the Norwood Chapels were both opened within a
month of one another. The land on which the
Norwood Chapel was erected was generously given
by the Rev. D. J. Draper, it being at first vested in
the following trustees, viz. :—Henry Goss, Thomas
Hill, Henry Broad, John Colton, Robert Hawkes,
John Green, Edward Johns, William Maguire, and
Andrew Johnston. When, later on, it was found
necessary to enlarge the chapel, and more land was
required, a new trust was formed. The names of the
survivors of the old trust wore still retained, and
the following were added : —William Orchard, John
Langsford, James Coombes, William Clarke, Reuben
Flavel, Joseph Lockwood, Philip Fry, Edmund


Gilding, Thomas Laffolly, John Holmes, and James
Pappin. Of these it may be said that a few remain
unto this present time, but the greater part are fallen
asleep. Immediately after the opening of the church
my father was appointed a class-leader.
About this time there was a great deal of excite-
ment in reference to the matter of the grant made by
the State for religious purposes. “ The Act of Council
authorizing State aid to religion,” known as the
“ Church Ordinance,” provided that any “ duly
appointed and officiating minister of religion ” might
obtain “ aid ” on the following terms and scale :
For 50 sittings let and paid for, £SO ; for the next
150 sittings, 10s. per sitting. There was also a
proviso that under no circumstances could more than
£2OO be received from the Government by any one
minister, no matter what number of seats were let.
It was required that the trustees, or other properly-
appointed officers, should certify to the number of
seats let aud paid for, with the names of the seat-
holders, and this had to be done each quarter.
There was also provision for granting aid towards the
erection of chapels and ministers’ houses, but no grant
for any one church or parsonage was to exceed £l5O.
Discussion had taken place in the various quarterly
meetings year by year in regard to the acceptance of
the grant.
A general election took place in 1851, and
during the contest one of the burning questions was


NORWOOD WESLEYAN CHURCH,
Erected 1850. Transept added 1856.
D




the continuance or otherwise of the grant-in-aid to
religious bodies. During the excitement at the time
there were some of the officials of Methodism who
were considered to have acted most indiscreetly.
My father thus alludes to this matter: —“ A sad
breach has been made here in reference to the grant.”
He then refers to three local preachers who had to be
suspended on account of their actions in reference
thereto, and he adds—“ Our three brethren, will, I
fear, be lost to us. O God, give me grace to act wisely.”
At the June quarterly meeting of 1851, the
principal business done was the decision to divide the
circuit. On the same day “ I was allowed to give my
vote for a member of the Legislative Council. I
voted for Mr. Waterhouse, who, I trust, will prove a
worthy member. The election has caused immense
excitement in the colony. O may God direct its
affairs.” He refers to the fact that the Church was
greatly prospering, and thus writes of his own
experience :—“ How kind and good God has been to
me and mine. All our wants have been richly
supplied. Bless His holy name. I have had some
blessed seasons in His house as well as privately.
Praise the Lord for this. God is pouring out His
Spirit upon the colony, and souls are being saved.
T have felt His influence to quicken and raise my
soul. I feel the cleansing blood again applied to my
soul. Bless the Lord for full salvation. Glory to
God 1 He takes me for His own.” He now truly
experienced—


“A rest, where all our soul’s desire
Is fixed on things above ;
Where fear, and sin, and grief expire.
Cast out hy perfect lore.”
The next item of importance noted is the opening
o£ Pirie Street Church. On the first Sabbath the
sermons were preached, morning and evening, by the
Rev. John Eggleston, of Sydney, and in the afternoon
by the Rev. John Gardner, formerly of Chalmers
Church, North Terrace. On the following Sabbath
the services -were conducted by the Revs. D. J.
Draper, T. T. N. Hull and J. Eggleston. A
successful bazaar was held during the intervening
week. The entire proceeds of the opening services
and bazaar were £1, 250.


CHAPTER V.
VICTORIAN GOLDFIELDS. REVIVALS. AUSTRALASIAN
CONFERENCE OF 1882.
SmST was in the years 1851 and 1852 that South
jfelgO Australia was greatly depleted of its popula-
tion through the discovery of gold in Yictoria.
Almost all the men, who were able to go, went,
and at the beginning of 1852 my father
wrote : —“ All trade is suspended. At present I see
no alternative but to go. I trust to be guided by the
Lord.
‘ I’ll praise Him for all that is past,
And trust Him for all that’s to come.’
If it is opposed to His will, O may He prevent me, if
not, I trust my way will be opened. It is dishearten-
ing to see our new chapels deserted.” So great
was the exodus that in some villages there was
scarcely a man left, and some of the churches so
recently built, had, for a time, to be closed. After
much prayer and dependence upon God, my father


decided to go, and for about four months there is no
entry in his journal.
Daring that time of great excitement he remained
faithful, and was made useful on the diggings as a
local preacher and Christian worker generally. The
late Mr. «T, D. Bone and my father, amongst others,
are spoken of as having been zealous, in turn with the
ministers, in conducting open-air services. The well-
known names of Hill, Broad, Bouudy, Broadbent, and
Orchard also appeared on the first weekly plan, which
was published on May 2, 1852.
The first entry my father made in his diary after
his return from Victoria is as follows:—“I desire
gratefully to acknowledge the goodness of God to me
while going to, and during my stay there. But how
little labor for Christ, I would ever remember the
signal deliverance wrought out for me. When I saw
no prospect of benefiting myself, or answering the
object of my journey, Cod opened my way, and blessed
me beyond rny fears. 0 for a grateful remembrance
of these things ! I would likewise be thankful to God
for permitting me to return home again under such
favorable circumstances. Our passage was rather
long and rough, and our companions anything but
agreeable,
‘ When all Thy mercies, O my God,
My rising soul surveys,
Transported with the view, I’m lost
In wonder, love, and praise.’”


On January 1, 1853, he again writes : —“By the
goodness of God I am again brought to see the
commencement of another year. The past has fled,
never to be recalled. It was a year of immense
importance to thousands. How many died 1 How
many improved their circumstances from penury to
plenty 1 How the population has again increased!
To me the Lord has been gracious. I have had all
things richly to enjoy. Christmas Day was a very
happy day. My soul has been sweetly drawn towards
God. His service has been perfect freedom. Last
night we held a watch-night service for the first time
in our chapel. I had the privilege of preaahing from
‘The voice said, Cry.’ It was a good season, and God
was very present. I have now entered upon another
year, and I humbly intreat Thee, O God, to bless
me with Thy grace so that it may be devoted to Thee.”
On commencing, in the year 1854, to occupy a
new house which had been erected for him on the
Parade, he, in the following terms, dedicated it to
God :—“ 0 God, do Thou make this house Thy loved
abode. Here let Thy Word be read, here let there
ever be an altar dedicated to Thy service. Here let
my wife and little ones lire in health and peace, to
love, serve, and adore Thee. Over it let Thy wings
be spread, around it let Thy arms be stretched. Let it
be a home for all who love Christ, especially for Thy
ministers. Lord, in the name of Christ, and in the
exercise of faith, I beseech Thee to take it. Let
nothing be ever done in it to grieve Thy Spirit or


cause Thee to depart.” To be born and trained up in
such a home, and with such sacred influences
surrounding us, was a privilege for which all the
members of the family will be eternally thankful.
“If of parents we came, who honored His name,
’Twas His wisdom appointed it so. ”
Reference is made on August 26, 1856, to a
gracious outpouring of the Spirit in connection with
the Society at Norwood “ Our Society has been
visited with a gracious revival. Fourteen days ago it
was resolved to commence special services, and the
result has been an increase of at least forty souls.
What a mercy to see so many make choice of God for
their portion! Such a revival I never witnessed.
The power of God was very manifest; the most
sceptical must have been convinced that God was in
the place. To-night I can rejoice in a sanctifying
God. Glory ! glory !
‘O Jesus ! ride on till all are subdued.
Thy mercy make known, and sprinkle Thy blood;
Display Thy salvation, and teach the new song
To every nation, and people, and tongue.’
We have also commenced the enlargement of the
chapel, our congregation being very large. May God
give me grace to act my part in endeavoring to keep
these precious souls in the straight path.”
The revival, above referred to, continued, until at
least sixty were added to the Lord. His own class


increased in numbers to such a degree that it became
necessary to divide it so as to form three classes, and
the cause continued in a vigorous and healthy con-
dition. The references to his religious experience
during the next year or two indicate that he was still
resting fully on God. Not that there were no times of
cloud and of sore temptation. There were times when
he keenly felt his utter unworthiness, and when he
was led to make confession of heart-wandering; hut
this was a condition which he ever greatly deplored,
and in which he could not rest. He longed for the
patience, the meekness, the gentleness, of Christ, for
he well knew that if he had not the spirit of Christ
he was none of His.
In the year 1857, another season of special
services, during which there was a great awakening,
is thus referred to :—“ Lord, help me to praise Thee.
0 God, how good Thou hast been to souls here in
arousing and pardoning. Glory, glory to God.
What seasons of refreshing we have again seen. To
God be all the praise. O Lord, keep those who have
trusted in Thee. Pardon those who are seeking
Thee. And still, Lord, do Thou revive Thy work
and save souls. Glory to God, Thou canst do it.”
The names of ministers who are referred to as
preaching in and about the circuit at this time were
the Revs. Spencer Williams, John Harcourt, P. R.
C. Usher, and Joseph Dare. He attended the
opening services of the new chapel at Payneham on
October 24, 1858. The Rev. Thomas Binney, from


England, who was then on a visit to the colony,
conducted one of the services, and it was a day of
spiritual refreshing.
There are several entries about this time having
reference to the pressure of the times, owing to the
serious depression in trade. This, at times, occa-
sioned him, as well as others, no little anxiety.
He was ever able at such seasons to cast his care
upon Him who cared for him. Other incidents
of interest, to which casual references are made,
are the purchase of a Mission House for the preachers
on April SO, 1850; the visit of Dr. Jobson to the
colony, and the lamented death of the Prince Consort.
In the year 1862 the Australasian Wesleyan
Conference was held in Adelaide, under the presidency
of that father of Methodist preachers, the Rev. James
Watkin. By the decision of that Conference the
Norwood, or Third Adelaide Circuit, came formally
into existence on March 26, 1862. The Rev. Spencer
Williams was the Superintendent, and Mr. Henry
Goss, of Payneham, Circuit .Steward. The number of
preaching places was seven, including in that number
Terryville and Wesley Male, names which have now
become obsolete. There were also eleven local preach-
ers, and one on trial, and two hundred and thirty
members. The first plan of the circuit was printed
by Mr. Waddy, at Mount Barker. By the Conference
of 1862, the Rev. John Watsford was appointed to
labor in Adelaide.


My father had now been spared to enter upon his
fortieth year, and he thus records the experience of
his soul:—“O how good God has been to me in the
past ! No affliction, no poverty, all my wants
supplied ; but Christ is mine, and salvation mine,
and hope of heaven mine ; what cause for gratitude
and praise.
‘ What a mercy is this, what a heaven of bliss,
How unspeakably happy am I ;
Gathered into the fold, with Thy people enrolled,
With Thy people to live and to die.’
The first quarter of the history of the new circuit
was a most successful one. The superintendent was
thankfully able to report that there were eighty-one
on trial for membership. At that meeting the Rev.
John Watsford was present. He preached in the
evening an effective sermon on 1 Sanctification,’ and
it was followed with a good prayer meeting. We
were all quickened and stirred up to our duty and
privilege.”
Following upon this, special services were again
held, and these are thus referred to :—“ I am glad
that I am alive ; I am glad to be spared to record
God’s dealings to me and my family, and to the
Church of God in this place. God has been very
good to me as regards earthly affairs, but how much
more so in spiritual things. This week has been
devoted to special pleading with God for the out-
pouring of His Spirit, and He has graciously heard
and answered. His people have been quickened, and


many souls have been savingly blessed. Among
them my two eldest children profess to have found
good. God is evidently working on them and I trust
it will be permanent. The meetings have been
marked with great power.” In a fellowship meeting
held at the close of the week, twenty-six persons
openly testified to have received Christ during the
meetings, and the work was still continued, the Lord
still adding to them such as were being saved. At
the September quarterly meeting, which was held
at Payneham, the finances were satisfactory, and it
was reported that there were sixty-five on trial and
twenty-nine in junior classes. At the same meeting
Messrs. D. S. "Wylie and P. Webb were recommended
to the district meeting as candidates for the ministry.
At the local preachers’ meeting a discussion took
place on the question of the Eternal Sonship. On
the Sahbath following that meeting my father went
with Mr. Henry Edmonds to Magill, and heard him
preach with much acceptance and profit. Mr.
Edmonds was later on received as a probationer in
the ministry, but he finished his course during his
first year and died at Goolwa in 1866.


CHAPTER VI.
REMOVES TO ADELAIDE. RETURNS TO NORWOOD.
JUBILEE OF METHODISM. REV. WILLIAM TAYLOR.
-sfe-
IfOR a period of twelve years my father had
now resided at Norwood. He had frequently
thought that it might be conducive to the
I - ~' growth of his business, as well as more
favorable in obtaining situations for his sons,
if he removed to Adelaide. In the year 1862
he took that step, believing it to be of God.
The members of his class deeply regretted the
separation which then took place. They arranged for a
social tea, to which they invited him and my mother.
At that meeting there were many testimonies given of
the real assistance which he had rendered them in
their spiritual life, and they assured him of the regret
they experienced at parting. As a memento of their
esteem they presented him with three very handsomely
bound volumes, with suitable inscription in each. But
although, so far as residence was concerned, he had left


the vicinity in which he had spent twelve happy and
useful years, it was evident from his frequent visits to
his former sphere of life and labor, that the sympathy
of his heart remained true to Norwood, and it need
not be wondered ac, that, when the period of twelve
months had passed, he was glad again to remove his
home and family back to the more familiar spot. He
soon again found himself in his old relation to the
Church of his choice. In August, 1864, he records his
attendance at the meeting to inaugurate the Jubilee
celebration, to commemorate the introduction of
Methodism into Australia. These services began with
a public breakfast, held in the Pirie Street lecture hall,
on August 10. After the breakfast a public meeting
was held, which was presided over by Mr. Thomas
Padman. At that meeting addresses were delivered
by the Revs. J, Watsford and S. Ironside, and Mr.
(now Sir John, K.0.M.G.) Colton. During the after-
noon a deeply interesting and eloquent sermon was
preached by the Rev. J. Watsford, from the words,
“ What hath God wrought.” Later still in the day a
public tea was attended by about nine hundred
persons, and at the public meeting which followed, the
church was crowded. Mr. Colton presided, and the
Revs. J. Watsford, S. Ironside, J. Cope, T. Lloyd, R.
C. Flockhart, and W. Brown, with Messrs. T.
Mitchell, T. Padman, and L. Roach, took part in the
meeting, which was a most enthusiastic and successful
one. Similar meetings were held throughout the
different circuits of the colony. It was reported in
the Magazine that, when the celebration took place at


Norwood, “the chapel was inconveniently crowded,
and many had to stand about the door, not able to get
in. Considering that the circuit has in hand the very
important undertaking of Kent Town Chapel, and
also that there has been a heavy outlay of circuit
expenditure within the last year or two, it is a matter
of astonishment to many that the jubilee subscriptions
and collections exceed four hundred pounds.” The
latest official returns up to that time reported 215
ministers, 5,372 local preachers and class leaders,
39,605 Church members, and nearly 200,000 atten-
dants on public worship.
During this year (1864) my father had serious
thoughts in regard to resigning his position as a local
preacher. It was not because he did not love the
work or feel happy in it, but because of the respon-
sibility he felt -with respect to the training of his
family. He says : —“ I want to do right ;my family
seem to need me at home on the Sabbath. I am
away from home a great deal during the week, and
when I return lam tired. On the Sabbath they are
all at home. The responsibility is too great for my
wife. She needs her rest, and I have no right to
deprive her of it. I could work in the Sabbath
school, and still be with my children. ... I
want to he right here, O Lord, Thou seest me ; do
Thou guide me.”
The arrival of the Rev. William Taylor,
of California, had been eagerly anticipated. I


remember that on the Sabbath that Mr. Taylor
commenced his labors in this colony, my father,
ray eldest brother, and myself, walked in to Pirie
Street Church to hear him. My father was specially
interested all through the mission by the prominence
given to the subject of “ Entire Sanctification.” He
remarks : —“ He is clear and decided on the subject
of Christian perfection, having enjoyed it for some
twenty years. He regards it as perfect loyalty, per-
fect submission, perfect love, confidence, meekness, etc.”
The next item of interest recorded, is the opening
of the Kent Town Jubilee Church. The foundation
stone had been laid on October 10, 1864, by the
Pev. S. Ironside, who was the superintendent of the
Adelaide Third Circuit. The church was opened by
the Rev. William Taylor on August 6, 1865. He
preached in the church twice, and in the afternoon in
the open air to an immense crowd. The public
meeting was held in the Pirie Street Church, and in
all £620 was contributed at the opening services.
My father was the first layman to occupy the pulpit
of that church, which be did on the Sabbath
succeeding the opening. On October 14 of the
same year, he writes :—“ Our anniversary at Norwood
last Sabbath was very successful, good sermons, good
influence, good collection. On Monday we removed
the debt of £125. Now I hope our way is clear for
a new chapel. All glory to God in the skies.”
By the death of Mr. R. IT, Bennetts, he lost a
member of his class, and both the Norwood and


Kent Town churches lost one of its trustees. He had
been converted in the Norwood chapel under the
ministry of the Rev. Joseph Dare. At the time of
his death he was one of the circuit stewards. He left
a clear testimony, and fell asleep—one more attes-
tation to Wesley’s words : “ Our people die well.”
The incidents noted, among others, during the
year 1866, are the holding of the Australasian
Conference in Adelaide (when my father was able to
renew his acquaintance with several ministers who
had previously labored in the colony), the loss of the
steamship London, with the Rev. D. J. Draper and
Mrs. Draper on board (this sad event occurred on
January 11, 1865), and the introduction of the second
circuit collection during the quarter. In the month
of September he thus states his religious experience ;
—“ God is my portion. I feel all is clear between me
and God. I come, a guilty, weak, and helpless worm,
but I accept Jesus as my ‘ wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.’ I feel that while I
give up all to God, He gives me all I need. Bless the
Lord, Omy soul! How foolish to be full of care,
when He has told us to cast all our care upon Him.
0 for perfect confidence ! I feel I can and do trust
Him.
‘ To know He takes me for His own,
0 what a happiness is this.’ ”
The last entry in his diary for 1866 is ;—“I still
feel confident of my filial relation with God. I can
still cry, 1 Abba, Father.’ But I have still to strive.
E


The war in my members still goes on, and I am afraid
I too often yield. 0 God, pardon all my unfaithful-
ness, and wash me again in the precious blood of
Christ. I would here again insert my sense of the
goodness of God in the year that has passed. At its
commencement I trembled as I looked onward, but
God has been better than all my fears. He has
bountifully supplied my wants. All my family have
enjoyed remarkably good health. Bless the Lord!
There has been great distress in the land, and at the
present time there is great trouble in many homes. I
trust all this will work together for good. There are
revivals in many places. O may the time to favor
Zion come.”
In the month of April, 1867, the Revs. Samuel
Knight and J. Young Simpson arrived in the colony
from Victoria, and were both appointed to the
Norwood Circuit. The first services they conducted
in Norwood Church were in connection with the
Sabbath-school anniversary. On the following even-
ing, at the public meeting, opportunity was taken of
speaking words of welcome to the new ministers, my
father being chosen to represent the Norwood Society.
Both ministers at once won the hearts of the people,
and it was blessedly realised that they had come in
the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel.
On the Good Friday there was a very large
gathering from all the surrounding circuits to a camp
meeting which was held at Enfield. “It was a most
blessed season of grace and sweet delight. There


were some twenty or thirty penitents throughout the
day. God was most signally present. I believe God
will greatly bless our new ministers, and make them
very useful. My soul has been greatly blessed. I
long for God.
‘ 0 would He more of heaven bestow.’ ”
On April 20 he writes :—“ God has been very
bountiful in temporal mercies, but exceeding abundant
in spiritual. The services this week have been very
refreshing. Several in the neighborhood are in
distress. Glory be to God ■ He is working. 0 may
it become more general. I hope this Sabbath will be
one long to be remembered. I have to preach at
Norwood this morning, and Mr. Simpson this evening.
O for souls to-day ! Lord, make me pure. Amen.”
After this he records with gratitude : —“ It has been a
time of great blessedness. The Spirit has been poured
out; the Church has been quickened; several have
found peace through believing; great grace has rested
upon the people. My own dear boys have all been to
the altar. I believe the good Spirit has touched their
hearts. 0 may the work continue. Save souls
to-night. Amen.” In referring to his own share in
the blessings of that joyous time, he says : —My own
soul has richly shared in the baptism of fire. I have
graciously realised the cleansing blood of Jesus. 0
blessed, sweet experience !
‘ ’Tis done ! Thou dost this moment save,
With full salvation bless ;
Redemption through Thy blood I have,
And spotless love and peace.’


The good work thus begun at Norwood extended
all through the circuit, and at the next quarterly
meeting there were eighty reported as on trial for
membership.
Other incidents to which brief records are given
are the visit of H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh,
the official landing taking place on October 31, when
over 4,000 children belonging to the schools of
Adelaide and suburbs were gathered on an immense
gallery, which was erected on the site of the present
General Post-Office. When the procession arrived
there, all stood up and joined in singing the National
Anthem. The laying of the foundation-stone of Prince
Alfred College took place on November 5, 1868.
He also states that at the December quarterly meeting
he was, after much persuasion, induced to take the
office of Circuit Steward. Still later, he notices the
breakfast which was given at Norwood to Mr. and
Mrs. T. G. Waterhouse, on their departure from the
colony ; the death and funeral of Governor Daly ; the
departure of the Rev. J. Watsford from the colony
after six successful years of service, and arrival of the
Rev. W. L. Pinks; the removal of the Rev, J. Y.
Simpson and arrival of the Rev. James Haslam. The
new building at the rear of the Norwood Church,
which had been specially erected for school purposes,
was now occupied, and it was named after the
generous donor of the land on which it was built,
“The Draper Hall/ 1 The good times of refreshing
still continued all through the circuit, and the services


were marked with special blessing and power. On
November 7, he gratefully records:—“ All my children
are well, and, better still, a comfort to us. My son
John commenced conducting Divine service at Monta-
cute and Athelstone on October 25, 1868. Mr.
Padman went with him.” By the Conference of 1869
the Rev. Thomas Lloyd was stationed at Norwood,
and the Rev. R. S. Casely at Kent Town. About this
period several of the standard bearers of the Norwood
Church, including Messrs. Davy, Abbot, and Orchard,
were translated to the Church triumphant —all wit-
nessing a good confession and giving fresh testimony
to the sufficiency of the grace of God. In his own
experience he still continued to realize a high state of
grace, and could cheerfully say : “ I still feel my
state of perfect love to be very blessed. I feel Jesus
to be fully mine.”
At the local preachers’ meeting held in the month
of September, my brother John passed his examin-
ation, and was received as a fully accredited local
preacher. At that same meeting my own name was
mentioned as likely to be useful as a preacher. I may
add that I made my first attempt to preach at Ashton
on January 29, 1870.
The visit of the Rev. William Taylor, of
California, -was the principal event of interest to the
Methodist people during the year 1870. During the
services which were conducted by him, scores sought
and found the Saviour. The good work spread and
was carried on through several of the surrounding


circuits, and at the June Quarterly Meeting of the
Norwood circuit it was thankfully reported that there
were 100 on trial. At this time my father says ;
“I have walked in love, and had great joy in the
Holy Ghost. I have had great comfort and help in
preaching, and believe God has often blessed the
Word. I have been reading Taylor’s ‘ Model
Preacher’ and the ‘ Life of Thomas Collins,’ from
which I have received great advantage.”
Having received the intelligence of the death of
his father at the age of eighty-two years, he thus refers
to the event—“ Bless the Lord, Omy soul, for His
sustaining grace to my dear father in life and in
death. I trust to follow my dear parents to the
better land. My remembrance of my father is very
precious. He must have been converted to God some
thirty five years since. I have heard him refer to his
penitential struggles, and his finding pardon while
repeating these lines—
‘ Now, if Thy gracious will it be.
Even now my sins remove,
And set my heart at liberty
By Thy victorious love. ’
And it was done. For over seventy years he was in
the employ of T. T. Kekwick, Esq., and his father, of
Peamore. He taught in, and was also Superintendent
of, the Sabbath School for many years.”
At the September quarterly meeting of 1871 my
brother was proposed as a candidate for the ministry,


and the meeting recommended him to the district
meeting. My father felt that this was a most impor-
tant step, and his own experience many years before
naturally recurred to him. A t the same meeting it
was decided that Kent Town should become the
head of the circuit.
In February, 1872, he thus recalls the mercies of
God. “Twenty-six years ago to-day my dear wife and
I became one. What a continuation of mercies have
we received from the Lord since then. What a
numerous family (his family now consisted of seven
sons and three daughters), bringing immense care ; but
what domestic joy and happiness have they afforded
up to this time. All but one (who was transplanted to
the Paradise above) are still with us. Another year or
two will make changes in our happy home. But as
they leave our doors, they will go forth, 1 trust, to
make happy homes in other places.”




NORWOOD WESLEYAN CHURCH.
Erected 1878.




CHAPTER VII.
DIARY DISCONTINUED. SUMMARY. ILLNESS,
CLOSING SCENES. DEATH.
ST has been rather disappointing to me, as well as
to the other members of our family, that, for
. some unaccountable reason, uiy father discon-
tinned keeping the story of his life. Of his
experiences during the last twenty years there
is scarcely any record. That, however, is the period
with which we, as well as his friends, are most familiar.
Those who will take the trouble to read this book, and
who were acquainted with my father, will be able, to
some extent, to fill up for themselves the record of
the years which intervene between his last recorded
experience and the time of his departure from the
scenes of earthly toil. The last twenty years, as they
were the years in which he enjoyed the maturity of his
.Christian experience, were, there can be no doubt, the


happiest years of his life. In regard to Ills own inner
life, he had safely arrived at a condition of soul which
never admitted a shadow of doubt as to his relation
to his God. He “walked in the light,” and so, he
“ walked with God,” and had the unvarying testimony
that he pleased God.
There was alwaysa deep reality about his religion,
which all those who came into contact with him, both
in connection with Church matters and business
concerns, clearly recognised and acknowledged, Before
the Church and the world “ he wore the white flower
of a blameless life.” Whatever faults he had, and it
would not do to say, or to suggest, that he was faultless,
they were imperceptible to his friends. During this
later period, he was able, as the result of wise and
careful management, to desist from taking any active
part, in business pursuits. He thus had ample leisure
for any special duties which ire felt called upon and
qualified to perform. He continued to take his full
share of the work of a local preacher until very
recently, and it was only when increasing age
demanded it, that he requested to be relieved from
distant appointments. Still, wherever his presence
could be secured, he was ever welcomed and listened
to with respect. But it was also as a visitor of the
aged, and especially the sick, that his latest years will
be remembered. To many a sick-bed he has gone as
an angel of God, to minister comfort to the afflicted
and dying, or to warn, in faithful and yet loving words,
those who were unprepared to die.


It was always a source of great comfort to him to
see how his family, not only remained true to parental
example and godly teaching, hut also to witness their
fidelity to the Church of their fathers. That two of
his sons should be called to the work of the Christian
ministry, and two others to be actively engaged as
local preachers, while the others in various spheres
were devoting their time and talents to the cause of
Christ, was naturally to him most cheering. There is
no question that, with him, religion was the chief
concern, and he was ever anxious that it should ever
be so with his children. The end of his days came
sooner than had been anticipated. He had been careful
of his constitution, and it was fondly imagined that
as his father and grandfather had been spared to a
great age, his days might be lengthened out accordingly.
But God knows what is best, and He makes no
mistakes. The sickness which was unto death, only
commenced a few weeks before it terminated. But
for the greater part of that time a fatal result was not
anticipated. It was a great privilege to have him in
our home at Mintaro for a fortnight during tiis affliction.
He came in the hope that a brief change would be
beneficial. Though he was very weak when he came,
he seemed to be bravely endeavoring to overcome it.
He paid several visits to homes in this neighborhood, and
the friends have since referred to those visits as times
of refreshing to them. His presence was a means of
blessing in our home. He still maintained his almost
constant communion with God. His memory, especially
in regard to preachers and sermons, was wonderfully


retentive. Often when I was absent from home on
circuit duties, he had lengthy and interesting
conversations with my wife, again and again referring
to circumstances which had transpired very many years
before. His change with us was of no benefit to his
bodily health. On returning home to Norwood, his
medical attendant soon concluded that there was
cause for the gravest apprehension. After trying in
vain to remove the cause of trouble, the doctor
suggested that a consultation should take place. Drs.
Hayward and Marten made a thorough examination
of the patient, and, as a result, the following telegram
was on June 26 sent to the distant members of the
family“ Consultation doctors consider father’s case
hopeless; may linger a month.” As soon as it was
possible, the members of the family repaired to the
parental roof, but it was none too soon. The sick one
only commenced to remain in bed (during the day) on
Thursday, June 28. The doctors had diagnosed his
case as one of cancer; but, on Monday, July 2, his
regular attendant seemed compelled to alter his
opinion, and suggested that the advice of another
skilled physician should be obtained. Accordingly,
on the following day, Dr. Verco was associated with
Dr. Hayward. Their verdict was, that there was no
cancer, tumor, or anything of that nature, but that
he was suffering from an accumulation of fluid on the
kidneys, and they feared he would not survive the
week. We all, therefore, determined to remain to the
end. We had not long to remain. It was a great
relief to us that there was no severe pain associated


with the disease. There was a grlul»al- -wasting
away, and consequent consciousness of weMnross and
weariness. But there was not the least murmuring.
His patience and quietness were most astonishing.
He seems to have chosen as his motto the text — 11 In
returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and
in confidence shall be your strength.”—lsa. xxx., 15.
There were very many who came to see him, and so
long as it was considered advisable, they were permitted
to do so. Many of the ministers and office-bearers
from his own and surrounding circuits, members of
the Norwood Church, with which he had been so long
connected, and those especially who had been members
of his own classes, felt it to be a privilege to look upon
his face, and to hid him the last farewell. Some of
the scenes witnessed in that room were beyond
description. A grandchild, bom only a week before
his death, was brought to be placed in his arms to
receive his blessing, and those who were present will
never forget that all-comprehensive prayer, offered to
the Triune God on behalf of that child. On the
Tuesday afternoon, after the second consultation had
been held, he displayed no anxiety at all to know
what the doctors had said about his case, and when,
after some time, he understood their verdict, there was
still no anxiety. He had done the work of life, and
had long before made preparation for death, and now
there seemed nothing left but to calmly and quietly
rest on God. He, therefore, simply folded his hands,
and with confidence said —“Blessed Jesus, into Thy
hands I commend my spirit, for Thou hast redeemed


me by Thy precious blood.’’' The end came on the
following’ day, Wednesday, July 3. There did not
seem to be any decided change in his condition until
about neon. During the morning he had, now and
again, spoken of pain, and once was heard to say,
“Father, Father, a little respite.” But about mid-day
it was recognised that the change was approaching.
The Scriptural language, “ Thou changest his counten-
ance and sendest him away,” was beginning to be
Terified. All the members of the family were informed
that the end was near, and all who were able at once
repaired to his bedside to wait the issue. We had
hoped and prayed that the end would be painless and
peaceful, and we were grateful to God that such was
the case. Our father had ever been fond of singing
hymns of faith and hope ; and, though it was at
first difficult, we felt that even amidst our tears
there was the utmost cause for rejoicing. He was
proving that, to the Christian, death is robbed of
its terror and sting. He could rejoicingly exclaim,
“Thanhs be unto God, which giveth us the victory
through our Lord «Tesns Christ.”
Could he then have expressed his wish he would
have said, “ Sing when I die,
‘ Stand not around my bed with bitter cry
When I shall die,
But let your eyes look on beyond the ways
Trodden so painfully these earthly days,
And let yonr lips attune themselves to praise,
Sing when I die.


Let not your hearts be laden with a sigh
Because I die;
Let Faith her happy promises fulfil,
Into your souls her comfort sweet instil,
And make you glad that the dear Lord doth will
To let me die.
In my last hour with cheerful faces nigh
Help me to die.
Let the sweet smile of heaven reflected shine
From out your ej’es, and from that Home divine
Let music echo on your lips, O mine !
Sing when I die.’ ”
So as we stood around his bed we sang, through the-
last hour, such hymns as, “ What are these arrayed in
white, “ Rock of ages, cleft for me,” “ I am sweeping
through the gates,” etc. Now and again his lips were
seen to move, and his eyes were uplifted in prayer.
The only words we were able to distinguish were,
“ For Christ’s sake!” “Safe!” “Peace!” And these
were all we wanted. A few minutes before the end he
slowly raised his right hand, and closed his eyes to the
fleeting things of earth ; and in a few moments more
his happy soul, had escaped from its house of clay, and
his eyes beheld the “ King in His beauty.” That was
in one sense the chamber of death, but it was the
place through which the freed spirit passed into a more
abundant life. It was, perhaps, the greatest privilege
of our lives to be there. We ourselves were in the very
suburbs of Heaven. We then thought of the lines—
“ The chamber where the good man meets his fate,
Is privileged beyond the common walk of virtuous life.
Quite on the verge of Heaven.”
K


His children will never forget that scene, and they are
glad to be able to hand down the memory of it to the
generation after them. Though we were all conscious
that we had suffered an irreparable loss, our hearts
were so comforted and assured by Divine Grace, that
there was not the least repining. To my mother, as
well as to each member of the family, there was given
a real and blessed resignation to this dispensation
of God’s providence. We knew that be was only
fallen asleep, and that
“ To fall asleep is not to die,
To dwell with Christ is better life.”
On the following morning, when the intelligence
was conveyed through the daily papers, many who had
not known of his serious illness, were surprised to find
that all was over, and many were the messages of
comfort, sympathy, and respect, which came from
every direction. The funeral took place on Friday,
July 6. The Hev. H. T. Burgess, the Superintendent
of the dvorwood and Magill Circuit, when, waited on
with reference to conducting the service, at once
suggested that this was an appropriate occasion in
which the body should be removed to, and a service
held in, the Church. To this we readily assented.
During the earlier part of the day, and up to the time
for the service, many were the tokens of affection
which were sent to be placed on the coffin and the grave.
The service in the Church was fixed to commence at
2. SO p.m. At about two o’clock, the coffin was carried
into the Church by six of the sons of the deceased.
66
FCNEUAL.


My youngest brother (Mr. Joseph Langsford), who
resides in West Australia, was the only member of
the family unable to be present. We all regretted,
as much as he did, his unavoidable absence. A brief
service was held in the house, especially for the
comfort of my mother and two of my sisters, who
were unable to be present in the Church or at the
grave. The Church was crowded. The mourners
included, in addition to his sons and one daughter, his
eldest brother, Mr. William Langsford (who is in his
eighty-second year), and besides these, there were his
son-in-law, and daughters-in-law, several grandchildren,
and many nephews and nieces with their children.
The service was conducted by the Rev. H. T. Burgess,
who was assisted by his colleague, the Rev. C. T.
Newman, as well as by the Rev. H. H. Teague
(President of the Conference), and the Rev. J. Young
Simpson. Hymns appropriate to the occasion were
sung, and Mr. Burgess delivered a short address, in the
course of which he said that a tribute of respect was
being paid to one whose association with that sanctuary
dated from its commencement, and who had long been
known as an honored member of the community.
That esteem had been won by their late friend
through the consistent sanctity of his life. His was a
light that had not flickered or wavered, but had shone
with steady and increasing lustre. The explanation of
his saintly character was to be found in his own
personal experience. While he knew many things,
there were two he knew thoroughly —he was acquainted
with the human heart, and he knew God. His


knowledge of humanity, with its needs, was derived
from the study of his own heart. Having mastered its
problems, he was able to help others, and, for the assist-
ance he had rendered them many would rise up and
call him blessed. He knew God as the result of long,
free, and fearless intercourse with Him. Having
made the Lord his friend, and given to Him the
services of a consecrated life, he was able to follow
His directions willingly and to trust Him implicitly in
every emergency. Thus there grew up within him an
experience of absolute rest and quiescent patience
which nothing was able to disturb. Sincerely confi-
dent that all was well, and strong in assurance that
never faltered, the duties of life were faithfully done,
and its end anticipated without fear. The reality of
religious peace and power was thus illustrated in
life and death. An example had been set which
would not be forgotten, and an influence exerted
which would never pass away.
Mrs. Herrington very feelingly rendered, “O rest
in the Lord,” and the service was concluded by the
organist playing the Dead March in ‘ r Saul,” while all
silently stood. Then we again carried our beloved
father’s remains to the hearse, and the long procession
slowly proceeded to the Payneham cemetery, where
rest so many of his friends. Arrived at the gates, we
again carried the coffin to the grave-side. A large
concourse of friends had assembled, and after a portion
of the burial service had been read and the hymn
“ Rock of ages ” sung, the Rev. T. Lloyd closed


the service with an appropriate prayer and the
benediction. We returned home, thankful that we
had been able to perform that last service for one who
had been a loving and a faithful parent. A memorial
service was held in the Norwood Church on the
following Sabbath evening, which was also conducted
by the Rev. H. T. Burgess.
In the course of his sermon Mr. Burgess said that
on the last occasion he saw his departed friend alive,
he found him resting on a familiar text. Trying to
find it in the Bible, his memory was caught by another,
which seemed to dovetail into it. The two passages
would form a most appropriate starting-point for some
observations which might he suitable to the occasion,
and the manner in which they were suggested rendered
the use of them almost imperative. The passages
were:—
“In returning and rest shall ye be saved: in
quietness and in confidence shall be yonr
strength.”—lsa. xxx. 15.
‘ ‘ And the work of righteousness shall be peace,
and the effect of righteousness quietness and
assurance for ever.”—lsa. xxii. 17.
In these words might be found both a suggestion
of much that was special and beautiful in Mr.
Langsford’s religious life and character, and at least a
partial explanation of his delightful experience. It
would not be necessary to indicate the parallel or the
point of contact along the line. Having the finished


life and admirable character, with what it produced, in
their thoughts, the application would be made without
direct suggestion.
The initial point was “ righteousness.” This was
indicated by the text, in the statement, “ In returning
. . . ye shall be saved.” The returning to God,
there referred to, distinctly meant the re-establishment
of such relations with Him as could not be so well
expressed by any other term. The local bases of the
passage furnished an illustration. The people to whom
it was spoken were turning away from God, seeking
help elsewhere ; making warlike preparations, seeking
victory by their own prowess. They were reminded
that safety —salvation—depended upon, and would
result from, their hastening back to God and resting
in Him. In personal life the same principles applied.
Righteousness was all-important as its basis and true
characteristic. Right relations with God were essential
to a harmonious and successful life. There must be
the right state of the heart, otherwise everything would
eventuate in failure. A heart right with God formed
the best and only satisfactory basis for both character
and life. Following upon this there must be the right
employment of all the powers which were possessed as
a trust. The culture of the will and the affections,
and the presentation of the members as instruments
of service, were included. Choosing the will of
God under all circumstances and conditions, and
obedience to its utterance at all costs, followed as
matters of course.


There was here, therefore, both a question of
character and a description of conduct. The term
righteousness might be applied in both relations.
The man whose inner life was pervaded by this
principle, lived a life of holiness. The law of his God
was in his heart, and by that law his whole being was
dominated. From this, as a centre, radiated Christian
excellencies, which both enriched and adorned, making
the life beautiful and its example a constant power.
It had its outward as well as its inner manifestation.
Righteousness was essentially an active quality influ-
ential in all the details of every day life. It was
religion at work producing its true and proper results.
It was godliness reduced to practice, and, instead
of hindering or interfering with the discharge of
worldly duties and responsibilities, it sanctified them
all. Righteousness in conduct was what the world
demanded from the people of God, and His grace alone
could supply.
The work of righteousness was said to be peace.
This was always the case. From the very outset of
the blessed life the effect was as described—“ Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God.” The
maintenance of right relations with Him meant the
continuance of a harmony which nothing could disturb.
On the other hand unrighteousness involved discord.
There would be jangling notes, friction, dislocation,
and possibly disaster. The peace, moreover, was
inward as well as outward. The man of rightheartedness
would be at peace with himself. His conflict —a


foolish and one-sided quarrel—with God being termi-
nated, the cessation of hostility was followed by a
great calm. The perturbed, because self-condemnatory,
spirit was tranquilised, and the smitings of a remorse-
ful conscience were felt no more. There was also
peace with others as a kind of corollary. Righteousness
disarmed antagonists. Where rectitude prevailed, the
attacks of opponents failed to wound, and their
weapons were turned aside. Righteousness was in
itself a panoply of defence. Yet further, its “ work ”
was peace with surroundings which it deprived of
their power to disturb. Collisions resulted from
departure from right principles, and deviations from
the right path, which righteousness escaped.
The peace thus wrought was not only diversified
in its sources, but of a special quality. It was widely
removed from apathy or unconcern. Such might be
the peace of stagnation, torpidity, or death ; but not
the living grace and blessing so precious as a personal
possession. It was the peace of intelligent acqui-
escence in the Divine will and purposes. Not only the
abandonment of a fruitless and often painful resist-
ance, but a surrender that was both full and glad—
joyfuljin proportion to its fulness. In another aspect
it was loyal devotion—-which was the very opposite of
rebellion—with all of conscious wrong and misery
thereby involved. When, as the result of harmonious
adjustment, all friction and irritation ceased, the
result was a substitution as of storm for calm. There
was also the peace of conscious safety, when appre


hension was subdued and there was no sensation of
alarm. Such, and more, was the peace wrought by
righteousness. It was described as perfect in its
quality passing understanding, and therefore incapable
of full and adequate description, and withal having
a potency of its own. The peace of God was able
to guard the hearts and minds of those who had it for
their own.
Of all this their departed friend was a proof and
exemplification. During his life, and while actively
engaged, the fact was recognised, but now that his
career, being complete, could be viewed as a whole, the
connection was even more conspicuous. Every one
who knew him recognised that he had received the
power which makes for righteousness, and that it was
operative in a marked degree. Hence the calmness,
the confidence, the reposefulness of his piety all along,
and especially his spiritual experience during physical
weakness and in the presence of death.
Yet a further effect of righteousness is said to
be quietness, which may be regarded as the outward
manifestation of inward peace. No spiritual turmoil or
perturbation of spirit. No disturbing doubt or tortur-
ing apprehension. No restless tossing on the billows of
uncertainty, but a quiet anchorage within the sheltering
haven of God’s protecting care and love. Without, as
well as within, this effect of righteousness may be seen.
There is such a thing as an atmosphere of quietness
which some men seem to breathe. There is an


environment which cannot be penetrated, and happy
are they who have this to enjoy.
With it goes its twin blessing, “ assurance for
ever”; security based on the appropriated promises and
clear enjoyment of God. Righteousness is emphatically
stated to have as its accompaniment the special favor
of God. Who shall dwell in the holy hill of God ?
“ He that walketh uprightly and worketh righteous-
ness.” To him there is given the security of an
impregnable defence. To the righteous are promised
protection, support, guidance, and all else that can
safeguard against possible ills; having which
guaranteed assurance for ever is no presumption, but
the outcome of simple faith.
In this quietness and confidence—only another
term for assurance—is found unfailing strength. There
is strength in repose as well as in conspicuous activity.
Hence is derived strength to do the will of God, not
hurriedly and perhaps fitfully, but steadily, and with
fruitfulness in results; strength to bear the burdens of
life manfully and uncomplainingly ; strength to suffer
whatever may befall with untiring patience and
unquestioning indignation. The reason is obvious.
Such quietness and confidence connects their possessor
with almighty power. He who leans on God is himself
charged with spiritual energy. For him there is
an inexhaustible supply of grace available, and he may
boldly say, “ I can do all things through Christ who
strengtheneth me.” Moreover, such a spiritual calm


conserves the strength derived from God, and prevents
its being expended in restlessness or wasted by
fretting.
Not only so. This quietness and confidence
combined is a manifestation of strength. It shows
settled convictions as to the truths that are held,
abiding faith in the promises on which reliance is
based, implicit trust in the Fatherhood of God and the
care of His Providence, firmness in the grasp of
principles as rules of life, and close attachment to Him
with whom union has been established. In all these
there is more of what it is desirable to witness than in
loud-voiced protestations or feverish action.
The rest thus attained is described as of saving
efficacy. To be saved by resting is salvation of a very
precious kind. This is not the repose of indifference
or idleness, but the practical result of having appropri-
ated Divine assurance, and the result of consciously
dwelling in the personal presence of God. Not only is
it the rest of faith, which is belief in its highest form,
but of hope, which confidently anticipates coming good,
and of a joyful experience as an earnest of good things
to come.
On all these aspects of the spiritual life our
departed friend yet speaketh. His finished life may
serve as a commentary on the verses which have formed
the theme of our meditations. We are impressed
thereby with the possibility, the value, the blessedness,
of personal righteousness ; the safety to be found in


trusting Cod ; the mighty power of a godly life ; how
spiritual strength may Ire maintained, despite physical
weakness; the, fidelity of God to His promises ; and
the combined sweetness and strength of inward peace.
The sermon, of which the above is a condensation,
was attentively listened to by the large congregation.
At its close the appropriate hymn, “Jerusalem the
golden ” was sung, and the solemn, triumphant strains
of the Dead March in “Saul ” were a fitting termination
to an impressive service.


CONCLUDING REMARKS.
SFTER all that has been said, it seems hardly
necessary to attempt anything like a delineation
of my father’s character, or a resume of his
S life and work, It may, however, be sufficient,
in closing this memoir, to refer briefly to a
■;' few of those characteristics which stood out
most prominently in the different relations of life.
As a father :
“ He was—
But words are wanting' to say what :
Think what a father should he.
He was that."
He was never happier than when all his children were
around him. In our early life he did all he possibly
could to give us a good education, and then ho en-
deavored to make our home life as attractive as
possible. And our home was a truly happy one. We
never needed to go outside it for our pleasures. We
were all fond of music and singing, and when we


gathered, after the duties of the day, it was quite a
common thing to spend the closing hours of the day
together in innocent enjoyment. In this way the
influence of our parents was ever acting upon ourselves,
and we shall ever he grateful for those ties which in
early life kept us from seeking our pleasures away from
home. On public holidays our parents were ever
anxious for our enjoyment, and, as a rule, they
accompanied us on our excursions, and took delight
in taking part in our games. As early as possible we
were taken to the sanctuary, and, later on, were
expected to remember the preacher’s text, and still
later to he questioned as to the treatment thereof.
Oar parents watched over our spiritual life, and it
was a great joy to them that their children walked in
truth.
As a citizen he did not take any prominent or
public part either in municipal or political matters.
His sphere did not lie in that direction. Still, he ever
felt the responsibility which the franchise gave him,
and, if he could so arrange it, he did not fail, at
election time, to record his vote. He believed strongly
in the secrecy of the ballot, and, while he, according
to his judgment, voted for the right men, he did not
care to he questioned as to who he had voted for, nor
was he inquisitive to know for whom others had voted.
It is evident, however, that though he did nob actively
engage in such matters, he gained for himself the
respect of those who did, as the following letter,
received by my mother, will testify :


“ Town Hall, Norwood,
“ South Australia,
“July 11, 1895.
“ Dear Madam,
“ I have the honor, by direction of His Worship
the Mayor and Council, to convey to you and the
members of your family their sincere sympathy in
the bereavement you have been called upon to suffer
by the decease of your dear husband, and your family
the loss of an affectionate parent. The Council
recognises that, whilst your husband did not take any
active part in municipal matters, yet he has, by a long
residence in our midst, manifested such an upright,
consistent, and exemplary life, that his example as a
townsman has done much to influence those hy whom
he has been surrounded for good.
“In tendering this tribute of respect to the
memory of the departed, the Council sincerely trusts
that you may be comforted in your sorrow as you think
upon the esteem and respect in which he was held
during his life, and so unmistakably manifested at his
death.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ Geo. W. Gooden,
“ Mrs. J. Langsford, “ Town Clerk.”
“Parade, Norwood.”
It was, however, in the positions which he occupied
in the Church of Christ that his life was most influential.


As a preacher , he was “a workman that needed not to
he ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth,” He
very rarely, if ever, undertook bo conduct a service
without having had time to make due preparation for
the responsible duty. He had a very high conception
of the province of the preacher; ami, as he had a
strong conviction that he was called of God to go forth
as an ambassador of Christ, he ever sought the
qualifications necessary to faithfully discharge the
obligation. For over fifty years he was engaged in
calling sinners to repentance. His preparation was
generally characterised by deep and clearly-expressed
thought, and his delivery was ever forcible and earnest.
Ihe was able to give a word in season to God’s own
people, for their guidance, comfort, and stimulus. He
could attractively present the mercy and grace of God
in the gift of His Son, and when he felt that occasion
demanded it, he could discourse on sterner topics. He
knew the constraining power of love, as well as
the “ terror of the Lord.” He had the privilege, in his
early days, of hearing some of those who were regarded
as the foremost preachers of the time, and he was in
manor respects fitted to he a competent critic, But
there never was a more sympathetic listener. He was
one of those hearers who went to the house of God in
the spirit of prayer and with a desire to be profited,
and who are a source of help to any preacher. Iduring
the three years of my ministry in his circuit, whenever
I was planned at FTorwood it was always a cause of
regret to me if he were absent, He was the hearer
who helped me most.


As a Class Leader, he was most successful. He
ever realised that the position carried with it grave
responsibility, and from week to week for nearly fifty
years, he was most regular in attendance. He knew
how to lead a class without wearying its members, and
how to make it interesting, profitable, and attractive to
old and young alike. In his later years lie still
retained his aptitude for sympathising with the
struggles and difficulties of young converts, and was
ever ready to extend his sympathy and help.
One of the members of his class writes:—“For
thirteen years I met in your honored father’s class at
Norwood, and words fail me to toll how often it
has, and how it does still, help me, for ‘ he being dead
yet speaketh.’ His counsel and advice was sound,
good, and full of kindness. In prayer he seemed
to converse with God, and we all loved and revered
him. He will be missed by the aged and sick. We
rejoiced to see him come in, and to hear him talk
of heaven, and in his prayers bring us nearer to
God. Many have safely gone home, who blessed
the day they heard his voice."
Another writes;—“We shall miss him very much
in the class meeting. I always felt lifted out of myself,
and helped on the way by him; he was so trustful and
full of faith.”
Still another testifies : —“ The time spent in his
class will never be forgotten by me, and many of his
words have I treasured, and I ' often recall him to


my mind as he sat at the table, or engaged so
earnestly in prayer. I felt it was a privilege to have
known him thus—
‘ There is no death ! The stars go down
To arise upon some fairer shore ;
And bright in heaven’s jewelled crown,
They shine for evermore.’ ”
Dnderlying all his religious life and work, there
were two things which always strongly impressed me.
One was, that he was a man of prayer; and the
other was, that while he strongly believed in the
personality and deity of the Holy Ghost, he ever
also recognised the necessity of His presence. Among
my earliest recollections is that of my father rising
early to engage in private meditation and prayer, and
often have I heard that voice pleading with God
morning after morning for the preparation for the
duties and obligations of life. No public engagement
was entered on without special prayer. During the
later part of his life, and while he had ample leisure,
he for a long time made it a practice to go some
time during the day to the vestry, where in the
evening his class would meet, to spend an hour in
wrestling with God on behalf of himself and his
members. In his diary, he also relates how, on
certain Sabbath evenings, while the preacher was
engaged in delivering the message of the Gospel, he
would spend the time in prayer that God’s blessing
would accompany the Word. The following extract
from a letter received from the Rev. John Watsford


(a name beloved and revered throughout Australia),
will testify to the impression made upon his mind by
my father’s life. He writes :
“For six years while I lived in South Australia
I knew your now sainted father well, and greatly
respected him as a most devoted and conscientious
Christian, and an earnest and successful worker in the
cause of God. We had in Adelaide a blessed revival
of religion, and had to carry on meetings for many
weeks, and no one more heartily entered into that work
than did your dear father. His prayers at some of
those meetings, so earnest and so appropriate, I have
never forgotten. While I write this, his well-known
voice seems to be ringing in my ears. His thoroughly
consistent life, and warm heart, and sound mind, made
him a helper in such a work that I highly prized, and
never failed to use. I ever looked to him as a man
who had power with God, and 1 remember how when
at times in our meetings we had some hard struggle
with unbelief or the powers of darkness, I have called
on him to pray, and while he was wrestling with God
the foe has been defeated, and the victory came. As
I remember him during these six years, I know not
how better to describe him than as ‘ a good man, full
of the Holy Ghost and of faith.’”
The quarterly meeting of the Norwood and Magill
Circuit, held a few days after my father’s death, passed
the following resolution :


“ This meeting records its high estimation of the
prolonged, raided, and useful services rendered to
the cause of God in this circuit and neighborhood by
the late Mr. .holm Langsford. As one of the original
trustees of the Xonvood Church, he was closely
identified with its history from the commencement.
As a class-leader of unusual spiritual insight and
judieionsness he was eminently successful. His labors
as a local preacher wore frequently owned of God,
and by his consecrated talents in these and other
departments of the Master’s service, he was enabled to
exercise a most salutary and permanent influence.
“To the- bereaved widow and family this meeting
offers its tender condolence, assuring them that the
name of the departed husband and father 1 will be
permanently held in reverential regard by his former
associates in Church life and work.”
At the local preachers’ meeting the following
resolution was passed : —-
“ This meeting places on record its high apprecia-
tion of the Christian character and valuable services
of the late Brother John Langsford, who had been a
local preacher for more than half a century, and
during the last forty-five years labored diligently and
acceptably in this and neighboring circuits, turning
many to righteousness, His gifts as a preacher were
of a high order, and the spirituality of his nature
rendered his words exceptionally powerful. He now


rests from his labors, and his works follow him.”
If I were to include in this sketch all the
testimonies received as to the respect in which my
father was held, it would greatly increase the size of
this volume. I only append a few extracts :
One says —“It would he like gilding refined gold
were 1 to attempt to write anything in his praise,
but I cannot help testifying to his manly, upright, and
charitable disposition, which I have noticed during
the forty years of our acquaintance.”
A minister who knew 7 him well, wrote—“ His death
makes me feel very much poorer than I was before.
His life was so well spent, so rich in holiest service,
his Christian hope so well grounded, and his daily
readiness for the great change so complete, that death
could bring no sting for him.”
O o
Another minister thus writes: “The life that
has j ust ended has been one of the grandest ever lived
in this colony ; a life full of Christian labor, a life of
rare fidelity to and for the Church, a life blessed
to the conversion and spiritual health of a great
number.”
The Rev. Samuel Ironside, now 7 resident in
Tasmania, writes : —“ My memories of your father
date back thirty-one years, to the time when I was
put in charge of the Norwood Circuit by the


Conference. Being sent all the way from Sydney
a perfect stranger, I had some misgivings, but they
were soon and happily removed. There was a noble
band of local preachers ready to welcome me—Thomas
Padman, Henry Goss, John Langsford, Nicholas
Trudgen, and Henry Broad. How their names rise
lovingly in my memory as I write. I never had
a better set of pulpit helpers in any Circuit in which I
have travelled—able, loyal, faithful. Most, if not all
of them, ‘rest from their labors, and their works follow
them.’ I could put your father into any pulpit in our
Church with the fullest confidence. He was always
acceptable, always useful. Were Ito write his
epitaph, I would simply transcribe Acts xi,, 24 ‘He
was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and
of faith, and much people was added unto the Lord.’ ”
An old resident of Norwood, who many years ago
removed to New Zealand, writes:—“His was a
lifetime spent in the Blaster’s service, and now' he has
gone to his reward. He has heard the words —‘ Well
done good and faithful servant.’ His is no starless
crown. What a meeting it would be as his ransomed
spirit entered the pearly gates, and the word passed
through the heavenly plains—‘John Langsford has
come home! ’ How those he had been the means
of leading to the Saviour would hasten to greet him,
and 1 ead him up to the Lamb to receive his crown ! I
often think of the old times at Norwood. He put
his whole heart into his work. . . . Earth is
poorer and heaven is richer when we lose such


men. . . . His joy was to do the will of the Lord,
and now the battle’s won and he has received the
victor’s crown.
‘ Oh, may we triumph so
When all our warfare’s past,
And, dying, find our latest foe
Under our feet at last.' ’’
The testimonies which I have given are only a
few out of the many which have been received, but
they are sufficient to show that the life which my
father lived was spent for the glory of God and for
the welfare of his fellow men. My labor of love is
now ended, and I have thought that I might very
appropriately conclude by quoting a favorite hymn of
my father’s, one which he frequently sang with the
deepest feeling, and one which may be regarded as the
key to his life and death.
“God of my life, through all my days,
My grateful powers shall sound Thy praise ;
My song shall wake with opening light,
And cheer the dark and silent night.
“When anxious cares would break my rest,
And griefs would tear my throbbing breast,
Thy tuneful praises, raised on high,
Shall check the murmur and the sigh.
“When death o’er nature shall prevail,
And all the powers of language fail,
Joy through my swimming eyes shall break
And mean the thanks I cannot speak.


“But 0, when that last conflict’s o’er,
And I am chain’d to earth no more,
With what glad accents shall I rise
To join the music of the skies !
“Soon shall I learn tIT exalted strains
Which echo through the heavenly plains
And emulate, with joy unknown,
The glowing seraphs round the throne.
“The cheerful tribute will I give,
Long as a deathless soul shall live :
A work so sweet, a theme so high,
Demands and crowns eternity.”


“THE BIBLE AND ITS USE.”
A Paper read by Mr. Langsford in connection with the
inauguration of a Biblical and Theological Class at
Norwood , on August !f, 1866.
KN commencing the duties of a Biblical and
Theological Class, we conceive that no subject
can be more suitable and appropriate than
the one which stands at the head of this
paper.
From the inexhaustible storehouse of this Book,
all the subjects to be discussed in this class must be
drawn, and the final decision of all questions which may
be argued, settled. Acquaintance with this Book,


theoretically and experimentally, is the ultimate object,
we trust, all the members have in view who join this
class. And it is scarcely possible to mention a subject
which does not find its counterpart here. What has
been said of a part of the Book is applicable to the
whole. It is a kind of text-book to almost every
writer—on geology, geography, chronology, astronomy,
natural history, ethics, jurisprudence, political economy,
theology, poetry, and criticism—from the time of
Moses to the present day; a Book to which the
choicest writers and philosophers in pagan antiquity
have been deeply indebted ; a Book from which the
flimsy writers against Divine Revelation have derived
their natural religion and all their moral excellence; a
Book written in all the energy and purity of the
incomparable language in which it was composed ; and,
finally, a Book which for importance of matter, variety
of information, dignity of sentiment, accuracy of facts,
impartiality, simplicity, sublimity of narration, tending
to improve and ennoble the intellect and ameliorate
the physical and moral condition of man, cannot be
equalled. The Bible is a revelation from God, not in
part, but entirely ; not the subjects bearing on religion
only, but every matter introduced into the sacred
volume. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God.
We can scarcely conceive it possible for an intelligent
creature like man, upright and innocent, to be left in
ignorance of his Creator and of a knowledge of His
will. Such a state did not exist. Between man and
God there was the most confidential intercourse. But
sin caused disruption, and alienation from God was the


result, and as the human race multiplied, the distance
from God and truth became greater, until men, not
liking to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind, and the whole race,
with a few exceptions, wandered on in endless mazes,
lost. Then the question, “ Who by searching can find
out God 1 ?” came up, and then the might}' struggle in
human minds to penetrate the darkness and lift the
veil from unseen things has been thus graphically
given. There had been enough, and more than enough,
of conjecture on the awful topics of revelation. Mighty
minds in successive ages had roused all their gigantic
powers to grapple with futurity, had labored and
labored in vain to lift the veil from the invisible world ;
yea, and had been unable to decide satisfactorily the
question of their own immortality. Neither the
beautiful constitution of nature nor the strongest light
of reason availed them here. There was not sufficient
analogy between that which is sensible and that which
is spiritual to assist the process of enquiry, so as to
justify any certain conclusion, and a more powerful
beam was necessary to penetrate the darkness
covering eternity. They resembled one of their own
vessels in that infancy of navigation. It went forth
from the port well built, well-manned, the heart of
courage was in her mariners, the arm of strength in
her rowers, the head of skill and experience with her
pilot. But the storm arose, and she was driven from
her course. As yet the compass was not. Neither
sun nor stars for many days appeared, and no small
tempests lay on her. Of what avail then was the skill


of the pilot, even if the helm obeyed his hand in the
strife of the elements, when he knew not where to
steer. Night overtook her—a gloom deep, dense,
impenetrable. The light in the ship contributed
nothing to scatter the obscurity around her. Mean-
while, the thunder of the breakers warned them that
they were rapidly approaching some unknown strand.
They sounded, and the fathoms diminished ; they cast
anchor, and wished for the day. At length it came ;
the morning broke from the, east. At first little could
be distinguished in the twilight, a thick mist brooded
upon the ocean and the land • increasing light gave
some shadowy outlines, sometimes to he traced, at
others mingling with the vapor, and lost in it. By and
by the sun arose. The parting mists gave the bold
and beautiful cliffs to his sweet influences ; it rolled to
their summits and vanished, while the sun crowned
every headland with his splendor. “We have also a
more sure word of prophecy ; whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a
dark place, until the day dawn and the day star arise
in your hearts. ” Such is the light thrown on the path
of man by the Bible, and without such aid man never
would have found his way from Nature up to Nature’s
God.
That God has spoken, and that the Bible contains
His utterances, are facts placed beyond any reasonable
doubt. The statements of the Old Testament Scriptures
are authenticated by the records of the times to which
those statements belong. Interwoven with the history


of different Governments, their rise and fall, is the
prediction that One, before all others, and above all
others, in the fulness of time should appear. His
parentage, birthplace, reception among men, His
humiliation, sufferings, death, resurrection, and
ultimate conquests, are given by different men in
different places covering a period of fifteen hundred
years. In the New Testament we find One answering
the description of that given in the Old, as face
answereth to face in a glass. He claims to be the
predicted One, submits His claims to the closest
scrutiny His enemies can make, and the expressed
conviction is, “We know that Thou art a teacher
come from Ood, for no man can do the miracles Thou
doest except God be with him.”
The renovating and elevating truths of Scripture,
where cordially believed and experienced, speak their
own authenticity. The comfort and consolation derived
from the Scriptures in times of sorrow and distress,
their God-like origin.
11. The Use of the Schiptckes. —The Bible
is not intended as a mere school book, in which
children may learn to read, though we approve of the
use of the Bible in schools. The minds of vast
numbers of children would be altogether void of those
great and renovating morals which pervade the Bible
were this Book entirely excluded from our schools.
Neither is the Bible intended to be a mere pleasure
book, to be taken up and laid aside as whim or fancy


may dictate. The Bible is man’s every-day and life
book ; from his earliest boyhood to his latest manhood
the Bible should be his stand-by ; his directory in
difficulty ; his comfort in distress.
One great use of the Bible is to convey instruc-
tion, and to it we are indebted for nearly all the most
useful information we have. Take from the world all
the intelligence conveyed (directly or indirectly)
through the Bible, and how meagre the stock which
would remain. A great deal of personal, social,
political, and scientific knowledge is conveyed in the
Scriptures. But the great advantage of the Bible is,
it teaches me who I am, whence I came, whither I am
going, the existence of God, my relation to Him, His
providence over me, my responsibility to Him, the fact
of my lapse from Him, His purpose of love in my
recovery, the gracious remedial means provided to this
end. These, and a number of kindred subjects, all of
like importance, are clearly revealed in the Bible.
The Bible is intended to exercise a corrective
influence on man. To err is human. “ Lean not unto
thine own understanding” is the advice of the wisest of
sages. No unshaken confidence should be placed in
the deductions of men ; such is his own shortsighted-
ness, and such the clouds of mist which hang over all
subjects brought within the horizon of the human
mind, that he cannot decide with anything approaching
certainty; and then he is in danger of being
deluded by misrepresentations made to him by- un


'“■'-I'," ■ ,
sanctified and satanic agency. The Bible is the only
infallible standard. This is perfect ; to this we may
turn with the confident assurance that its utterances
are not delusive.
The Bible supplies the answer to that very general
problem, “ Who will show us any good 1 ” What is
good, and where to find it? are questions which have
agitated the breasts of men in all time past, and the
answers have been just as diversified as the enquirers.
One reply has been, “It is not in me and another,
“It is not in me.” One generation after another has
been engaged in its pursuit ; but it has been as the
mirage of the desert; it has enticed them on and on,
but ever eluded their grasp. The Bible reveals to
them what is good. “Here the fair tree of knowledge
grows.”
The utility of the Bible is further seen in that it
gives an answer to that all-important question, “ How
then can man be just with God, or how can he be clean
that is born of a woman ? ” Many have been the
doctrines propounded to the world professing to meet
the spiritual condition of man ; but how utterly
wanting in adaptation to the longings of man’s
immortal nature.
Two great desiderata have to be met in man’s
moral and spiritual condition. Pardon, to remove the
guilt of past transgression ; and sanctity, to purge the
foulness of his depraved heart. The Bible prescribes


the remedies to meet these spiritual maladies. It
declares a fountain opened for sin and uncleanness,
and produces the testimony of those who have washed
their robes and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.
How unspeakably valuable, then, is the Bible.
It is more to be desired than gold ; yea, than fine gold
—-sweeter also than honey or the honeycomb ; by it
are we warned, and in keeping it there is great reward.
Brethren, love your Bibles; young men, test your
religion by the estimation in which you hold your
Bibles; one and all, let us hold to the Bible as
tenaciously as we cling to life. Let us be pre-
eminently men of this one Book.


A Sermon.
REST FOR THE WEARY.
“Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and 1 will give you rest. —Matfiujr xi. US.
«HESE words are an indirect proof of the
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. We do
not find such an utterance coming from the
S lips of any of the Prophets or Apostles. It
h supposes unlimited resources. Christ knew the
T extent of human wretchedness ; the numerous
applicants He would have for relief. He saw as
He went to and fro in the streets of the cities, as well
as on the country roads of Palestine, the lame, the
blind, the deaf, the dumb, the leprous. To all these
He said, “ Come unto Me,” And he saw a great
H


amount of heart-wretchedness, which was concealed
from the public view. He needed not that any should
testify of man, for He knew what was in man. And
to all these He said, “ Come unto Me.” These words
have gladdened the hearts of tens of thousands since
they were uttered. May they gladden our hearts. We
purpose noticing the condition of those to whom the
words are addreseed, the invitation given, and the
promise made.
I. The Condition of those Addressed. —“ All
that labor and are heavy laden.” It has been
supposed that there is a reference here, to the burden-
someness of the Jewish economy. There were not only
the precepts as given by Moses, which were numerous,
and very minute ; but to these there were added the
traditions of man. Christ refers to this as a “ burden
grevious to be borne,” and the Apostle Peter referring
to the same subject, says, that it was “ a yoke which
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.” Christ
invited them to relinquish their faith in, and observance
of, the traditions of man, and to embrace the doctrines
and precepts taught by Him. The condition spoken
of is not so much a bodily as a mental one; although
wherever Christianity is allowed to exercise its legiti-
mate influence, it will greatly improve the physical
condition of men—in lightening their burdens, and
shortening their hours of labor.
Men labor and are heavy laden from different
causes. With some, the burden is that of doubt or


unbelief. Thoir minds are ever perplexed with such
questions as—What am II Where am I going? I see
my fellow creatures dying around me, and I conclude
that I shall die. If I die, shall I live again? If so,
in what state 1 Will that state be permanent, or
transitory ? Is there a God ? Has He revealed Him-
self ? If so, is the Bible that revelation ? If there is
truth in the earth, how and when can it be found? To
all such enquirers, Christ says, “ Come unto Me.” “ I
am come as a Light into the world : he that believeth
in Me shall not walk in darkness.” “If any man will
do His will, he shall know of the doctrine.” “I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life.”
Another’s burden is that which arises from an
awakened conscience. All men will in general terms
confess themselves to be sinners, but this is a very
different state to the condition of that man whose mind
has been enlightened by the revealing Spirit, He sees
his base ingratitude to God as the great Father. He
acknowledges his direct rebellion against God as
the supreme King. He realises his exposure to
punishment for the transgressions of laws which
are holy, Just, and good ; and from a sense of his
sin he is filled with sorrow and shame. He experiences
a broken, contrite heart, a heart with grief oppressed,
and from the depths of this broken heart, there ascends
the cry, “God be merciful to me, a sinner.” To such
also Christ says, “ Come unto Me.” He is the great
sin bearer. “He was wounded for our transgressions;
He was bruised for our iniquities.”


Another’s burden is the mystery which surrounds
the dealings of God with him. He has faith in God and
His providence. And yet “ clouds and darkness are
round about Him,” and often with Job he is led to
say, “ Behold, I go forward, but He is not there; and
backward, but I cannot perceive Him, on the left
hand where He doth work, but I cannot behold Him,
He hideth Himself on the right hand that I cannot see
Him.” “ Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of His
waterspouts, all His waves and billows go over me.”
“ All these things are against me,” and they are
utterly confounded by Paul’s teaching that “ all things
work together for good to them that love God.”
Another’s burden arises from a sense of spiritual
weakness , and a want of aggressive energy in the cause of
God. “My leanness, my leanness,” is their complaint.
Most Christians feel that they have not attained the
fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ, that
they are not full-grown Christians. On discovering
this, they realise that they are not as concerned on the
subject as they should be. They do not “ hunger and
thirst after righteousness ” ; they do not “ stir
themselves to take hold on God”; and they are
grieved and distressed with themselves. They know
they ought to be making impressions for good on
others, their children, neighbors, and all around
them. But they are powerless for good; indisposed
to take up their cross, deny themselves, and follow
Christ. That all this may be remedied, Christ says,
“ Come unto Me.”


11. The Invitation Given.—The difficulty to
many is that of distance. Jesus seems to some, up in
the third heaven, and altogether out of their reach.
This, as regards His humanity, is correct, for He has
ascended on high, and is set down on the right hand of
God. But for all practical and saving purposes, He is
nigh at hand; in His Spirit He is in every place.
“Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in
My name, there am lin the midst of them.” “And, 10,
I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.”
To the believing soul the personal presence
becomes a blessed fact. Faith is the means of appre-
hending Him ; Prayer the medium of communication
with Him. “ Those who come to God must believe
that He is.” Faith stands to them instead of
sight. “ Whom having not seen, we love; in whom
though now we see Him not, yet believing we rejoice.”
‘ ‘ Faith lends its realising light,
The clouds disperse, the shadows fly ;
The Invisible appears in sight,
And God is seen by mortal eye.”
This is what the Apostle means by “ seeing Him
who is invisible.”
111. The Promise Made.—“l will give you rest.”
A promise is of no positive value, unless there is
the ability and willingness to fulfil it. Both these
conditions are fulfilled in Christ. In virtue of Hia
Godhead, universal nature is His. “The sea is His,


and He made it ; and His hands formed the dry land.”
“ All things were made by Him, and for Him.”
In consideration of His redemptive work, the
Father has given all things into His hands.
In reference to His willingness, we need only
remind ourselves that He gave His life. “Though He
was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor.”
The terms of the promise are “ I will give.” How
exceedingly suitable are these terms to those who have
nothing to pay. The craving for rest and satisfaction
exists in every human heart. All are seeking to
possess it. It can only be obtained from one source,
and that is Christ.


A Sermon.
"I AM JESUS.”
“Why persecutest thou Me? ... I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest.” —Acta ix. J, 5.
■ ctfcg.
MIIESE words stand connected with one of the
most important events recorded in sacred
history, viz., the conversion of Saul of Tarsus.
Saul was born about two years before Christ,
of strict Jewish parents. He was sent to Jerusalem
to receive his higher education. After he had returned
to his native town, the ministry of Jesus took place.
He returns to Jerusalem about the time of the
Pentecost. He was one of those who consented to
Stephen’s death. He manifests a persecuting spirit,
and is suddenly arrested by Christ.
I. The Announcement —“I am Jesus.” What
a world of meaning, and how full of suggestion is


that name. There never was a period in the world’s
history when the person and claims of Jesus occupied
more thought and secured greater attention than at
the present time. Men in all lands, wherever
Christianity is asserting itself, are criticising and
investigating the claims of Christ.
The world is as much in need of Jesus to-day
as ever. It can provide no substitute for Him.
There have been wondrous changes during the
last fifty years ; great inventions; but no substitute
for Jesus.
There is no one hut Jesus that can reveal to man
the truth it is so essential that he should know
concerning God, of man’s relation to God, his
responsibility to God, his alienation from God.
There is no one hut Jesus that can stand forth
before the eyes of the world, and with perfect sincerity
say—“ Follow Me.” All others have defects in their
teaching and blemishes in their lives.
None but Jesus can effectually reach the sorrows
of men. One man may sympathise with, and, in some
measure relieve, the sorrow of another. Jesus was a
“man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.”
None hut Jesus can emancipate men from spiritual
bondage. “He breaks the power of cancelled sin.”


11. The Divine Complaint—“ Why Peesecutest
thou Me?” Looking back from our present position,
we cannot discover any just reason why they should
have persecuted Christ. He was one with them in
every respect, but their sin. He saw that this was
ruining them, and He lifted up His voice against it.
Hostility to Christ in the person of His followers is
still practicable. Hostility to Christ is shown by the
efforts made to undermine faith in His person, His
divinity, the revelation of God, the immortality of
the soul. Many also manifest indifference to Christ,
and this is regarded by Him as persecution. “He
that is not with Me is against Me.”




A Sermon.
MY FATHER’S HOUSE.
“In My Father’s house are many mansions ; . . . Igo
to prepare a place for you.” —John xiv. 2.
BN our intercourse with one another how is it that
we are not more heavenly-minded 1 Is it from
want of interest that we do not converse more
about heaven and the future life ? Are we so
full of the world, of eating and drinking, buying
and selling, of houses and lands, of the workshop and
the field, so occupied in thought with the things
which are seen, that we forget the things which are
unseen 1 Is there nothing of interest beyond 1 Or is
it for want of faith in these unseen things that we fear
to speak of them 1


There are many terms used in Scripture to
represent the eternal home of God and of all the saved.
It is spoken of as a “ country,” a “city,” an “ inherit-
ance,” and Christ speaks of it as
“My Father’s House.”
This is a term with which we are all familiar, and can
readily understand.
There is the idea of Shelter. When the storm is
beating, and the howling wind is blowing, we go to the
house for shelter; and we go into the house to be
shielded from the fierce rays of the sun. So heaven
will be a place of shelter. “No excessive heat they
feel.” “No lion shall be there.”
There is also the idea of Sociality. We think
not only of the building, but also of the occupants of
the house, and of their relations and associations one
with another. One-half of the joys of life arise from
the little acts of kindness rendered to one another in
the home. In heaven there is the highest type of
society—God, the angels, and the spirits of the just
made perfect. The ransomed of the Lord are there.
Many of our dearest friends are on the other side.
There is the idea of Homeliness. We feel more at
home in the Father’s house than anywhere else. There
is less of care while we are there. There is some One
who does the thinking, and who, as far as possible,
provides all things needful.


“ Many Mansions.” —This suggests Commodious-
ness. There will be room for all the family. Some
countries have become too thickly populated, and many
have to emigrate to other lands. But in heaven all
will find room. Though there is an innumerable
company of angels, and a multitude of the redeemed
which no man can number, still there is abundance
of room.
There is also a suggestion of Permanence.
Mutability is stamped on all terrestrial things—our
homes, our bodies, our friendships. Change and decay
are written on all we see. Heaven is an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away.
The things unseen are eternal.
There is also a suggestion of Grandeur. I go
to prepare for you. The selector goes out to make
ready. The wise bridegroom makes preparation
beforehand for the reception of his bride. The
preparation will be in accordance with the wealth of
Him who provides it, and He personally superintends
it. But there is a meetness for heaven which is
indispensable. In order to be with Jesus there, we
must be His friends here.




A Sermon.
THE SEALING OF BELIEVERS.
“ And grieve not the Holy Spirit of Hod, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption/’ —Ephesians ic. SO.
SN the economy of Redemption, the different
persons in the Trinity have their distinct offices
and work. While there is oneness and unity
in the purpose sought, there are diversities of
operation. Origination is attributed to God
the Father; execution to God the Son ; and
administration to God the Spirit.
There are various relations in which the Holy
Ghost stands to the believer. He aids him in prayer,
guides him into all truth, resides in him as a living
temple, and in the text He is said to seal the believer.


I. Explanation of the Text. —Sealing was a
custom which commonly prevailed among men, and it
is employed in Scripture to represent an important
work of the Holy Spirit. See John vi. 27 ; 2 Cor-
inthians i. 22 ; Ephesians i. 13.
1. Seals are used to ratify and confirm transactions
among men. Indentures, wills, and contracts are
thus attested and confirmed. There is a great moral
agreement between the believer and God, in the
performance of which certain conditions and stipula-
tions are entered into.
2. Seals are used for the purpose of identification.
For this purpose trade marks and brands are in use.
Slaves, in olden time, had the marks of their owners
upon them. So God’s people are known to Him,
“ Nevertheless, the foundation of God standeth sure,
having this seal: The Lord knoweth them that are His.”
“ I know My sheep, and am known of Mine.”
3. Seals are used for secrecy and security. Hence
the old and common custom with which we are all
familiar of sealing letters and parcels. To the uncon-
verted, the life of God in the soul of man is a mystery.
He cannot understand it, for it is spiritually discerned.
Our life is hid with Christ in God. It is only the
Spirit who can explain and reveal this mystery. The
believer in Christ is perfectly secure. As men prize
and value jewels and precious stones, so God esteems
the believer as His jewel and above all price.


Jf. The seal makes a corresponding impression on the
softened wax. So it is the work of the Holy Spirit to
impress the moral likeness of God upon the believer.
The outlines are defined in regeneration, and in
sanctification there is the filling up and permanent
impression of God. 2 Corinthians iii. 18.
11. Christians are Sealed unto the Day of
Redemption.
1. This expression is no doubt borrowed from that
arrangement made by God which existed among the
Jews, and which took effect every fifty years, termed
the jubilee, or year of release. Tnen property
reverted to its original owner, and slaves and hirelings
were free from their masters.
2. But that was more emphatically the day of
redemption, when the Son of God suffered and died on
Calvary, and put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.
Then were bought back for humanity all the blessings
and privileges forfeited by sin.
“Pardon, and peace, and heaven to buy,
My bleeding sacrifice expired.”
S. The dag of redemption experimentally is the
day, the hour, the moment when the sinner believingly
accepts Christ. Up to this point the sinner is in
bondage—bound with the chain of sin, led captive by
the Devil. But what a glorious emancipation is
i


experienced ■when' Christ comes and breaks off' his
fetters, and proclaims liberty to the captive, and the
opening of the prison to him that was bound.
J/.. But there is a more complete deliverance await-
ing the people of God. Though they are now the
children of God, they labor under many disabilities ; in
this tabernacle they groan, being burdened. Here
they often meet with physical pain and affliction, mental
disquietude and suffering, and the hateful assaults
of Satan.


A Sermon.
FACTS STATED AND INFERENCES
DEDUCED.
“He that spared not His own son, but freely delivered Him
up for us all; how shall He not with Him also freely
give us all things 1 ” —Romans viii. 32.
■HE promises of God are exceedingly precious
and valuable to the believer. But there are
riter some truths which carry greater comfort to
the heart than others. As some stars exceed
others in brilliancy and attraction, and as some
flowers are charged with rarer odour and fragrance than
others, so some portions of God’s Word are more sweet
and rare than others. The text is one of the choicest.
Our minds have often sought to revel in it, and to
draw out its blessed consolations for our own use, and


for the use of others ; but we have again laid it aside
until further light and more matured experience
and judgment should be attained. But convinced that
our time is passing, and if we use it at all we must use
it now, we commit ourselves to it, praying and hoping
that the Holy Ghost will give us wisdom and grace to
apprehend and realise the truth. In our text the
Apostle has laid down certain facts and bases, and,
from these facts he deduces certain inferences.
I. The Pacts Stated.— “ God spared not His own
Son, but freely delivered Him up for us all.” The
term “sons of God” is frequently used in Scripture.
Sometimes it is applied to angels and at other times to
believers. But when it is applied to Christ it is used
in a far higher and more real sense than when applied
to any creature. The term “ Son of God,” is not used
with regard to Christ as a mere official name, or to His
humanity, but to His own proper divinity and God-
head. However mysterious and incomprehensible the
subject may be, God has revealed the relation between
the first and the second Persons in the Trinity to be
that of Father and Son. The Father, when speaking of
Jesus, said, “This is My beloved Son.” And the
second Person addresses the first as His Father. The
term, His own Son, in the text is very expressive.
He spared not His own Son. An awful crisis had
arisen in the relation of man to God, and nothing but
the sacrifice of the Infinite and the Eternal Son could
bring about a reconciliation. And God spared Him


not. O, infinite love ! O, boundless grace ! We, as
parents, naturally shrink from the idea of danger and
suffering for our children, and when they are taken
away, even though it be from the evil to come, how
hard it is. But God delivered up His Son knowing
that He was going where He would not be welcomed.
Delivered Him up for us all. He permitted Him
to go—yea, He sent Him into the world to be the
propitiation for our sin. If our children need to
be chastised we would rather do it (however painful)
with our own hands, than permit strangers to do it.
But God delivered His Son up for the fiends of Hell
to shoot their arrows at; to humiliation, mockery,
scourging; and to a most lingering and painful death.
11. The Inference. —He will with His Son
freely give us all things. The object of the Apostle is
to confirm the faith of believers in the providence of
God. He had taught that “all things work together
for good to them that love God ”; and he argued that
God’s wonderful gift of His Son, was a sufficient
guarantee to hush all fears, remove all doubt, and
shame us out of all unbelief. There can be no question
as to God’s pity, care, and love. He will freely give
us all things.
1. All things to meet the necessities of our present
life. All things are His, the gold, the silver, and the
cattle upon a thousand hills, and, since He has given
His Son, He will not withhold these minor blessings.


2. All things to meet the need of our Moral and
Spiritual nature. God alone can satisfy that longing.
“ Thy gifts, alas ! cannot suffice
Unless Thyself be given.”
We may possess many other treasures, but without
God the soul is void and unsatisfied.
S. All things needful to qualify for duty, to arm us
for the conflict of life.
Here is the basis of comfort for the believer and
for the Church, and the basis of hope for the world.


A Sermon.
THE HOLIEST.
“ Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest
by the blood of Jesus.” —Hebrews x. 19.
■HE subject for consideration is that of personal
approach to God. This is a privilege of the
? highest moment —that God, the Eternal God,
should permit us to draw nigh unto Him ; that
we who “ dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the
moth,” should draw near to Him.
But what a privilege it is, when we remember, not
so much the infinite disparity there is between us and
the Divine Being, as when we think of the moral


difference which is found between us. Man, so sinful;
God, so holy: man, so guilty; God, so just: man, so
earthly; Gcd, so heavenly : and, yet He permits our
approach. O, wondrous condescension ! 0, boundless
love !
And yet, how indifferent we are to this dis-
tinguished favor; how rarely we pray ; what reluctance
to come before God. O, that we might rightly
estimate this favor, and be invited to more fully and
frequently avail ourselves of it.
I. What are we to Understand by the Holiest 1
The Apostle gathers this expression from the inner
sanctuary, as it was ordained of God under the
Mosaic economy.
But this was only typical of the heavenly, the
greater and more perfect tabernacle, that which is not
made by hands. This is the true “holiest.” “Bor
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with
hands, which are the figures of the true, but into
heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for
us.” Under the Christian dispensation there is no
locality where God can alone be worshipped, though
houses of prayer are exceedingly blessed and made
sacred to us by many pleasing recollections. But, as
Christ taught the woman of Samaria, approach to God
is not confined to them. Coming to God in prayer is
a spiritual act—those who worship Him must worship
Him in spirit and in truth. God complained of His


ancient people that they drew nigh unto Him with
their mouths and honored Him with their lips, but
their hearts were far from Him.
Approach to God is possible in any place, and at
any time. It should not be an occasional act, but
an habitual living in the Divine Presence, dwelling in
the secret place of the Most High, and abiding under
the shadow of the Almighty.
11. Boldness to Enter into the Holiest.
Under the Mosaic dispensation, admission to the
holiest was limited to the High Priest. However good
in their moral character the ordinary priests were, and
however circumspect in their attentions to the duties
of their office, they dared not enter into the most holy
place, for to do so would have cost them their lives.
The High Priest only could enter, and he only on
one day in the year.
But under the Christian dispensation there is
admission to the holiest for all , and at all times. There
is a welcome awaiting everyone who draws nigh—a
thorough, hearty welcome. We may come with
boldness, with the utmost confidence, in the “ full
assurance of faith.”
‘ ‘ The veil is rent in Christ alone;
The living way to heaven is seen ;
The middle wall is broken down,
And all mankind may enter in.”


When our first parents fell, by eating of the
tree forbidden, they were driven from the garden,
and an angel with- a flaming sword, which turned
every way, kept the way to the Tree of Life; but that
hindrance lias been removed.
111. Boldness to Enter into the Holiest by
the Blood of Jesus. — It is in consideration of the
blood of Jesus that we have boldness and permission to
enter; but for that blood, God would be to us a
consuming fire. His blood was typified by the blood
which the High Priest took on the great day of
atonement, when he entered the most holy place, and
with which he sprinkled the mercy-seat. “ But Christ
being come,” etc. (Hebrews ix. 11-13.) The guarantee
we have that we may draw nigh, and that our prayers
will be heard, is the “ blood of Jesus.”
Refer to
Infinite preciousness of the blood of Jesus;
Its ever-living efficacy ;
What a privilege the Jew would have thought
it to enter !
Have you availed yourself of this permission 1
Do you say, “I am so sinful; so unworthy ” ? You
must come in contact with God, and it is better to
come while the blood pleads. Believers, use your
privilege when the world presses heavily—when the
devil thrusts sore at you.


A Sermon.
CHRISTIAN PERFECTION.
“Not as though I had already attained, either were already
perfect; hut I follow after, if that I may apprehend
that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
“ Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended : hut
this one thing I do , forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which
are before,
“I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus/’ — Philippian* Hi. Id-14.
m 0 be satisfied with that position in life in which
God has placed us is wise and proper. Having
food and raiment, let us therewith be content.
Godliness with contentment is great gain.
“Thou shalt not covet,” is one of God’s
commands. In this aspect of the matter,
Paul said, “ I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content.”


But while we are to be content with our portion
in reference to earthly good, we are to “ covet earnestly
the best gifts ” —the higher, the heavenly, the holy
things. To be satisfied here is unsoriptural, for
advancement, progress, higher attainment is the privi-
lege of the believer. True, we ought to be thankful
for the least spark of love, the smallest ray of light, of
joy, and of hope. But “ the sole return His love
requires, is, that we ask for more.”
In the text we have expressed the true Christian
aspiration and longings, and the true Christian spirit
and resolution is here presented.
The term “ perfect,” and other similar terms, are
frequently used in the Scriptures. It is said of Noah
that he “ was a just man, and perfect in his genera-
tion”; that he “ walked with God.” Of Job, it is
asserted, that he “was a perfect and an upright man”;
and there are many similar expressions used in the
New Testament. By this perfection we are to under-
stand not merely the being saved from sin—it is to be
conformed to the image of Christ; to be perfect and
complete in all the will of God ; to be filled with all
the fulness of God.
To apprehend that for which we are apprehended,
is to lay hold of that for which Christ laid hold of us.
There are certain great purposes for which Christ lays
hold of the sinner. He is as a sheep going astray; he
is in the broad road to destruction, going down to the


chambers of death. But Christ lays hold of him ; arrests
him as He did Saul of Tarsus, brings the man to a
stand-still, humbles him, leads him to acknowledge his
ignorance. Christ apprehends him that he may become
rich in spiritual enjoyment, abundant in Christian
labor, patient in suffering and cross-bearing.
The mark for the prize of the high calling of God.
The hope and anticipation of the prize allures the
youth at his studies. What strenuous efforts men make
to gain some proffered distinction. God offers a prize,
a crown that fadeth not, an inheritance which is
incorruptible, a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory.
Absolute perfection belongs to God alone. There
will never be a period in our history, when the words
of the text will be inapplicable. Through the cycles
of eternity, we shall still say, “Not as though I
had already attained.’' But this should not discourage
us in our earnest pursuit for more, but forgetting the
things which are behind we must press forward. There
must be no lingering, no looking back. How sadly
this halting has hindered and retarded our Christian
course. After years of profession and privilege, how
little perceptible advancement in Divine things. Doing
our first works over and over again is tiresome, wrong,
and discouraging.
“ This one thing I do.” In order to secure the
object of this laudable ambition, the Apostle exhibits
a singleness of aim and purpose. He had one object to


gain, and one way of gaining it. It is rare for men to
excel in many things, in many branches of knowledge.
Men direct their thoughts to one thing, and in this try
to excel. As Christians we should seek this one thing
—to be Christlike; to realise the spirit and mind of
Christ; and in our life to walk as He walked. We
may often be allured and tempted to divert from
this path. But, by God’s help, we must keep ourselves
to this one thing.
While there was only one aim He had only one
way, and that way was faith in Christ. He overcame
his foes, surmounted his difficulties, rose from one
stage of triumph to another by keeping the faith. He
could say, “The life that I live, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me and gave Himself for
me.” Having formed his purpose, he gives to it
persistent application.
“ Forgetting the things which are behind.” This
does not imply that we are to forget or be unmindful of
what God has done for us. We are to “remember all
the way in which the Lord our God has led us.” We
are occasionally to “ look to the rock from whence we
are hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence we
are digged.” We are to consider these things to incite
to gratitude. We are to forget the things which are
behind, so as not to depend on them or be indifferent
to further attainment. There is nothing which we have
done in the past which will allow us to bo sluggish in
the future; there is nothing we have enjoyed in the past
which will fill up the vacuum of the soul for the future.


A Sermon.
THE FRIENDSHIP OF GOD, AND ITS
ADVANTAGES.
“lii His favor is life.”— Psalm xxx. 5.
■VERY hum in being experiences a longing after
something outside and beyond himself. His
¥cry is, “ Who will shew us any good ? ” This
is perfectly natural. The mouth of the soul
is ever open and its cry is “ give,” but men
make the mistake of trying to feed it with the
wrong kind of food; some seek to satisfy it with gold,
others with position, others with pleasure. None of
these meets the demands of the soul. God only cnn do
this.
I. The Favoe of God.— This has been lost by sin,
and man is under sentence of death. But the Bible
teaches the doctrine of the forgiveness of sin. This to


be enjoyed must be known. To witness this is the
prerogative of the Spirit, and, until this is consciously
known, all is doubt and conjecture.
The favor of God implies a conscious sense of
His nearness and manifested presence in the soul. It is
more than a belief in His omnipresence; it is a
dwelling in God, and God in us. “ I will dwell in
them, and walk in them.” “My Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him.” This is as real as the union of soul and
body ; it implies an habitual confidence in and submission
to God. We have perfect confidence that God’s will is
right, and we cheerfully submit to it. This favor is
secured by grace, through faith ; it is retained by
obedience.
In His favor is life, as a matter of fact, and as a
matter of experience. The great ends of life only
then are answered.
In His favor is happiness pure, satisfactory, and
permanent. The testimony of Scripture is that “ the
work of righteousness is peace.”
In His favor is strength. Without it we are like
Samson shorn of his strength—weak as other men ;
but with it we can trample on sin and Satan.
In His favor is courage. “ The people that do
know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.”
“ One man shall chase a thousand, and two shall


put ten thousand to flight.” “By my God have I ran
through a troop: by my God have I leaped over a -wall. ”
In His favor there is security. “ God is our refuge
and strength.” “As the mountains are roundabout
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about His people.”
“ Who is he that shall harm you, if ye are followers
of that which is good ? ”
His friendship is abiding-, it can only be forfeited
by sin. No change in time, place, or circumstances
can affect it. He is “the same yesterday, and today,
and for ever.”
Are you the friend of God 1 If so, you will be
jealous for His honor ; anxious for the extension of His
cause. Make much of God as your friend, your
relation to Him is of the highest order.
J




A Sermo n.
THE CHRISTIAN’S LIFE AND DEATH.
“ For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.”—
PhUippians i. 21.
■HE Philippian Church was dearly beloved by
the Apostle Paul. For its sake he endured
¥and suffered much. By a vision he had
assuredly gathered that he was to preach
the Gospel in Macedonia, and he and Silas,
his fellow-laborer, had set out on the journey.
With the results of their labors all are familiar. A
Christian Church was organised, to which Paul was
particularly attached ; and to it he wrote this Epistle.
About ten years had elapsed since the planting of this
infant Church, and now Paul was a prisoner at Rome,
where for about two years he had been waiting for
a decision upon his case. But this period had not


been wasted or unfruitful. He asserts that the things
which had happened unto him had fallen out rather to
the furtherance of the Gospel. His present state was
one of suspense, but not of uneasiness or despair. He
was happy and contented.
I. The Object of the Christian Life, as
Illustrated in the Character of St. Paul.
“ For me to live is Christ.” Too often the noble
purposes for which life has been given are overlooked
and forgotten. It is spent in the corroding cares of
earth, in the fleeting and unsatisfactory pleasures of
the world. Paul did not live for worldly honor or
fame, or to accumulate gold or silver, but having been
convinced of the importance and value of spiritual
things, he gave all diligence to secure them. He
could truly say, “For to me tS Jive is Christ.” This
implies :
1. An acquaintance with Him. He made this
acquaintance on the way to Damascus, and from that
memorable day to the end of his life he maintained his
communion with Jesus. Acquaintance with Christ is
a most blessed privilege. “ This is life eternal, to know
Thee.” And he counted all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord.
This acquaintance was not a mere knowledge of Christ
as a historical personage, but an intelligent and
reciprocal communion.
2. This knowledge led the Apostle to regard Him
with supreme affection and attachment. There are some


persons whom, the more you know of them, the less
you esteem them ; you dislike their manner and spirit.
Not so with Christ, for He always improves on
acquaintance. To the Apostle He was the “ fairest
among ten thousand, and the altogether lovely.” All
beauty centres in Jesus. He is not only the beloved
of the Father, but He is the object of admiration and
delight to His people. They can say, “ Whom having
not seen, we love.”
3. It implies an absorbing interest in Christ's muse.
The Apostle was not an indifferent spectator in the
great mission of Christ, nor was he lukewarm. He
had enlisted in the cause of Jesus and made it his own,
and in some humble degree he could say with the
Master, “ The zeal of Thine house hath eaten me up.”
Identification with Jesus is the duty of all Christians,
both in the letter and in the spirit. He that is not
for Him is against Him. He that gathereth nob with
Him scattereth abroad,
f It also implies a willingness to labor to extend
the cause of Christ. The Apostle used every means,
and embraced every opportunity, of preaching Christ.
He was “in labors more abundant.” His was a noble
example of devotion to the cause of Christ. His
highest aim was “to preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ.” He realised such
preciousness in Christ that he was always, in effect,
saying
“O that the world might taste and see
The riches of His grace.”


To suffer for Christ is a distinguished honor, and
we know that if we suffer with Him we shall also be
glorified together.
11. To Die is Gain. Death is a solemn event
which must soon occur to us all. When a few years
are gone we shall go the way from whence we cannot
return. “It is appointed unto men once to die.” The
day is not far distant when it will be said over us,
“Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust.” Will
death be gain to us 1 It will not to the unpardoned,
but it will be to them all loss. We notice the
Apostle’s confidence in prospect of death.
1. Death is a gain to the Christian in that it
releases him from the labor and suffering connected
with his Christian calling.
2. Death frees him from the imperfections of
his nature and the assaults of the devil.
S. Death is a gain in that it introduces him to his
home in heaven. “In My Father’s house are many
mansions.” The Christian’s relation to the world is
that of a pilgrim and a stranger. Here “he has no
continuing city,” but he seeks one to come. Heaven
is his home, his Father’s house. That is the centre to
which all the family in heaven and earth are gathering.
A Death will he a gain to the Christian, because
then his nature will be perfected.
3. It will he gain in the associations which he
forms—the loved ones gone before, the good and holy
of other lands and times, of Jesus and the Father.


