

Consecration
OF THE
]©)p. GallciGjl'jer, 13.1©).
Of GOULBURN,
WITH FULL PARTICULARS OF THE
o£P£iT)or)i2:s, IB ei®rr)or)S, 0 [
c 7l del resses, |e>(ar)cju©i, FO usic, §C.
O HARA & JOHNSON. GENERAL PRINTERS. 24 JAMIESON-ST.




THE CONSECRATION
OF THE
Eight Rey. Dr. Gallagher, D.D.
COADJUTOR-BISHOP OF GOULBURN,
WITH FULL PARTICULARS OF THE
CEREMONIES, SERMON, PRESENTATION OE ADDRESSES,
BANQUET, MUSIC, &o.
(*@)
ftiwW:
O’HARA A JOHNSON, GENERAL PRINTERS, 24 JAMIESON-STREET.




PEEFACE.
In response to the innumerable requests of Bishops, Prelates, Priests,
and Laymen who witnessed, with Catholic pride, the truly magnificent
ecclesiastical function in SS. Peter and Paul’s Cathedral, Goulburn, on
Sunday, July 7th, 1895, and its antecedent and consequent ceremonials,
and who listened with genuine pleasure to the grand display of pulpit
and platform oratory which emanated from our Eminent and Right
Reverend visitors ; but above all to preserve and hand down to those
who will in the future direct the spiritual progress of the Diocese of
Goulburn, the uniquely eloquent addresses of him whom the voice
of brother priests has elected, whom Rome has confirmed, whom
Eminent hands have consecrated and anointed, whose elevation to
dignity and authority all have approved ; to give to the students and
ex-students of St. Patrick’s College in the present and the future, a
loving memorial of their old President and best of masters, —acting on
behalf of the Priests of this diocese and of the Ex-students of St.
Patrick’s. — We, the professors of the College, tender to the public
this account of the Consecration of the Right Rev. Dr. Gallagher.
As will readily be seen, this is nothing but a collection of extracts
taken from various journals, whose courtesy and kindness in devoting
such an amount of trouble and space to the report of the proceedings,
we beg to acknowledge on behalf of His Lordship Dr. Gallagher.
We are especially indebted to the u Goulburn Herald,” the “ Evening
Penny Post ,” the “ Sydney Freeman's Journal” the “Wagga Advertiser ,”
and the “ Irish-Australian ,” from all of which we have compiled the
present pamphlet.




AN ACCOUNT OF THE CONSECRATION
THE RIGHT REV. DR. GALLAGHER, D.D.,
COADJUTOR-BISHOP OF GOULBURN.
Sunday, July 7th, 1895.
SPHERE was history making at Goulburn, on Sunday, July 7th,
i 1895. Prelates, priests, and people from all part of Australia
gathered within the Cathedral of St. Peter and St. Paul to witness the
consecration of the Right Rev. Dr. John Gallagher, as Coadjutor-
Bishop of Goulburn. Twist your fancy as you will—a pastoral sym-
phony in purple, a festival of memories, a poem in pageantry—and
the home-made phrase cannot be bettered—a great day for Goul-
burn.” Public interest no less than religious sentiment was keenly
touched in the succession of sacred ceremonies, beginning with the
presentation of a popular priest to the consecrating Cardinal and
ending with the blessing of a brilliant Bishop. All things conspired
to crown the occasion with the fairest graces of spiritual and spec-
tacular completeness. The cathedral itself, imposing without and
elegant within, was a fitting frame for the holy and happy scene in
which Dr. Gallagher moved as the chief figure, and affection and art
left nothing undone in surrounding the rite of consecration with the
elements of faith and felicity. It was a day large with responsibilities
for the new prelate who had the mitre placed on his head, and the
crook of the pastoral office committed to his hands—a day overflowing
with consolations for those whose prayers followed the progress of the
beautiful ritual, and whose hearts went out in the Te Deum.
It need not be said that the event was looked forward to with
peculiar interest by the Catholic community of Wagga, amongst whom
the newly raised prelate worked with indomitable zeal and remarkable
success as pastor of St. Michael’s for a period of eight years. To his
flock in Wagga, Dr. Gallagher was endeared by the tendered recollec-
tions —a bond of sympathy existing between pastor and people rarely
excelled in ecclesiastical history. It can also be said that the feeling of
esteem entertained for the new Bishop was not confined to the members
of his own denomination, but was shared generally by the whole
community. Amongst the whole body of citizens, Dr. Gallagher was
recognised as a ripe scholar, an eloquent divine, broad-minded and
tolerant, and charitable to a degree which gained him the goodwill
and affection of all classes. During his residence here, he became such
a notable landmark in the social and religious life of this town that he
came to be looked upon as a permanent possession, and it is not going


too far to say that Dr. Gallagher harboured no higher ambition than that
those relations should be allowed to remain unchanged. At the same
time, it must be confessed that those brought into contact with the
Eight Eev. gentleman could not fail to credit him with intellectual
powers which made his transference to a higher sphere of usefulness
only a question of time. With the modesty usually met with in men
of undoubted ability, he was himself the sole individual who distrusted
his own capacity for a great governing position in the church of which
he was a minister. To his fellow priests of the diocese in which he
labored, Dr. Gallagher had endeared himself no less than to the people
of Wagga, and when the question arose of appointing a coadjutor to
the aged prelate (Dr. Lanigan) who had ruled over the See since its
creation as a Catholic diocese 28 years ago, Dr. Gallagher was, with
common consent, marked out as the most worthy occupant for the
position. It will be remembered that now nearly a year ago, a
Council of priests was held in Goulburn for the purpose of nominating
three fitting clergymen to act as coadjutor, and at that meeting the
large majority of votes were given to Dr. Gallagher. His name, there-
fore, occupied the first place in the list of suitable priests submitted to
the Pope for his approval and aftermost careful inquiry, and profound
consideration given to such matters at the Vatican, the Pope confirmed
the choice which had been made by the priests of the diocese, and
approved of by the Catholic Bishops of the province. In respect to
his elevation to the episcopacy, the Catholics of Wagga had, as we
stated at the time, very mingled feelings on the subject. The predo-
minant sentiment was, no doubt, a pleasureable one, that the ability,
erudition, zeal and Christian charity for which Dr. Gallagher was
distinguished, had found proper recognition, but there was also a deep
sense of pain that this recognition entailed the cost of robbing them of
a pastor of whom they were justly proud and in regard to whom they
entertained feelings of love and reverence. When it was finally settled,
however, that the St. Michael’s congregation could no longer hope to
retain Dr. Gallagher’s services for themselves, a movement was im-
mediately inaugurated for the purpose of testifying in a worthy and
enduring manner, the extent to which these services had been appre-
ciated by those to whom he had ministered. A representative committee
of Catholics was appointed to carry out this movement, and although
it was designed that the testimonial should be confined to members of
the Catholic denomination, it is gratifying to state that a number of
gentlemen connected with other churches in town insisted on being
allowed to subscribe liberally to what they deemed so laudable an object.
It was decided by the committee that the testimonial should take the
form of an illuminated and elaborately framed address and a purse of
sovereigns, and that the presentation should be made to the new
Bishop on the occasion of his being endowed with the full powers of
his exalted office. A numerous deputation of leading Catholics was
appointed for this purpose, and these gentlemen accordingly attended
the consecration ceremonies at Goulburn, on Sunday, July 7th, 1895.
It may be here needful to explain that although Dr. Gallagher
has been, in reality, appointed to fill the position of coadjutor to the


present Bishop of Goulburn, this fact was in no way recognised in
connection with his consecration. The design being that Dr. Gallagher
should carry out episcopal functions, it was, of course, requisite that
he be endowed with episcopal powers by being created a Bishop. But
according to the theory of government adhered to by the Catholic
denomination, for each diocese there can be only one duly appointed
Bishop, while at the same time every Bishop consecrated must have a
diocese given him to govern. There are, no doubt, good and sufficient
reasons for this policy, one of the chief of which possibly is that the
church does not deem it consistent with the dignity of the office to
keep on hand a stock of ready-made prelates. When appointing a
Coadjutor-Bishop, therefore, to assist a prelate whose failing powers
necessitates such help, the difficulty we have referred to is surmounted
by giving the Bishop selected for this purpose one or other of the
ancient Sees in Asia Minor, Messopotamia, or some other old-time
domain of the early church, but from which the Christian population
has long since vanished. Having been appointed to this charge which,
though a sinecure, gives them the sarr e status in the hierarchy in regard
to the performance of episcopal functions as the most highly placed
prelate, it is then permitted by the governing authorities of the church
that they should give their assistance to the prelate on whose account
they were in reality called to the episcopate. These prelates are of
two classes, the first and the most important being those appointed as
Coadjutor-Bishops with the right of succession to the See in which
they are assisting, on the demise of the reigning prelate. The other
class are merely permitted to act as auxiliary bishops, the question of
succession to the See being left an open one. Of the first-class Dr.
Gallagher is now a member, and he has been allowed to accept the
position of coadjutor to Dr. Lanigan with absolute right of
succession to the See of Goulburn. To comply with the ecclesiastical
law, however, he has been appointed Bishop of Adras, a diocese in
Asia Minor, the glories of which have long passed away, but which
in another age had no doubt a stirring history.
A circumstance that lent particular significance to the consecration
was that Dr. Gallagher was the first Australian Catholic Bishop in which
the principle of election by the clergy had been brought into operation.
Heretofore these colonies have been treated more in the light of fields
of missionary effort by the Vatican, than as a regularly constituted
ecclesiastical province, and, as a consequence, power of appointment
of Bishops has been exercised by the Pope on the advice of the Metro-
politan and his suffragan Bishops without any reference to the wishes of
the clergy over whom the new prelate is appointed to rule. In the
view of colonial Catholics, the establishment of what they consider the
more satisfactory system carried out in the case of Dr. Gallagher’s
selection is a fact of great value, not alone as evincing the higher
opinion entertained in regard to the church, but ah-o as likely to be
attended with many beneficial results.
Whether it was to mark the inauguration of a new era, or out of
personal respect and esteem for the latest truly gifted and pious


addition to their number, it must he admitted the whole Catholic
hierarchy of Australia seemed to combine to lend an eclat to the pro-
ceedings never before attached to a similar event in the colonies. Never
before were so many Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy assembled
together at the same time in any town or city in Australia, and little
less interest seemed to be taken in the event by the laity. Visitors
were present in Goulburn, not alone from the outlying portions of the
diocese, but from the metropolis and many other parts of Australia. A
pleasing feature in the proceedings was the large number of ex-students
of St. Patrick’s College, Goulburn, who attended from widely scattered
centres to show their affection and respect for one who as Principal
of their Alma Mater had won for it endearing laurels, and to whose
scholarly attainments and educational skill they owed so much of the
success many of them had attained in the battle of life.
His Eminence Cardinal Moran, their Graces the Archbishops of
Melbourne and Adelaide, and the other Prelates who took part in the
consecration were formally welcomed to Goulburn on Saturday afternoon,
July 6th, 1895, after the arrival of the 3.10 train from Sydney, which
had on board a large number of the visitors. His Eminence and
several of the distinguished visitors had arrived in Goulburn
prior to this Amongst those who arrived by the train were
Dr. Higgins, Auxiliary Bishop of Sydney; Prior Vaughan, who is
in the colony on a mission from the old country; Dr. Byrne, Bishop
of Bathurst; and Dr. Lanigan’s old friend, Dr. Murray, the Bishop of
Maitland, who was present at the consecration of Dr. Lanigan in
Goulburn, over a quarter of a century ago. A procession, consisting
of members of the A.H.C. Guild and Hibernian Society and the
children attending the Conventand Patrician Brothers’ Schools, marched
to the station with flags and banners gaily flying. A large concourse
of people assembled at the station to witness the arrival of the train.
The visitors were escorted to carriages in waiting for them, and the
procession led the way to the Cathedral, where the formal welcome
took place, the building being thronged. The Cardinal occupied the
Throne, and the other prelates and clergy assembled within the altar
rails. The following address was then read by Mr. Charles
Gillespie:—
To His Eminence* Cardinal Moran, their Graces the Archbishops and their
Lordships the Bishops of Australasia.
Your Eminence,—We rejoice that an event in the history of the church in
this diocese has afforded us an opportunity of bidding your Eminence and their
Lordships the Archbishops and Bishops of Australia a hearty Cead mile Failthe
to the Cathedral City of Goulburn.
In the exalted position your Eminence occupies, we recognise the responsibility
imposed upon you, together with your other high duties of proclaiming with no
uncertain sound the doctrines of the Faith, and we, your spiritual children, are
proud to acknowledge that your learning and research, your keenness of argument
and urbanity of speech have enabled you to nobly uphold the character and
teachings of the Catholic Church throughout Australasia.
As “ Watchmen of the Towers of Israel,” your Lordships the Archbishops and
Bishops of these colonies—eminent for vigilance over the people under your charge
—with you also the duty is incumbent to advance the “ Faith once delivered to
the Saints.”


Princes of the Christian Church, the Catholics of the south feel confident
the interests of the church militant could not ,repose in better hands or be upheld
by more loyal hearts.
We again welcome you to Goulburn on the occasion of another and honoured
name being added to the bright hierarchy of Australasia - one whose brilliant
endowments and fresh spirit will bring to the episcopate additional lustre, and a
strength courageous and indomitable as your own. An event of so much interest
will, together with your visit, long be remembered with gratitude to God by the
Catholics of this diocese.
We humbly pray, therefore, that the blessings of the holy Trinity may crown
with success your labours to build up the Church of Christ in these great colonies.
Soliciting the benediction of your Eminence, your Graces the Archbishops, and
your Lordships the Bishops of Australasia.
Signed on behalf of the laity of the diocese,
C. GILLESPIE.
Goulburn, July 6th, 1895, R. McKILLOP.
Copies of the above were then presented by Mr. Gillespie to the
Cardinal, the Archbishops, and the visiting Bishops.
His Eminence, in returning thanks, assured the people that it
was a very great pleasure to himself and brother Prelates to come
amongst them and be associated with them on that most auspicious
occasion They had come to the city with its beautiful surroundings
to take part in the morrow’s feast, which, he was sure, would be a
great joy to the venerable Prelate who ruled the diocese and to the
clergy and laity associated with him. Their venerable Prelate was
recognised as one of the veterans in the Australian hierarchy, and he
rejoiced that day because one of his own selection was about to
become associated with him in his future work. They looked around
them and they saw the great things that had been accomplished during
the past 28 years. They saw that beautiful cathedral, and churches,
and buildings devoted to religion scattered throughout the district, all
of which had been brought into existence under the guidance of their
venerable Prelate, the first Bishop of the diocese. How had it all been
done ? Their Bishop was remarkable amongst them for his love of
religion, his love ot Australia, and his undying patriotism for his
native land, and it was that true love that had quickened him with an
energy to achieve the great thing he had achieved, and to-morrow’s
feast would bring to his side one quickened with the same true love,
the same unflinching love of religion, the same earnest love of
Australia, and the same true patriotism and never-failing love of his
native land—one who would render valuable assistance to their
venerable Prelate in his old age, and one whom he trusted would be
associated with their Bishop for many years to come in carrying on
the great works which had prospered so well in his hands. In looking
to the future they saw that Australia needed energetic men to corres-
pond with the future that awaited us, and he did not know whether
the clergy of the diocese could have chosen one more earnest, more
devoted, than he whom they were about to consecrate. By his gentle-
ness and his piety, no less by his energy and his ability, he had been
justly selected to stand by the side of the Bishop of that diocese. He
would cherish the traditions of the See and with his assistance those


great works which had been carried on by the venerable Prelate of the
diocese would be crowned and perpetuated. It was therefore a matter
of the greatest pleasure and delight for one and all of the prelates to
be associated with the clergy and the faithful, and, still more, with
their venerable Bishop, in the morrow’s auspicious work.
His Grace the Eight Eev. Dr. Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne,
returned thanks on behalf of himself and other prelates. He said it
must have struck every person who had joined in the procession which
had led to the Cathedral that the scene was in many respects unique.
It would be difficult in any country, but it would be very difficult
in that new country to find so many Bishops, headed by the
Cardinal Archbishop, so many clergy, both of the regular and
secular orders, and so many laity join in procession such as they had
just witnessed ; and to his mind there could be no more stronger
evidence of the love and the affection, and the deep and abiding regard
which lay deep in the hearts of the people towards the venerable
Bishop of the diocese and towards him who to-morrow would be his
Coadjutor-Bishop. Such manifestations told of the pre-eminence of
that deep affection and devotion which proclaimed the strength and
unfailing energy which were found in the Catholic Church as they
existed in that diocese and throughout the country. They also pointed
to the glories of the future. The bishops and people had reason under
such circumstances to feel a great confidence in the future of the church
in Australia. They had a right to feel that even the ancient glory of
the Irish Church would be reproduced here. To-morrow’s ceremony
might be the beginning of a new era in the prosperity of the diocese
and he trusted that by lightening the burdens they would thus pro-
long the years of the venerable prelate of the diocese. That the new
Coadjutor-Bishop would prove a stay and a support to their venerable
Bishop was the wish and prayer of all, and unless he contradicted his
past, and the knowledge of those who had known him from the days
when he was a student in college, he would be to his venerable chief
all that he could desire ; to the priests of the diocese a kind and
tender, while at the same time a firm, administrator; and to the
people what they expected of him, a father to the young, a brother to
the old, and to everyone what a good Bishop was required to be.
The Cardinal gave his blessing to the congregation and the people
dispersed.
Dr. Gallagher’s Appointment and Career.
The appointment of a Coadjutor-Bishop for Goulburn is in accord-
ance with a wish expressed to the Holy See some twelve months ago,
by his Lordship Dr. Lanigan, who is now in the 28th year of his
episcopacy. The choice fell upon Dr. Gallagher by election, which
was carried out in a manner prescribed by tlxe church. The matter
was first considered at a meeting of the senior priests of the diocese.
Several names were submitted at the meeting, and on a ballot being
taken Dr. Gallagher was elected by a large majority. This election
was subsequently approved of by the Cardinal and Archbishops of the
Province and finally ratified by the Holy See,


The new Coadjutor-Bishop is a man of scholarly attainments, a
deep thinker, and an eloquent preacher. He is most favourably
known throughout the colony in connection with college work, and he
has also laboured with marked success as a parish priest in the diocese
over which he has just been called to share in the control. Profoundly
learned, unobstrusive, sincere, and earnest, he has not only endeared
himself to the members of his own church, but he has won the respect
and esteem of persons of all shades of opinion. He has given evidence
of being pre-eminently fitted for the lofty position he now occupies,
and his appointment is one that has given very great and general
satisfaction. He was born in County Tyrone, Ireland, in 1847, and
therefore attained his 48th year. After going through a very good
classical education in the intermediate classical school at Castle Derg
and the Monahan Seminary, he entered Maynooth College in 1863.
This is one of the principal colleges in Ireland, and it was here that
Dr. Lanigan pursued his higher ecclesiastical studies. Dr. Gallagher
gave early promise of a brilliant career, and he entered the college as
the most successful candidate of his diocese in the concursus of that
year, a kind of bursary competition which is held in the dioceses in
Ireland. His course at the college was a most distinguished one. He
passed very successfully in theology, science, history, and French, and
in classics he stood at the head of the class of 80 students. In 1870
Dr. Lanigan visited Ireland on his way home from Rome, and during
his stay in the old country the Rev. Father Slattery (now stationed at
Tumut), Rev. Father Dowling (who has since joined a religious order),
and Dr. Gallagher volunteered to come to Australia. They hft their
native land shortly afterwards, and landed in the Lennoch Castle the
same year. Dr. Gallagher came direct to Goulburn, and for about
three years he acted as a curate at the Presbytery. He was next
called upon to take charge of the Yass parish, where he laboured for
a short time till the opening of St. Patrick’s College at Goulburn, in
1876, his Lordship Dr. Lanigan recognising his undoubted abilities by
appointing him a professor at the college. Subsequently he was made
president, and the remarkable success of the institution whilst it was
under his control is too well-known to need recapitulation here. Suffice
it to say that the college rose rapidly in the estimation of the public,
attained a distinguished position among the educational institutions of
the colony. The large number of students that passed the examina-
tions and the rare qualifications displayed by the president of the
college attracted pupils from distant parts. He was always very
popular with the students, and no master was more esteemed and
respected than he. His presidency of the college, which extended
over some 10 or 12 years, was one unbroken record of success, and his
name will always be closely linked with the brightest days of the
institution. Some six years ago he retired from the college to take
charge of the Wagga Wagga parish, a post which he held till a few
months ago, when he returned to Goulburn to take up his old place at
the college. When he went to Wagga the parish church, which was
built by the Very Rev. P. Dunne, laboured under a debt of several
thousands of pounds. He not only succeeded in wiping out the whole


of this heavy debt, but he was able to build a very handsome chapel
at the Convent of the Presentation Nuns. This chapel is much larger
than the ordinary Convent chapel, as it is the custom among the
people of Wagga to attend early mass in the chapel at the convent.
Besides this Dr. Gallagher also had erected a large boarding school
capable of accommodating about 100 young ladies, a work which
involved a considerable outlay. His ministration of the parish was
extremely successful, and he took his departure a few months ago
amidst the general regret of the people. It must also be mentioned
that he acted as assistant Bishop on the occasion of Dr. Lanigan’s last
visit to "Rome (ad limina Apostolorum) in 1891.
The Diocese of Goulburn.
The Goulburn Diocese is now a very important one, its progress
having been very great under the guidance of the present pioneer
bishop, Dr. Lanigan. At the time of his consecration it is estimated
that there were in the diocese 16,000 Catholics and only seven priests,
four of whom very soon after left the diocese. There was one
Convent of Sisters of Mercy and twelve professed nuns and two novices.
In the schools under diocesan control there were 600 children and
there were only 25 churches, some of them very small and many of
them wood. In December, 1891, Bishop Lanigan celebrated the Silver
Jubilee of his episcopacy, and, in replying to an address that was
presented to him on that occasion, he gave an interesting account of
the work that had been accomplished during the last 25 years. He
said : “You may count 36 churches of stone or of brick, and many of
these very fine. You may count 15 churches of wood, making 51
churches all built in 25 years. You may count 13 presbyteries of
brick, 20 convents, and amongst them one only of wood, the others of
brick ; three monasteries of brothers of St. Patrick, all brick; 20
schools distinguished from the convents, all brick; making in all 107
buildings. Twenty-five years ago our people in this diocese numbered
under 17,000 ; now within the same territory there are about 30,000.”
We leirn from a valuable work just published by Cardinal Moran on
the history of the church in Australia, that Father Fitzpatrick,
who in later years rendered great service to the Australian Church as
Yicar-general of the Archbishop of Melbourne, and Father Brennan,
who closed his missionary career as pastor of Penrith, were the first
resident priests in Goulburn, and their charge embraced the whole of
the surrounding territory extending to the coast and the Murray
River In 1840 Father McGrath, who was appointed to the pastoral
care of Goulburn, Bungonia, Braidwood, and Broulee, erected a small,
but for those days a beautiful church at Bungonia, dedicated to St.
Paul. In July, 1841, he laid the foundation of another church at
Goulburn, but for sjme years no progress was made with it owing to
some disagreement regarding the church lands. All difficulties
being at length removed, a brick church was erected under the
invocation of St. Peter and St. Paul, and with various additions and
enlargements gave place to the present grand cathedral. When there
was a question of erecting additional episcopal Sees the Archbishop of


Sydney suggested Yass as being preferable to Goulburn. It was
better equipped with ecclesiastical property, be said, and gave promise
of greater importance in future and was more removed from Sydney.
The choice of the Holy See, however, fell upon Goulburn, which was
erected into a diocese by brief of the 10th March, 1864, and the Right
Rev. Geoghegan, Bishop of Adelaide, was translated as first bishop to
the newly-erected See. He was on a visit to the home countries at the
time of his translation to Goulburn, and he died in Ireland on the 9th
May, 1864, before taking possession of the See. The onerous duty of
forming and organising the new diocese then devolved on the Rev.
William Lanigan, pastor of Berrima, in the Archdiocese of Sydney,
“ who,” says the work mentioned, “ after 26 years of episcopacy still
continues to lead his faithful flock in the paths of piety and truth.”
The brief of his appointment to the See is dated the 10th December,
1866. The consecratkn of Dr. Lanigan took place in the cathedral at
Goulburn, on Sunday, 9ihJune, 1867. It was the first time that an
Australian Bishop was consecrated in his city.
'lt S 9
The Consecration.
religious ceremonial provided by the Catholic Church for the
QfjX. consecration of her Bishops is of a most imposing and solemn
character. Carried out as was the ceremonial on Sunday in the
fulness of its majesty, the event, as a matter of course, drew
together a large gathering, and by ten o’clock, the hour set apart for
the inception of the proceedings by which Dr. Gallagher was elevated
to the episcopacy, the cathedral held a large congregation, included
amongst whom were Catholics from almost every portion of the
Goulburn diocese, leading laymen from Sydney and elsewhere, and
members of different denominations from this city.
There was a very large gathering of distinguished prelates and
diocesan and other clergy. Those present from Sydney were —His
Eminence Cardinal Moran ; Very Rev. Dr. O’Haran, private secretary
to the Cardinal; Right Rev. Dr. Higgins, Auxiliary-Bishop; Right
Rev. Mons. O’Brien, Rector of St. John’s College ; Very Rev. Mons.
Yerdon, of St. Patrick’s College, Manly; Yery Rev. P. Le Rennetel,
S.M.; Yery Rev. P. Slattery, 0.8. F.; Yery Rev. A. Boyle, C.M. ;
Yery Eev, P. Treand, M.S.H.; Yery Rev. Father O’Connell, S. J.; Yery
Eev. J. Ryan, S. J.; Rev. Father Bunbury; Eev. T. Long; Rev.
Father D’Arcy ; and Prior Yaughan, who is at present on a mission
to Australia.
The visiting Prelates and Clergy from other places were—Most
Rev. Dr. Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne ; Rev. P. Phelan and Eev.


Philip O’Doherty, of Melbourne diocese; Most Rev. Dr. O’Reilly,
Archbishop of Adelaide ; Right Rev. Dr. Moore, Bishop of Ballarat;
Very Rev. T. O’Farrell, C.SB.R., Ballarat; Right Rev. Dr. Corbett,
Bishop of Sale, Victoria ; Right Rev. Murray, Bishop of Maitland;
Very Rev. P. V. Dwyer, Sacred Heart College,. Maitland ; Rev. Father
Cleary, C.SS.R., Maitland; Right Rev. Dr. Byrne, Bishop of
Bathurst; Very Rev. Father Byrne, President of St. Stanislaus’
College, Bathurst; Rev. J. M. Curran, F.G.S., Bathurst; Right Rev.
Dr. Dunne, Bishop of Wilcannia ; Very Rev. T. O’Connell, Wilcannia;
Right Rev. Dr. Doyle, Bishop of Grafton ; Rev Father McKay, New
Zealand. The Goulburn diocese was represented by Rev Father
Finnegan, Gundagai; Rev. Father M. Slattery, Tumut; Rev. Father
Hennessy, Albury; Very Rev Dean 0 Keefe, Yass; Rev. P. J.
Donovan, Adm., Goulburn; Rev. W. McGrath, Young; Rev. J.
Gaffey, Crookwell; Rev. T. O’Shaughnessy, Gunning; Rev. E. J.
Fallon, Temora ; Rev. 1. Gray, Narranderra ; Rev. M. Buckley, Junee;
Rev. Dr. Daly and Rev, J. Dwyer, St. Patrick’s College ; Rev. Father
Fogarty, Wyalong; Very Rev. Father Vincent Grogan, C.P.; Very
Rev. Father Gregory Callaghan, Provincial of the Passionists, now on
a visit to Australia ; Rev. Fathers O’Sullivan and Griffin, Goulburn
Presbytery ; Rev. J. Lane, Grenfell; Rev. Father McAlroy, Burrowa.
A number of lay visitors were present from Wagga, Dr. Gallagh-
er’s old parish. They were Messrs, George Coleman, (Mayor of
Wagga), J. Gormly, M.P., P. Moran, W. B. Loughran, J. E. Maloney,
W. M. J. Walsh, W. J. Monks, I. Rudd, T. J. Foley, M. A. Ferry,
and P. Heffernan. Amongst the laymen from Sydney we noticed Hon.
T. Dalton, M.L.C., Mr. J. J. Spruson, Registrar of Copyrights, Mr.
P. T. Riley, of Riley Brothers, Messrs. J. Blakeney, J. T. Donovan,
McEvilly, W. Dwyer, senr., (school inspector), J. Dwyer, P. White
and others. Mr. M. Coen of Yass, and Mr. P. J. Donnelly of Gundaroo
were also amongst the visitors.
The ceremony commenced with a procession from the Bishop’s
house of all those taking part in the solemn event. They marched up
the nave of the cathedral and took their places in the sanctuary. The
procession was led by the altar boys, and then came the Clergy, secular
and regular, the Bishops and Arch-bishops, and His Eminence the
Cardinal, accompanied by his private secretary, the Rev. Dr. O’Haran.
At the rear walked Dr. Gallagher, the Bishop-elect, accompanied by
the assisting consecrating Prelates, Dr. Murray of Maitland, and Dr.
Lanigan of Goulburn. The Cardinal took his seat on the throne, and
the Archbishops and Bishops occupied seats on the Gospel side. The
Cardinal, consecrating Bishops, and Bishop-elect were invested with
the robes appertaining to the solemn office about to be celebrated.
The Right Rev. Monsignor O’Brien and Very Rev. Monsignor Verdon
and Dr. O’Haran, accompanied the Cardinal to the altar. The Bishop-
elect was led to the altar steps by the assistant Bishops, Dr Lanigan
and Dr. Murray, Fathers Slattery and Finnegan acting as Dr. Gallagh-
er’s chaplains, Very Rev. P. V. Dwyer attending Dr. Murray and
Very Rev. Dean O’Keefe attending Dr. Lanigan. Rev. Dr. Daly
read the Papal Bulls containing Dr. Gallagher’s appointment, and then


followed the various solemn and dignified acts of consecration with the
intermediate parts of the mass prescribed for such an important
occasion. The laying on of hands, the anointing and bandaging of
the head of the Bishop-elect, and the presentation of the erozier and
ring, were parts of the ceremony which were watched with great
interest by the congregation. Towards the close and after he had
been duly installed on the faldstool of the altar, robed in all the vest-
ments of high office, Dr. Gallagher was visibly moved by the solemnity
of the proceedings. Whilst the Te Deum was being sung the newly
consecrated Bishop marched round the church accompanied by the
assistant Bishops, and administered his blessing to the congregation.
He returned to his seat on the altar, and advancing to His Eminence
and the assisting Bishops he received from each the kiss of peace, and
shortly after the ceremony closed after having lasted over two hours.
Very Eev. Dr. O’Haran and Eev. J. Dwyer were Masters of
Ceremonies.
The Music.
The singing in connection with the ceremony was rendered by a
choir of 35 performers; Mr. George McConnell organist, and Mr.
Carey Taylor conductor. While the Cardinal was being robed the
organist played The Chorus of Angels, from Scotson Clarke. At the
commencement of the Mass the choir sang Hummel’s beautiful Kyrie,
opening with a subdued whisper and gradually increasing the voice
power until a treble forte strength was obtained, dying away again
towards its close into the hushed whisper that marked its opening.
The Gloria and Credo were taken from Hayden’s Ist Mass; but as the
ceremony was already too long to admit of their full rendition these
two pieces had to be considerably curtailed. The extracts from each,
however, were conspicuous for exactness of time and sympathy
between the singers, suggesting at once successful conductorship.
During the offertory Gounod’s Ave Maria was sung by Miss Archer, a
visitor, who possesses a very sweet contralto voice, and who was kind
enough to assist the singing throughout. The Sanctus was an extract
from Gounod’s Messe Solennelle, the last chorus only being given. This
was soon followed by the beautiful Benedictus from the same work,
and we think with even better effect than on any previous occasion
owing to the better balancing of the parts. The opening soprano solo
was sung by Miss McConnell, and the subdued chorus from the thirty-
five voices, with alternate light and shade of sound, its prayerful
melody and beautiful harmony, placed this item as the most successful
effort of the performers. The Agnus Dei , which closed the singing,
was, like the Kyrie , taken from Hummel, a Mass never before
rendered in Goulburn. The musical effort was very successful, and
much praise is due to the young organist of the Cathedral. Wiegand’s
Pontifical March was played on the organ as the congregation dispersed.
During the evening service Mr. J. T. Donovan, of Sydney, sang
Gounod’s Nazareth with fine effect.


Dr. Higgins’ sermon, was a great sermon worthy of a great
occasion.
“All power is given to me in Heaven and on earth; go ye
therefore and teach all nations. And behold lam with you all days
even to the consummation of the world ” (Math. 28, 18.) These words
were taken from the Gospel according to St. Matthew, and contain our
Divine Lord’s parting charge to His Apostles. He had come to the
close of His earthly mission undertaken 38 years before, for the re-
demption of mankind and in obedient e to the will of His Father. He
had accomplished every design that was involved in that scheme of
Divine mercy, redeemed every promise, and fulfilled every figure, by
which it had been foreshadowed. He had preached His Gospel, called
His disciples, founded His Church. He had sanctified that Church by
the shedding of His precious blood and risen from the grave in testi-
mony of the Divine character of the work He had accomplished, and
having spent forty days in forming and strengthening and perfecting all
that had been thus achieved at the expense of so much labour and
tears and blood. He comes to the last important moment of His life—
His final separation from His brethren. And knowing that the work
which he had begun should not end with His ascension into Heaven—
that it should go on to the end of time, diffusing its light and scatter-
ing its blessings to all future generations—He proceeds to single out
from His disciples those whom He had already chosen as the leaders
of the movement which He had so lovingly inaugurated—the bearers
of His standard, the heralds of His divine teachings, the future rulers
of His Church : and in the exercise of that plenitude of power received
from His Father, He bestowed upon them that high warrant of authority
in virtue of which they should continue through themselves and their
successors to preach His gospel to the end of time. “All power is
given to me. . . go teach all nations,” The high commission then
conferred with such suggestive solemnity was duly ratified ten days
subsequently on the great Feast of Pentecost, when the spirit of God
descended upon the apostles in the form of tongues of fire, thus
imparting to them that plenitude of grace and power which fitted them
for their exalted office, and quickened their hearts with strength and
courage to endure the labours and trials and heroic sacrifices which
the prosecution of their future mission was destined to entail. Thus
was the infant Church of Christ equipped and chartered and launched
on that perilous course she has pursued so triumphantly for the past
1,900 years, surmounting every obstacle, subduing every foe, repelling
every assault of her enemies ; until to-day her battalions are formed
and her colours are flying in every land where there are minds to be
illumined by the light of divine truth, and hearts to be won to the
service of God. Oh, how mighty was the potentiality involved in these
four words, “Go teach all nations.” The message which they delivered
was first taken up and obeyed by a few poor illiterate fishermen ; and
what did it convey ? It sounded a declaration of war against a world
that was arrayed in all the fulness of pride and wealth and power, it
assailed deep-seated habits of life, that had become the recognized
privileges of a lewd, self-indulgent age; it proclaimed doctrines of


religious truth and principles of moral conduct that we renew and
startling and diametrically opposed to the prevailing notions of sensual
pleasure, and as a consequence it would rouse up the anger, hate,
hostility of the most powerful nation that ever swayed the destinies of
a people. Still that message went forth from the lips of the poor
fishermen in all its force and clearness of expression. It was pro-
claimed in the busy streets of the great cities and at the lowly hamlets
of the simple peasant. It resounded along the valleys and through
the woodlands, over the plains and the mountain tops, drawing away
the ignorant and the erring from their degrading habits of sin and
superstition to replenish their immortal souls with the pure light and
regenerating energy of God’s eternal truth. When the first heralds
of this truth were cut down by the sword of the persecutor new
leaders sprang up to seize the standard of the Cross, as it dropped
from their grasp, and carry it bravely before the world. And so the
message of truth was borne on by the Church of Christ from gener-
ation to generation in obedience to the Divine mandate. The jealousy
of nations, the hostility of nations, the violence of unbridled passion,
assailed her at every stage of her onward march, only to bring out in
stronger relief the indestructible vitality with which she had been
endowed. She was the accredited herald of Christ’s truth to the
nations of the world. And the consciousness of this high commission,
the virtue of those assuring words, “I am with you all days,” the
purity of her doctrines, the righteousness of her principles, the fire of
her all-pervading charity, the fulness of her self-sacrificing devotion,
bore her up and heralded her on and carried her triumphant through
every storm that has risen to check the progress of her mission or
silence that message of truth and peace that she has been divinely
charged to deliver to the world. Such she has been, such she is, and
shall ever be. Never since the world began has there been witnessed
anything like her ; so beauteous in her form, and so harmonious in
all her parts ; so vast in her extensions; so compact in the unity of
her members ; so perfect in her constitution, and so unchangeable in
that enduring stability that stamps upon her brow the unmistakable
mark of her divine origin. Yes, dear brethren, springing from the
lowliest beginning and confronted by the mightiest opposition, she
has been ever sustained by the strength of that God whose work she
is. She stands before the world to-day full of life and vigour, as
devoted to her mission and as eager for new conquests as when Peter
first unfurled the standard of Christ crucified in the streets of Jerusalem
on the day of Pentecost. Now, beloved brethren, all this should
bring us not unnaturally to the consideration of the imposing cere-
mony which has just concluded, for in it we have a fresh development
of that progressive activity to which I have been drawing your attention.
By that ceremony a new sentinel has been placed on the watch-towers
of Israel, a new leader has been chosen to carry the banner of God’s
Church and to guide her onward march of enlightenment in this new
land ; and that that choice is pregnant with high hope and promise of
future blessings, the thrill of joy which its glad tidings lately sent
through the length and breadth of this diocese sufficiently proclaim.


When Moses of old felt the weight of his declining years and the
weakness of his decreasing strength he appealed to the Lord for a
helper to share with him the burden of his office. The Lord answered
him and said, “ Aaron the levite is thy brother. . . . Speak to
him and put my words into his mouth, and I will be in thy mouth
and in his mouth, and I will show you what you must do.”
So too, dear brethren, when the venerable prelate, who came
here 28 years ago, the bearer of God’s message of grace and
mercy, and love to you and your Fathers, who first planted this vine-
yard of the Lord in your midst, and has since been engaged so
assiduously in watching over its growth, fostering its strength, and
perfecting its fulness of form, felt that the needs of that development
which he had so ably directed called for an exercise of energy which
a too-sensitive conscience, perhaps, did not hope to command, like the
patriarch of old beguiled to the dictates of his fatherly solicitude for
your spiritual welfare, and turned his eyes towards the apostolic See
of Peter for the desired relief. The Holy Father, the spring of all
spiritual authority in the Church, hearkens to the voice of his aged
son calling for help and in due time the choice of Peter falls upon him
whose virtue and learning, whose talent and culture, whose long and
varied experience in missionary and scholastic work so eminently fit
him for the exalted office. Accordingly the illustrious head of the
Church in Australia comes here to-day the bearer of the Apostolic
commission to this young priest to impose hands upon him and transmit
to him his share of that message, “ Go teach all nations,” while not
only his brother Prelates from his own province, but also the venerable
metropolitan of Victoria, their Lordships of Ballarat and Sale, and
many distinguished ecclesiastics from this and the neighbouring
diocese and South Australia, lend the prestige of their presence to the
imposing ceremonial that they may join in your common joy, and
swell that chorus of acclaim that will go out from this vast assembly to
your newly-consecrated Coadjutor-Bishop on this festive occasion. But
there is in all this a deeper significance than any religious rite can
adequately convey, for in the Church’s Bitual there is no ceremony so
solemnly suggestive and so far-reaching in its effects as the conse-
cration of a Bishop to her. On the day of his ordination the young
Prelate before you was raised to the dignity of the priesthood, he
received a distinction of which the saints treat in language that must
sound truly startling. St. Ignatius, the martyr says that “ the priest-
hood is the most sublime of all created dignities St. Chrysostom,
that “it should be numbered among the things of Heaven” ; and the
Angel of the Schools that “it is the greatest dignity that can be
conferred on man or angel.” Now, the explanation of this strange
language is to be found in the nature of the power the priest received
at his ordination, which theologians call his jurisdiction over the
natural and mystic body of Jesus Christ. In virtue of this power he
participates in the eternal priesthood of the Son of God and exercises
a most intimate control over His divine person. He takes bread into
his hands in the celebration of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and
pronounces as he bends over it the mystic life-giving words of conse-


oration, when immediately the heavens open and the Son of God
descends from His throne of glory at the bidding of that priest’s lips,
to take His place upon that altar as truly as He once lay an infant in
the manger at Bethlehem or hung on the cross on Calvary when He
offered Himself a victim for the sins of the world. He pronounces
the words of absolution, “I absolve you from your sins,” over the
sin-stained soul of a duly-disposed penitent, and the judgment thus
pronounced on earth is as fully ratified in heaven—that is, the marks
of those sins are removed, that soul is restored to grace, re-established
in the friendship of God, re-invested in all its lost rights as a child of
God, and an heir to the kingdom of heaven, and a result is achieved
by the words of the priest of God which the accumulated merit of all
the angels and saints in heaven, and of all the men upon earth, could
not attain, which even Mary the Mother of God and the Queen of
Angels could not effect, for as St. Ligouri has expressed it, “though
this divine Mother can pray for us and by her prayer obtain whatever
she wishes, still she cannot absolve the Christian from even the
smallest sin.” Why ? Because the forgiving of the sins of man is a
God-like work, an omnipotent power to be exercised only by Himself
and by those to whom it may have been given in these words, “whose
sins you shall forgive they are forgiven.” Hence, dear brethren, the
language of the saints to which I have referred; hence ISt. Chry-
sostom’s remarkable words, “A priest’s life is a God-like life, and his
profession an angelic profession.” Now, dear brethren, to this sublime
dignity conferred on the young prelate on the day of his ordination
nothing sublimer has been added to-day, since God has nothing
sublimer to bestow, and yet I say the ceremony you have just witnessed
is possessed of the most profound significance. When the conse-
crating Cardinal-Archbishop imposed hands upon and annointed his
head and hands with Holy Chrism the Holy Spirit came to perfect
internally what had been symbolized by that external rite, and
entering into his soul He fills it with the fulness of grace and imparts
to him the plenitude of sacerdotal power which constitutes the Bishop
the image and likeness of the one true High Priest—“ that High Priest
who has entered with His blood into the eternal sanctuary and is the
Bishop and the Shepherd of our souls.” The sacerdotal character has
become invested with a new potency—an inward spiritual energy—
not inherent in the simple priest, in virtue of which the Bishop is
empowered to transmit unto others what he has himself received, to
perpetuate the apostolic succession in the Church of God, and thus to
hand down from generation unto generation “ unto the consummation
of the world,” the eternal priesthood of Jesus Christ. Oh, dear
brethren, what a startling transformation has been invisibly effected
before your eyes in this church to-day and under the gaze of the
admiring angelic choir! The newly-consecrated Bishop has been made
the recipient of a divine power which enabled him, in the advance-
ment of the salvation of souls, to do what God and His bishops can
do, to take the young Levite aside and by imposing hands upon him to
invest him with power and authority to call down Jesus Christ from
Heaven, to offer Him in sacrifice for the glory of His Father, and in


the expiation of the sins of men—to assume such awful familiarity with
his God as to take Him in bis hands and administer Him to the
faithful, to enclose Him in the darkness of the tabernacle or carry Him
to the bedside of the dying, becoming thus the guardian and com-
panion of his God; and this to the end of time. By the solemn rite
thus concluded the young prelate is empowered to take the young
Levite aside, and by laying hands upon him to infuse into his soul that
spiritual power which first entered the hearts of the Apostles, when
their Divine Master breathed upon them and said, “ Deceive ye the
Holy Ghost; whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven.”
"When Our Saviour pardoned the sins ot the paralytic the event
seemed so wonderful to the incredulous Jews that they cried out
in amazement “who can forgive sin but God alone?” In this
they were correct; for the forgiveness of sin is the exercise
of an Omnipotent power, which belongs to God alone. But while
gifts and height of dignity might avail unto the piactical attainment
of the great ends for which they have been given, something more is
needed. At the opening of the ceremony just concluded, when the
prelate elect was presented by his sponsors as an applicant for Con-
secration, the officiating Cardinal-Archbishop put the significant
question “ Habetis Mandatum Apostolicum? ” (“Have you got the
Apostolic Mandate?”) —and it was only on the solemn assurance that
the high sanction of the Holy Father had been obtained that he
presumed to raise him so presented to the episcopal dignity. Now,
all this should serve to remind us of what it will be interesting
to recall, namely, that in addition to the plenitude of sacerdotal
power confer)ed in the Sacrament of Orders there must also be the
Apostolic authority to use that power. There must be that sending
forth to teach first conferred in these worOs, “Go ye and teach all
nations,” which can come alone from the authoritative voice of Peter’s
successor in the Apostolic See. When these woids were first addressed
by Christ to His Apostles, He created them universal b ; shops, with
the power to preach His Gospel in every clime, to found Sees and to
appoint Bishops thereto, with this all important provision, that the
bishops so appointed should be under the jurisdiction of Peter. Now,
this was a power confined rigidly to the Aposths, and hence when
they passed away it did not descend to their successors, but became
concentred in the Apostolic See, so that the successors of Peter in that
See since then have enjoyed the exclusive right to appoint Bishops
erect Sees, and confer that fulness of jurisdiction which authorizes
the feeding of the sheep of Christ throughout the world. Hence that
marvellous unity of the Churth by which her most distant outposts are
bound to her centre by the closest bonds of obedience, sympathy and
love, constituting as it always has her life and her glory the admira-
tion of her friends and the despair of her enemies, the firmest bulwark
against which the gates of hell shall never prevail. The Sovereign
Pontiff then, as Yicar of Christ and successor of Peter, and Supreme
Head of God’s Church, is the spring of all her power and authority.
The domain of his jurisdiction embraces the whole world and without
its pale there is no communion with the Church of Christ, no partici-


pation in the treasures of her sacramental grace, no fellowship with
the saints. Hence, no matter what may be the personal merits of the
young Prelate, or plenitude of the sacramental power conferred, he can
exercise none of his episcopal functions until tne keeper of the keys
of the kingdom of Christ defines the limits of such exercise by assign-
ing a flock to guide and a diocese to rule. Hence it comes that in the
Apostolic Brief just read as the warrant of his consecration he is not
appointed to the diocese of Goulburn, which still happily enjoys its own
venerable ruler, but to a vacant diocese in the distant land of Asia Minor,
with this important provision, that while titular ruler of that distant
See he will be permitted to give the benefit of his services to the aged
prelate wno has sought the aid of his supporting hand. His appoint-
ment comes from God, through the voice of His representative on earth.
“It comes from no king or commonwealth.” It is the Holy Ghost who
has placed the Bishop to rule —according to the words of St. Paul
and to rule the Church of God within the limits of his jurisdiction. In
the exercise of that rule he owes no account to any earthly
superior. He takes no cognizance of popular blame or favour,
and looks forward to no earthly reward. The guiding princi-
ple of his actions must ever be the glory of God and the spiritual
interests of the flock committed to his care, and while the
golden rule of charity laid down by St Paul must ever bind him to
be ‘‘all to all to gain all,” the day on which he should allow any
earthly consideration to shape his conduct in the discharge of his
sacred trust, or damp the courage with which he will keep God and
duty high above the influence of flesh and blood, on that day he should
cease to be the faithful shepherd. No wonder then that the saints of
God have shrunk in every age from the weight of a bur len which, as
St. Augustine tells us, the shoulders of angels should hesitate to
assume. No wonder that they craved witn whole-souled earnestness
to be spared a responsibility that involved so many dangers to their
eternal salvation, and that they were dragged from their hiding
places by the imperative call of that voice which must ever speak with
the authority of God. A keen sense of their own unworthiness
enabled them to realize more fully the binding force of the obligations
they were called upon to assume in guiding the sheep of Christ on
their way to heaven. They foresaw that upon their fidelity should
depend the salvation of others, and that if through any fault of theirs,
through any weakness of virtue, any deficiency of knowledge, any
coldness of zeal, any abatement of generous self-sacrifice, a sheep of
the flock should become lost to Him who had purchased that sheep
with his precious blood, an account of that loss should be rigidly
demanded on the great reckoning day. Now, in all this they were
only taking that forecast of the future which their superior intelli-
gence enabled them to do, and if to-day the young Prelate, who sits
enthroned before you, allows his thoughts to travel from the imposing
spectacle around to the contemplation of the distant future, and if in
seeking to read that future—in detecting the endless labour, the
harrowing care, the sleepless nights, the bitter heartburning which
may lie behind the plaudits of approving friends, he feels his courage


fail and his heart grow faint, he only gives another proof of his fitness
for the position to which he has been raised. But 1 shall venture to
say he has much to inspire hope. He has in the first place the call of
Him who has said ‘‘You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and
appointed you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and your fruit
shall remain”—who needs the aid of no human power to attain His
divine purposes ; and if a wholesome spirit of humanity should still
suggest thoughts of personal unfitness, it should remind him that he
is the successor of the poor fishermen who had no leai ning save the
knowledge of Christ crucified. No gold or silver, or aught save their
trust in Him, who strengthened them and who is the same yesterday,
to-day and for ever. He will have, and 1 trust for many long years to
come, the matured wisdtm and varied experience of him to whom I
have already referred as accepting 28 years ago the Apostolic Mandate
to found this extensive Diocese, and who has succeeded in forming out
of the few scattered fragments which awaited his arrival, this smiling
garden in the vineyard of the Lord. He will have the order and peace
so happily reigning within its limits, and the faith and piety of a believing
people whose generous hearts will prove so fruitful a soil for the exer-
cise of his ministrations. He will have ecclesiastical institu-
tions that dot the fair face of this Diocese—its noble Cathedral in which
we are assembled, its Diocesan college, its 50 churches, its 48 Catholic
schools, its 21 convents of teaching Sisters, its 3 houses of teaching
Brcthers, its 2 orphanages for the fatherless little ones, and its beauti-
ful monastery at Mount St. Mary’s—all raised up as if by the
enchanter’s wand during these 28 years, and now ready at his hand as
so many agencies of good to serve him in continuing and spreading
that diffusion of light and truth and grace he finds in such active
operation. He is fortified by the esteem and goodwill of his brother
Bishops, who are here to-day to evince by their presence how cordially
they appraise the selection of the Holy See, and rejoice with you that that
selection has received the high seal of the Spirit of Cod in his solemn
consecration. He is supported by the confidence and sterling friend-
ship of his own priests whose choice he is, and who have the more
reason to rejoice to-day, since as the witnesses of his priestly life and
zealous labours, they can best gauge the blessings that are destined
to come to you and to them from his future ministrations. And shall
I not say that a large measure of consolation and sustaining hope will
come to him from the reverential love and filial attachment of you, the
faithful people of this Diocese, to whose heart the young Prelate has
long since won its way by that gentleness of word, generosity of action,
warmth of heart, and fulness of sympathy, that have marked his every
relation with you. I say, then, the young Prelate has to-day much to
give courage, hope, and consolation. But that consolation will not be
all his own. It will be shared in by many. By the venerable Bishop
who receives as a helpmate a son so intimately known, so highly
valued, and so implieity trusted, a son w'hose large experience and
brilliant talents so fit him to assume his share of the duties which are
awaiting him. It is shared in by the Bishops of Australia, who
rejoice to receive into their ranks and welcome to their council-table


one whose learning and prudence will lend to help their deliberations,
and whose high scholarly attainments must prove so valuable in those
polemical encounters in which the Church is sometime forced to
engage in defence of religious and historic truth. And, need
I add, the priests and people of Goulburn will rejoice in a
measure most of all, for to you he is given in a special sense as the
bearer of many a spiritual blessing. You have had his life before
you for the past 25 years as the zealous priest, the cultured scholar
the kind, gentle, trusted friend. You had him guiding the destinies
of your diocesan college for many years and with marked success.
You had him filling the role of the typical pastor among the good people
of Wagga, where his singlemindedness, sincerity, and devotion to duty
have inscribed a record that shall not be soon effaced. And again,
when the interests of higher education in this diocese called for the
sacrifice you have him in the exercise of a generosity as rare as it was
magnanimous resuming the charge of your diocesan college and
proving by the rapid revival of prosperity that the master-hand of the
old educationist had not lost its cunning. Now, in view of all this, in
view of the gifts of mind and heart and soul of which it gives evidence, it
would be idle in me to say as to the treasure which this day brings to
the Catholics of Goulburn in the person of their young Coadjutor-
Bishop. But this much I must-say, that no brilliancy of reputation,
no well-assured hope of future success can relieve you of the duty
which you owe in the duty to offer your fervent prayers before the
Throne of God in his behalf, that Heaven’s choicest gifts may descend
upon him, that the love of the Father may come in ample measure
into his soul, that the grace of the Son may sanctify him and give him
strength to sustain the heavy burden of his office, that the light of the
Holy Ghost may illumine his mind with its brightest rays and guide
his footsteps along the rugged highway that lies before him, so safely,
so righteously, and so well, that the episcopacy so auspiciously begun
to-day may all the hopes of future blessings which are so
confidently hoped for his administration, may prove for you, his
faithful flock, and for him a source of choicest heavenly blessings here
and the harbinger of everlasting happiness hereafter.”
After Mass the new Bishop was besieged by friends anxious to
offer their congratulations. Men, women, and children crowded round
to kiss his ring and to receive his episcopal blessing. The clergy were
the most fervent in their congratulations.
f IZETgji*-
Th.e Banquet.
* LOWERS, flags, and foliage quite transformed the usually austere
boys’ schoolroom, adjoining the cathedral, into a bright banquet-
hall. The tables were prepared in a style which may best be des-
cribed as “ regardless of expense ” by the Sisters of Mercy, Mrs.
McKillop, Mrs. Gillespie, and Mrs. De Lauret. The professional


waiter, with, his seedy suit of black, his decayed, smile, and his splendid
stupidity, enjoyed the sweet oblivion of “ a Sunday oft,” the ladies,
with a number of fair assistants, attending to the large company with
artistic assiduity.
His Lordship Dr. Lanigan presided, having on his right his
Eminence Cardinal Moran, Archbishop Carr, Dr. Gallagher, Dr,
Corbett, and Dr. Higgins, and on his left Archbishop O’Eeilly, Drs.
Murray, Moore, Byrne Dunn, and Doyle. At this table there were
Very Dev. Prior Vaughan, Messrs. G. Coleman, Mayor of Wagga
Wagga, J. Gormly, M.L.A. (Wagga Wagga), W, B. Loughran,
(Wagga Wagga), P. Moran, (Wagga Wagga), Hon. T. Dalton,
M.L.C. (Sydney), W. Dwyer, (Sydney), M. Coen, (Yass), H. O'Brien,
Mayor of Goulburn, W. E Eiley and T. F. Meyer of Goulburn. The
other tables were occupied by the clergy and laymen, amongst the
latter of whom were the following : —Messrs. J. J. Spruson, registrar
of copyrights, P. T. Eiley, J. Blakeney, and J. T. Donovan, (Free-
man’s Journal), U. and A. McEvilley, J. Dwyer, and P. White,
(Sydney), J. E. Maloney, W. M. J. Walsh, W. J. Monks, I. Eudd,
T. J. Foley, M. A. Ferry, and P. Heffernan (Wagga Wagga), P, J.
Donnelly (Gundaroo), J. Bourke, (Murrumburrah), E 0. Mooney
(Cootamundra), Inspector Brennan, F. P. Brennan, and P. Hartigan
(Yass), T. Hetherton (Narandera), T. Morrin (Junee), Dr. McKillop,
C. Gillespie, C. Eogers, W. C. Taylor, and others from Goulburn.
The ex-students of St. Patrick’s took possession of the end of the
banquet-room, in which the applause was started during the speech-
making and the applause prolonged.
The Chairman, on rising to propose the first toast, said that the
occasion was not a very usual or frequent one, because Bishops
generally lived as long as they could. (Laughter). It was a very
rare thing for a Bishop to find himself placed in the circumstance he
was—to have his coadjutor appointed during his lifetime; but he
found that he was living too long. He thought they
might be tired of him before he died (laughter); hence he wanted to
get some one to take his place, so that the position of the people might
be tolerable. They would see after all that, though he was an old man,
he was not disposed at all to be over troublesome to any one.
(Laughter.) All the circumstances of the day's celebration directed
attention to a most singular position in the world. The Lord built
His church on a rock, and by His divine power established it as a
permanent rock. The present illustrious pontiff, Leo XIII, showed to
the world the Church of Christ, for whilst there were Catholic con-
gregations in every country in the world they had all one unalterable
faith, because every Catholic held the faith the same as the head. The
Sacred Scriptures were in the hands of Catholics, God’s words; and as
such must teach, as coming from God, one faith ; and so in the hands of
Catholics the sacred Scriptures were in perfect harmony with the divine
articles of the faith. The rulers of the world considered his words, and
the Catholics everywhere received his words as coming from one who
sits as a divinely-constituted teacher. Even those who were not


Catholics must respect his words, because they were always founded on
Christian principles, and thus were always just and reasonable and
for the peace and happiness of society. He asked them
to drink to the health and happiness of the glorious Pontiff, “Leo
XIII.”
The toast having been duly honoured.
The Chairman proposed the second toast. .Religious duty brought
us into relation with Cod, and civil duty brought us into relation with
civil rulers. Christian principles must enter into the everyday acts of
man—all Christian civilization rested upon that. At the head of the
civil order stood Queen Victoria. (Applause). In the free institutions
of the country Catholics had no reason to complain. If they had any
reason it did not come from the Queen ; it came, and might come
occasionally, from those who administered the free institutions, or from
the people themselves because they neglected the proper exercise of
their righ.cs. During her reign the Queen’s life had been, so far as
they could learn, very worthy of a queen. He asked them to drink to
her health.
The Chairman next proposed “ His Eminence the Cardinal-
Archbishop.” (Great Applause), Very many circumstances combined
to make that a day of rejoicing, and amongst others was this cause —
that they had amongst them one who had rank in the highest order of
the hierarchy —(applause), and everybody said he was worthy of it.
(Renewed applause) When the change was made in religion in the
16th century historians who recorded the events generally put a colour-
ing on history, and to those who examined it it was not true history.
Of all men living there was no one who had done more to throw the
shade aside and give facts from unquestionable sources and show true
history than his Eminence (applause), and he was doing it still,
continually. He asked them to join with him in wishing him length
of days, strength, and happiness to contend for justice and for truth.
(Cheers.)
Cardinal Moran in returning thanks begged to assure them that
it was to him, and he was confident it was to each of his brother Pre-
lates, a pleasure and a privilege to be associated with the clergy and
faithful of their diocese in that day’s grand ceremonial He was sure
that each of the Bishops rejoiced in the joy of the venerable Prelate
who was presiding. (Applause.) They honoured him (Dr. Lanigan)
as the veteran of their hierarchy and as a veteran who had won the
brightest laurels in his missionary career. He had been a model not
only to his own diocese but to the Australian Church, to the whole
episcopate, and a guide to them in carrying out the purpose of their holy
religion. (Applause). If any were to ask what works he (Dr. Lanigan)
had achieved the}' had only to look round, not only in the city, but
every district of the diocese, to see the churches erected, the schools
built, and the religious institutions flourishing on every side, and at
the same time through his wisdom, through his principles of peace and
charity, they found unity and concord and happiness prevailing
throughout every caste and community in this great diocese. But he


would say that if each of the prelates rejoiced with the venerable
Bishop they rejoiced still more perhaps with the devoted cleigy of the
diocese. (Applause). A Bishop might achieve great things, but
without a zealous and devoted clergy his labours must be in a great
measure in vain. (Applause). Under his guidance the clergy of the
diocese had become a model to the whole Australian Church.
(Applause). It was pretty much like a general and his work. No
matter how brave a general might be, no matter how great his skill,
unless he had an army at his back he could not achieve grand results.
With a devoted clergy such as his Lordship had had under his
guidance there was nothing that could not. be achieved in the great
work of education and charity and religion in this diocese. They
rejoiced too in the rejoicing of the devoted faithful throughout the
length and breadth of this diocese, for the faithful rejoiced no less than
their clergy and chief pastor in having a new guide assigned to them,
in having a zealous prelate assigned to them to aid their venerable
Bishop in his great works of religion and charity, and in future times
to carry on those works to maturity. He had a share in imposing the
burden on the Prelate who was consecrated that day. (Prolonged and
enthusiastic applause). If he remembered aright there was one work
which commenced its meditation on the life of St George, the Patron
of England, by saying “ Consider first that we know nothing about
him.’’ (Laughter). He could not ask them to say that they knew
nothing about Dr. Gallagher He was happy to say that he was well-
known to each one amongst them. From the day of his ordination to
the present, through every grade of the sacerdotal duties, he had been
with them. They had rejoiced in his early labours ; they had partaken
of the practice of his piety, eloquence, ability, and zeal. He did not
well know what part of the world Dr. Gallagher came from. (Laughter).
He suspected from the same corner of Ireland that honours St.
Columbkille. That saint had many distinguished qualities. In the
first-place he had a wonderful spirit of religion, and he infused around
him the blessings of his own most singular piety and devotedness in
every work of religion. In the second place he was a wonderful
missionary. He went as far as Scotland, which was very far in those
days. St. Columbkille identified himself so perfectly with the land of
his adoption, and so impressed his own spirit upon the good Scotchmen,
that for many many years he had been venerated as a Christian and chief
patron of the Highlands of Scotland. In the third place St.
Columbkille, with all his wonderful piety, and his missionary ardour
and success, never lost the love of his native land. It seemed that he
set upon his own people the wonderful impress of his own great
features. If they asked him for a mirror of the three qualities St.
Columbkille had—piety, missionary ardour, and love of country—he
would point to Dr. Gallagher and say “ you have them all in him.”
(Great Applause). He would not refer to the great things he had
already achieved in the work of religion. He had a great deal still
before him. He had to unite with their Bishop in carrying to
perfection all the works in which he was engaged. He had to sustain
him, not only in a material way, but in the true spirit of religion,


charity, and piety. It used to be said that it vas the chief function of
a Prelate to open Heaven very soon to the Bishop whom he assisted.
(Laughter). He was confident that the piety of Dr. Gallagher would
best be shown in preserving the venerable Prelate of this diocese for
another 28 years. He had already laboured 28 years, and after 28
years more he (his Eminence) would give him full permission to go to
Heaven. (Laughter and applause). He did not know that there was
a land in the world that so deserved the earnest devoted affection of
those who made it their home as this fair land of Australia. (Applause).
There were many things that might be observed in regard to this love
of Australia, this true patriotism in Australia. The people came from,
many lands, and he trusted that it was only the virtues of their
country that they brought with them, that they might plant them here
to bring forth their abundance. He trusted that everything that was
vicious, that tended tv dissension, discord, and the dissemination of
violence would be left in the old countries, would be exiled for ever
from the fair shores of Australia. The parents of many whom he
addressed had come from that land of the west that was dear to them
all, and they would be unworthy if they did not continue to love with
dear affection the mother land that gave them birth. (Applause).
An evil genius in old times found a precious casket known to possess
a special living aroma which was its hidden treasure. Being unable
to open it he dashed it to the ground, and when he had broken it
angels came and bore to a distant land the living aroma, and those
were the angels of justice, virtue, and liberty. Thai casket was to him
a model of old Ireland. It had fallen to it at times that an evil genius
should come to rob it of the treasure of its faith. (Applause). The
angels of justice, virtue, and liberty had wafted that treasure to other
lands. Amongst others they brought it to Australia, and its living
aroma dispersed amongst the sons of Australia its life-giving influence
and spread blessings on every side. They wished Dr. Gallagher and
the venerable Prelate of this diocese many many years, and he was
sure that of the Bishops, Clergy, and faithful not one would ever have
cause to regret the ceremony of the day, but would ever rejoice more
and more that Providence had sent them such a grand and eloquent
and zealous pastor to aid the Prelate of this diocese and guide their
footsteps in the paths that lead to paradise. (Applause).
bishop qallaoher’s reply.
Bishop Gallagher, who was received with prolonged cheering,
said :—Your Eminence, Most Rev. and Rev. Fathers, and gentlemen,
—ln what terms can I sufficiently thank you for the eloquent but too
flattering words in which the sentiment of my health has been pro-
posed by his Eminence, and for the enthusiasm with which it has
been received by this distinguished assembly ? Great, indeed, is the
honour done to our venerable Bishop, and to the priests and people
of the diocese of Goulburn, through this sacred ceremony in which I
play no inconsiderable part. (Applause and laughter.) It is an
honour and a privilege of which the memory will last while the
youngest of us lives, and of which, for their sakes, I personally feel


exceedingly proud. (Applause.) The consecrator is a prince of the
Church who, a born ruler of men, towers head and lofty shoulders,
not merely by his exalted dignity, but by his life of unceasing labour,
aud noble gifts of head and heart, above all the leaders of the colony.
(Cheers.) His assistants are two Prelates whose friendship for me,
long and tried and true, should not prevent me from saying that which I
think, that their names shall live in their virtue and works when most
of us are forgotten, like those of Hilary of Poitiers, or Yirgilius of
Salzburg, or Boniface of Mayence, as the founders of two of the most
illustrious Sees of our fair Southern land. (Cheers). Then, coming
from afar, the Archbishop of Melbourne, friend and patron of my
youth (cheers), my professor in my grand old “Alma Mater,” May-
nooth College, idol of his own people, loved and esteemed by all who
can admire great talents wedded to great virtues, whose learning,
whose eloquent defence of our holy Faith, and whose great personal
influence derived from works and worth recall, even in the mediocrity
of our times, the first glories of the early Church. (Cheers.) From
Adelaide comes a prelate, already the founder of a new See, on whose
shoulders, younger than my own, has been placed, with the pallium,
not only the burden of a diocese that would require the shoulders of
an Atlas to bear (applause), but the surveillance of an ecclesiastical
province which means the half of Australia. (Applause.) Around us
at this festive board are the suffragan Bishops, not of one, but of
three provinces, each the centre of a hive of busy workers building up
the city of God spiritually and materially. 0 fortunati quorum, jam
moenia surgunt —whose works, already the possession of the historian,
are synonymous with the annals of their progressive Sees. (Applause.)
To them and to those distinguished clergy and laymen, on behalf of
©ur venerable Bishop and his priests and people, I, as their spokesman
at least for the present occasion, return our sincerest thanks, and
assure them that they have by their presence here to-day placed us
under obligations which shall never be forgotten, though they can
never be repaid. (Cheers.) And now, your Eminence, my Lords,
and gentlemen, perhaps I should stop here, and allow those who can
really instruct and deliyht us an opportunity of speaking. However,
I can hardly refuse myself the pleasure—though it be a pain to you—
of giving expression to at least one of the many thoughts with which
one’s heart is full on an occasion like the present. There is no danger
for our holy faith in this new land, if only we all—Bishops, priests,
and people—strive, each in his own sphere and according to the
measure of his gifts, to improve the talents entrusted to his care.
(Applause.) The Catholic iaith is a plant which, if Ibe allowed the
expression, seems to suit the climate and take kindly to the soil of
Australia. Sacrifices indeed she is called upon to make; but they do
not seem to overtax her strength. Trials she has in plenty. But
she appears only to thrive under them the more. (Applause). Some-
times a cloud of calumny and outrage passes over her. But it serves
only to bring out her truth and beauty in more effective colours—in
light more brilliant than before. Bigotry has not altogether dis-
appeared, as we can see any morning in the papers. (Hear, hear.)


But the wavelets of hostility and prejudice grow fainter and feebler
in their receding curves as the years roll on. (Applause.) Statesmen
admit her conserving influence and good men admire her zeal. The
laws, with perhaps a few well-known exceptions conceived in a spirit
of fair play, while securing the rights of all, leave her free to pursue
her special task of proclaiming tiie truths of God and saving the souls
of men. Gradual extinction of dogmatic faith must indeed be the
necessary result of shutting out religion from the education of the
young. But she will make in the future a more determined effort
than she has done even in the past to save her own children in her
own schools. And earnest souls who live not on bread alone, who
yearn after higher than earthly things and conquests nobler than
those of matter, will seek in ever-increasing numbers, a refuge in the
bosom of the grand old Mother Church, which alone unchanged and
unchangeable amidst all the revolutions of society, and all the variations
of human thought, upholds the cause of God, reveals to man his true
destiny, and satisfies all the aspirations of his soul, (Cheers.) Trusting
for her strength to the Divine promises alone—paying to Cgesar that
which is his due, asking nothing from him but to be left alone,
glorying only in the willing subjection and loving loyalty of her
children, she extends her influence, she consolidates her power.
(Cheers.) Her institutions rise up apace. Like the valiant woman of
the Sacred Narrative, she hath, even in this, our own fair country,
looked well to the paths of her house and hath not eaten her bread in
idleness ; therefore her children rise up and call her blessed. In a
word, blending the calm wisdom of matured experience and the
subdued enthusiasm of conscious strength with the elan and dash and
magnificent spirit of self-sacrifice which are the glorious privilege of
youth, she goes forth —vera incessu patuit dea —
Grace in all her steps, heaven in her eyes,
In every gesture dignity and love,
as she has gone into so many regions before, to achieve her latest
conquest, to lead captive to the obedience of her faith and the practice
of her laws the heart and the intellect of this young and promising
and happy land. (Cheers). This brings me to the point to which I
have been coming Under its now somewhat altered circumstances
the Diocese of Goulburn will not fail to take, I hope, its accustomed
place in the onward march of progress. When a continuator—another
Bollandist—takes up the thread of our history where your Eminence
has left off (cheers), and records the progress of another century, it is
my hope and prayer that the next chapter devoted to Goulburn in
that continued history will not be out of harmony with the chapter
which is already there—(cheers)—that the continuity of good work
shall not be broken—that “ Qualu ah incepto ” shall be the motto still.
(Cheers). Unless his coadjutor be very unworthy, my conviction is
that, in the future as in the past, the people will rally round their
priests, and the priests will be bound in closest union with their
Bishop. (Cheers). And Bishop—l mean our grand old Bishop, Dr.
Lanigan—(cheers)—priests, and people will vie in holy emulation
with those Bishops, priests, and people of the other Sees who spur us


on, but arouse not our jealousy by their great good works. The word
“jealousy” is not found in the Lexicon of Goulburn. And all of us
will continue to build up, on foundations broad and deep and strong
—each his own allotted portion of the grand Australasian Church,
bound as we are and ever shall be, not merely by the dutiful bonds of
obedience, subjection, and faith, but by the warmest affections of our
hearts, in due subordination of dignity and of power, through your
Eminence, to the glorious Pontiff whose wisdom guides and whose
skilled hand steers so successfully the barque of Peter amid the storms
and tempests of the present times. (Prolonged cheers).
Dr. Lanigan, in proposing the health of the Archbishops and
Bishops, said that Dr. Gallagher was the first priest he had had the
pleasure of ordaining for the diocese of Goulburn. He engaged him
for the mission when a little fellow (laughter) at Maynooth, and the
spirit of courageousness then manifested by Dr. Gallagher in offering
himself for that field of labour would he (Dr. Lanigan) felt satisfied,
remain with the new Bishop to the last. His lordship also referred
to the fact that that day’s consecration ceremony was the third of its
kind which had been held in their cathedral, and he believed no other
church was so honoured save the Cathedral Church of Sydney.
(Applause).
His invitation to cordially honour the toast of the Archbishops
and Bishops was warmly responded to.
Archbishop Carr, in replying, referred briefly to his former visits
to Goulburn. That day not the material but the living temple was
consecrated with the highest form of consecration it was possible for
man to receive.
Archbishop O’Reilly replied at considerable length in a very
humourous address. He mentioned that with the exception of Dr.
Gallagher he was the youngest Bishop as a Bishop. If a plebiscite
could be taken of the clergy of Australia —and he knew them fairly
well—he believed a very large number would have voted for the
accession of Dr. Gallagher to the first vacant mitre. He had known
Dr. Gallagher by his speeches, his sermons, and his writings, and had
always felt convinced that if he lived long enough he would one day
be a Bishop, and that sentiment was general throughout Australia in
the ranks of the clergy. Maynooth had added another illustrious
name to the roll of her illustrious sons. He congratulated the Bishop
of the diocese, the clergy who served under him (Dr. Gallagher), and
the laity who were to benefit by the services of both.
The Chairman, who intimated the necessity of not unduly
protracting the proceedings, briefly proposed “The Clergy, Secular
and Regular.” He need not say a word about the Goulburn priests—
of course he held them above every other class of priests, (Laughter
and applause). In view of the shortness of time he hoped that the
secular priests would allow one of the superiors to reply for all.
Rev. Father Finnegan, the oldest priest in the diocese,
acknowledged the toast. He thanked his Eminence for the kind


words he had said of the priests of the diocese. He thought all the
priests of the diocese rejoiced at this occasion. The choice of Dr.
Gallagher gave universal satisfaction in his parish (Gundagai), and
when the people heard of it it seemed as if Henry Parkes had pro-
claimed a public holiday. (Laughter). The priests considered Dr.
Gallagher the right man in the right place (applause) on account of
his talents and his singular virtues. His life had been a most blame-
less one. He was esteemed not only as a distinguished missionary
priest and a fervent, practical worker, but was looked up to as one of
the most learned professors in Australia. He had heard some priests
say the other day that if there was another preferment they intended
to vote for Dr. Gallagher and get him as their Bishop. The priests
were all glad to see the venerated Prelate of Goulburn presiding that
day with such energy and zeal. There was no one more glad of it
than the Coadjutor himself. The priests had great love and veneration
for their Bishop. There might be some Bishops to equal but none to
excel him. In the most difficult circumstances his kindness had never
been wanting, and though strict as a Bishop they had always regarded
him as an elder brother. (Applause).
The Rev. Father Le Rennetal spoke for the orders. He said the
priests of Sydney considered it an honour to be representing the clergy
at such a ceremony as they had witnessed that morning. They con-
sidered it an honour that their church should have a new Prelate such
as the Right Rev. Dr. Gallagher. (Applause). They considered him
as a leader in every walk of life—a leader as a priest and a scholar,
and he was certain he would be a leader as a prelate. Ur. Gallagher
had the confidence of every priest in this diocese, and—he spoke of
what he knew —the confidence and esteem of every priest in the
diocese of Sydney. (Applause),
Archbishop Cxrr said they could not separate without recognizing
him on whose account they were all assembled the venerated Bishop
of the diocese, Dr. Lanigan. (Applause). Instead of giving them his
health he would propose to them the great principles on which his life
had been formed. First of these he would place before them was un-
ceasing, unselfish devotion to duty. He had been a spiritual mason
who had built up with his own hands a great order and the material
and spiritual edifice by which he found himself now surrounded in his
honoured old age. Secondly, he had been devoted to the great cause
of Christian education. (Applause). It was his devotion to that
great cause which had brought such a special blessing upon himself
and the diocese. He knew that if the little ones were not attended to
all the labours of his clergy devoted to the after lives of those
children would be comparatively useless. God had blessed his work,
blessed himself, and blessed his diocese on account of his devotion to
the cause of Christian education. The third principle which had
actuated his life was that of devotion to the great old Catholic land
from which he had sprung. They read in fable that every time that a
powerful man touched the earth he received new vigour from the
contact, and every time the Bishop’s mind went back to the land of his


birth and every time he had had the opportunity of visiting it he had
received from the mental or bodily contact new strength for his future
labours. He prayed that God might bless his labours for many years
to come, that he might be, as he was, the patriarch of the church in
Australia, that his example might stand before the priests and Bishops
as that of a Prelate who had always been unselfish and devoted to
duty, that God might give him length of years and in return for his
faithful life an honoured and a holy death. (Great applause).
The Chairman briefly replied and proposed “ The Laity of
Goulburn and the Yisiting Laity.” He always scolded the Goulburn
Laity when he was here, but praised them everywhere else. (Laughter).
He was glad that they had the Mayor, who was considered a very ex-
cellent Mayor, kindly with them.
The toast, which was drunk with musical honours, was briefly
acknowledged by Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. Coleman, Mayor of Wagga, also responded. He was a
representative of the town in which Dr. Gallagher performed his last
duty as a missionary priest. Acting for representative citizens of
Wagga of all shades of opinion, it was his pleasant duty after Dr.
Gallagher’s selection to convey their congratulations to him.
Mu. Gormly also replied.
The Hon. T. Dalton, M.L.C., said a few years ago there was only
one Bishop in Australia ; now there were 35 prelates. Outside the
metropolis such a gathering of priests and bishops as that of the day
had never been seen before. Every man was to day proud to belong
to the Koman Catholic Church ; he was able to hold up his head in
the senate or anywhere. To what did they owe that as laymen ?—to
the hierarchy and the priests of Australia. But for that they would
still be looked upon as they had been in the past.
In response to calls Mr. F. P, Brennan spoke for the ex-students
of St. Patrick’s College. He said no body was more proud than they
of the distinguished honour conferred upon Dr. Gallagher.
“The Press,” proposed by the Chairman and acknowledged by
Mr. W. R. Riley, ended the toast list.
Presentation of Addresses.
fI&N the evening the Cathedral was almost filled to overflowing again,
Sags Occupying places in the front benches were the members of the
H A. 0.8 Society and A.H C. Guild. The devotions consisted of the
Rosary, recited by Rev. Father O’Sullivan, and Pontifical Bene-
diction, the celebrant Dr. Gallagher, with Revs. Father Finnegan and
Slattery as his assistants.


The sermon was preached by Dr. Byrne of Bathurst. The festival
celebrated by the church on that day —the first Sunday in July—was,
he said, what was known as the Feast of the Precious Blood. He had
been asked to say a few words, and he did not know of any subject on
which he could with more advantage dwell than on that great mystery
of faith. That day was one of universal rejoicing throughout the
Diocese of Goulburn, nay, throughout the entire church of Australia,
by reason of the consecration of the one whom the people, the priests,
and the Prelates of the church deemed most worthy to assist the
present venerable Bishop of Goulburn in the woik in which he was
engaged. His Lordship preached an eloquent sermon, directing
himself to one point chiefly, namely, the efficacy for the salvation of
the world that attached to the mystery of the redemption. As of old,
the destroying angel passed by those houses the door posts of which
were marked with the blood of the unspotted lamb, so only by apply-
ing the Precious Blood to their souls could salvation be attained by
those coming after Christ.
After Benediction the members of the Wagga deputation assem-
bled at the Cathedral for the purpose of making the presentation to
Dr. Gallagher. The presentation took place outside the rails of the
high altar. The following gentlemen composed the deputation :
Messrs. G. Coleman, J. Gormly, J. E. Moloney, W. B. Loughran,
T. J. Foley, P. Heffernan, W. M. J. Walsh, and W. J. Monks. A
draft of the address was read by Mr. Coleman, the framed and
illuminated presentation, which was on view on the stand, being much
admired. Together with the address Dr. Gallagher was presented
with a purse of sovereigns.
Mu. Coleman before reading the address to Dr, Gallagher, said :
“My Lord, your parishioners of St Michael’s Wagga Wagga, have
deputed us, a few of their number, to attend here to-day, as a
deputation to present to your Lordship this address and purse of
sovereigns as a mark of the esteem and affection which they feel for
you. When in due course you were called to a higher and greater
office in the Church, your faithful people of Wagga, moved by feelings
of pleasure on the one hand and sorrow on the other—pleasure at the
honour conferred upon you, and sorrow at losing your presence and
your services—felt that the only thing left to them was to place on
record the relations of mutual love and veneration which during eight
years of administration, you established on such lasting foundations,”
Mr. Coleman then read the address, which is as follows :
«To His Lordship the Right Reverend John Gallagher, D.D., Coadjutor Bishop
of Goulburn.”
“ May it please your Lordship,—
“ On this, the occasion of your consecration to and full investiture with all
the powers and functions attaching to the high and holy office of Coadjutor Bishop
of Goulburn, the parishioners of St. Michael’s, Wagea Wagga, among whom you
have faithfully laboured for the past 8 years, reverently approach you to heartily
congatulate you upon the auspicious event, and to earnestly and sincerely wish
youall the divine grace nec. ssary to sustain you in the discharge of the momentous
and sacred duties now devolving upon you.


“ After a distinguished career in your national college, Maynooth, inspired by
the same spirit which movtd the saintly missionaries of old, yon left your loved
home to devote yourself to the arduous duties of amissionary priest in the fair land
of ynur adoption. With what indefatigable zeal you have devoted yourself to this-
sublime vocation is known and appreciated throughout the land. As a ripe scholar
and eloquent pulpit orator you have won a well-merited reputation. You have
edified us by your untiring zeal and priestly life, enlightened and instructed us by
your profound erudition, and won all our hearts by your mild and gentle
disposition.
“ In your twenty-five years of devoted and incessant labours in the cause of
religion and education you have achieved magnificent results and have now
received a splendid reward. That you have qualified yourself for this great dis-
tinction by a laborious probation in the office of Priesthood, the monuments you
have raised to the Honour of God in this diocese amply testify. As Professor
and President of our Diocesan College for over thirteen years you have gained for
that in-titutiou a high reputation and placed it upon a level at least with the'
fcremost educational establishments of the colonies. The beautiful Convent pile
on Mount Erin in our own town in its completed form attests at once your zeal
arid ability, and speaks eloquently for the deep and lasting interest you feel in,
raisins? and enobling the tone of our Catholic womanhood. By the introduction of
the Patrician Brothers you have secured a solid and valuable foundation for the
faith and morals of our boys while placing within their reach the priceless advan-
tage of a sound education To you was entrusted the task of reducing the debt
on our church and the success which has attended your efforts in this respect sets
the stamp upon your faculty for organization and upon your character for in-
domitable perseverance/’
“ Whilst living amongst us you never failed to recognise the duties of citizen-
ship and did your part cheerfully and well. Your public utterances—breathing a
fine spirit of tolerance and good will—are remembered and preserved by the
community among whom you lived, admired and respected for several years. No-
greater proof of this could be manifest than the readiness with which your non-
Catholic friends have assisted us in paying you this mark of respect.”
“ With keen pangs of regret your last parish takes leave of its revered pastor. We
share to the full the honorable pride you may justly feel, as well in the titular dis-
tinction you have won in the hierarchy as in the larger and enhanced opportunities
it gives you of continuing in the vineyard of your Master those splendid services
which the holy See has now so signally recognised.
“ Beseeching the Almighty to long spare you to adorn by your piety, your zeal
and your learning the high office in which the Holy Father has confirmed you*
and desiring to be remembered in your prayers.”
“We are, your Lordship’s grateful parishioners.
“ For the parishioners of St. Michael’s, Wagga Wagga'
Committee.
“ George Coleman (chairman), John Cox, M. O’Connor, James Gormly, F,
M’Douough, P. J. Mahon, John M’Garry, P, J. Coffey, E. W. Donnelly, P. Moran"
T, J Foley, Chas. Smith, Thos. Halloran, William Walsh, John Nash, J, E.’
Moloney, Martin Treacey, W. B. Loughran, A. P. Lysaught, M. Loughlin', L*.
Corbett, James Eyan, W. M. J. Walsh, Hon. Secretary, W. J. Monks, Hon",
Treasurer.
“Wagga Wagga, Sunday, 7th July, 1895.”
Mr Coleman continuing, said :—We ask you to accept from your
old parish the last committed to your charge before your selection
for a great office in the Church, for which you are eminently qualified
this address, and to preserve and cherish it as a tribute of regard from
a faithful and affectionate people, whose hearts go out to you upon


this momentous epoch in your life. Our gifts are not limited to these.
We bear again the commission to hand to you from the Boarders of
the Presentation Convent, Wagga, a full set of vestments;
from St. Eugene’s School (Presentation Convent) an illuminated
address ; from St. Mary’s pupils (Wagga Wagga), a missal and
stand; from the Infants’ School (Presentation Convent), a breviary;
from St. Joseph’s School, an Irish bog-oak crucifix; from the St.
Michael’s Boy’s School (Patrician Brothers), an illuminated address
and gold cross. We have also to formally present to you from your
old friends, the good nuns of the Presentation Convent, Wagga Wagga,
the mitre of which your Lordship has already received possession, and
in which you were consecrated at the ceremony of to-day.
After making the presentation Mr. Coleman said : We cannot
bring our task to a close without making a fitting reference to one of
your parishioners who, though his name appears as a signatory to the
address, is prevented by an unfortunate accident from being present
here to day in person and discharging the duty which has fallen on
me. The whole Catholic population of the colony, to whom his
reputation as an earnest and consistent churchmen has made him known,
have heard with regret of the deplorable accident by which Dr.
Morgan O’Connor of our town has b“en for some time at least laid low.
For a quarter of a century Dr. O’Connor has been the head and front
of every movement in the district of Wagga connected with the
Catholic faith, of which he is at once a capable, an earnest and a
courageous exponent. Your Lordship expects from me no statement
of Dr. O’Connor’s keen regret at not being here this evening in his
proper place, nor need I assure you that although prevented by his un-
fortunate accident from being here in person, the good doctor is with
us this evening in spirit, joining in the united wishes and prayer of
your people for your future happiness and success.”
The Right Rev. Dr. GU.lla.gher, in replying to the Wagga address,
said : —lf I said that this address from the people of Wagga took me
by surprise—that I did not expect it —I should not be telling the
truth. It is only in keeping with the whole tenor of their mode of
acting as citizens for a townsman whom they respect, as Catholics for
a piiest who has laboured amongst them for so many years. All that
I have heard and certainly all that I know by personal experience of
the people of this fine town and leading district forces me to believe
that there is not, beneath the Southern Cross, a congregation, in
proportion to numbers and resources, more loyal to their faith, more
generous to their priests, more ready to help with heart and hand every
noble and deservin ' cause everything that tends to the benefit of our
fellow men or to the advancement of religion. That allusion in your
beautiful address touches me with a peculiar force, which tells me that,
although I never sacrificed one jot or tittle of Catholic Doctrine and
always insisted upon the justice of our Catholic claims, yet kindly feel-
ing and harmony and peace, so far as my ministry was concerned,
reigns between every class and creed ; that this great mark of respect
from a Catholic people to their pastor received ready assistance from


those who hold not the same faith nor kneel at the same altar as you.
The only thing to which I could take exception is the strong wording
of the address, which, though expressing, I am sure, your genuine
sentiments, gives a picture of me far too perfect, far too high, far
different from what my inner consciousness tells me I am. One thing
I willingly admit—the interest, greater indeed in desire than in
accomplishment, yet always lively, always sincere, which I took in the
progress, in the happiness, in the virtuous lives and good name of the
people who were entrusted to my care. There is a charming story
(contained in a single verse of the Old Testament) used by a great states-
man with exquisite felicity on a remarkable occasion, which has often
struck me as one of great beauty. You will recollect that the prophet
Eliseus, in Journeying to and fro was very hospitably entertained by
what is termed in the Bible a Sunamite woman. In return for her
hospitality he wished to make her some amends, and he called her to
him and asked her what there was that he should do for her. ‘ 1 Shall
I speak for thee to the King ? ” he said, ‘ ‘ or to the master of the host ? ”
Now, it has always appeared to me to be a great answer that the
Sunamite woman returned. She replied : T dwell in the midst of my
own people.’ Such is the reply I should have wished to make in re-
gard to you. Amongst you my lot was cast. I felt proud that, through
me, your noble parish had the honour and the privilege of being the
first ‘ Permanent Rector ate,” canonically instituted of the great church
of Australia. We were so happy together, in town and country, in
the houses of the wealthy, an honoured and a welcome guest; in the
humbler homes of the poor, more happy still, for we felt that amongst
them we were the true Soggarth Aroon, that we brought, on each
succeeding visit, a new blessing to their lowly hearths, that we were
their instructor, their consoler, and their trusted friend. I knew my
sheep and my sheep knew me. You were never afraid to unbosom to
me your sorrows, and you were ever only too anxious that I should be
a sharer in all your joys. From the first we worked together, shoulder
to shoulder, to remove the heavy debt that weighed upon the district.
When that debt was gone, we felt a mutual pride in the great works
which, not I, but your own Catholic spirit set on foot and which your
generosity brought to a successful issue for (rod’s glory and for the
religious education of your children. Obedience to higher authority
often called me away for lengthened periods to other spheres of duty.
But Wagga was always my home. Your pastor ever longed to return
to the “midst of his own people” —hie illius arma : hie currus fuit —in
its simple presbytery—centre of spiritual life to a faithful people, sur-
rounded by its efficient schools and reposing beneath the shadow of
your splendid temple. Amongst you I should have been happy to
work on even to the end, ever planning something new, laying the
foundation, as times went on and as our means allowed, of some new
institution, ever seeking to introduce, according to the requirements of
time and place, one of those countless instruments of beneficence or of
enlightenment, which Holy Church keeps in reserve for the
amelioration of men here on earth —for the salvation of their immortal
souls beyond the grave. Your children, too, of whom I was so Justly


proud, now happily so well trained in secular and religious knowledge
by the Brothers of the Monastery and by the good Sisters at their
several Convent Schools, were growing up around us, to be, as I fondly
hoped, no less for me than for you, the staff of our old age - uur crown
of glory and our joy. “ I dwelt amidst my own people,” and when
death came, happy should I be to dwell amidst them still, to repose in
peace in your beautiful little cemetery, nestling beneath that shelter-
ing hill, awaiting the dawning of the happier and brighter day in
company with the faithful people whom I loved, for whom in life I
had thought and worked and prayed. But my honest conviction was
that 1 was never destined to be a Bishop. The high qualities that
befit that exalted dignity did not seem to be given to me —
“ An eye to guide, and a hand to rule, and a calm and kingly head ;
And a heart from which, like a holy well, the souls of his flock are fed.'’
Borne has spoken, however, and the cause is finished. Like her
Divine Founder, she has chosen the weak things of this world that she
may confound the strong ; the foolish things has she chosen that she
may confound the wise. From a simple priest, lam one day, though we
all trust that day is still remote, to become your Chief Pastor, whoso
duty is to judge, to interpret, to consecrate, to ordain, to offer, to
baptize, to confirm. My ministry must now be for the whole Diocese,
and not for one district, how «herished soever that district may be.
“ Take heed to yourselves and to your whole flock over which the
Holy Ghost hath placed you Bishops to rule the church of God.” My
residence must, perhaps of necessity, be in another place. My
relations to you may be somewhat changed. But the home should be
far away, and the change great indeed, which can ever alter, much
lees efface the strong warm feelings of affection and esteem which
remain deep down m my heart for the kind-hearted, the generous,
the devoted and faithful people of Wagga Wagga.
Miss Sykes next came forward and read the following address to
his Lordship from the members of the Sacred Heart Society, Goulburn.
Accompanying this address was a purse of twenty-five sovereigns.
To the Right Reverend Dr. Gallagher, Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn.
“ We beg iyour I ordship’s acceptance of cur gift, accompanied by a most
cordial welcome from the members of the Sacred Heart Society at Goulburn. We
desire also to express the deep gratification we feel at your return to us as Co-
adjutor to our Beloved Bishop, to whose devoted care and untiring zeal and energy
we are indebted for the many blessings we now enjoy.
Praying that God will give you health and length of days to labor in His
divine service,
W e are Your Devoted Children,
The Members of the Sacred Heart Society
A. Gaskell, Sec.
J. Doyle, Treas.”
On Sunday afternoon, August 4th, at 4 o’clock in SS. Peter and
Paul’s Cathedral the Eight Eev. Dr. Gallagher replied to the address
which the members of the Sacred Heart Confraternity presented to


his Lordship on the occasion of his consecration as Coadjutor-Bishop
of the diocese of Goulburn. It will be lemembered that owing to the
great number of addresses which he then received from the parishioners,
from tie different Catholic societies of Goulburn, and nom various
other quarters the Bishop was unable to find time on that day to make
separate replies to each, and consequently was compelled to make
other and more suitable arrangements. He therefore decided to reply
to the address from the parishioners of Goulburn on the Sunday night
after his consecration and to those of the Catholics societies at their
respective general meetings. Accordingly his able and scholarly
replies to all, with the exception of that to the addiess from the
Sacred Heart Confraternity, which met on Sunday for the first time
since his consecration, have already appeared in the columns of the
local papers. August 4th, however was the great day for the Sacred
Heart Confraternity, which we understand is numerically the strongest
of the Catholic societies in Goulburn, claiming at the present time
about fiOO adherents in the Cathedral parish, ihe general meetings
are held on the first Sunday of each month, and when it was
announced at all the Masses on Sunday that Dr. Gallagher meant to
fulfil his promise of replying to their address it would seem as if all
the members made it a special point to attend the atternoon meeting ;
for precisely at four o’clock considerably over 600 members could be
counted in the church who listened to the reply, which occupied nearly an
hour in delivery, with rapt attention throughout. After the prescribed
prayers were said by Father Griffin, the Director of ihe Confraternity,
the Bishop entered the pulpit, and the address, which was beautifully
framed and artistically decorated, was formally handed to his Lordship
by Miss Sykes and Miss Gaskell. His Lordship then said :
My dear Associates of the Sacred Heart Sodality— To say that
your beautiful address —beautiful in the simplicity of its diction, but
still more beautiml in its high Catholic and religious sentiments—does
not give me great pleasure would be to acknowledge that which I my-
self should be very loth to admit — that my new oignity makes me
forget old memories and old friends, that there is in me neither the
zeal of a Bishop nor the heart of a Priest nor the feelings of a Catholic.
Some of the happiest and some of the holiest associations of my life
are intimately bound up with the sodality of the Sacred Heart. When
his Lordship the Bishop first thought of consecrating our diocese of
Goulburn to the Sacred Heart of our divine Lord, about the year 1877,
he did me the honour of asking me to explain in a few brief instructions,
from the pulpit of your old Cathedral, the nature of the devotion and
the blessings which its introduction was certain to confer upon
individuals, upon families, and upon the whole people. A few years
subsequently your spiritual director —and here I should remark that
your sodality in Goulburn has always been singularly favoured in the
spiiitual directors, too fondly remembered to require my naming them,
whom the Bishop in his prudence has successively placed over it, to
arouse its flagging energies, to counsel, and to guide. A few years
subsequently your then spiritual director, the earnest, the labouring,
the saintly Father D. T. Walshe, whose mortal remains are the


precious possession of our college grounds, determined to present, as
the first fruits of your piety and thanksgiving, a statue and an altar to
the Sacred Heart. Many changes and many improvements have been
made since then. The old order changeth, giving place to new; and
your finished Cathedral—lasting memorial of the organising power of
our venerable Bishop and of the generosity of his priests and people,
now occupies for grandeur of proportions and elegance of detail a
premier place amongst the splendid churches of our fair Australian
land. Yet this altar and this statue, the first gift to religion of your
infant sodality, still remain among the proudest monuments and most
appropriate ornaments of your completed Cathedral. The duty and
the pleasure of saving the few words of instruction and encouragement
that accompanied their dedication to their high and holy uses about
the year 1881 devolved on me. It was a mark of affection and esteem
from a good priest which after the lapse of fourteen years I still value
at a high price. Again, from the day on which as pastor of Wagga
Wagga I became directly responsible for the care of souls, my first
solicitude and greatest delight was to foster and make racy of the soil
the sodality which I found already established to rekindle its zeal, to
fill up its lacunae, to add to its members, to witness the blessings
which fidelity to its rules brought to young and old —to our schools, to
families, to the entire parish. Faith peace, prosperity, and union of
hearts seemed to take root, to grow and flourish in the same soil with
devotion to the Sacred Heart of our Divine Lord and the saying of
the Kosary. The “ Sodality of the Sacred Heart and Apostleship of
Prayer; ” it is the greatest association, whether spiritual or temporal,
that exists in the world at the present day. It is the greatest in the
number of its members, in the wideness of their diffusion throughout
the world, in the wealth of indulgences by which it has been enriched
by the sovereign Pontiffs, in the promises made directly by our divine
Lord himself—through its foundress, the blessed Margaret Mary—to
those who, enrolled beneath its banner practise faithfully devotion to
the Sacred Heart. Reckoning its members from every class and condition
of men, from every tribe and people and colour and tongue, it
strengthens our belief and consoles our piety by illustrating to us at
once the unity and universality of our holy laith. Again, it supports
the weakness of each one of us taken as individuals by the vicarious
help of so many millions (twenty millions, I believe,) through the
world, members of the sodality, who, devout worshippers in spirit and
in truth, are—at least many of them—holier, better, and nearer to
heaven than ourselves. Our divine Lord himself assures us that if
only we are faithful to the daily prayer, to the monthly confession and
communion, to the holy life and devout practices which this sodality
enjoins, aid will be ever at our command from the overflowing fountain
of His Sacred Heart sufficient to fulfil our mission here in time and
work our salvation for eternitv. Graces, the first promise says, will be
given us to discharge worthily the duties of that state of life in which
we have been placed by the providence of God. And what grace so
much to be prayed for, so well worthy our every effort to obtain as


the grace to do well that work which, whether we be in lowly or in
high estate, God has given each of us to do.
Honour and shame from no condition rise ;
Act well your part, there all the merit lies.
To know and knowing to do that which before us lies in daily life is
the prime wisdom. That which your right hand hath got to do, do it
well. The path of duty, he who walks it only thirsting for the right,
and learns to deaden
Love of self, before his journey closes
He shall find the stubborn thistle bursting
Into glossy purple, which outredden
All voluptuous garden roses.
This grace to do one’s duty faithfully, come what will, not to gain
the favour of applause of men, but of Him who would have us obey, not
for wrath, but for conscience sake, the Good Father, who, seeing in secret,
will repay us, is the first promise made by our Lord himself to the
devout client of the Sacred Heart. And the second is like to this :
“In families peace will reign.” My peace I leave you ; my peace I
give you; that peace which the world cannot give—that peace above
all earthly dignities, peace within ourselves by freedom from sin, that
happy union of hearts in the Christian family which makes burdens
light and joys so sweet, which adds a fresh zest to our highest
pleasures and makes the heaviest cross so easy to bear, —foretaste of
that peace without end and without alloy which is the reward of the
blessed in the Letter land. Another promise is “ I will comfort them
in all their trials and afflictions.” Who amongst us has not these?
The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, the law’s delay,
the insolence of office, the scoffs and spurns that patient merit must
from the unworthy take, the heartache and the thousand natural
shocks that life is heir to, the sickness of the body and the weariness
of the soul, the loss of friends, the hope deferred which maketh the
heart sad, these constitute the cross which willingly or unwillingly
each of us must bear. As we journey down the path of life, many
a rose may delight our eyes by its tints of wondrous beauty or lull
our senses for a moment by the sweetness of its odour. But is only
for a moment. Already the canker worm is gnawing at its heart;
beneath its expanding petals lurks the latent thorn. It is only by
bearing the cross that we can hope to wear the crown. “ l)oest thou
think,” saith the devout author of the Imitation,“ to escape that which
no mortal could ever avoid ? What saint was ever in the world without
his cross and afflictions ? Our Lord Jesus Christ himself was not one
hour of His life without suffering; and doest thou pretend to seek
another way than the royal way which is the way of the Holy Cross ? ”
“If any one wishes to become my disciple, let him take up his cross
and follow Me.” But that Sacred Heart which was wounded for our
iniquities and bruised for our sins will give us grace and strength to take
up our cross cheer fully and bear it, up the steep and rugged hill of
Calvary, after Him patiently even to the end. Promising fervour to
tepid souls and mercy to the sinner, holding out the hope of success
even in our temporal affairs, if such be serviceable to the salvation of


our souls, this devotion, if taken up with faith and zeal, will raise all
the labours and all the sufferings of each day to the merit of a super-
natural act and inscribe our names on the Divine Heart in characters
of light which can never be effaced. Surely then it must be a source
of pride and pleasure to me to witness the steady advancement of this
great sodality in this its parent home of the diocese. It will be a
labour of love to me to assist your spiritual director by any means
within my feeble power, to note the increase of its numbers, the grow-
ing earnestness of its members, the heartiness becoming warmer day
by day of whole-souled co-operation with your spiritual adviser and
guide, for the beauty of God’s house, for the support of venerable or
beneficent institutions, for the more regular and devout frequeetatiou
of the sacraments, for the wider diffusion of Catholic teaching and of
Catholic practices, for the maintenance and encouragement of every
good and noble and deserving cause. One other thought has arisen
in my mind, suggested by our meeting of to-day, which before ending
I would wish to translate into words. The establishment of the Holy
Family in the Cathedral parish—the same society as yours under
another name throws the sodality of the Living Rosary and Sacred
Heart into the exclusive care of the devout feminine sex —the mothers,
wives, and daughters of our people. Now on them devolves a high
and solemn duty. It is not going too far to say that on the women of
Australia depends to a great extent not merely the future of our holy
faith, but the domestic virtue, the social purity, the high and holy
moral sense, those generous, elevated, and chivalric sentiments of
fidelity to faith, honour, and purity which even still more than intel-
lectual advancement or material progress, constitute the true greatness
of every Christian land. Right faithfully do they fulfil their mission.
Great is my love for the ancient classics, yet cheerfully do I make my
own the words of the distinguished Spaniard, Antonio de Guevera,
and say—“ At the present day I swear to thee that there are women
in the world of such excellence that I have more envy of the life which
they lead in secret that of all the sciences which the ancients taught
in public.” I have seen them in every condition of life—in the
splendid mansion, in the humble and lowly home, in the town resid-
ence, in the slab hut and bark gunyah of the primeval forest. Their
strong faith and tender piety, even under most adverse circumstances
their generous abnegation of self, their long suffering and patience
under severe trials, their yearning desire (even beyond that of wealth
or social position) that sons should grow up faithful and pure and
brave, and that daughters be modest and virtuous, these high qualities
speak to me with a clear and sonorous voice and forbiJs me even in
moments of dejection to think that with such valiant women to warn,
to council, to command, faith and morals have anything to fear in our
fair Australian land. This brings me to the point to which I have
been coming. Vividly realise the dignity, the responsibility of your
position; rise to the high level of your exalted mission Like the
true woman of all the Christian ages, take Mary in the quiet retire-
ment of her humble home at Nazareth, mother of sorrows at the
foot of the cross. —“Ry the cross her station keeping stood the mournful


mother weeping close to Jesus to the last; through her heart His
sorrow sharing all His bitter anguish hearing—now at length the
sword has passed,” —Mary our tainted nature’s solitary boast, to be
your protector, your model, and your guide; love her rosary, wear
her scapular, carry her beads and say them every day. Fondly
cherish this beautiful devotion of the Sacred Heart of our divine
Lord, Be exact in saying the daily prayers and faithful to the
monthly confession and communion. Like the valiant woman of the
Inspired Narrative, look well to the paths of your house, and eat not
your bread in idleness ; but put forth your hands to strong things and
let your fingers take hold of the spindle. With a hand open to the
needy and arms stretched out to the poor, let your mouth be ever
open to wisdom and the law of clemency be on your lips. In a word,
drawing all your strength from within, from a faithful discharge of
the duties of your state, from the Sacred Heart of our Divine Lord,
with great diffidence in self but trust in God, strive to spread around
the social circle in which you move, especially around your own
domestic hearth, the sweet aroma of faith and hope and love, of
womanly tenderness and affection sanctified by piety. Thus thinking
thus acting, you will not merely save your own souls, which should
be your chief care ; but you will be a source of strength and happiness
to your family, to your pastors who must give an account of your
souls, and lend, as far as in you lies, a helping hand towards building
up the prospeiity of our district, the progress of our great country on
its only solid and safe foundation —faith, purity, chivalrous sentiment,
and all the sacred sanctions of our holy Catholic religion.
To Da. McKillop was assigned the task of reading the address
tendered to his Lordship by the Catholics of the diocese and which
was in these terms: —
“To the Right Rev. John Gallagher, D.D., Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn.
May it please your Lordship,—
With sincere feelings of respect and love the Catholics of the Goulburn diocese
desire to jexnress their congratulations at your elevation to the Hierarchy of
Australia.
They desire also to show their gratitude to the Holy See for your election and
to the clergy of the diocese who nominated you as worthy to till the episcopal
office.
For many years you, aided by self-denying colleages, have successfully guided
through severe trials the higher educaiion at St. Patrick’s College with most
praiseworthy results ; and you have ministered with priestly devotion to the wants
of the people in various parts of the diocese during your long missionary career.
Universally you are regarded as an intellectual champion priest of the church.
Though every inch an Irishman, you are proudly claimed as a citizen of Australia
by right of residence of over a quarter of a century. As a man your learning and
high-souled principles add honour to the land of your adoption. Jt cannot there-
fore be sui prising that everyone hails with joy the dignity conferred upon you.
They pray that Almighty God may give you grace to be a worthy Coadjutor
to our revered and venerable Bishop, whose long term as spiritual ruler of this
diocese has been so eminent and good, and that your united efforts may prove as
successful as his have been in enabling the church to fulfil its lofty destiny in these
colonies.


Further, they request that you remember them in the Holy Sacrifice of jthe
Mass, and that you accept the humble offering they now present.
Signed on behalf of the Catholics of the Diocese,
Charles Gillespie, Chairman.
Robert McKillOP, Treasurer.
John Walsh, Secretary.”
The presentation in connection with the above was in the form of
a cheque for £ tOO.
Reply to Address from the Catholics of the Diocese.
On Sunday evening, July 14th, Dr. Gallagher, replying to the
above address, spoke as follows to the congregation, a very large
one, in SS. Peter and Paul’s Cathedral, after Vespers. He said—ln read-
ing over your address one or two thoughts, rather casual and incidental
than bearing directly on the sacied ceremony of this day week, arrested
my attention. In one part of your address you make a kindly reference
to the country from which I came, and say that I am every inch an Irish-
man. I feel proud of the illusion. That I still cherish a strong, warm
affection for the laud of my birth, for the land that nursed my infancy,
that educated me as a boy, that nourished my young soul with high
ideals, where the bones of my parents and kindred commingle with the
the dust, I freely admit. i hough weighed down with many sorrows
she was my mother ; her soil was sacred to me, her honour, her glory,
her freedom, after God and his Holy Faith, enlisted all the sympathies
of my young heart, excited its warmest affections, and had I remained
at home would, after the duties of my sacred office, have engaged, I
think, the best energies of my life. If, in spite of all her faults, to
love her still, her progress, her happiness, her good name, to condole
with her in her sorrows and rejoice with her in the hope of nationality
restored, to have lent her a helping hand in the hour of need —if this
be a virtue, I admit its influence ; if it be a crime, I plead guilty to
the soft impeachment. But the sphere of my duties and of my labors
is my true country. To the missionary priest especially are the words
addressed, “ He who loves father or mother or sister or brother more
than me is not worthy of me.’’ The vineyard of his divine Master
should be his chief, if not his only care. The flock which that Master
has given him to tend should engage all his attention. To them he
has vowed, and to them he owes all the gifts of nature and of grace
which he has received, all the faculties of his mind, all the loyalty of
his heart, all the labors of his life. His ambition and aim should be
to have the privilege of saying at the last day, like Him who who sent
him forth and who is his model the Good Shepherd who laid down
his life for his flock, “ Father, of them whom thou has given me to
keep I have lost not even one.” By the vows that I made, therefore,
by the obligations of my state, as well as by the feelings of my heart
and the purpose of my life, you are right in claiming me as a true son
of my adopted land. it is hrrdly necessary for me to add that I feel
very grabful to the people of Goulburn for the beautiful address and
handsome testimonial which they have presented to me. It brings


back to my mind memories that are very dear to me. It unites the Alpha
and the Omega—the beginning and end—of my career in Australia.
In the little brick church which twenty-five years ago occupied the site
on which this splendid Cathedral now stands I celebrated my first Mass
beneath the Southern Cross. The first three—probably the three most
zealous and profitable—years of my priesthood were spent amongst
you. Here that trend was given to my life in the sacred ministry
which ends in my coming back to you as a bishop. Under the care of
our venerable Y.G. Father Dunne—who still
“ Husbands out life’s taper at the close
And keeps the flame from wasting by repose ”
in Albury, who in the Signified leisure of a well-spent life does not
even now allow his solicitude for the foundling and orphan to shut out
his active mind from a keen concern in all the prime interests of
religion—Father Slattery and I received our first practical training for
the pastoral office. If there is in me any skill in the administration
of a parish, any tact in economising one’s resources, or any practical
shrewdness in turning to best advantage the generous offerings of our
faithful people for all the wants of religion, any exactness in having
all to render an account of their stewardship at stated times (and these
are not unimportant secondary qualities of an Australian Bishop) I
owe it to my first three years in Goulburn, and to the strict discipline
of him who is—after his Lordship the Bishop—the grand old man of
the diocese. You congratulate me on being elevated to the episcopal
dignity. It is not a mere form of courtesy, it is the warm genuine
expression of your feelings as a Catholic people, putting in another
form that which is the teaching of the great apostle of the Gentiles,
St. Paul, “A faithful saying, if a man desires the office of a Bishop,
he desires a good work.” This was surely true of the time in which
it was written, when the rulers of the church laboring with their own
hands, proclaimed the divine message to the kings princes and
people of Israel, in perils by land and perils by sea, in spite of
dungeons and persecutions and the swords. It was true again of those
days when, if their crosiers were of wood, their hearts were of gold,
when their purple if the symbol of rank was still more the symbol of
martyrdom, when they taught their people and celebrated the Divine
mysteries in subterranean caves, when tbe placing of a mitre on a
heroic br_>w marked it out for the lions, when they were ever ready
to attest their faith by the shedding of their blood, when in a word,
not by human eloquence or power; but by the preaching of Jesus
Christ and Him crucified, by their sufferings, their courage and the
splendour of their virtues, they vanquished the majesty of the Caesars
and placed the symbols of man’s redemption above the eagles of the
Capitol. He who in those days stepped into the place of the brave
soldier who had fallen, and obedient to the voice of the Sovereign
Pontiff, said with noble courage “ Hand recuso laborem ” desired a
good work and was worthy of the congratulations of the people.
'J his was true also of the Bishops of the medieval church, who from
their superior merits were called upon to add to their sacred functions
the administration of civil duties and cares of state. It was a work


exceeding good they did who changed the savage hordes of Northern
Europe into pious Christians, who tamed the self-willed pride of the
half-civilised barons, who won from feudal despotisms the municipal
and political rights which we now enjoy, who laid from their episcopal
funds the foundation of nearly all the universities and high schools of
Christendom, who, a brotherhood of holy pastors, went forth with
mitre and crosier and uplifted hand to rule and teach and bless happy
and contented peoples. It is true also in our own day of those apos-
tolic men—the evangelisers of peace, whose footsteps are blessed
who, like my own immediate predecessor in the See of Adras—John
Bax, of holy memory-leave their people and their native land for ever
and go with the crucifix in one hand and the Gospel in the other bear-
ing the glad tidings of salvation to those who sit in darkness and in
the shadow of death, ready to lay down their lives for their sheep, as
he did about this time last year in Central Mongolia. Even here
amongst ourselves he who desires the episcopate desires a good work ;
if blameness, sober, chaste, prudent, a teacher, modest, not quarrelsome,
not lording it over the clergy, but becoming a pattern of the flock
from the heart, he has the “ will and the power,” to use the words of
the Pontifical Biief, which gives myself authority and jurisdiction and
a flock, “to instruct his people not merely by sound doctrine, but by
the example of a good life, and to rule the churches given to his care,
through God’s assisting grace in tranquillity and peace.” But if the
office of a Bishop be great and good, if his dignity be elevated and
his burden heavy, you also have a correlative duty. You are the
congregation of the Cathedral church. If as such you have great
privileges —and is it not a great privilege to witness the sacred
solemnities of the last few days—you have also great obligations.
Noblesse oblige. Ihis is a motto whose justice in an ecclesiastical
as in a social sense you fully recognize, and which your practice, I am
proud to say, commends. As is the heart to the human body, such
should the episcopal city be to the body corporate of the diocese.
Health, vigor,(elasticity spring from it. The Cathedral church should
be a moc el to all the churches of the diocese, by the fulness of appoint-
ments, by the solemnity and decorum of its public services, by the
regularity with which its people frequent the sacraments and show
forth the faith that is in them by upholding the principles and prac-
tising the precepts of their religion. The beautiful and noble words
of your address, breathing throughout a fine spirit of Catholic faith,
are not required to convince me of your loyalty and devotedness. The
cheerful alacrity with which you have responded to every appeal of
our venerable Bishop ; this splendid Cathedral in which we are assem-
bled ; the generosity with which you support your many institutions
of charity, of education, of religion ; the number and variety and
vigorous life of your benfit societies and sodalities of devotion ; the
immense crowds of young and old who on each succeeding Sunday
come to the altar of God, to God who rejoiceth our youth, must be a
source of courage and of strength (whatever his misgivings about self
may be) to a new Prelate, whether auxiliary or chief, when entering
upon the first discharge of his high and holy functions. From the


overflowing fountain of practical faith, of piety, of generosity, of
edifying lives, and good works here bubbling up at the centre of the
Diocese, it should be the task, as assuredly it will be the delight of
your Coadjutor-Bishop to divert invigorating rills for the refreshment
and beauty of the still arid plains extending afar—that many and
many a weary traveller on the journey of life weary, footsore, dispirited,
may drink of the waters of the fountain of life and regain new
strength and courage for his journey to the everlasting city.
The Goulburn branch of the A.H.C. Guild embodied their con-
gratulations in the subjoined address, read by Mr. D. Hanigan,
secretary. The address which was in illuminated form, was enclosed
in a handsome frame.
“ To the Right Rev. John Gallagher, D.D., Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn.”
On behalf of the Goulburn Branch of the A.H.C. Guild, we beg to offer your
Lordship our most respectful and most sincere congratulations.
The position of Coadjutor-Bishop, which you are called upon to fill, is one
which brings with it the highest responsibilities : but, if this be the case with the
office, we venture to say that your Lordship, as its occupant, will be found equal
in every respect to the demand made upon you. It does not come within our
province to dwell upon the fitness of your Lordship for the lofty charge entrusted
to your care. Those more competent to judge have pronounced in your favour,
and this decision of the supreme ecclesiastical authority would, if nothing else were
in evidence, satisfy us of the wisdom of the choice. This however we might be
permitted to say that from our knowledge of you as a priest we may assume that
your career as Prelate will be memorable in the history of the Church in Australia.
It would be ungrateful on our part not to make reference to the great things
done by his Lordship the Right Rev. Dr. Lanigan, who has borne the heat and
burden of the day in the labour attached to founding a new diocese.
To your Lordship will fall the task of continuing the work so well commenced
by Dr. Lanigan, and that your effort will be fruitful of most happy results we are
fully confident.
Feeling satisfied that our spiritual interests will ever engage a place in your
Lordship’s thoughts we, in turn, promise not to be unmindful of our obligations as
members of the A.H.C. Guild.
Signed on behalf of the Members,
Daniel C. Hannigan, Secretary.
William J. Cheeseman, Bursar.
George J, Taylor. Trustee.
Jeremiah O’Neill, Trustee.
Gerald Brooks, Councillor.”
Eeply to Address by A.H.C. Guild.
On Sunday, July 14tb, after the last Mass the members of the
Goulburn branch of the A.H.C. Guild met in the Guild-Hall,
Bourke-street. They assembled in full force, all wearing the regalia
of the society. The Eight Eev. Dr. Gallagher, Coadjutor-Bishop of
Goulburn, met the members for the purpose of replying to the address
which they had presented to him on the previous Sunday in connection
with the consecration ceremony of that day. His Lordship was
accompanied by the Eight Eev. Dr. Murray (Bishop of Maitland), Eev.
P. J. Donovan (chaplain of the Guild), and Eev. D. Griffin.


Dr. Gallagher, who on rising was received with great enthusiasm,
said their beautiful and most Catholic address was very pleasing to
him. It brought to mind those first years of his ministry when he was
still young and enthusiastic and zealous and strong. He remembered
well that evening in 1871 when his Lordship, Dr Lanigan, having
given his approval and his blessing, and the 1 ite Mr. Ruble of Sydney
(then, he thought, warden of the parent branch) having delivered an
address full of instruction and wise advice, they, not without serious
misgivings but fixed determination and high resolve, inaugurated St.
Peter’s Goulburn branch of the Australasian Holy Catholic Guild. Mr.
P. T. Riley, Father Slattery, and himself (Dr. Gallagher) were ap-
pointed a sub-committee to revise the rules and to recommend such
slight modifications of detail as the then circumstances of time and
place in Goulburn seemed to require Right loyally in continuous
sittings for three or four months they performed their task. No clause
was passed over ; no suggestion was offered that aid not receive their
most earnest attention. It was their humble servant who, with mag-
nificent indiscretion, proposed, and he believed had earned, that self-
denying ordinance of which their official minutes preserved no record
—that with a view of husbanding the resources of the infant branch
all calls, medical included, should be met for the first twelve months
by a voluntary subscription from the members and thmr friends. That
their labours were not in vain, that the foundations were well and truly
laid the uninterrupted prosperity of their society for the last twenty-
four years, its numbers daily increasing, its accumulated funds, the
prudence that had directed its counsels, the harmony and peace which
had reigned amongst its members, the untold blessings, spiritual and
temporal, which it had conferred on families and on the district,
sufficiently attested. (Applause). He then thought, as he thought
that day, that their society supplied a great want, and marked for the
diocese of Goulburn a period in the onward progress of the Holy
Faith. The events of the last few days had necessitated his looking
over some papers connected with his first years in Goulburn. Amongst
others unearthed from the distant past was one dated December 1871
bearing on their society. From it he would select the following words
spoken on that occasion :—“ There is not and there never was estab-
lished in our midst a society which merits more the patronage and en-
couragement of our Catholic people than this, the first general meeting
of which I have announced to you to-day. Of all the enemies that
assail the church at the present moment - and they are many—of all
the hostile influences which seek to restrict her liberty, to retard her
progress to minimise her action on society, there is none more active
in its efforts, more powerful in its resources, more insidious in its
methods than the anti-Catholic and secular associations of the day.
Heresy has been a deadly enemy of the church, but heresy is dissolving
and passing away. The infidel and revolutionary press, at least in
some of the countries of the old world, is a powerful opponent too.
But it lacks that strength which comes from system and organisation,
while men of genius and of eloquence are always ready to refute its
mis-representations and its errors if deemed worthy of being refuted,.


If again the prurient and corrupting literature of the day tends to
wean men’s minds from faith and their morals from virtue we are con-
soled by the thought that a healthy reaction is already setting in. But
the associations which spring from the materialistic spirit of the age,
they have all the vigour and energy of youth, all the strength of union,
of system, of organisation; all the patronage of popular favour, and
all the success of a definite purpose and determinate aim. Now, this
aim, real, if unconscious, secular, at least, if not anti-Catholic, is
independence of Almighty God, at least in all things secular, solicitude
for the body to the exclusion of the soul, philanthropy without faith,
morality without religion, and, as a practical result, death to the calling
of the clergy.” Further he found the following: “The man who,
having a Catholic benefit society in his district, joins, by preference,
one which is divorced from religion is not a sound Catholic at heart.
Trust him not. In the hour of need he is certain to betray you. His
thoughts are of the earth —earthly. He belongs not to that class of
men by whom faith is defended, or great and noble causes are maintain-
ed. His is not the courage or heart of a Maccabeeus. He is not of the
blood of those men by whom is to be wrought the salvation of Israel.”
(Applause). Another extract having reference to the great and varied
work which the society would accomplish for religion through its mem-
bers was also quoted by Dr. Gallagher, who, continuing his reply,
said :—This was written in all the fervent enthusiasm of youth for the
day on which their new branch was inaugurated. Yet there was
hardly a word which bis calmer judgment, instructed by the varied
experience of a quarter of a century, would wished to see changed.
As the parent Ca'holic benefit society of Australia this was, to some
extent, the model of them all. Deriving its name and its spirits from
the guilds or crafts of the middle ages, which contributed so much to
perfect the mechanical arts, to elevate the status and secure the
municipal and civil rights of the working classes to sanctify the works
of the hands of men with the blessings of religion it realised to a large
extent the desire of the Holy Father, who, in his great encyclical on
“Condition of Labour,” wished that Catholic associations having
religion as their groundwork should be everywhere established for
helping each individual member to better his condition to the utmost
in body, in property, and in mind. The work which it was doing, the
good which it had done quietly, without observance, without show,
bore testimony of it. The society was not a delicate or sickly plant
that required the watering-can of flattery or false praise to give it an
ephemeral bloom. It had struck its roots deep and firm into the soil.
Its trunk was strong. Its branches spread far and wide, sheltering
many beneath their protecting shade, and its leaves were for the
healing of the people. What then could he say, what need he say,
except to repeat what they had heard a hundred times ? To be loyal
members of their admirable society. To be true to the spirit of its
rules. To be thoughtful for others as well as for themselves. To win
the means of doing good at its proper cost of labour, of sacrifice, and
of self-restraint. He asked them to show that a society working in
the light of day, having no oaths of secrecy, no secret objects, no secret


leaders, could do all that men under God’s blessing were able to do to
promote human progress, human happiness and human freedom.
(Applause). On the foundation rock of God’s love let the fair and
goodly edifice arise of love to men. From the strict observance of its
religious duties, confession, communion, staunch loyalty to holy Faith,
which was the first object of the society, let the second in natural
sequence flow, namely, provident and seasonable aid for the widow and
the orphan, for the day of misfortune, of sickness, and of death.
(Applause). In a word, illustrating by their upright, manly, truthful,
sober, and laborious lives, that beautiful motto which their banner
bore, Dilectio Dei et Proximi, by loving the Lord their God, with their
whole heart and with their whole soul, and with all their strength and
all their mind, and their neighbour as themselves. “This do,” he
concluded, “ and your society shall be a source of untold blessings to
its own members and their families, and a source of pride and strength
to our holy Faith throughout the length and breadth of our grand
young Diocese of Goulburn.” (Loud and continued applause).
Rev. P. J. Donovan moved votes of thanks to Dr. Gallagher for his
address, and to Dr. Murray for his presence on the occasion, both of
which were carried with acclamation.
His Lordship, Dr. Murray, in replying said that Dr. Gallagher in
his magnificent address had brought them back twenty-five years. He
(Dr. Murray) would take them back twenty-eight years, the occasion
being his first visit to Goulburn, and the event which brought him
being the consecration of their bishop, Dr. Lanigan. Then the
Catholics of Goulburn had but a poor church ; now they had one of the
finest in Australia. At that time only three Bishops were in attend-
ance at the consecration ceremony. At last Sunday’s ceremony of a
similar character they had twelve Bishops and one Cardinal. (Applause.)
The convent of those days was considered a fine one, yet it had, in the
years that had elapsed, increased fourfold. The Bishop’s house con-
tained cnly four rooms; now —well he did not know how many were
in it. (Applause and laughter.) At that time there was no college,
neither was there a monastery. All the evidences of religious pro-
gress they saw around them were brought about under the guiding
hand of their venerable Bishop. He was consoled beyond measure
by what he saw. He wished to congratulate all —Bishops, Priest, and
People on having such a worthy man to help their Bishop and trusted
he would have the honor of assisting Dr. Lanigan for many years—in
the possession of the Asiatic honors he had conferred upon him as
Bishop of the See of Adras. (Laughter and applause.)
Mr. J. Knopp, president of the local branch of the H.A.C.B.
Society, was spokesman for that body, reading the address on their
behalf, which was got up in a very attractive style in book form :
“ To the Right Rev. Dr. Gallagher,
Right Rev. and Dear Sir, —
We, the members of the Sacred Heart Branch (No. 164) of the Hibernian
Australasian Catholic Benefit Society, desire, on this the occasion of your conse-


oration, to express our heartfelt joy and gratification at your elevation to the
Episcopacy,
We feel that we are justified in saying that during the history of the church
in Australia no appointment has been made that has given to Catholic hearts more
general satisfaction and pleasure. Nor is there amongst all the devoted and
scholarly missionaries of the church one more eminently fitted to wear the mitre
and bear the crosier.
It is therefore an especial p’easure to us that you have, Deo Volente, been
chosen as Coadjutor and successor to our present and well-beloved Prelate, and we
feel, when by God’s will his mantle shall have fallen upon you, that the glorious
work of the church so nobly and faithfully conducted in this diocese by our dear
Bishop, Dr. Lanigan, will be continued on similar lines, and that you will keep us
bound together by that Divine bond of brotherhood and Christian faith which has
been so well sustained in the past.
Your long and devoted service, in the diocese, not only as a Missionary Priest,
but as President of St. Patrick’s College, has enabled us to judge by your Christian
character, your profound learning, your brilliant endowments, and your soul-
stirring eloquence. We trust therefore that as our Bishop, and under God’s
guidance, you may be spared for many, many years to give additional lustre to the
Episcopate, and to promote and foster the Faith which is so dear to our hearts.
We cannot let this occasion pass without thanking you from our hearts for
the sincere and warm interest you have at all times taken in the Hibernian
Societies of the colony. Your long term of office as Chaplain of the Wagga
Branch was the means of bringing you closely in touch with our workings, and
you have always been ready to assist us not only with a friendly hand but with
sound and kindly advice, and we venture to hope for your assistance and prayers
in the future.
We feel that the wonderful success and prosperity which have attended all
church-work in the diocese under our Reverend Bishop, Dr. Lanigan, will, by your
intellectual knowledge, your eloquence,iand your never-tiring zeal and energy, be
further stimulated, and that you will, in your exalted position as Coadjutor, relieve
Dr. Lanigan of much of the burden he has so nobly and bravely borne for so many
years.
We pray that the blessings and guidance of Almighty God may attend you in
your labors, and again heartily and sincerely congratulate you on your elevation to
the Episcopate.
Beseeching your prayers and blessing for the members of our society and for
the faithful generally,
We are, Right Rev. and Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JACOB Knopp, President.
James McAloon, Vice-president.
C. J. McShane, Secretary.
Reply to H.A..C.8. Society.
Dr. Gallagher’s reply to the address from the above society was
given at their regular meeting, held on Monday evening, July
15th. There was a fair attendance of members, Mr. J. Knopp, Pre-
sident, was in the chair. Dr. Gallagher was accompanied by the Rev.
P. J. Donovan, Chaplain of the society, and the Rev. D. Griffin.
The Chairman welcomed his Lordship and regretted that more of
the members were not present to hear the reply to the address which
they had as in duty bound presented to his Lordship on the occasion


of his consecration. It had been presented in the spirit which should
actuate all good Catholics, and he had no doubt but that the reply
would contain wise counsel, coming as it did from an old Chaplain of
one of the branches of the society,
The Bishop in replying to the address said :
Brothers of the Hibernian Australian Catholic Benefit Society,—
I accept your address with pride and gratitude. Men, as most of you,
are in the prime of life, constituting not merely the bone and sinew, but
the brain power of your trades or social circles or respective districts,
thus bound together for mutual improvement and for mutual benefits
under the banner of religion, are to Bishop or priest in Australia as a
tower of strength. Like the knights of chivalry in the middle ages to
their liege-lord, you are to the priest in his parish —to the Bishop in
his diocese — deem et tutamen —an honor in peace, a bulwark in time of
war. In return for your noble words of loyal fidelity to our Holy
Faith, of esteem for myself, and of greetings for my welfare, what am
Ito say ? I can think of nothing better than to bring before you one
or two of those excellent and suggestive thoughts which are already
familiar to you from the introduction to your Book of Eules, or your
president’s initiatory charge. Whatever may be said of the past in
Australia, Catholics have no longer any excuse that there is no
Catholic society for them to join within the bosom of their own church,
offering benefits equal at least, if not superior to, those afforded by
the most prosperous or widespread benefit societies of the land.
Thoroughly under the sanction of the Church, non-political—having
nothing secret about it (either sign or pass-word), and opening its
meeting to the press—it invites attention, it courts inquiry, it has
nothing to fear, it performs it works of beneficence in the light of
day. Solicitous to cultivate and perfect the social relations of our
nature and to watch over the moral conduct of its members, it pro-
poses not only to give the weekly allowance and medical care in time
of sickness, and at death to make provision for the widow and the
orphan, but to unite together countrymen and co-religionists as friends
and brothers in the sacred cause of humanity, fraternity, and religion.
Not only is the aim and purpose of your society good, but its very
name is one of which not Australian Catholics alone, but every lover
of patriotism and freedom, of great sacrifices and great struggles
made for conscience sake, ought to be proud. It unites the inspira-
tions drawn from the two countries that are worthy of our esteem, our
gratitude and our love. It suggests the thought of Ireland, the land
of [ancient and illustrious memories wedded to Australia, this fair
young land of golden hopes. It carries us back in the past to the
home of our fathers, that country whose valour in every form of
contest has been tried and not found wanting, on many a foughten
field, whose soil is sanctified with the blood of heroes, of martyrs, and
of saints; and onward in the future to this promising land of our
adoption, of our birth, which yearns to test its prowess in the lists,
whose sons (and daughters too) will achieve, as the years roll on, and
as occasion calls for it, great things in the cause of progress, of freedom,
and of virtue. The surest guarantee of a noble future is an affectionate


reverence for an illustrious past. Your society is Catholic also.
You are not ashamed to be and to be called members of that great
congregation of the faithful who profess the same doctrine, partake of
the same sacraments, and under the guidance of their lawful pastors,
are bound with the bonds of devotion, loyalty, and love to the Noble
Pontiff, great in head and great in heart, who now occupies the chair
of Peter, whose reign has been fraught with so many blessings, for the
defence of truth, for the preservation of social order, for the progress
and happiness of the world. You are children of that great church
which, founded by Christ on his Apostles, has subsisted in every age,
will last to the end of time and be spread throughout all the nations—
docile children of that great church which was great and glorious
before any of the societies, or dynasties, or religions of the modern
world came into being, and which will still go forth on her blessed
mission of beneficence and enlightenment when all these shall have
ceased to be. Be proud then of the name which your Society bears.
With fond recollections ever cherish the memories of Ireland, con-
doling in her sufferings, rejoicing in her prosperity, and impressing
on the minds of the rising generation a love for the noble and devoted
people from whom most of them have sprung. Be faithful to the
traditions of that ancient race, true to the genius of that spiritual-
minded people. Its destiny is to be the salt of the earth —to hold
aloft the light of faith in the midst of a worldly and materialistic age.
I dwell on this point because I have heard it said that some object to
the society on account of its name “ Hibernian.” If such there be
seek not to have him as a member. Such a man will do no credit to
our Society. “ Remember the heroes full of benignity, and intel-
ligence,” said Pythagoras. There is no surer sign of a noble nature
than a reverence and love, strong as death, for the memory of our
ancestors and the glorious traditions of the past. Shut a man out
from the knowledge of his own country or of his ancestors, make him
cease to feel an enthusiasm for the history of his people or the glory
of his native-land, cause him to forget or treat with contempt the
time of old.
Those grand old times, when hearts were leal and true,
And a manly thought like a pealing bell would thrill them through and through.
One step more and you have in that man a tool, a traitor, or a slave.
But let the outstretched arm of one of the orators of his race, graved
by the cunning of the sculptor, point out to him the former greatness
or the present degradation of his country, let the eagle eye of her
warriors or of her statesmen chide him from the immortal canvas, let
the long array of poets, saints, and sages pass in review before his
enraptured imagination, the very sight will rouse him up from his
inglorious lethargy. Stimulated and encouraged by the example of
the mighty dead, he will vow to right the grievances or to raise to still
greater heights the honor of his race—to live with the glory or to
expire with the liberties of his people. These thoughts are universal
as the soul of man. They are the possession of every people that has
achieved greatness or conferred benefits on the human race. Why
should the children of Ireland (whether born in that distant island or


sprung from that noble stock) cease to cherish them or be made to
forget them. There is not a single page in the annals of that gallant
people of which any one need be ashamed. While mindful of the old
land still more must you be faithful to the new. Be obedient to the
laws of your country. Help to build up her progress in the domain
both of matter and of mind. Take an intelligent interest in her
political struggles, and guard as the apple of your eye the honesty and
freedom of her municipal institutions. As husbands you must be
affectionate and truthful (If I read aright, the promise you make when
entering your noble Society) ; as fathers, careful of the religious and
secular education of your children and of the moral well-being of all
who come within the circle of your care ; as sons, dutiful, respectful,
and obedient; if in the employ of others, diligent in their works and
services ; if you have an enemy, generous and forgiving ; as a friend,
faithful, leal, and true. But above all, as members of a great Catholic
Society you should be practical Catholics, obedient to the command-
ments of God and to the precepts of the Church, generous in supporting
her institutions, and compliant with the instructions and advice of her
Prelates and her pastors. In a word, sober, industrious, upright,
willing to help the needy and distressed, kind, charitable, and courteous
to all, discharging honorably the duties of your state, you will at the
same time help to build up the progress and enlightenment and hap-
piness of this great country on its only solid and secure basis, the faith
and morals —the teaching and sacraments —of our holy Catholic
religion.
The President moved a vote of thanks to the Bishop for his
eloquent and suggestive address, and was sure when his Lordship was
better acquainted with the members he would find them answering the
qualifications he had set forth of a faithful member of their Society.
He hoped that during his tours through the diocese his Lordship would
use his influence in endeavouring to obtain a unanimity of feeling among
the various branches of the society in regard to the establishment of a
district lodge with Goulburn as the centre.
Mr. C. J. MoShane seconded the vote of thanks, and said he was
sure they had all attentively listened to the magnificent and eloquent
reply the Bishop had given to their address, and that from its
delivery the members would have a higher knowledge of their duties
as members of the Society, and would be found practising in their lives
the truths so clearly put forth by his Lordship.
The vote was carried by acclamation.
The Bishop replied and said any service he could render to the
Society would be a labor of love, and whenever the opportunity oc-
curred he would be only too willing to speak a word in favor of the
Goulburn district. He was sure that the spiritual interests of the
members were in safe keeping in the hands of their chaplain. It was
always the endeavour of the chaplain to have the members free to
manage the material affairs of their society as their prudence might
direct, but at any time if asked he would be only too happy to advise.
He thanked them most heartily for their kind reception. (Applause).


Presentation to the Cardinal
and Visiting Prelates.
on the consecration of r the Eight Eev. Dr.
Gallagher as Coadjutor-Bishop, Cardinal Moran and the
majority of the Archbishops and Bishops of Australia visited
Goulburn; and on Monday, July Bth, at 11 a.m , the pupils attend-
ing the High School, Convent of Mercy, presented them with an
address of welcome.
The proceedings were held in the School Hall, which was
artistically decorated for the occasion, and were witnessed by a large
assemblage of Catholics and other residents.
The programme began with a chorus, Welcome Here , exceedingly
well executed by the elder pupils.
Miss S. O’Donnell then read an address of welcome couched in the
following terms :
To the most Eminent and most Reverend Cardinal, Archbishops, and Bishops
assembled at Goulburn, for the Consecration of the Right Reverend Dr.
Gallagher, Sunday, July 7th, 1895.
“ May it please your Lorsdships,—
Whilst the generous and loyal Catholic people of Goulburn have welcomed
and striven to do honour to the Venerable Hierarchy whose eminent Head and
Members—the doughty champions of their Faith—the uncomprc mising promoters o f
their eternal and temporal welfare in this Southern World, have graced by their
august presence the City of Goulburn, it would be ungracious and most blame-
worthy on the part of us, the pupils of the Convent of Mercy, if we failed to
express our deepest sense of gratitude to your Lordships, not alone for having
condescended to personally visit our schools and encourage our feeble efforts, not
alone for having so long and so steadfastly united into a resistless phalanx to carry
out the fierce struggle against the bitter and relentless enemies of Catholic
Education—for your Lordships have done that in the press and on the platform ;
but we desire to especially thank your Lordships to-day for having come at the
cost of great inconvenience to assist at that solemn and impressive Ceremony
which we witnessed yesterday, when your Lordships conferred the Apostolic
Character on one who has always been among the foremost in the struggle for the
advancement of true Christian learning in this diocese ; one who by his great-
ness of mind and singleness of character, will be a worthy Coadjutor to our
venerable and esteemed Bishop, and a priceless acquisition to the illustrious
Episcopate of Australasia. We thank your Lordships most sincerely, and humbly
ask.your Lordships’ Blessing that we, each and all. may fit ourselves while in these
hallowed halls, to one day take our places in the distinguished ranks of those who
are the truest types of Catholic Womanhood.
We are, your Lordships’ grateful children,
The Pupils of the Convent of Mercy,
St. Patrick’s, Goulburn.”
The vocal solo, Alla Stella Confidents, with violin obligato, was
pleasingly rendered by Miss Jessie McKillop, and her sister played
the obligato with great taste. A fantasia on the harp was finely per-
formed by Miss S.O’Donnell. A vocal duet was well given by the Misses


3L McCormack and Allison. The chorus, Arm, Bear Erin, by the
juvenile pupils was a most acceptable item. Miss Olive Barnes, a
little girl, gave in clever style a violin solo, Simple Aveu , and was
loudly applauded. The Misses Armstrong and J. McKillop excellently
sang the duet, Soft Fell the Dews, &c., and were loudly applauded.
The pianoforte duet, Boute en Train, was ably performed on two
pianos by the Misses Armstrong, Sykes, O’Donnell, and Allison. The
chorus, Listen to the Woodbind's Song, was exceedingly well rendered
by the elder pupils.
An excellently well rendered programme was concluded with an
amusing dialogue entitled Women's Curiosity, which was well executed.
The performance as a whole was highly creditable and spoke in
unmistakable tones of the care and attention bestowed by the good
Sisters of Mercy on their young care.
The Cardinal then replied and thanked the children for their
Address and expressed the pleasure he had in being present at their
most entertaining exercises which were a fitting close to the ceremony
of yesterday. That ceremony was in many respects most unique in the
history of the Church of Australia. There was a large gathering of
the hierarchy, of members of [various orders, and of priests to testify
the affection in which their venerable and good Bishop and the delight
all felt at the addition made to the Australian Hierarchy on the previous
day. He congratulated them on their beautiful Cathedral. Their city
had many special attractions and their Cathedral held a proud position
in its completeness ; but if he were asked to point out the special gem
connected with the attractions of the city he would not have the
slightest hesitation in attributing that position to the children’s Convent
home, (Loud applause). To be seen almost everywhere in the various
dioceses are the results of the training of these devoted nuns, and the
Goulburn diocese was to a great extent indebted to its nuns for the
success it had attained. The Sisters of Mercy were foremost in good
works and the sisterhood in Goulburn was the oldest branch in the
colony. He looked upon their labours as a source of untold blessings,
and it was truly cheering to see the results of their training of the young,
as evidenced by the beautiful programme they had just heard. He
again congratulated the children on their convent home, and asked
them to bear in mind that the Australian Church had a great destiny
before it in the future, and its reaching that destiny depended in a
very great measure upon the young carrying out in their lives the
useful and religious training they were now receiving. (Applause).


Presentation from the Clergy of the
Diocese.
COpiHE presentation to Bishop Gallagher from the Priests of the
diocese of an illuminated address accompanied by a purse of
sovereigns (£152) then took place.
The Bev. Fathers Finnegan of Gundagai, and Slattery of Tumut,
as two of the senior priests, were chosen to make the presentation, the
former reading the address, and the latter presenting the purse. The
address was a beautiful work of art executed at the Wagga Convent,
It read as follows: —
“ To the Right Rev. J. Gallagher, D.D., Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn.
May it please your Lordship,—
The Priests of the diocese hail with great joy your appointment by the Holy
See to the exalted aud responsible position of Coadjutor-Bishop of this important
diocese. It must also be a gratification to our venerable and beloved Bishop, Dr.
Lanigan, to have got a Pri jst of his diocese, and one according to his own heart,
to relieve him of some of his responsibilities —a relief which he has well-merited
after a period of over twenty-eight j ears of a laborious and very successful ad-
ministration of the affairs of his extensive diocese.
Your blameless life, your piety, your learning, your eloquence, but above all
your humility—the foundation of every virtue—are the best guarantees that you
will be a worthy successor to our venerable Bishop, and that religion and education
under your fostering care will flourish and make great progress in the future, as it
has done in the past. You and your attached companion, Rev. M. Slattery, P.P,,
of Tumut, after a brilliant and successful course of studies in the famous College,
Maynooth, were the first volunteers from Ireland for Goulburn when the diocese
was sadly in want of priests. By your learning and careful management for
fifteen or sixteen years you raised the character of our diocesan college, and gave
it a place among the kindred educational establishments of Australia.
You have been very successful in your missionary work in Goulburn, Yass, and
especially in Wagga Wagga, where, with the hearty co-operation of a most generous
people, you paid oft: a debt of the church of nearly £BOOO within five years, and
within the same period of time you added a boarding-school to the convent capable
of accomodating one hundred lady pupils ; and you also built a beautiful church
attached to the convent, in which a large congregation of the laity assemble to
hear Mass on Sundays, You will receive many addresses and congratulations on
to-day, but none, we presume, more welcome than that from the Priests, who
pledge themselves to co-operate with you in every good work which you mar
undertake for the onward progress of religion and education in the diocese.
We beg your acceptance of a purse of sovereigns as a token of the esteem and
respect in which we hold you, and we pray that God may grant you many years of
life and happiness.
Signed on behalf of the Priests of the Diocese of Goulburn,
P. Dunne, V.G, H. M. Finnegan, M. Slattery, R, Butler, P. J.
O’Keefe, J. J. Curley, R. T. Daly, P. J, Donovan.”
Father Finnegan on behalf of Father Slattery,- a college com-
panion of the new Bishop’s—presented Bishop Gallagher with a hand-
some pastoral staff made of silver, gilt, and artistically finished. It was
obtained from the establishment of Mr. E. J. Hollingdale of Sydney.


Bishop Gallagher in reply said :—My dear Brothers and Fathers
in the Ministry : (Jut of the countless thoughts that well up from the
heart and seek for utterance on a day like this it is difficult to select
those most suitable, and when selected it is equally difficult to find
words in which fittingly to express the things we wish to say. By
ordination certainly, and almost in years, I am the senior Priest of
this diocese—being with my life-long friend, Father Slattery, the first
priest ordained on November Ist, 1869, by your venerable Bishop Dr.
Lanigan, then recently consecrated and placed over this newly
constituted See. From the foundation of the Diocese we, the Priests,
have been always one and the same. All my wants were your wants,
and all yours were mine. In all the relations of sacerdotal life, in
building up the material edifice, in ministering to the spiritual wants
of the people, in all the courtesies and duties of hospitality, illud frigi-
dum verbum, meum et tuum was unheard of and unknown. What new
work for God’s glory or the benefit of our fellow-men, accomplished
by one of us, that did not furnish us a common joy ? What one of our
brethren or of our people has fallen away from the Faith or from the
path of duty that touched not our hearts with a poignant sorrow that
was common to us all ? What brave soldier of the cross from our
gallant little army of labor, of sacrifice and of prayer falling in the
ranks, has gone before us with the sign of Faith, that does not consti-
tute for each of us and for our flock a new intercessor at the Throne of
Mercy and of Grace ? No cant, no hypocrisy, no aping a piety that we
did not feel, no murmurings at our unjust treatment, no assumptions
of authority, no seeking after pre-eminence ; but a cheerful perfor-
mance of the duties of the day. And the days of labour succeeded by
those evenings of intellectual and social enjoyment, of harmony and
peace ; those Attic nights where no crude surfeit reigned,—not spent
in toys or sports or wine,
But search of deep philosophy,
Wit, eloquence, and poesy—
Arts which you loved, and they, you know, were mine.
One of yourselves till yesterday, as yet I know not how to wield the
language of position or authority before Priests my fellow-workers,
many of whom are more fitted by prudence, by zeal, by piety, by
noble works unselfishly accomplished, for the exalted dignity of the
Episcopate than I am. Like David girt with sword and clothed in the
hemlet and armour of Saul, I feel myself encumbered and impeded
rather than assisted by my new dress, and my inclination, like his,
would be to say : “I cannot go thus for lam not used to it.” The
words of kindness and of praise which inside the last few weeks from
priests and people have been addressed to me rather humiliate than
make me proud, fori do not think that I deserve them. If I spoke
from time to time a few words of instruction or of encouragement at
the introduction of a new school or at the opening of a new church or
foundation of a convent, it was for me only a labor of love. If I took
an interest in the schools of the Diocese, or in higher Catholic
Education, it was a work so congenial to my nature that it could
scarcely claim the merit of duty. If one’s sympathy was always


ready to cheer your exertions and second the efforts of your zeal for
advancement of mind or the alleviation of suffering it was because
your noble aspirations, never thinking of self, touched the heart-
strings of even my cold unemotional northern nature and made them
vibrate in symphony with your own.
Men talk of hearts unkind, kind deeds with coldness still returning—
. Alas I the gratitude of men has often left me mourning.
By the form in which you put your splendid gift you tell me in fact
and through private communication you tell me in words that the
munificent donation of money which accompanies this address was in-
tended for my personal and exclusive use. On this point also you will
allow me to digress a little. When the gallant Urias wearied with
journeying and worn out with the fatigues of war, was asked by
David to go down to his house and wash his feet and refresh his soul,
it was a noble answer that the grand old warrior made. “ Shall I,”
he said, “go down to my house and eat and partake of the joys of
domestic felicity, while the Ark of God and Juda and Israel dwell in
tents, and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord abide upon the
face of the earth. By thy welfare and by the welfare of thy soul I will
not do this thing.” While the temple of God is still in many places
unbuilt and hardly anywhere adequately furnished for worthy cele-
bration of His Awful Sacrifice; while the children of Catholic parents
literally grow up in darkness and in the shadow of death through the
want of a Catholic school; while the foundling and the orphan cry for
bread and have no one to break it to them; while our faithful people
dwell in tents earning scanty subsistence by unceasing toil; while you
brave soldiers of Jesus Christ, the latchet of whose shoes I am not
worthy to loose, bear unmurmuring the heat and the burden of the day,
shall I spend this donation spared from your personal wants, in eating
and drinking, or in adornment of my person and my house ? By the
welfare of thy soul I will not do this thing. Thankfully indeed will I
accept your gift. Your generosity will perpetuate my name, blending
it with the cause of (higher) Catholic Education The object to which
your generous offering will be given is already known to you. It
will be given in keeping to faithful men—to form with accretions
coming from myself and others, the nucleus of a permanent bursary
at St. Patrick’s College. It will help to create a spirit of healthy
rivalry amongst our primary schools. It may tend to foster vocations
to the ecclesiastical state. It may be the means of introducing to the
College one after another youths, who, as we go into the home of our
eternity, may take our places at the altar, become sentinels on the
watch-towers of Israel, be fit to grasp in the revolving years with a
firmer hand than mine the crosier of Goulburn. In fine, my dear
Fathers, on this auspicious day we have many signs to cheer us on—
many reasons to be hopeful. Truly my lines have been cast in goodly
places. During the long and fruitful Episcopate of our venerable
Bishop—who, we all hope, will be preserved to us for many years, to
guide, to counsel, to command —the foundations of our fine diocese
have been laid broad, and deep, and strong. The seed has been sown
upon a grateful soil, we have but to reap the harvest. Our people


co-operate with us nobly, generously, cheerfully, giving even from
their poverty to every appeal of religion, of education, of philanthropy.
No call of our Holy Faith for a deserving object ever knocks at the
door of their hearts in vain—
They hare a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as the day for melting charity.
Anti-Catholic prejudices are fast dying away. The wandering sheep—
in spite of all the bitter things said by those who are opposed to the
re-union of Christendom —are anxious to return to the fold. Normal
church action has been brought to bear, and healthy spiritual life,
radiating from a vigorous centre, circulates in regular ebb and flow to
the remotest corners of the diocese. Still a great work has yet to be
done. Churches have to be built. Schools—But to-day is not the
time nor is this the place to tabulate a programme of future work.
That will come only too soon. But this should be a day only of joy
and cheerfulness for you and me. You, my dear Fathers, will pray
for me that God may give me the grace and strength necessary for a
worthy discharge of the onerous duties of the Episcopate —that energy
and zeal may compensate for the want of ability—that uprightness of
intention and singleness of purpose may supply the deficiencies of tact
and rule and administrative skill. “ More things are wrought by
prayer than this world dreams of.” You will ask of Him who can
bring down the proud from their and exalt the lowly, that, for the
sake of our faithful people, for the sake of our good religious, devoting
themselves so heroically to education and good works, for the sake of
the little children whom our Saviour loved growing up under their
protecting care to be our crown of glory and our joy, for your own
sakes, my dear brother priests, you will pray that Religion and all its
complex interests may not suffer in this promising young Diocese
through the worthlessness or inefficiency of him who, more from your
wishes than his own, may one day—though I hope that day is far
distant—become its chief pastor.
The morning’s proceedings with the Cardinal giving
the company his blessing.
...
y x


Prelate and President.
Presentations at St. Patrick’s College, Gotjlbttrn,
Tribute of the Ex-Students to Dr. Gallagher.
Monday evening, July Bth, at the invitation of the ex-students
jUI and students of St. Patrick’s College, a large and distinguished
company assembled in the great hall to witness the presentation of
addresses to Bishop Gallagher. Amongst those present we noticed the
Eight Eev, Dr. Byrne, Bishop of Bathurst, Very Eev. Dr. O’Haran
(private secretary to the Cardinal-Archbishop), the Very Eev. P. Y.
Dwyer (President Sacred Heart College, West Maitland), Prior
Vaughan, and Fathers Slattery, Gaffey, Fogarty, Curley,
O’Shaughnessy, Donovan, Hickey, M'Alroy, Griffin, O’Sullivan, etc.,
of the Goulburn diocese. Father M‘Kay, of New Zealand, Mr. George
Coleman (Mayor of Wagga), Mr. M. Coen (ex-Mayor of Yass), Mr.
W. Dwyer (Inspector of State Schools), Mr. 0. Gillespie, J.P.,
Goulburn; Mr. W. E. Dwyer, solicitor, Goulburn, and Mesdames
Coleman, M‘Killop; Misses O’Donnell, Mingay; Miss Crook, Mittagong;
Misses Gillespie ; Miss Dwyer, Petersham.
Brilliant Muster of Ex-Students.
The following ex-students were also present and were seated to-
gether in a prominent position in the hall:—Mr. W. M. J. Walsh,
M.A., solicitor, Wagga; Mr. U. M‘Evilly, 8.A., solicitor, Sydney;
Mr. A. M'Evilly, B A., Sydney ; Mr. F. P. Brennan, M.A., solicitor,
Yass ; Mr. T. P. Moloney, 8.A., solicitor, Sydney; Mr. P. K. White,
barrister-at-law, Sydney; the Very Eev. E. T. Daly, D.D., and Eev.
Joseph Dwyer (Professors of the College) ; Mr. Isidore Eudd, grazier,
Wagga; Mr. Thomas Arragon, grazier Tumut; Mr. Myles Hannon,
grazier, Breadalbane; Mr. Charles Frazer, solicitor, Tumut; Mr.
John Dwyer, of Hill, Clark and Co., Sydney ; Mr. J. Connellan, 8.A.,
Professor of the College; Mr. F. Tietyens, solicitor, Albury; Mr. L. J.
O’Neil, solicitor, Burrowa; Mr. W. Monks, architect, Wagga;
Alderman Eenehan, of Cootamundra ; Mr. James Burke, of Murrum-
burrah; Mr. P. B. Hefferman, Wagga; Mr. James Garry, Binalong;
Mr. C. L. Doherty, Sydney ; Mr. J. Larkin, Bannaby, etc. Among
the ex-students unable to attend, but who sent sympathetic messages,
were Dr. W. Odillo Maher; Dr. J. J. O’Dwyer, |L.E.G.S., 1., of
Gundagai ; Mr. E. M'Nevin, and Mr. Ed. Kirby.
The proceedings began with the performance of an operetta, “Tit
for Tat,” by three of the students. The piece was very amusing. The
characters were: Sparkler, Master N. Doherty; Percy de Yere,
Master P. Johnson ; Bill (the servant), Master J. Coen, all of whom
acquitted themselves admirably. The audience frequently testified
their approval by applauding the performers.


THE EX-STUDENTS’ ADDRESS.
Mr. Ulric M'Evilly, who in presenting the ex-students’ address
was supported on the platform by the ex-students’ committee, consist-
ing ot Messrs. T. P. Moloney, Walsh, A. M'Evilly, White and
Tietyens, said:—
My Lord, —I have been requested by my fellow ex-students to
read our address. I need not tell you that we are proud of being ex-
students of St. Patrick’s College. (Applause.) I need not say that
we consider it a great honour that at one time we had the privilege of
pursuing our studies under your own personal guidance. (Applause).
And it is unnecessary for me to mention with what genuine happiness
we have come back to Goulburn to assist as far as we were able in the
imposing ceremonies by which you have been elevated to the position
which we know you will adorn with so much piety and so much
dignity. (Cheers.) We remember how in college days you helped us
over the difficulties which all students have to overcome—how you
assisted us to advance in culture and refinement—how you encouraged
us to study the mathematics and love the classics, and try to unravel
the mysteries of science. (Laughter and applause.) And we do not
forget how you impressed upon us that when we had gone away our
Alma Mater would always expect to hear of us being honourable and
straightforward and upright men (cheers) —how in comparison with
that portion of our education all else was nothing.
“ Sword, Sceptre, Lyre, alike were frail,
That Science was a blind Man’s guess,
And History a nurse’s tale.”
(Applause.)
Mr. M‘Evilly then read the following address :
“ To the Eight Reverend John Gallagher, D.D., Titular ;Bishop of Adras,
Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn, President of St. Patrick’s College.—May it please
your Lordship,—We, the ex-students of St Patrick’s College, Goulburn, have
assembled here to-day from various parts of Australia to testify our lasting affec-
tion for you, and our gratification at your election to the high and distinguished
office of Coadjutor-Bishop of Goulburn. Well nigh a quarter of a century ago the
foundation-stone of our Alma Mater was laid, and we know what time and energy
you have expended since then in labouring to make our college what is is and has
long been, one of the leading educational establishments in New South Wales. It
was with sincere regret —a regret which was earnestly expressed by our numerous
body—that we learned, some eight years since, that your devotion to duty had so
prejudicially affected your health as to necessitate your retirement from the pre-
sidency of the college ; but our regret was changed to joy when, some few months
since, we learned that his Lordship Dr. Lanigan in his wisdom had restored to our
Alma Mater as president the one to whom she already owed so much and upon
whom her future prosperity so much depended, with health and strength renewed.
This occasion forcibly brings home to us the indomitable and constant energy with
which in our college days you were wont to devote yourself to doing what was
right; and now after being separated from you for so many years, we find that you
have been constantly progressing, faithful to the principles inculcated by you and
expressed by your own familiar Latin sayings, ‘'aye quod agis ,” ‘ excelsior ,’ for do
you not by your example stand forth to us as one doing well what is to be done,
rising higher and higher, beckoning us on, as it were, by your actions to rise up
with you in our respective spheres, in a few words leading and encouraging us to
live as men should live for God, their country, and themselves. Not withstanding
that yon will now have to assist in bearing the burden of the administration of the


affairs of a great diocese, we hope sincerely that our Alma Mater will continue to
derive the benefit of your experience, and that under your guidance our college
will continue to be as successful in the future as it has been in the past. We
cannot refrain from expressing our thoughts that his Lordship Ur. Lanigan has
been singularly blessed in having received as his Coadjutor one who by his talents
and learning, his perseverance, his resources and his assiduity in combating
difficulties is so eminently fitted to cope with the great and important question of
Cathode Education, the necessity of which caused his Lordship to head in this
colony that great movement which has for its object the providing for our Catholic
Youth an education not second to that provided by the State, combine 1 with
and fortified by a thorough religious training. We again congratulate you on your
elevation to the high and distinguished office which we feel and know you will so
worthily occupy. ”
The address (exquisitely illuminated by John Sands, of Sydney),
was signed on behalf of the ex-students by:—R. T. Daly, D.D. ;
J. W. Dwyer,; W. Odillo Maher, M.D,; J. J. O’Dwyer, L.R.C.B,
(Ireland); W. M. J. Walsh, M.A.; U. M’Evilly, 8.A.; T. P. Molony,
B.A. ; A. M’Evilly, 8.A.; P. K. White, 8.L.; Charles Fraser, P. W.
Tietyens, E, Kirby, E. M’Nevin, I. Y. I. Rudd, and L. J. O’Neill.
Mr. M’Eyilly then handed to Dr. Gallagher a cheque, which he
said was over and above the amount subscribed towards the address,
and which, he said, the ex-students had decided at a meeting held
that morning to devote to the St. Patrick’s College Bursary Fund
guaranteed on behalf of several ex-students. (Applause.) He also
handed to his Lordship a guarantee of a guinea each from twenty-one
of the ex-students. Mr. M’Evilly explained, amidst cheei s, that the
ex-students had desired that the total should be the foundation of an
“ Ex-students’ Bursary ” in commemoration of the elevation of their
old President to the Episcopate. It was also announced that a re-
union of the ex-students would be held in Goulburn next Easter.
THE PRESIDENT’S REPLY.
Dr. Gallagher, who was received with loud cheers, said : — My Dear
Ex-Students, —Of all the addresses which have been presented to me
inside the last few days—and these, as you are aware, have been
neither few nor cold—there is none that touches at least one chord of
my heart so directly as that from the ex-students of St. Patrick’s
College. (Applause.) Nor is this unnatural. I was present on the
day on which the foundation-stone of the college was laid. (Applause.)
I opened the first class that was taught within its walls. (Hear, hear.)
I nursed it in its infancy, and tended it -with loving care. I saw it
with pride grow up into the fulness of the stature of perfect manhood.
(Applause.) And when it seemed to require me no more, I left it
with a blessing, to pursue, when freed from the incubus of my then
declining health, as everyone thought, its onward career of usefulness,
of prosperity, and of glory. But times changed, difficulties arose,
numbers diminished, expenses increased—troubles “thick as autumnal
leaves that strew the brooks in Yallombrosa” gathered around. When
being in straits —and what man or institution does not feel the burden
of the present time ?—(hear, hear) —it cried out to me to lend a helping
hand, I could not turn a deaf ear to the appeal. I left a district and
a people that were dear to me from many causes—bound to me by every


tie that can unite a faithful people to their priest —not because I loved
them less, but because I loved Bt. Patrick’s College more. (Cheers.)
Yet good men and true, lay and clerical, whose zeal for religion and
education is as sincere as mine —and whose sacrifices are more generous
in their behalf —have doubted and still doubt whether my interest in
the college was not a fad, whether my fond hopes can be ever realized,
whether results bearing any proportion to sacrifices will ever repay
our toil and care. Nor in this opinion are they singular but suppoited
by authority of great weight. Some few years ago the deepest thinker
and most vigorous writer that the American Church has yet produced,
Dr. Brownson, wrote thus of the graduates of Catholic colleges ia
America: “ The weakest, the most milk-and-water, the least zealous
and efficient Catholics one meets with are precisely those who have
graduated with high honours from our Catholic colleges. We do not
find them, under the guidance of the clergy, at the head of Catholic
movements in our cities and taking the lead in efforts to elevate the
social position of Catholics and to vindicate their rights. They are not
seldom confirmed infidels and indifferent to all religion, with only
Catholicity enough to shut them out from the plea of invincible
ignorance at the judgment seat of Cod. Such is our experience,” he
continues, “of thirty years. And we have long since placed our hope
for religion in our intelligent young mechanics and labouring men
rather than in the graduates of Catholic colleges.” Shall this be the
deliberate opinion which, some twenty or thirty years hence, an
illustrious Reviewer will give of our Catholic colleges of Australia?
To some extent I fear that it may be. No education, how Catholic
soever it may be, can accomplish everything. Education has no
creative power, It can only work on the material that is supplied to
it. It cannot give grace ; it cannot and it ought not usurp the place,
nor supply the want of the Sacraments and of prayer. (Applause.)
Carve the granite rock with razors, moor the vessel with a silken
thread, then may you hope with such delicate and frail instruments as
human science and human learning to fight those giants- the passions
and the pride of man. Again, it is the smallest part of the education
of youth that is given or acquired in the schoolroom or college hall.
(Applause.) Much more is acquired in the family, in the streets, at
the club, in social intercourse, from the general tone of thought and
manners of the set with whom we mingle, or of the locality in which
we dwell. (Applause.) The Catholic college can do little for those
who have no intellectual or religious associations outside the college.
(Hear, hear). It cannot, let it do its best, educate the rising gener-
ation much above the adult generation around them. Many of its
students leave the college to enter a non-Catholic‘atmosphere —perhaps a
non-Catholic home. In professional, in commercial, and especially in
political life, popular favour gives a premium to the forts d' esprit who
have shaken off the trammels of religion and too often of morality. In
eth society into which they enter religious thought and practice are
probably at a discount; scepticism has been elevated into a science,
indifference is regarded as an accomplishment, and a pitying contempt
for all religion is looked upon as the sign of a strong and elevated


mind. Polished Yoltairean wit is too often sharpened against every-
thing holy. Everything venerable or to be reverenced is the target
against which the poisoned arrows of sarcasm and of ridicule take
deadly aim. Now. that moral courage which, in defor ce of virtue or
religion or principle, can withstand the ridicule or live down the pre-
judices or differ from the practice of those with whom they associate is
the rare privilege of a chosen few. In some, again, the name of being
at college is of greater value than formation of character, moral
improvement, or solid attainments Weak and narrow minds of small
calibre but large conceit cannot possibly within a year or two lay that
only sure foundation of all useful knowledge—a thorough appre-
ciation of our own ignorance and of the limited power of our minds.
For them a year at college may be an injury rather than a benefit.
With them shallow draughts intoxicate the brain, while drinking
deeply might sober it again. For them —“ a little learning is a
dangerous thing.” They should “ drink deep or touch not the Pierian
spring.” The depth of reading and mastery of style which would
supply fit weapons against every foe require a form of study and a
length of time which scarcely any of our Catholic colleges has as yet
at its command. Not thoroughly grounded, therefore, in the teach-
ings of their Church (Catechism), thrown suddenly into a non-
Catholic atmosphere, ambitious, of those distinctions which the
popular voice (or vote) seems only too anxious to bestow on those who
have no faith, or at least make no practice of religion, listening
perhaps with too attentive an ear to the sweet seductive voice of the
siren of pleasure, too many of the graduates of our Catholic colleges
may fall away or at least do little credit to themselves, to their Alma
Mater , or religion. (Hear, hear.) Dr. Brownson’s experience of
America may be to some extent, for a few years, repeated in Australia.
To me, therefore, it must be a source of pleasure exceeding great that
so many ex-students of St. Patrick’s College actually present, repre-
senting either by letter or word of mouth nearly every student that
passed through its halls, should thus honour themselves and their
religion, by honouring their old master, no matter how unworthy
that old master may he, when entering into the possession of his new
dignity. (Cheers.) It augurs well for St. Patrick's College, and it
augurs well for you, my dear ex-students. The College, no doubt, has
difficult times before it. Money is scarce, competition is keen. Catholic
colleges of great and various merits attract students even from our
own diocese to their classrooms. It can expect nothing from the
favour of those in power, or from the wealth of the great. All its
strength, like the beauty of the king’s daughter, must be from
within. But it is not the favour of the great, or the wealth of the
opulent, or the splendour of its halls, or the salubrity of its climate—
though these be potent factors of success —that constitute, at least in
its initiatory stages, the true greatness of a seat of learning.
" God works through men, not hills or snows,
In man, not men, is the God-like power.
The man, God’s potentate, God foreknows,
And he gives him strength in the destined hour,”


(Applause.) This hour has come and the men , sons of the soil, are
here. ‘‘Men, my brothers ” (or if you prefer it, my own children) —
“ Men, the workers ever shaping something new,
That which we have done but earnest of the things which they shall do,”
(Cheers.) Cheered by your encouragement, aided by the hearty co-
operation of students who are proving themselves worthy of all their
care, broadbasing their hopes of the future upon the confidence of
parents, helped perhaps by an occasional advice from their old
master, but above all relying on their own worth and on the protection
of Him in whom they trust, they will lift up St. Patrick’s so that the
glory of its second temple shall be still greater than was the glory cf
the first ( applause); they will make her the chosen home of holiness
and of knowledge —the Alma Mater of many sons-—intellectual laymen
who will be religious, and devout religious who will be intellectual—
who by their virtues and their talents in Church and State will do
honour to their Alma Mater, their religion and their Country.
(Cheers.) As for you, my dear ex-students (who are to me, on a day
like this, my crown of glory and my joy) —(applause) —what can I
say to you that you have not heard often before within this very hall?
You will continue, as inside this Diocese, at least, many of you are
doing, to help your pastor in every effort he shall make to add to the
beauty of God’s House, to have the children of his flock educated in a
Christian school, to introduce as times go on institutions for the
improvement of the mind, for the alleviation of distress, to throw
around the nakedness of our unregenerate human nature, in social life
and in the domestic circle, the warm, chaste, and elegant drapery of
religion. For the grand old name of “ gentleman,
Now defamed by charlatans
And soiled with all ignoble use,'’
you will in all your civic and social duties, in all the obligations of
your state, in all the courtesies of life, strive to maintain its pristine
meaning, never inflicting unnecessary pain, respecting the honest con-
victions of all; but never sacrificing to base servility or base condes-
cension the principles of your faith or the dictates of an enlightened
conscience. (Cheers.)
“ Yet ne’er with wits profane to roam,
Be complaisance extended,
The Atheist’s laugh is a poor return
For deity offended.”
(Applause.) Yes, the smile of the Atheist is like the silver plate on a
coffin You may again compete in honourable rivalry with the graduates
of every school for the highest prizes of merit presented by our social
life or offered by the free institutions of the country. You may, as I
have often told you, dig down deep and investigate those mysteries
that lie hid in the bowels of the earth. Soaring up into the heavens, you
may unfold to us those secrets of divine wisdom and power which are
made known to us by the number and motions of the heavenly bodies.
Or, expanding your eagle wings, you may range with majestic swcop
over the broad fields—-aye, the very mountain-tops—of literature, of


history, of philosophy. But if you follow the instructions which you
have learned from me, you will base all your knowledge, all your pro-
fessional success, all your social theories, all your scientific investi-
gations, all your political principles, all your advancement in time, all
your hopes for eternity, on their only safe foundation—the solid rock-
bed of our Holy Catholic religion. (Cheers.) “ Fides et sciential as
in the past, so in the future, whether stamped upon our crest or not,
let it be the motto for you and for me. (Loud and prolonged
cheering.)
In addition to the amount of the cheque handed in, the ex-students
before separating subscribed some 25 guineas towards the fund, so that
the success of next year’s bursary is assured. The day was indeed a
red-letter day for the ex-students, who came from all parts of the
colony to do honour to their old master, and before separating for their
respective homes, a unanimous vote of thanks was passed to Mr. T. P.
Moloney, who had acted as secretary to the movement, for the energy
he had displayed in bringing together so many or the ex-students to
do honour to their beloved President.
The Bishop was loudly applauded on resuming his seat, and the
ex-students rose in a body and gave three ringing cheers for their old
President and one for their Alma Mater.
Masters J. McCormack, J. O’Sullivan and M. Coen then appeared
on the platform, the two former bearing an illuminated address in a
handsome frame. Master Coen acted as spokesman, and said he and
his two fellow students had been deputed by the present students to
act as a committee to present the Eight Eev. Dr. Gallagher with an
address and two books. Their relationship with their President had
existed only a short time, but in that time he had won their love and
respect and they wished to express those sentiments by presenting him
with an address and the accompanying books as a memento of their
relationship. He then read the following address :
•‘May it please your Lordship,—
At a time when your Lordship’s many ’and sincerest friends from every side
are offering to your Lordship their kindly wishes and pledges of devotion, it would
ill become us, the students of St. Patrick’s College, to be behindhand on this
auspicious occasion ; for though we cannot claim to be your Lordship s friends yet
we have a claim as strong, if not stronger, for mutual attachment.
We are students of that Alma Mater with which your Lordship has been
identified for so many years, which flourished under your Lordship’s prudent
guidance, which felt so keenly your Lordship’s temporary separation, and which
agains bids fair, under your Lordship’s care, to reach and preserve that old stan-
dard of proficiency, intellectually and morally, which it so long maintained.
We look with pride on the grand array of ex-students who fill with honour
every calling in the land, and we aspire to one day rank with them and vie with
them in practising those grand lessons and following out those noble examples set
us in the halls of St. Patrick’s.
Permit us then to offer to-day our heartfelt congratulations, accompanied with
a memento, not a gift, on your Lordship’s well-merited elevation to the Apostolic
dignity. Wishing your Lordship many ytars and happy ones—happy in the dis-


charge of arduous duties—and sincerely hoping that the increase of those duties
may not prevent your Lordship from still presiding over the destinies and directing
to nobler achievements the efforts and aims of your Lordship’s grateful pupils.
Signed on behalf of the Students,
John McCormack, John O’Sullivan, Michael Coen.”
Dr. Gallagher then replied :
My dear boys. It is as gratifying to me to receive as it is, lam
convinced, a source of joy to you to present this beautiful address. If
the honour of his 1 Alma Mater ’ must be always dear to every genuine
student; if St. Patrick’s College, which was my happy home for the
fourteen best years of my life, has been always the favourite object of
my especial care, surely this day must be a proud one for all of us. on
which its President is not only clothed with the highest honour that
could be conferred upon him, but placed in a position where he can
more effectively advance its best interests than he was ever able to do
before. My own boys do not of course expect from me a formal
answer to their address, to preach a sermon or test your patience by
a homily long drawn out will be more in keeping with another time
and another place. But there is a beautiful passage, which this
occasion suggests, from a little book with which most of you will. I
hope, one day be familiar—The Anabasis of Xenophon. I wish
enough of you understood it to justify my quoting the whole passage
from the original text. For those ancient Greeks fought bravely and
wrote well; and said and did many j ust and noble things for liberty,
and learning and native land, and even in a certain sense, for religion
also, which we moderns could afford with profit to learn. Clearchus was
the leader of the famous ten thousand on their march to Babylon. One
day having to address his soldiers he said words like these “Cyrus
became my patron and friend and gave me ten thousand daiics which
I taking, did not lay aside for my own private use, nor squander in
luxurious ease, but I spent them for your interests and for you—And
never shall anyone say that I leading Greeks in the midst of dangers
abandoned them in the hour of trial or betrayed my sacred trust of
leadership, hor I think that you hold the place for me of allies, and
friends and native land ; that with you acting the part of brave men I
should be honoured wherever I am ; but without you I should be fit
neither to benefit a friend nor to guard myself against a foe. As I am
resolved to lead you on, follow me as you have done before to victory
or to death.” Clearchus fell as we all know in the hour of victory.
But another—till then a private soldier but gallant, prudent and
skilled as he, took the command and led them to the achievement of
deeds whose simple story still wins the admiration of the world.
So it may be with you. Your leader may fall after a victory won ; or
like & still greater leader—him of the chosen people when just in sight
of the promised land— Hut another raised up by Providence will take his
place. And all of you, working together with one heart and one soul doing
well, and for a noble purpose the work which God has given you, even
within these walls, to do—will in the great cause of learning and religion


and everything that is true and beautiful and good, accomplish results
which will secure for St, Patrick’s College and for you a high place in
the Collegiate annals of your native land. (Loud and continued
applause).
The proceedings concluded with another opperetta, “The A.rtful
Mendicants,” in which the characters were Buffl.es (a blind artist),
Master P. Johnson; Zackariah Morgan (also blind), Master N.
Doherty; Pedestrian, Master M. Coen. This was also very amusing
and was creditably performed.
O’Hara k Johnson, Printers* and Publishers, 24 Jamieson-atreet, Sydney.




