

THE EIGHT DAYS' MISSION.
AUGUST 1ST TO 8TH.
To the Congregation and Parishioners of St John’s,
Darlinghurst.
We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God.
My Dear Friends,
Ever since I took temporary charge of this Parish
it has been my earnest desire to have a week ot Special
Services, with a view to share in those blessings which were
vouchsafed on the Eight Days’ Mission held some months ago
in other parishes in and around Sydney. And my wish was
strengthened when I found that your pastor approved of the
proposal, and that our Bishop warmly sympathized. When
one heard of “ showers of blessing,” graciously vouchsafed
in answer to prayer on those various Mission Services, one
could not help saying, Why should we alone remain dry, while
all around is falling the' dew of God’s blessing, and the
healthful Spirit of His Grace? Should we not rather be
stirred up to lay hold of the unstinted promise, Prove me
now , saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows
of heaven and pour you out a blessing , that there shall not be
room enough to receive it.
And when I found that one already known to some of
you, whose ministry has been blest to many, the Rev. T. B.
Curweu Campbell, was willing to be the Mission Preacher,
1 could no longer hold back, but leaving it to the Good Lord
to pardon all defects in the preparation I could hope to make
for a Mission, in the short time allowed me, and to perfect
His own strength in weakness, I felt constrained to invite
His servant to come amongst us in the fulness of the blessing
of the Gospel of Christ-
I have ventured, dear friends, thus to write of my personal
feelings, because you have been so kind to me as not to let
me feel that I am a stranger—though but a wayfarer, tarrying
for a short space among you. And to speak my mind freely,


it is this very circumstance of the necessarily brief period of
my ministry here which intensifies my desire for your spiritual
profit, and therefore makes me most anxious to have a
Mission Week, such as have been found so helpful to many
elsewhere. It were disheartening to think that the work of
any portion of one’s life was like the play of children building
houses in the sand, to be swept away by the next tide. Yet
what is all our work—and chiefly the work of a minister of
Christ —but the merest child’s play, and labour lost, unless
it be really work for God, stamped with His approval,
and crowned by His blessing? Therefore it is that I cannot
but feel affectionately desirous of you that during this short
remaining period of my stay here a rich and effectual blessing
may be vouchsafed, so that in future years, if God will, many
may look back on this as a time of blessing, when the seed
of Eternal Life was implanted, or quickened, in their hearts,
and that on the Great Harvest Day, both he that soweth
and he that reapeth may rejoice together. Pray that it may
be so.
When the Mission Preacher comes amongst us, may
God bless His own word on the lips of His servant. I shall
look forward with much hope to that week, and I do ask all
of you to set it apart for prayer and for serious thought.
Make an effort to come to the services. Let your servants
and your children come. Pray noic for a blessing on the
Mission, and expect a blessing. And let each one ask “ What
is to be my blessing ? What will the Mission do for me ?”
The Lord Jesus says to yew as He did to the blind man whose
eyes He opened, “ What wilt thou that I should do unto
thee?” Dear friends, what I want to see amongst you is,
reality —heart religion. This only pleases God. This only
gives peace and joy. Have you got it, or is it this yew want ?
Oh! may it be yours. Receive Jesus into your heart,
and it is yours.
He calls you in a special manner in this Mission.
“ To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts.”
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.” Do not let Him pass
-and leave you without a blessing.
Earnestly praying for His blessing upon you all,
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
E. C. STUART.
St. John's Parsonage,
Darlinghurst, July 7th, 1875.


Prayer for God's blessing on the Mission, which may
be used daily at Family Prayer.
0 God our Heavenly Father, Thou hast promised to
give Thy Holy Spirit in answer to the prayers of Thy people.
We humbly beseech Thee to pour out that Holy Spirit upon
us, and bless the endeavour now being made to win souls
for Christ.
O merciful and loving Saviour, do Thou guide and
strengthen Thy ministering servants who shall take part in
this work. Fill them with love for souls, and earnest zeal
for Thy glory.
O Spirit of all Grace, endue them with Thine own power
from on high, that they may with boldness speak the truth
as it is in Jesus, and open the hearts of those that hear, that
sinners may be converted unto Thee, and Thine own people
built up in their most holy faith.
O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons
and One God, grant that this may be in very deed a time of
refreshing, from Thy presence, to the glory of Thy Name and
the salvation of immortal souls.
Hear us, O God, and answer us for Thine own Name
and mercy’s sake, through the mediation of Jesus Christ
our Saviour. Amen.
Or this :
Almighty and everlasting God who enablest us to will
and do those things which are good and acceptable unto Thy
Divine Majesty; prosper, we beseech Thee, the Mission
work in which we are now engaged ; have mercy upon this
parish and neighbourhood ; convert all blind and impenitent
sinners ; enlighten the ignorant; restore the backsliders;
comfort the sorrowful: and succour all who are tempted or
afflicted in mind, body or estate ; pity, O Lord, and have
mercy upon all men, for Jesus Christ’s sake, who liveth and
reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, one God, world
without end. Amen.
In private Prayer, not only ask for a blessing on yourself and on
the Mission generally, but remember before the Throne of Grace any
particular persons whose wants you know, or for whose conversion you
are anxious.
Printed at the “Churchman” Office, 370, George-street, Sydney.




THE EIGHT DAYS' MISSION
AT
St. John’s, Aarlinghurst.
AUGUST 1ST TO 8TH, 1875.
PRAYER has gone forth from many lands,
Many a distant shore,
That this time may be remembered
When time shall be no more ;
That souls may here be born to God,
To holiness and love,
And place their treasure, and their hearts,
On better things above.
That in the great, glad Harvest Day,
With gladsome heart and voice,
The sower and the reaper then
Together may rejoice.
The shepherd, who does seek to guide
Their feet to pastures fair,
Sends up to God for this dear flock,
A deep and earnest prayer ;
That he who comes to speak to them
Of life and peace and love,
May come imbued with Gospel light,
Sent down from God above.
That life may be no more to them,
Like children at their play,
Who build their houses on the sand,
The next tide sweeps away.


That Jesus of Nazareth pass not
Without a blessing given,
A blessing pouring richly down,
Like manna sent from heaven.
The high and low, the rich and poor,
In prayer together meet,
For the coming, special, holy time,
A blessing to entreat.
*
Time after time they gathered there,
In deep and heartfelt prayer ;
Did they not gather in His Name ?
Then God was present there.
The Bishop faithfully set forth,
With earnest heart and tone,
That they should boldly work for Christ,
Ashamed of sin alone.
The special time has nearly come,
Again they meet to pray
For the Spirit of the living God,
To bless the coming day.
The messenger whom God hath sent,
Tells them in earnest strains,
They have no need to be afraid,
“ The Lord Jehovah reigns.”
Though waves may rise and billows rage,
The soul with fear to fill,
The Saviour of the world is near,
To whisper “ Peace be still.”
That holiness becomes His House,
Who heaven and earth hath made ;
The heart in perfect peace will be,
Which on the Lord is stayed.


The Sabbath of the week has come,
God’s sweet and holy day ;
The worshippers together meet,
To hear, and praise, and pray.
What thoughts must fill the man of God,
As he beholds that throng y
Beholds each earnest, anxious face,
And hears that burst of song.
He prays with longing, earnest heart,
That heavenly food be given,
To feed that hungry multitude,
With living bread from heaven.
Each day throughout the holy week,
The sacred courts are trod ;
And they who never prayed before,
Lift up their hearts to God.
The preacher’s lips are touched with fire,
From God’s own altar sent;
He points them to the Lamb of God,
Entreats them to repent.
Tells them unless the heart be changed,
And humble faith be given,
Believing, trusting, child-like faith,
They cannot enter heaven.
Their motives then will all be pure,
Their hopes exalted be,
Their conversation not of earth,
But of eternity.
The holy influence of their lives,
Shall spread like leaven round,
Till many hearts shall seek and find,
The Saviour they have found.


“ What wilt thou have me, Lord, to do ” ?
Like Saul will be their cry;
Or, like to Samuel of old,
“Thou callest, Here am I.”
O may the young of this dear flock,
For whom the Saviour died,
Be sheltered in the Shepherd’s arms,
And in His fold abide.
And may the Church and People here,
This special season prize,
As bringing peace to many hearts,
And light to many eyes.
And may that peace and light abound,
To other Churches spread,
Till many hearts shall know the Lord,
As Christ their living Head.
K. O. F.


YOUR PRAYERS ARE EARNESTLY DESIRED FOR
lire |lteing 0f §0&
ON A MISSION ABOUT TO BE HELD IN THE PARISH OF
ST. JOHN’S, DARLINGHURST, SYDNEY,
AUGUST Ist, to Bth, 1875.
Pray that the gracious influences of the Holy Spirit be shed abroad, and the
people made willing in the day of God’s power,
Pray that the name of the Lord Jesus may be magnified by many being
brought to rejoice in Him as their Saviour.
Pray for fruit which shall “ remain —St. John, xv. 16.
When ye pray, believe.”—St. Mark xi. 24.
E. C. “ ' T. R. Curwen Campbell,
Officiating Minister. ‘ A fission Preacher.




THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, THURSDAY, MAY 6,
II CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
I SYDNEY AUXILIARY.
Last evening, the annual meeting of this auxiliary was
held in St. James’s Schoolroom, Castlereagh-street;
the Bishop of Sydney in the chair. The attendance
was not numerous, and consisted principally of
ladies. The proceedings were opened by the Bishop,
who said they were assembled to celebrate the
second anniversary of the Sydney Branch Auxiliary,
of the Church Missionary Society, which had been so
many years in existence, but which had been so re-
cently revived. He was glad to find that such a
Society preserved its existence amongst us, and that
it was, as the report showed, so prosperous. Small as
was the amount, it was large compared with what was
sent by other Missionaay Societies to India and
Africa ; anl he looked forward to a much larger
amount of support. He longed to see better attend-
ance, and believed if it were shown to the public that
the work was doing good, a better attendance would
be secured at the annual meetings. His lordship pro-
ceeded to treat of the great undertaking the mission-
aries and their friends were committed to, and called
on the Secretary to read the following
REPORT.
The Committee of the Sydney Auxiliary to the Church Mission-
ary Society in presentmg their first annual report to the sub-
scribers, desire to acknowledge with feelings of devout
gratitude to Almighty God, His undeserved goodness,
in having vouchsafed to their endeavours a larger
measure of success than might have been an-
ticipated from the efforts which have been made. Lest, however,
the expectations of the subscribers should be too highly raised by
this statement, or the friends of missions in this colony should en-
tertain the supposition that the sum which has been subscribed,
and the interest which has been shown, has been in any way
commensurate with the importance of the work, your committee
would at once express their conviction that the duty which de-
volves upon the members of the Church of England in this land
to aid the cause of foreign missions has been but very inad-
equately discharged, and that, considering the urgent calls which
are heard on every side, and the increasing opportunities which
i ire being granted at the present time for the advancement of the
Bungdom’ of the Redeemer, the amount subscribed furnishes no
round whatever for self-gratulalion or boasting.
As has been already stated, however, there is undoubted reason
fir thankfulness for that which has been accomplished. The
1 imber of persons who have shown an interest in the work of the
axillary may be few, and the amount subscribed inconsiderable,
lien compared with the support which is afforded to many exist-
'g societies which have objects of a somewhat similar character
Qview ; but in drawing this comparison, it is necessary to bear
mind that many of these receive assistance from the commu-
_tv in general, while other institutions, the maintenance of which
•*Us exclusively upon the members of the Church of England,
I e felt nevertheless to be of such a character as are essentially
Ihcessary to the well-being of the colony. The same general in-
jrest, however, must not be expected to be taken in the work of
j a Association whose ends are entirely of a spiritual nature,
{■hose object is the salvation of souls in distant portions of the
whose operations only indirectly benefit those who assist in
arrying them out, and the necessity for which those only who
| .ersonally feel the value of Jesus Christ as the Saviour from sin
lean duly estimate.
When these considerations are permitted to have their just
weight, it will be evident that in being able to report that up-
wards of £260 has been received during the past twelve months,
the first year of the present Auxiliary’s revived existence, with-
out the employment of any systematic effort for obtaining it, and
chiefly remitted without solicitation to the secretaries, your com-
mittee consider ttal ao-Tiuo 5' J ‘ v n.i
of humble thanksgiving and praise to God, and have undoubted
evidence that He has, in this land, scattered here and there
a people whom he has taught to feel deeply concerned for their
own salvation, and to whom he has imparted the spirit of Him
whose mission was to seek and save that which was lost, and who
has left us an example that we should follow his steps; and what,
may be asked, can be a truer ground for thankfulness than this,
or can give us more encouragement with reference to the future .
It would be easy for your committee to assign many other
l icasons why, in the present state of the colony a more general
Uterest is not manifested in the work of privilege and
auty which your Auxiliary is endeavouring to carry
on __ the necessity for missionary work nearer home,
ind the extension of the means of grace in the
>olonv itself—both having, undoubtedly, prior claims upon the
'’hurch are amongst some of the most obvious, and may be sug-
'estive of others: your committee, therefore, do not feel it neces-
sary to enlarge upon these points, but it would at once advert to
me or two subjects of an important and interesting character which
lave been pressed upon their consideration during the year that
ias passed away, and which furnish topics for thankfulness and
irofitable reflection. And among the first of these must be
nentioned that to which reference was briefly made at the
Inaugural Meeting of this Auxiliary, in May last year; the fact
that an association similar in constitution to the present one, and
formed for the express purpose of rendering aid to the Church
Missionary Society at home, once existed in this colony the
observation and experience of the past year has deepened the
conviction, that no inconsiderable measure of the aid which has
been afforded to the revived association is to be traced to the
existence of the former one; and it must be apparent to every
reflecting mind, that when measures were adopted for the forma-
tion of this Auxiliary, how much encouragement was afforded to
those who took part in this work, to find, that upwards of 20 vears
ago others, manv of them now gone to their rest, had sympathised
in their feelings and shared their desires, and that in consequence
they had not to incur the responsibility of forming a society, |
but rather to enjoy the privilege of reviving one which had
already existed, and in connection with which also we fand the re-
vered names of the late Metropolitan of India, Bishop Wilson, the
late Bishop of Australia, the late Rev. Samuel Marsden, and the
nresent Archdeacon of Cumberland, as well as those so well
known to many in this colony as Sir William Burton and Mr.
John Campbell, the late Revs. Richard Hill and Robert Cart-
wright, the Revs. Thomas Hassall, and John Elder, the
last named of whom both continue to feel the warmest interest
in the welfare of the present Auxiliary—and whose names also
appear in connection with the Rev. W. M. Cowper as the vice-
presidents of the Association. . , , , ~.
In adopting, therefore, the opinion that it is the duty of the
members of the Church of England in this colony to aid the
Church Missionary Society in spreading the Gospel
nf Jesus Christ among the heathen, notwithstanding
tchis land, it m3 l or .9*™*,
to know that this sentiment was shared by the wise and good,
who have passed from among us, and that among their number is
to be found the late Lord Bishop of Australia, who, on various oc-
casions expressed the warm interest which he took in the opera-
tions of the Church Missionary Society.
The second topic of importance to which your committee deem
it necessary to advert with mingled feelings of thankfulness and
deep concern is that which must have excited the interest and
serious attention of every friend of missions —it might be said per-
haps of every Christian : the alarming occurrences which have
recently taken place in India; undoubtedly the widest and the
most important sphere of all the Church of England’s missionary
operations in the world.
At the first intelligence of these calamitous events, and at the
later accounts of the destruction of the lives of missionaries, of
churches, schools, and mission premises, there might appear to be
but little cause for thankfulness, and sorrow, anxiety, and fear
perhaps too generally weighed down even the Chris-
I tian’s heart. Subsequent events, however, and every
I later account from India and from home, have served
I undoubtedly to show that, in connection with these solemn
I visitations, a gracious God has most manifestly remembered
f mercy, and that He justly claims from us thankfulness and praise
for the good which He has so signally evolved from the evils which
He permitted. There is every reason for cherishing the prayer-
ful hope that all things which havo occurred will be overruled, to
the abundant enlargement of missionary operations—to the great
increase of the funds and agencies of missionary societies, and
will be productive also of real and lasting blessings to the Church
at home.
Your committee have observed, with considerable thankfulness,
the beneficial effect of the intelligehee in increasing the funds of
your Auxiliary, and in heightening the interest felt in all its pro-
ceedings. Since February last no less than £42 of the total
sum subscribed during the year having been contributed espe-
cially for India—a fund expressly for that purpose having been
opened at the suggestion of the Reverend Edward Synge—to
whom, both for the initiation of this movement and the essen-
tial service which, with several others, who have greatly assisted
your committee by lecturing on missionary subjects, and in other
ways furthering the cause they have at heart, the sincere thanks
of the Association are most justly due. While thus referring to
the subject of India, your committee desire to be permitted to
express the earnest hope that the objects contemplated by the
Church Missionary Society may receive increasing assistance from
the prayers and efforts of the members of the Church of England,
and that on no account wi 1 those who have this cause at heart
permit the funds of the Auxiliary to suffer any diminution during
the coming year, though, through God’s great mercy, there be
no such sad necessity and claim as induced the opening of the
special fund for India. On the contrary, they would indulge the
hope that, as the Auxiliary has now been established, and in the
good providence of God been permitted to render aid
to the parent society precisely at a time when demands upon it
were never more urgent, or it more greatly needed assistance,
your "assocflltion may be enabled annually to afford increasing
sympathy and support.
In conclusion your committee refer the subscribers to a brief
statement of some of the proceeding of the society, to which your
Auxiliary is affiliated, extracted from their annual report for the
year ending May. 1857; to which will be found appended an
extract from a private letter received from India by one of the
members of your committee, and deemed by them as likely to
prove interesting to the subscribers: attesting as it does the
reality and importances of missionary work as well as the happy
results with which it is not unfrequently attended. '
Treasurer’s Account.
L Dr.
:o collections at the inaugural and
quarterly meetings £3O 15 S
Contributions to the general fund 190 0 0
Contributions to the special fund
for India 42 16 0
£263 11 8
By expenses of printing, advertising,
books, maps, and postages ...... £l7 4 3
Remittances to Parent Society—
4th November £125 0 0
11th February 45 0 0
4th May 75 0 0
245 0 0
Balance in the Bank of New South
Wales 17 5
£263 11 8
Captain Martindale next moved the following
resolution: —“That the report, which has
now been read, be received and printed
under the direction of the Committee; that
this meeting is of opinion that there is cause for devout
thankfulness for the measure of assistance which the
auxiliary has been enabled to render during the first !
year of its revival to the Society at home, and would
regard the success which has attended the efforts that
have been made as an incentive to increased exertions
to enlarge the funds and agency of the auxiliary.”
The Rev. Edward Synge seconded the motion. He
took a cursory view of the history of the spread of the
Gospel in Western Africa since forty-five years ago,
when there was only one communicant, and offered a
reviving contrast in the circumstance that the Church
numbered between three and four thousand at the
present time, besides teachers and Sunday
1 scholars. So with respect to India,— there
I they had 176 native churches compassing a hundred
I professing Christians. He felt they had cause to take
I courage. In India the whole of the progress had
A teen effected by a fearful disparity of numbers, whe-
A ier in military achievement, by such men as Clive
And Wellesley, or in missionary enterprise, by a small
Hand of earnest and pious men. He commended the
Resolution at some length, and it was put and carried
Mr. Alexander Gordon moved the next resolu-
tion:—“That this meeting, while it would desire W.
express its deep concern at the solemn occurrence:!
which have recently taken place in India, and itso
sympathy with the Parent Society, in the severe losses 1
which it has sustained in consequence of the late in- 1
surreotions, would nevertheless remember that thq
history of missions bears ample testimony to the facl£
that God has frequently caused apparently
circumstances to carry out His purposes of mercy, anc £
would humbly cherish the expectation that He will la-
this instance make these calamitous events subset
vient to the extension of missions in India. H n
spoke at considerable length in powerful
of the missionary cause.
The Rev. Samuel Fox, of Tumut, supported thA
resolution, and it was submitted and passed. \
The Rev. W. M. CoWper proposed the third resolu-
tion, as follows : That, notwithstanding the urgent
need there is for the extension of the means of grace
in the colony itself, demanding prayerful and continu-
ous effort; that this meeting is firmly persuaded that
in endeavouring to obey the Saviour’s to
preach the gospel to every creature, they _are adopting
the surest course for the obtaining of spiritual bless-
ings to the Church in this land and to the community
at large.” The rev. gentleman forcibly set forth the
peculiar claims of this Society. He considered that
this colony ought to feel a great interest in it, espe-
cially in consequence of the benefit it had achieved in
New Zealand, where it had been first in the field, and
to a very large extent instrumental towards the accom-
plishment of the results of missionary labour to be
witnessed there. It was the Church Missionary So-
ciety also which gave New Zealand a bishop, and for
some time paid half his salary. He would call atten-
tion to one peculiar feature in the Society—its care in
providing proper men as missionaries. He had heard
complaints of there being too much attention
paid to foreign missions and too little to home
missions ; but he trusted the public would in no wise
consider they were injuring the Home Missionary
enterprise in supporting this Society, but that all they
gave to send the Gospel to those who had never heard
of it would only remind them to feel more for their
brethren at home.
The resolution was seconded by Mr . R. Stewart,
and, being put to the meeting, was adopted.
The Rev. Thomas Hayden then moved:—“That
the thanks of this meeting be given to the Right
Reverend the Lord Bishop of Sydney, the patron of
the Auxiliary, for the kind interest which he has
taken in the endeavours which have been made for the
furtherance of the society’s operations ; to all those
friends who, during the past year, have exerted them-
selves in its behalf; and that the following gentlenaen
be appointed the committee for the year ensuing, with
power to add to their number : Patron, the Bishop of
Sydney; president, the Yenerable the Archdeacon
y vloo prftftidentcj) Rct. J. W•
Cowper, John Elder; treasurer, Mr. Alexander
Stuart; secretaries, Rev. Thomas Hayden^-W. "3E
Richardson ; committee, John Campbell, Esq., M.L. A,
G. K. Ingelow, Esq., Captain Martindale, R.E ,
Henry Moore, Esq., Alexander Stuart, Esq., Captain
Ward, R.E.
The Rev. W. H. M'Oormick seconded the motion,
md it was carried.
A vote of thanks was awarded to the Right Rev.
Chairman, and the meeting closed with the usual
1 lenediction.


jLJines.
CiT. JOHN’S, DARLINGHUBST. —COLLECTIONS
►3 will be made (D.V.) in behalf of the Church Mis-
sionary Society, TO-MORROW. Aupist 15th.
Preacher: The Rev. E. C. STUART. 8.A., Secretary
C. M S. Calcutta. f A'V*—
M. H.
ROBERT HILLS,- . ) Churchwarden^^
H. EDWARD A. ALLAN, )
A very unusual ceremony took place at Christchurch on
Sunday*August 8. Some children belonging to English
families were baptized by a Maori clergyman, with acces-
sories of choir by native children, in the native church.
The minister’s own son played music and led the singing.
It is said to be the first time such a baptism took place.
Natives are congregating at Matapihi settlement for the
holding of a great tangi over the remains of a daughter-in-
law of Tupaea. The important subject of thc present rela-
tions between natives and Europeans is being discussed. _
Additional reports from the officers in charge of native
districts have been laid on the tables of the General Assem-
bly. The most important of these papers are from Major
Mair, of tbe Waikato; Mr. Hopkins Clarke, of Tauranga ;
and Mr. H. W. Brabant, of Opotiki. Their general tenour
is in effect that a perceptible improvement has commenced
in the conduct of the natives. .They have been engaged
more extensively in cultivating, and have with greater-
willingness engaged under contract with the Government
in road-making. The Raukokore natives (East Coast)
have sold upwards of 3000 bushels of wheat
and those at Te Kaha nearly 4000. Other native
districts have given large quantities of maize. The
Nagatiawa, Ngatipukeko, the'Ureweras, the Ngaitai, and-
Whakatohea tribes have been engaged in public works.
The Tauranga natives have received £l3O for the Katikati
road, and are spoken of as good workmen, receiving at the
rate of 6s. and 6s. a-day. The Kupapas, or “ friendlies,
formerly a shiftless set, appear to be turning their attention
to industrial pursuits There is still the cry for the
surrender of the confiscated lands among some of the
Waikato tribes, but this cry is_ felt by the more helpful
natives to be unavailing. There is now what is called an
“Ultra Hauhau” party, which implies that a considerable
number of the old Hauhaus are not averse from earning
their living, or earning money from the pakeha.
