





The Reader will observe that it is only the princi-
pal Legal Documents, which are the most essential, that
are appended hereto; but the whole of the Appendix
is included in 750 Copies, in another form of the
Work.


- -


THE CROWN LANDS
AUSTRALIA.


■


CROWN LANDS
AUSTRALIA:
BEING AN EXPOSITION
THE LAND REGULATIONS, AND OF THE CLAIMS AND GRIEVANCES
OF THE CROWN TENANTS;
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE APPENDED;
TOGETHER WITH A FEW
HINTS UPON EMIGRATION & THE GOLD FIELDS.
WILLIAM CAMPBELL,
LATE MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF VICTORIA.
JOHN SMITH & SON, GLASGOW;
WILLIAM.BLACKWOOD & SONS, EDINBURGH AND LONDON,
1855.
III




PWLjFifln
Melbourne, 22d Mat, 1854.
William Campbell, Esq. M.L.C.
Melbourne.
Dear Sib, —We, the undersigned Tenants of the Crown, cannot permit
you to leave this colony without tendering to you the expression of our
warm thanks for the ability, energy, and perseverance you have dis-
played in advocating the cause of the pastoral interests of the
community.
Appreciating as we do the sincerity which has ever formed the
groundwork of your action in this cause, and feeling that your interest
in it can never be diminished, we venture to request that you will
represent our grievances to the Home Government, and maintain lha
rights you have ever so consistently upheld.
Wishing you a safe and happy voyage to your native land, and the
realisation of all your hopes in re-visiting it, we remain, Dear Sir,
Yours very faithfully,
D. Maclachlan.
E. Taylor.
William Snow Clifton, J.P.
John Goodman, M.L.C.
J. H. Kerr.
Wm. J. T. Clarke.
Alexr. Cameron.
A. G. Brodribb.
Wm. Degraves.
Lewis Clarke.
Ered. Fenton.
J. West, tertius.
William Paterson.
W. B. Hamilton.
J. Sutherland.
James Hum.
James Webb.
Duncan Cameron.
J. M. Loughnan.
Thomas U. Ehyder.
A. M. Campbell, J.P.
Gideon S. Lang.
G. E. Maicke, M.D., E.E.S.
W. Eobertson.
John Brock.
J. H. Eoss.
Matthew Harvey, M.L.C.*
Andrew Eussell, M.L.C.
Alexr. Macallum.
Eobt. Eoss, J.P.
John Carfrae, J.P.
* M.L.C.—-Member of the Legislative Council,


Melbourne, 26th Mat, 1854.
My Deal. Sik, —In forwarding you the inclosed Address, I cannot
refrain adding some personal expressions of gratitude for your exertions
in a cause in which, with many others, I am deeply interested. Only
aware of your projected departure within these last few days, I have
not obtained many signatures, which, if time had permitted, would
have been hut too willingly joined to the list of those already appended.
I will only mention, that every tenant of the Crown in Melbourne has
availed himself of the opportunity to express his admiration of the con-
sistent and honest career which you have pursued with so much ability
and determination. —Believe me, yours faithfully,
D. M‘LACHLAN.
W. Campbell, Esq. M.L.C.
The reluctance felt by the Writer, in publishing the foregoing Address
and Letter, was overcome, with the view of showing that he was author-
ised to represent the grievances of the Crown Tenants of Victoria.
j*£ 10
KEN, 5
3* X Of- /


PAGE
INTRODUCTION,
ix
CHAPTER I.
LEGAL DOCUMENTS REVIEWED.
Order in Council—Sufficient Land open for Sale — Tenders for Runs — Transfer of
Leases guaranteed — Investment of Capital—-Expense of Survey and Settlement
of Boundaries—Lord Grey’s Despatches — Reserves not required — Crown Law
Officer’s opinions—Population all employed in Pastoral pursuits—Increase and
decrease of Wool—Legal claims —Governor’s power limited—Responsibility of
British Government —Representation of Pastoral Interest destroyed — Scheme
of Compensation, - -- -- -- -- --
3
CHAPTER II.
IMPOLICY OF DISTURBING THE LAW.
Power to Sell Challenged — Pre-emptive Right — Opinions of Crown Law Officers —
Instructions to concede Pre-emptive Right — Instructions disobeyed — Urgent
request for Re-consideration — Opinion of Law Officers of Victoria — Reserves
not justified- — Survey of Runs retarded by Survey of Townships — Population
dispersed — Agrarian feelings fostered — Cause of Scarcity of Butcher Meat —
Capitalists leaving the Colony — Decrease of Stock —Policy of granting the
Pre-emptive right—Lands applied for—Average price of Land—Crown Tenants’
capital idle—Policy of the Order in Council—Government bound to establish
rights—Decrease of Agriculture—Intimidations and Misrepresentations of the
Press—Squatters’ want of confidence in the Government, - - - -
16
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER III.
OPINIONS OP THP LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
Mr. Johnson’s Motion, relating to the Sale of Land at the Gold Fields, amended—
Colonial Secretary’s Admission of the Pre-emptive Right—Motion for the
Extension of the Settled Districts defeated—Immediate issue of Leases and
Sale of Lands under the Pre-emptive Eight recommended by a majority of 18
to 9—Reference to the Home Government—Provision in the Draft of the New
Constitution for the fulfilment of the Promises of the Crown, - - - 25
CHAPTER IV.
OFFICIAL DESPATCHES TO AND FEOM THE COLONIAL OFFICE.
Delay in the Settlement of the Question —Strength of Claims confided in—Want of
Representation—Compensation suggested by the Duke of Newcastle—Errors
regarding the Views and Claims of the Squatters—Development of the Re-


emptive Right in the several Districts, - - - - - - - 31
CHAPTER Y.
EFFECTS OP THE GOLD DISCOVERT.
Gold discovered in Victoria on the 8th July, 1851—Derangement of the industry
of the Colony—Agricultural decrease—High prices—Impolicy of refusing the
Pre-emptive Right—Bad faith of the Executive—Sufficient land legally open for
Sale —Leases due long before gold was discovered—Crown tenant entitled to
the increased value of lands applied for—Population quadrupled—High Wages
diverted many from the Gold fields—Gold fields inexhaustible—Auriferous soil
not adapted for agriculture—Rich volcanic soil convenient—Produce of bulky
articles practicable—Gold exchanged for Flour—Expense of farming—Squatters
the principal agriculturists near the Gold fields—Their importance acknow-
ledged by the Lieutenant-Governor, --------38
sources of the Colony—Compensation suggested by the late Lieutenant-
Governor—Error regarding the Maximum of Pre-emptive Right—Quibbling—
Governor can only legally refuse to Sell such Lands as are described in the 7th
Section of the “Order in Council” —Admission of Claims—lnjustice of Ante-
dating the Leases—Appeal to the Law—Sale for Speculative Purposes illegal
—lnfringements unnecessary—Colonial Secretary’s interpretation of the Privi-
leges of the Crown Tenant—Disproportionate Sale of Lands under the Pre-
CHAPTER YI.
GENERAL, OBSERVATIONS IN CONCLUSION.
First Settlement of Port Phillip in 1835—Difficulties of the Early Settlers—The
Result of their Success—Created Commercial Prosperity—Provided Means for
the Development of the Gold Fields—Led to the Discovery of Gold—Produc-
tion of Enormous Exports—Ex-Squatters greatest Opponents to the Pastoral
Interest—Mr. Foster’s Interpretation of the Eights of the Squatters, in 1851-
Wages in Victoria in August 1864—Duke of Newcastle’s application of the
same Law differently—Opinions of eminent Barristers—Mr. Robert Lowe’s
Interpretation, in 1847—Second Edition of the “Order in Council” proposed—
The People misguided by the Press—Produce of Two Millions’ worth of Ani-
mal Food—Modification of the Land Regulations—Scheme of Compensation
by the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce—Condemnation of the Procrastina-
tion of the Lieutenant-Governor, and the Despatch of the Duke of Newcastle
—Home Government’s Responsibility—Legal Proceedings in defence of such
Eights—Prevention of a State of Anarchy—Settlement of the Question before
the Control of the Crown Lands is given the Local Legislature—Representation
of Pastoral Interest swamped—Safety of Rejecting the dictation of the Press
—Honour of the Crown pledged—Legal and Moral Claims entitle the Crown
Tenants to a Recognition of their Rights—Abstract Conclusions demonstrated, 44
HINTS ON EMIGRATION,


INTRODUCTION.
The great pastoral interest of Australia had its
origin in the foresight and enterprise of the late
Captain John Macarthur of Camden, who will be
ever memorable in the history of his country.
That great interest was the means of creating
every other interest—not even excepting the great
gold interest; and Captain Macarthur may there-
fore be justly held the father of a country soon
destined to become, if under a wise and just go-
vernment, a great and mighty empire. In 1803,
Capt. Macarthur lodged a paper in Lord Hobart’s
office in London, in which it is stated, “ Captain
Macarthur is so convinced of the practicability of
supplying this country with any quantity of fine
wool it may require, that he is earnestly solicitous
to prosecute this, as it appears to him, important
object; and, on his return to New South Wales, to
devote his whole attention to accelerate its com-
plete attainment. All the risk attendant on the
undertaking he will cheerfully bear—he will re-


quire no pecuniary aid—and all the encourage-
ment he humbly solicits, is the protection of Go-
vernment, —permission to occupy a sufficient track
of unoccupied lands to feed his flocks.” The
Government acceded to his wishes, and ultimately
gave him a large grant of land; and it need
scarcely be said that his prophetic convictions
were realised: his flocks increased rapidly under
his care and good management. Others followed
his example: the lands were lying waste: the Go-
vernment very wisely encouraged their occupa-
tion ; and licensed any free and respectable person
who desired to occupy them. Commissioners were
appointed to manage these waste lands, and the
occupants voluntarily paid an assessment to defray
the Commissioners' expenses, and that of the po-
lice under their direction, so that their occupation
might not cost the Government anything. But in
the course of time, when nearly all the available
lands within a practicable distance were occupied,
great evils were experienced from the arbitrary
acts of these functionaries, who assumed great
power in defining the extent of runs, by lessening
one run in order to enlarge another. They were
accused of receiving bribes, and of acting very
unfairly between man and man. The occupants
were powerless against the Government, as they
had only an annual licence—they could not be
otherwise than dissatisfied—they required a better
tenure, to secure them against the irresponsible


acts of an arbitrary Governor and his needy subor-
dinates—they agitated their grievances, and ulti-
mately obtained an equitable title to a lease upon
definite terms , with a preferable right to purchase
at a fair value. They obtained that title through
an Act of Parliament, and an Order of Her Majesty
in Council. They were grateful for that boon
granted to them, and were encouraged to improve
their property, under the fullest confidence that
the promise of the Queen, under the sanction of
the Imperial Parliament, would be held sacred.
In this, however, they have been much disap-
pointed, as Her Majesty’s representative in Victoria
violated that promise, by refusing to give the oc-
cupant of Crown lands the stipulated pre-emptive
right, and otherwise illegally disposed of such
lands to their prejudice. The tenants of the
Crown (for such is the proper designation of the
Australian squatter) protested against such arbi-
trary infringements. The executive procrastinated
for years, and were encouraged in their indecision
by the clamours of the press. Ultimately the
question was referred to the decision of the Home
Government; and, after a waste of seventeen
months’ time, was left in as unsettled a state as
ever by the indefinite despatch of the Duke of
Newcastle, which is reviewed in the fourth chapter.
In the meanwhile a great gold-producing in-
terest sprung into existence, and now seemingly
excuses the executive from the fulfilment of pro-


mises and contracts entered into by the Crown and
its tenants; but which promises and contracts
ought to have been fulfilled years before any pro-
duce of gold existed in Victoria : indeed, both the
Crown and the tenant implemented the leases, as
is proved in the first chapter. The Crown tenants
are therefore entitled to be placed in as good a
position as that in which they would have been,
were it not for the procrastination of the executive.
It is impracticable to restore the lands which have
been illegally sold; but it is absolutely necessary,
for the ends of justice, that equivalent compensa-
tion be made to the injured pioneers of Australian
civilisation; and if the executive, through an ap-
parent pressure of expediency, are to continue such
violations of the rights of property, they are bound,
by the pledged honour of the Crown, and by every
principle of honour and of justice, to make provi-
sion from the Crown lands to indemnify the arbi-
trary abrogation of such rights.
An erroneous impression prevails regarding the
privileges of the tenants of the Crown, which re-
quires prominent correction. It was published by
Mr. Robert Lowe in 1837, that the Crown tenants
had a monopoly of buying the lands at 20s. per
acre; whereas the truth is, that they have only a
right to buy the land at a fair valuation , which the
Governor may fix at the highest obtainable price,
but which can never be lower that per acre.
The Act 5 and 6 Victoria is embodied in the


Appendix (No. 1), merely to complete the code of
land regulations: it was amended by the Act 9 and
10 Victoria, App. 3, and is applicable only to the
Settled districts. The reader will therefore ob-
serve that the legal claims of the Crown tenants
are chiefly founded upon Nos. 3 and 4 of the
Appendix.
The appropriation clause in the Assessment Act
(App. No. 2), which was in force when the leases
were demandable, shows that the Crown tenant is
liable only to be assessed for local purposes: and
that the attempt made by the Executive in the
Legislative Council last session to increase the
rent, by an exorbitant rate of assessment, in order
to meet a deficiency in the general revenue, was
illegal and unjust; and the exclusion of the appro-
priation clause in the new Act was an indirect in-
vasion of the rights of the Crown tenants: so much
so, that they are, in the absence of such security
of the proper appropriation of their assessment,
legally justified in refusing payment of it, as the
Act is thereby not in accordance with the Order
in Council, nor with the former Act. Such illegal
invasions upon the rights of the Crown tenants,
having no limit affixed, indicate what they might
have to expect from the Legislature hereafter, if it
was legally empowered to decide upon their claims
which the Home Government is in honour and in
justice bound to settle, before the Crown lands are
handed over to the Local Legislature, in which the


representation of the pastoral interest is swamped
by the formation of superfluous townships in the
pastoral districts. The Colonial Secretary, by
such invasions, evidently forgot his interpretation
of 1851.—See page 47.
The First Part of the Appendix is composed of
legal documents, which form a complete code of
the law of the sale of Crown lands, and which are
reviewed in the firsf chapter.
The Second Part contains the opinions of the
Crown law officers, which, though not forming any
part of the law, go far to explain and strengthen
that law: they are reviewed in the second chapter.
The Third Part contains the votes and proceed-
ings of the Legislative Council bearing on the
question; but they can only be received as expres-
sions of opinion on the part of that body, which
were not empowered to interfere with the man-
agement of the Crown lands. It also contains
opinions of distinguished barristers; protests and
memorials from the Crown tenants, in defence of
their rights; correspondence between the Lieu-
tenant-Governor and the Secretary of State foi
the Colonies; together with a report from the
Melbourne Chamber of Commerce, condemnatory
of the encroachments of the Government, and
suggesting a scheme of compensation.
The Fourth Part consists of statistical returns.
The long complicated despatch of the late Lieu-
tenant-Governor was enough to mystify the subject


to one of more leisure than the Duke of Newcastle,
who in his reply was evidently misled by that des-
patch, and so misapprehended the rights of the
Crown tenants; otherwise his Grace could not have
left such an important question in such an unde-
cided state, to the injury of the peace and pros-
perity of the Colony at large. The length of that
despatch precludes it from a place in the Appendix.
Lest the strictures which are necessarily made
upon the official acts of the late Lieutenant Go-
vernor may appear personal, I take this opportu-
nity of expressing the greatest respect for the
private character of that gentleman; hut the re-
presentation of the grievances of an injured class
of fellow-colonists being confided to me, I should
fail much in my duty were I to allow any respect
for private worth to shield the author of these
grievances from public exposure.
I have briefly touched upon the effects of the
gold discovery in Victoria, which, although only
disclosed to the government in the month of July,
1851, was actually discovered a year and a half
before then.
I have also briefly touched upon Emigration,
which may he benefited by a modification of the
land regulations, in order to dispel erroneous im-
pressions prevailing regarding them.
I have prefixed an Address from the Crown
tenants of Victoria, with a letter from Captain D.
M‘Lachlan, late of the Rifle Brigade, explaining


how the address was not more numerously signed:
this I do in order to show that I am authorised to
represent the grievances of that body. And feel-
ing honoured as a representative of such a respec-
table body, and in grateful appreciation of their
mark of confidence, I have voluntarily undertaken,
in the absence of a professional man, the compila-
tion and publication of documentary evidence in
proof of their rights; and only regret the imper-
fection of the exposition which I have thus ven-
tured to demonstrate.
W. CAMPBELL.
Cakraith, November, 1854.


CHAPTER I.
LEGAL DOCUMENTS REVIEWED.
Order in Council—Sufficient Land open for Sale—Tenders for Runs—
Transfer of Leases guaranteed—lnvestment of Capital—Expense of
Survey and Settlement of Boundaries—Lord (trey’s Dispatches—Re-
serves not required —Crown Law Officer’s opinions—Population aU
employed in Pastoral pursuits—lncrease and decrease of "Wool—Legal
claims—Governor’s power limited —Responsibility of British Govern-
ment—Representation of Pastoral Interest destroyed—Scheme of Com-
pensation.
On the 9th March 1847, an Order in Council, under the
authority of an Act of Parliament, entitled the occupants
of crown lands beyond the settled districts in New South
Wales, to “demand” leases, for 8 and 14 years, in their
respective districts, with a preferable right to purchase
during the continuance, and upon the expiration of the
leases.—App. 3 and 4.
On the 7th October 1847, Her Majesty’s representative,
the Governor of New South Wales, promulgated the
Order in Council, and required the demands for leases to
contain a clear description of the boundaries—supposed
extent—estimated capabilities of the runs, &c. ; and to be
made within six months of that date, under pain of for-
feiture.—App. No. 6,


The Order in Council reserved a power to extend the
intermediate districts up to the Ist January 1849. The
colony was accordingly divided into three districts—Set-
tled, Intermediate, and Unsettled. The lands in the
settled were left, as formerly, open for sale by auction.
The lands in the unsettled districts to be held under
lease for fourteen years, and during that term, “ not open
to purchase by any other person, except the lessee.”
(App. No. 4, Sect. 6.) The lowest price to be £1 per
acre; if the land was of greater value, the Governor to
exercise his power of having them valued. (App. No. 4,
Sect. 3.) On the expiration of the lease, the lands to be
open for sale, subject to the lessee’s preferable option
of purchase at a valuation—in the event of the lessee
declining to purchase, the value of his improvements to
be allowed to him out of the price of the land.—App. 4,
Sect. 16.
If more than three-fourths of the run remained unsold,
the lease renewable for the remaining portion.
The rent to be fixed at £2 :10s. per 1000 sheep, exclu-
sive of the assessment for Commissioners and Police ex-
penses.—App. 4, Sects. 2 and 4; see also App. 2, Clauses
I. and XL
As an encouragement to effect improvements, the rent
under the renewed lease not to be raised more than 50 per
cent.—App. 4, Sect. 18.
Under the Bth section of the Order in Council, (App.
4,) the Governor is empowered to reserve from sale lands
for such public purposes as are described in the 3d clause of
5 and 6 Viet. App. No. 1.
The 9th section of the Order in Council enables the
Governor to make grants or sales for public purposes.—
App. 4.


The formation of a railroad in the unsettled district to
bring all the lands within two miles of it, under the rules
of the intermediate district.—App. 4, Sect. 10.
The conditions of a lease in the intermediate district
are the same as those for a lease in the unsettled district,
except that the term is only for 8 in place of 14 years; and
that, at the end of every year, the Governor, on giving 60
days’ notice, can offer all or any of the lands for sale,
subject to the lessee’s option of purchase at a fair value.
(App. No. 4. Cap. III.) A lease, therefore, in the inter-
mediate district, though nominally for eight years, is in
reality only a lease for one year.
As the intermediate district in Victoria includes nearly
all the lands adapted for agricultural purposes beyond the
settled district, it is competent for the Governor, at the
end of every year, to throw any extent of land in that ex-
tensive district into the market for sale, and so require
the lessee, within 60 days, to exercise his option. Had
the late Lieutenant Governor legally exercised his power
in that way, which was afterwards pointed out to him by
the Legislative Council on the 28th July 1852 (App.
46), in place of destroying the rights of property, and
violating the law, which he did, by refusing the lessee the
option to purchase lands which he sold to other parties
for private purposes, all the odium attached to his govern-
ment on that head, and the groundless clamours of a
mercenary press, would have been avoided.
By a Proclamation of the Ist January, 1848, (App. 7,
8, and 9,) regulations were established for the acceptance
of Tenders for forfeited and for new runs. Under such
regulations, 61 tenders were accepted by the Government
between the Ist January, 1848, and the Ist July, 1852.
(App. 62.) The substance of the agreement entered into


between the Governor and the Tenderer was the payment
of a premium generally, in addition to the fixed.rent, by
the tenderer, for and in consideration of a lease; surely
the acceptance of the tender, the receipt of the premium,
with possession, under a promise to grant, forms a com-
plete equitable title.
On the same date, Ist Jan. 1848, another proclamation
was issued, establishing rules respecting the transfer of
runs, (App. 10,) by which any licensed occupant was
empowered to dispose of his interest in his lease, the right
of which to be “ thenceforth held to he vested in the person
in whose favour he requested that it should issue.” The
effect of the Government so guaranteeing the leases to
purchasers of runs, made them as marketable as any other
commodity in the Colony, so that, before the Ist July,
1852, no less than 514 runs changed hands. (App. 62.)
The fixed tenure of a lease, with the option to purchase
the land, gave a greatly increased value to runs, and they
changed hands readily at enormous prices. Good healthy
runs, with stock upon them, generally realised double the
value of the stock; that is, when a flock of 10,000 sheep
were worth only £5OOO, the same flock, with a good run,
was worth <£lo,ooo.
Let the reader only fancy himself in the position of one
of the 514 purchasers of runs, and, under a thorough con-
fidence in the honesty of the Government, to have paid,
perhaps, all that he was worth in the w orld for one of
those runs, and, in the course of a few months afterwards,
to find his just and lawful rights denied to him, by the
very Government who had induced him to invest his all
in the purchase of these rights; in such a position, what
could his feelings be ?
On the Bth August, 1848, a Proclamation was issued.


extending the limited time of applications for leases, from
the 6th April to the 30th September, 1848.—App. 15.
On the 7th June, 1848, an Act was passed by the
Colonial Legislature, to appoint Commissioners to exa-
mine and report upon disputed boundaries of runs. By
that Act, claimants for leases were required to submit
their disputes to the Commissioners, and to pay high fees
before their case could be heard.—App. 5.
Many were put to great expense, trouble, and annoy-
ance, in getting a survey of their runs made, and procuring
witnesses to prove their claims. The Governor, by the
receipt of the Fees, and by his decision in describing the
boundaries of the lands to be leased, implemented the
promise to grant a lease, otherwise the lessee’s money and
trouble would have been thrown away.
Lord Grey, then Secretary for the Colonies, by his
dispatches of the 29th November 1846, and 30th March
1847 —the latter transmitting the “Order in Council,” —
gave very pointed instructions to the Governor to be care-
ful in classing the lands of the Colony, on dividing it into
districts, as, to use his own words, “lands to be defined
as unsettled, would be put out of the power of the Crown, and
rendered unavailable to the public for purchase for the long
period of fourteen gears.” The interpretation of the Secre-
tary of State, written a few days after the date of the
“ Order in Council,” and transmitting it with minute in-
structions to the Governor, must be held to be the inter-
pretation of the Imperial Government; but, in fact, the
“Order in Council” is so clear that it will not bear any
other construction.-—App. 22.
Again, by an Order in Council, dated 18th July 1849,
the Governor was prohibited from selling any portions of


reserves to any other person than the holder of the lease,
for the purpose of pasture or cultivation. —App. 24.
The government exceeded its power by making large
reserves; and the late Lieutenant Governor of Victoria,
then Superintendent of Port-Phillip, destroyed the virgin
peace and prosperity of Australia Felix, by his legion of
townships and reserves. On the Ist July 1851 he had
made no less than 246 reserves beyond the settled dis-
tricts, containing an extent of 681,700 acres. (App. 76.)
He added to their number largely since then. The go-
vernment of New South Wales has in a great measure
rectified the error at first fallen into, as, by a proclamation
of the 11th March 1852, the lessee in .that Colony is em-
powered to nullify the reserve by applying to exercise his
right of purchase.—App. 21.
The practice of the government of Victoria, on the
contrary, has been to sell, right and left, utterly regardless
of the claims and protests of the tenants of the Crown.
While Port-Phillip was under the jurisdiction of New
South Wales, the opinions of the Crown law officers
(App. 27, 29, 30, 31, 41, d. f.) being clearly against the
power desired by the Superintendent of Port-Phillip,
Charles Joseph La Trobe, Esquire, restricted that officer
for a time, and ought to have satisfied him that it was
never intended that he should have the very arbitrary
power of selling the lands of any unoffending or offending
squatter when he thought proper. But ho! the opinions
of professional men of high legal attainments and matured
experience, like the Crown law officers of New South
Wales, did not satisfy him—nor would the interpretation
of the imperial Government, through the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, guide him, —he was blinded with
the <( love of power”—a power that no wise man would


wish to have the responsibility of exercising amongst a
free and enlightened British community. And, very soon
after he became Lieutenant Governor of Victoria, he ob-
tained opinions from Law officers of his own appointment,
which opinions, vague as they were, partly coincided with
his own, though in the main against him—as it was only
where there was “an absolute necessity ,” and not to meet
“the prospective wants oj the community ,” that they thought
he had the power to sell.—App. 41, g.
On the Ist January 1851, there were 5,600,000 sheep,
and 308,000 cattle, depastured beyond the settled districts.
(App. 72.) On the 29th March of the same year, the
population beyond the settled districts was only 13,914,
consisting of 10,029 males, and 3,885 females. (App. 75.)
It is very obvious that that small population were barely
sufficient to manage such a large number of sheep and
cattle; to wash, shear, and carry to a seaport, about
18,000,000 lbs. wool: in fact they were all employed in
pastoral pursuits; there was no other source of industry
within these districts. The remainder of the population
were fully employed in various pursuits in and around
Melbourne and the settled districts, and their prosperity
dependent upon the prosperity of the pastoral interest
entirely. Where then was the “ absolute necessity” of a
legion of townships and agricultural reserves ? Nowhere
except in the imagination of His Honour the Superin-
tendent and the Landjobber. The pastoral interest was
the only interest beyond the settled district, and did not
require either townships or agricultural reserves. The
squatters had a right to cultivate grain for themselves,
though generally they preferred purchasing iour at the
shipping ports, and carrying it on their return wool drays
which would otherwise reach the stations empty. The


Australian flockmaster found that he could grow wool
a greater profit than he could grow wheat, and was glad
to benefit the commerce of the colony by exchanging the
proceeds of wool for flour. His energies were directed to
improve the quality and Increase the quantity of the
staple of the country. It need scarcely be said that his
exertions were eminently successful, and that all other
classes in the colony participated in his prosperity. From
1807, when Captain Arthur first exported 245 lbs.
wool, to 1850, the quantity increased to the enormous
amount of 39,000,000 lbs. The British manufacturer
receives the whole of that immense quantity, which ex-
ceeds all other imports of wool into Great Britain besides.
From 1851 the progression in Victoria both in quantity
and quality has been assuredly reversed; and 1 fear, under
present prospects, that the decrease will be more rapid
than the increase was. Official returns may have unfairly
shown for the last two years an increased weight, but the
most of the material, “not being washed” as formerly,
contained nearly 50 per cent of grease. A short time
may tell whether it has not been impolitic, as well as
unjust, to discourage an interest that has developed the
resources of a wilderness so soon, and whether the British
woollen manufacturer may not yet have cause to lament
its decline.
The squatters never questioned the power of the
government in establishing inns and police along the
thoroughfares, nor of granting sites for churches, schools,
&c.; on the contrary, they subscribed to build churches
and schools, and paid assessment for police expenses.
That the occupiers of Crown lands have acquired an
equitable title to a lease, with an option of purchasing the
lands at a fair value, no one can deny; but should the


reader have any doubt on the matter, let him carefully
peruse the “ Order in Council,” (App. 4, and particularly
the 6th Section,) which expressly prohibits the sale of the
lands to the public, until after the lessee has exercised his
right of option to purchase; let him also observe the 10th
and 15th sections. The 7th section defines such lands as
the Governor is empowered to refuse to sell to the lessee.
The Bth section defines such lands as may be reserved
for public purposes. The 9th enumerates, in great detail,
the public purposes for which the Governor has the power
to make grants or sales of, concluding with the following
words, “ or for any other purpose of public defence, safety,
utility, convenience, or enjoyment, or for otherwise facili-
tating the improvement and settlement of the Colony;
but so that the quantity of land which maybe granted to any
railway company, shall not exceed, in all, the rate of 100
acres for every mile thereof in length.” Great stress has
been laid upon these words by the opponents of the
squatting system; but these words imply only public pur-
poses, and that the Governor might “otherwise ” than by
sale or grant, —dispose of lands for public purposes, for
instance, to lease them, —but even for public encourage-
ment in establishing railways, he was restricted to 100
acres for every mile of the line, which is only a breadth of
275 yards, the adjoining lands for 2 miles on each side of
the line, if within the Unsettled district, to be brought
under the regulations of the Intermediate district. If it
had been intended to have given the Governor the power
of selling the lands indiscriminately to private persons, by
auction, whenever he thought proper, it would have been
most absurd and superfluous to have made any division of
the Colony into districts under different regulations, and
equally absurd and superfluous to have mentioned public


purposes at all; because, if the Governor had the power to
sell to a private individual for any purpose, there would
have been no occasion to have reserved a power to sell
for public purposes ; but, if it admitted of the least doubt,
the prohibition in the 6th section, the provision in the
10th section, and the conditions of the sale in the 15th
section, must completely remove it; Lord Grey’s dispatch,
already referred to, interprets the matter so clearly, that
it certainly does not admit of a doubt.
It is hoped that enough has been adduced in this chap-
ter, to prove that the claims of the tenants of the crown
in Victoria are strongly and fully established in law and
equity. There was no necessity to have infringed upon
their rights. There were not even gold-digging agitators
to intimidate the Government for several years after it
had entered upon its invasions; but, had there been, it
could not have justified the destruction of private property
without compensating the sufferers.
It has been already shown that, in 1851, the population
beyond the settled districts, consisting only of 13,914
souls, men, women, and children, were all profitably and
fully employed in the production of an export alike valu-
able to the colony and the manufactures of the mother
country; it has also been shown that a legion of 246
reserves were made prior to the Ist July, 1851, before any
gold digging interest, or any other interest, except the
pastoral interest, existed in these districts ;• consequently, as
there was no other interest, there could not be any public
requirements, not even for townships, as inns had been
long established, and were recognised by the Squatters for
their general accommodation as public requirements.
The state of matters after the gold discoveries will be


observed in the sequel, though nothing can affect just
rights acquired by law.
The Reserves in the Intermediate districts were en-
tirely superfluous, because the Governor had the power,
on giving 60 days’ notice, of throwing any extent of land
required into the market; and, if there was any error ori-
ginally in giving an undue extension to the unsettled
districts, it was not the fault of those who obtained exclu-
sive privileges, but that of the local authorities, who had
power to extend the Intermediate district up to the be-
ginning of 1849.
It is thought by some that the Colonial Office
(after the evasive despatch of the Duke of Newcastle,
which will be observed hereafter) will try to get rid of
the responsibility of redressing the grievances of the
Crown tenants in Victoria, and may throw the onus of
repairing the violations of the late Lieutenant Governor
upon the Legislative Council. But surely the British
Government, who are now so nobly expending their best
energies in the Crimea in redressing the wrongs of the
Turks—and who are now requiring the Government of
Greece to indemnify Greek subjects for losses suffered
from the insurrection—>will not themselves shrink from
indemnifying British subjects for losses sustained at the
hands of Her Majesty’s representative. Surely they will
not be pusillanimous enough to hazard the sacrifice of
rights granted direct from the Crown , which they would
assuredly do, if they delegated the power of settlement to
the local Legislature; for amongst the many evils the
pastoral interest has sustained from the invasion of town-
ships, is included that of the total destruction of the re-
presentation of that interest in the Legislative Council—
so complete a destruction, that it is questionable whether


the pastoral interest will ever be able to return another
member: under such an adverse state of things, it
would be manifestly dishonourable in the British Go-
vernment to fly from its path of duty.
The squatters, as tenants holding directly from the
Crown, expect the Crown, as landlord, to fulfil the condi-
tions of the lease, and secure them undisturbed possession;
but should the Crown deem it judicious, in order to satisfy
the unreasonable cravings of an unsettled people, to ex-
tinguish the privileges of the leases by a scheme of com-
pensation, as suggested by the Duke of Newcastle and
others, (App. 54, 58,) the position of the parties require
that that compensation be determined by the Crowm, or
by valuers mutually chosen by the Crown and the tenant,
in the way pointed out in the valuation of land, where
the Governor has the power of finally appointing the um-
pire, and so really fixing the rate. The difference of va-
lue of the live stock without a run and their value with a
run would be a fair compensation.
The British Government can only be actuated by a
desire to do justice to those dependent upon it—and it is
trusted that it will not be swayed out of its path of recti-
tude by the prejudices of any party, whether in or out of
office; and that it will not sacrifice justice on the altar of
expediency or convenience. The pioneers of Australia
ask only for Justice ; and Truth will point out what jus-
tice is due to them.
The question of the appropriation of the sums of money
arising from the assessment upon stock, requires to he
better understood than it generally is. The assessment
was levied originally at the desire of the squatters them-
selves, for the maintenance of police and other local pur-
poses beyond the settled districts (see App. 2, clause XL);


and although the Legislative Council is empowered by
the “ Order in Council ” to levy a sufficient rate for such
local purposes, it cannot legitimately impose a higher rate
than sufficient for such purposes; or appropriate the rate
to any other purpose.
The documents referred to in the Appendix are ob-
tained from the Records of the Legislative Council of
Victoria, with the exception of Nos. 55 to 61 inclusive,
together with 74 and 78. The winter can safely vouch
to the authenticity of the whole of these documents, as
obtained from various sources, which they themselves will
show.


CHAPTER 11.
IMPOLICY OF DISTURBING THE LAW.
Power to Bell Challenged—Pre-emptive Eight—Opinions of Crown
Law Officers—lnstructions to concede Pre-emptive right—lnstructions
disobeyed—Urgent request for Ee-consideration—Opinion of Law
Officers of Yictoria—Eeserves not justified—Survey of Euns retarded
by Survey of Townships—Population dispersed—Agrarian feelings fos-
tered—Cause of Scarcity of Butcher Meat—Capitalists leaving the
Colony—Decrease of Stock—Policy of granting the Pre-emptive right
—Lands applied for—Average Price of Land—Crown Tenants’ capital
idle—Policy of the Order in Council—Government hound to establish
rights—Decrease of Agriculture—lntimidations and Misrepresentations
of the Press—Squatters want of confidence in the Government.
Having in the preceding chapter reviewed the claims
of the tenants of the Crown in point of law, it follows
now to expose the impolicy and injustice of disturbing
these claims.
In November, 1847, Messrs. Moore & Griffiths chal-
lenged the power of the Governor to sell land upon their
run. The lands were withdrawn from sale. (App. 25.)
The Crown Law Officers’ opinions were taken, which
opinions (App. 29, 30, 31, and 34) show that the Go-
vernor had no power to sell any portion of the runs beyond
the settled districts, except for public purposes. The
Governor’s encroachments w r ere thereby restrained for a
time.


On the 7th Nov. 1850, Messrs. Jeffries applied to pur-
chase lands upon their run, under the pre-emption right,
and disputed the power of the Governor otherwise to sell
the lands before they had an opportunity of exercising
their option to purchase. (App. 41.) The lands were
withdrawn from public sale, and His Honour, the Super-
intendent, submitted the case to the Government, and, in
doing so, said that (< the validity of the act of sale must
depend upon the decision of the law officers. ” (App. 41. 6.)
The Colonial Secretary, in reply, wrote, “your Honour
sees cause to question the right of these gentlemen, not
only to the obtaining of the lands at the upset price, but
to the exercise of any pre-emptive right whatever in
respect to them; without questioning at length the argu-
ments adduced in the report of the Attorney-General and
Solicitor General, it may be sufficient to state that these
officers, whilst admitting the actual power of the Govern-
ment to sell the land in question to the highest bidder,
are yet of opinion that such sale would not be in accor-
dance with the spirit of Her Majesty's Order in Council,
and the Government can have no desire to assert extreme
rights, but, on the contrary, has every disposition to act
up to the spirit of the Order in Council, His Excellency
conceives that the claims of the gentlemen referred to, and
every other pre-emptive claim of the hind, which is not over-
ruled by a strong public necessity, should be conceded
(App. 41.) Such decided instructions from a superior offi-
cer; based upon the opinions of the Crown law officers,
ought to have been obeyed by the Superintendent, as, to
repeat his own words in submitting the case, “ the validity
of the act of sale must depend upon the decision of the
Crown law officers.” But no ! he was determined to have
the irresponsible power of making or marring the fortunes


of every squatter at his will: lie delayed to carry out the
decisions of the Governor, and urgently requested the re-
consideration of the decision arrived at. (App. 41. e.j
In the Bth part of his letter he writes about reserves being
absolutely necessary for the settlement of the district, and,
in the 6th paragraph, about ‘‘lands in such and such
quarter being called for by the public,” forgettiug that
there were then no public beyond the settled districts, ex-
cept the public employed in pastoral pursuits, as has been
proved in the preceding chapter; yet His Honour thought
Messrs. Jeffries’ claim, and the claims of many others, to
' y
be overruled by a strong public necessity, when there
was no necessity whatever. To get rid of the importunity
of His Honour, the Sydney authorities, preparatory to
the separation of Port-Phillip, left the further con-
sideration of the question to the government of Victoria,
of which His Honour was to become the Head. (App.
41. His Honour, now Lieutenant Governor of Victoria,
appointed law officers, and soon obtained an opinion from
them, which opinion, though vague, is sound upon some
points. Their interpretation of public purposes is thus:—
“ The general words,” or for any other purpose of public
defence, safety, utility, convenience, and enjoyment, “ oc-
curring in the 9th section, must, according to the ordinary
rules of construction, be interpreted with reference to the
particular instance—lands, the subject of these instances,
are all to be appropriated to public purposes, in the en-
joyment of which every person may participate. They are
converted by the grant, sale, or other disposal mentioned
in that section, as it were, into public property, and de-
dicated to the use of the inhabitants generally .” (App.
41. g.j Much stress has been laid upon this opinion by
his late Excellency, but it clearly shows that a sale to any


private person cannot be a sale for public purposes; so
that a village allotment is as much private property as a
block of 1000 acres.
Further on in the same opinion, they say, “ we consider
that the Governor, when satisfied of an absolute necessity,
ivould be justified in selling, or reserving for immediate sale,
such portions of the lands in the intermediate or unsettled
districts as may be required for the formation and sup-
port of these towns and villages. But we are of opinion,
that it would not be in accordance with the correct inter-
pretation of this section, nor within the spirit of the Order
in Council, were the Governor, without reference to the
sites of towns or villages, or present and pressing public re-
quirements, to reserve for sale portions of land in those
districts, with a view of meeting the prospective wants
of the community!” Under this opinion even, how
could the 246 reserves, containing 681,700 acres in the
intermediate and unsettled districts, be justified, at a time
when there were only about 16,000 people in these dis-
tricts, and these people all profitably employed in pastoral
pursuits to the public advantage. There was no “ absolute
necessity ” for a single reserve then. The “ wants ” were
all “prospective .” However, His Excellency was bent on
“ power; ” the squatter’s legal rights were disregarded;
the lands were sold, and the moneyed land-speculator may
thank His Excellency for the spoil.
The delay in the issue of the leases was attributed by
the Governor to the want of a sufficient number of sur-
veyors; but the surveyors being employed in laying out the
townships and reserves, for the “ prospective wants,” could
not be employed at the same time in defining the bound-
aries of runs. The townships were not wanted, however,
and had the surveyors been legitimately employed, the runs


would have been very soon surveyed and described, as it
is only the extremities that require measurement; and
many of the runs bounded with water courses, dividing
ranges, roads, &c., require very little measurement to
describe them accurately.
The consequences will be that the population will be
thinly dispersed in a multitude of miserable small town-
ships, without proper police protection, where they will be
a thorn in the side of the pastoral interest; they will in-
dividually own a few cattle, and their agrarian views will
lead, as it has done already in the neighbourhood of
Kilmore, to deeds of barbarous cruelty and destruction of
property. Had there been no rights in the way, it would
have been most impolitic to have scattered a profusion of
townships and reserves throughout the country, to damage
and destroy an interest so essential to the prosperity of
the country; the public already feel the effects of that
discouragement in the high prices and scarcity of butcher’s
meat. It may be said, however, that high wages has been
the cause of producing that scarcity; and it may be ad-
mitted that it has had something greatly to do with it;
but the main cause is a feeling of great discontentment,
arising from the encroachments upon the runs, and the
want of confidence in the Government. The flockmaster,
having lost the security of tenure which he formerly felt,
could not safely increase his flock, because, if he lost his
run, as his neighbour had done, his flocks would be worth-
less to him; and, if they became diseased, he could not
remove them, and he dared not to sell them. There are
instances of several runs adjoining to each other being
completely lost in that way. The higher prices now
obtained for the stock more than covers the high wages ;
20


but nothing can cover the lawless spoliation of a Govern-
ment, or make the injured feel contented.
In another way, the colony suffers from denying the
squatters their right of purchase, as many are selling off,
and leaving the colony in disgust, abstracting capital
which would otherwise be invested in the purchase of a
portion of their runs. If the present retrogression in the
decrease of their stock is not checked, it will become
questionable whether a considerable portion of the Crown
lands of Australia, now under occupation, may not revert
to their original state of unproductiveness.
The granting of the pre-emptive right to th e fullest
extent would have accelerated the settlement of the
country, and would have established a respectable class of
proprietors, who, from practical knowledge of the capa-
bilities of the colony, and from the possession of means,
would have developed the resources of the colony to a
much greater extent than has been done under a vacillat-
ing administration.
The whole of the lands applied for under the pre-
emptive right, on the 12th May, 1850, was only some
60,000 acres. (App. 67 and 70.) It could not be sold
for less than 20s. per acre ; if it was worth more, the
Governor had the power of valuing it. The average
price of country lands, sold from 1837 to 1851, was
£1 Is. per acre, (App. 66), and from 1851 to Ist July,
1852, it was only £l 6s. 7d. per acre. It therefore
follows, from the low price realised for lands, even within
the settled districts, that there could have been no great
loss to the Revenue had the Crown-tenants got all the
lands they applied for, beyond the settled districts, at the
minimum price of 20s. per acre ; but if it was worth
more, they were willing to have paid value for it. At the


time they applied to purchase these 50,000 acres, which
they had a perfect right to do at a fair value, the value of
land was very low; and if that value has greatly increased
since the time they applied to purchase, it should be held
to their advantage, because the applicant’s belief that they
would get what lands they applied for, deterred them
from otherwise investing their capital, which they could
have done in many other ways to equal advantage; their
applications lay for years “ under the consideration of the
Land Board,” as the return App. 70 will show, and their
capital was during' that time comparatively idle, waiting
in expectation of “His Excellency’s approval of their
claim to purchase.” It is well known that capital invested
in land or houses, in and around Melbourne, during these
years, has increased generally 1000 per cent: then, why
should the capital of the Crown tenants, which legitimately
sought investment in those years, have been rendered
unavailable through the indecision of the Governor? For
had their claims met even with a refusal, in place of their
applications “ being under the consideration of the Land
Board ” for years, their expectation would have ceased,
and they would have felt at liberty to have made other
investments.
The best policy, perhaps, that can be adopted in the
settlement of a new country, is to give the first occupant
protection against intrusion, with a right to purchase “at
a fair value;” in short, to carry out Her Majesty’s “order
in Council.” It is surely not too much to give the man
who first explores and occupies new tracks of country, at
the risk of his life and property, a preferable claim to
purchase “at a fair value” The Australian pioneer
required nothing more, and the Queen in Council con-
ceded that right to him, under the authority and sanction
22


of Parliament; and the honour of the nation requires to
secure him in his just and lawful rights, and to cause him
to be indemnified for the encroachments made upon his
rights by the representative of the Crown.
The minutes of arguments adduced by a deputation of
occupiers of Crown lands, through their very able leader
the Honourable J. F. Palmer, the Speaker of the
Legislative Council, are much to the point.—See App. 43.
By returns furnished by the Lieutenant-Governor, in
May, 1853, he showed that there was a decrease of lands
under cultivation, from 57,298 acres in 1851, to 36,658
acres in 1852. (See App. 77.) By the same returns he
showed that 726,961 acres had been sold prior to 30th
May, 1853, or twenty times the extent of land under
cultivation.
These returns include the Crown lands in the pastoral
districts under cultivation, as well as the purchased lands
throughout the whole colony; and if such Crown lands
were deducted, say one-eighth, it would have left only about
4 per cent, of the purchased lands under cultivation ; yet,
in the face of such facts, elucidated by himself, the Lieu-
tenant-Governor went on adding to his array of “ agri-
cultural reserves,” under the guise of “ public requirements,”
without any regard for the remonstrances of the despoiled
tenant of the Crown. The land-jobber, through the con-
stant howling of an ill-informed press, accelerated his
aggressions. They made the public believe that he was
the friend of the squatter, and used means to intimidate
him from his path of duty. The Government was de-
scribed to be a squatter Government—the Governor was
declared to be a squatter himself, and to be in league with
the squatters and their representatives in the Council,
and such unfounded fabrications. The squatters, how'-


ever, knew better to their cost; and although their claims
“ were under the consideration of the Land Board,” and
generally considered in a measure dependent upon the
irresponsible will of the Executive, two out of the three
representatives of the three purely pastoral districts voted
with the minority against the Government, in Mr. John-
son’s motion of the 23d November, 1852, expressing a
want of confidence in the Government.
The opinions of the Legislative Council will be reviewed
in the next following chapter.


CHAPTER 111.
OPINIONS OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
Mr. Johnson’s Motion Eclating to the Sale of Lands at the Gold
Fields, amended—Colonial Secretary’s Admission of the Pre-emptive
Eight—Motion for the Extension of the Settled Districts defeated—
Immediate issue of Leases and Sale of Lands under the Pre-emptive
Eight recommended by a majority of 18 to 9—Eeference to the Home
Government—Provision in the Draft of the Hew Constitution for the
fulfilment of the Promises of the Crown.
To follow out the arrangement in the Appendix, it is
here requisite to review the votes and proceedings of
the Legislative Council of Victoria, which although fav-
ourable to the claims of the Crown Tenants, can only
be received as the opinions of a body, which had no
power to interfere with the administration of the Crown
lands.
The first opinion emanating from that body was
arrived at on the 20th July, 1852, when Mr. Johnson
moved, “ That an address be presented to His Excellency
the Lieutenant-Governor, requesting His Excellency to
cause measures to be taken for bringing into the market
a large extent of land, suitable for agricultural purposes,
in the immediate vicinity of the Mount Alexander and


Ballarat gold fields,” upon which an amendment was
moved, to add the following words, “in accordance with
the provisions of the Orders in Council, a due regard at
the same time being had to the rights and interests of the
occupiers of the land” (App. 44.) A long debate ensued,
for a report of which see App. 45 ; during the debate, the
mover of the original motion, whose views were con-
sidered inimical to the claims of the Crown tenants,
stated frankly in his reply, that “if the squatters did
not choose to take the land at a valuation, and when the
Government had the power of appointing two valuers out
of three; if the valuation was incorrect, it was not the
fault of the law, but of the impracticable Government.”
He disclaimed any intention of interfering with the
rights of the squatters, and considered the amendment
unnecessary; but it was thought that the original motion,
if left on the records of the House, without the qualifica-
tion of the amendment, might be construed into an
approval of the illegal sales of land by the executive :
the amendment was, therefore, put to the vote, and
carried. During the debate, the Colonial Secretary,
when speaking of some lands that had been withdrawn
from sale at the instance of an objection raised by the
occupier of the land, said “ These lands could be put up
on a future occasion, when a certain notice might be given
to the squatter that a part of his run would be offered
for sale, and the squatter could then, if he choose, claim the
privilege of purchasing such part ” Yet, notwithstanding
that explicit course of action pointed out by the organ of
Government, in his place in the House, these very lands
have been since sold to the highest bidder; and the
squatter who applied to purchase them has been denied
the exercise of his option to purchase. He was also


debarred from purchasing at auction, because, if be had
done so, he would have become a consenting party, and
would thereby have lost recourse against the Government
for the infringement upon his rights.
Eight days after the amendment of Mr. Johnson’s
motion, Mr. Fawkner moved, “ That an address be pre-
sented by this Council, requesting His Excellency to
represent to the Queen in Council the urgent necessity
for extending the area of the settled districts of Victoria,
and that His Excellency will be pleased to strenuously
urge upon the Home authorities the vast importance of
the extension, and the necessity for its instant adoption;
and that such a large addition has been, and is daily
being made to the population of this province, in con-
sequence of the gold found here, that not less than the
whole of the intermediate district, together with all that
extent of country in which gold can be profitably worked,
ought to be included in and under the title of settled
districts.” (App. 45.) Upon which Mr. Rutledge moved,
as an amendment, that all the words after “ That ” be
omitted, with the view to insert the following words,
“ That leases he immediately issued to the occupants of
Crown lands, to hear date on the *Jth April, 1848, in order
that the lands may he opened for sale under the Order in
Council of 9 th March, 1847, in quantities to meet the
demand of the increasing population of the Colony The
amendment was carried by a majority of two to one—
-18 to 9—out of a House consisting of only 30 members,
inclusive of the speaker—two members only being absent.
The amendment is, therefore, a decided opinion of the
Legislature, as to the interpretation of the spirit of the
Order in Council, and the settlement of the land
question ; and it agrees with the interpretation of Lord


Grey and the Crown law officers already adverted to ;
but unfortunately it did not agree with the views of
the Lieutenant-Governor, who took no steps to carry out
the leases.
On the 17th August, 1852, Mr. Fawkner moved “ that
an address be presented to His Excellency, that he will
be pleased to withhold the granting of all ‘lands ’ to all
persons who may have claimed, or may claim lands under
the so-called pre-emptive right, conferred, or supposed to
be conferred by the Order in Council, dated England, in
1847, until this matter shall have been brought under
the notice of Her Majesty in Council.” x Upon which
Mr. Polhman, a nominee, and holding office under the
Government, moved, as an amendment, the insertion,
after the word “ lands,” of the words “ beyond the home-
steads, or such quantity of land as to His Excellency may
appear proper in each particular case , to all persons who
may have claimed or may claim lands under the so-called
pre-emptive right, conferred, or supposed to be conferred
by the Order in Council, dated England, in 1847, until
■this matter shall have been brought under the notice of
Her Majesty and Council,” The amendment was
seconded by the Colonial Secretary, and carried without
opposition. The representatives of the pastoral interest,
confiding in the good faith of the British Government,
preferred to refer their disputed claims to the arbitration
of the Crown; in fact, they never recognised any other
power to deal with their claims. Being in the position
of tenants holding directly from the Crown, they fully
expected the Crown, as landlord, to fulfil the conditions
of their leases, which were implemented both by the
Crown and the tenant, as is shown in the first chapter.
It is very apparent that the amendment was the handi-


work of the executive ; it did not venture to disturb the
opinion formerly expressed as to the “ immediate issue of
the leases/’ though it recommended the sale only of such
portion “as to His Excellency may appear proper,” until
the matter was referred to the Crown. It was then, as it
had ever been, the desire of the Executive to refuse to
grant the pre-emptive right, and in order to suspend the
granting of that right, and have some reason for refusing
to comply with the expressed wishes of the Legislature,
so explicit in Mr. Rutledge’s amendment, and in Mr.
Johnson’s amended motion, the Executive got rid of
“ immediate ” action by a side wind.
The Legislative Council of Victoria made the follow-
ing provision, in the last clause of the proposed new
constitution for that Colony: “ Provided that nothing
herein contained shall prevent, or be construed to prevent,
the fulfilment of any contract, promise, or engagement,
made by or on behalf of Her Majesty, with respect to
any lands situate within the said Colony, in any cases
where such contract, promise, or engagement shall have
been lawfully made before the time at which this Act
shall take effect within the said Colony.” And the
Legislature of New South Wales made more explicit
provisions, guarding the vested rights granted under
“promise” and “engagement” of Her Majesty, in the
draft of the proposed constitution for that Colony. The
Legislature of Victoria has not since expressed any
opinion on the question.
In a pecuniary point of view, it will be immaterial to the
Crown tenant whether he gets his lease with the privileges
attached to it, or a fair compensation instead thereof.
But the loss of the “ run,” under any circumstances,
will hurt the feelings of many who have respectively


formed attachments to the localities which they redeemed
from the wilds, and which they were long taught to look
upon as their home and the home of their children ; and
no one but themselves know the miseries and anxieties
they suffered there, amidst the insubordination of
pampered servants; and when their property and their
lives were at the mercy of the aborigines of the country,
it was only the hope of making a home that enabled them
to surmount these dangers and difficulties; and it is not
without a bitter pang they will part with that hope, the
loss of which no pecuniary consideration can compensate.


OH AFTER IY.
OFFICIAL DESPATCHES TO AND FROM THE COLONIAL OFFICE.
Delay in the Settlement of the Question —Strength of Claims con-
fided in—Want of Representation—Compensation suggested by the
Duke of Newcastle—Errors regarding the Views and Claims of the
Squatters—Development of the Resources of the Colony —Compensa-
tion suggested by the late Lieutenant - Governor —Error regarding the
Maximum of Pre-emptive Right—Quibbling—Governor can only legally
refuse to sell such Lands as are described in the 7th Section of the
“Order in Council”—Admission of Claims —Injustice of antedating
the Leases—Appeal to the Law—Sale for speculative purposes Illegal
—lnfringements unnecessary—Colonial Secretary’s interpretation of the
Privileges of the Crown Tenant—Disproportionate Sale of Lands under
the pre-emptive right in the several Districts.
The late Lieutenant-Governor, by a long complicated
despatch to the Secretary for the Colonies, which was
more an attempt to justify the illegal encroachments of
his Government than a fair representation of the claims
of the Crown tenants, brought the question before the
Colonial Office. The despatch was dated 28th Decem-
ber, 1852. The early settlement of the question was a
matter of great importance to all parties; yet His
Excellency allowed upwards of four months to elapse
before he despatched the case to the Colonial Office, and


the Duke of Newcastle's despatch of the 23rd Novem-
ber, 1853, did not reach the Colonial public before the
14th March, 1854. In the meantime the squatters
confided in the strength of their rights, and in the
integrity of the British Government—they were so much
off their guard, that they did not appoint any one to
represent their claims to the Colonial Office, nor did they
secure the advocacy of any section of the press in either
Melbourne or London. They confided too much in
both their legal and moral rights; and it is much to be
regretted that circumstances could have led a Minister of
the Crown to write such a document as that evasive,
indefinite despatch of the Duke of Newcastle’s. (See
App. 54.) The instructions to the Governor, in the
twenty-fourth paragraph of that despatch, are absurd in
the extreme; namely, to give a nominal lease to such
parties as may be silly enough to give up their equitable
title to a hona-jide lease, with an option to purchase at a
valuation. At the same time,- the suggestions in the
paragraph, proposing a scheme of compen-
sation from the lands of the Colony, is perhaps the most
practicable mode for the indemification of the destruc-
tion of vested rights.
The late Lieutenant-Governor, in the sixty-sixth para-
graph of his despatch, of the 28th December, 1852,
writes “ that the extension of the pre-emptive right over
the whole of the lands covered by their lease, with the
exception of such portion as the Crown may be legally
considered empowered to reserve from, or withdraw from
occupation, under the 9th section, was neither asked for ,
nor dreamed of in this Colony, either by the settler or
the executive Government.” But His Excellency must
have forgotten facts, as, with that very despatch, he sent


inclosures to show that parties had very early challenged
his power otherwise to dispose of the land upon their
runs: see Messrs. Moore & Griffiths, Messrs. Jeffries,
and Messrs. Booth & Argyle’s claims. (App. 25, 41, and
60.} Again, in the sixty-seventh paragraph, His Ex-
cellency writes, “ Why should the lessee have the
advantages of that purchase under the pre-emptive right ?
I cannot for my part assign a satisfactory reason.” No,
he could never see any reason for the fulfilment of Her
Majesty’s promises, nor for the obedience of the orders of
superiors, though given under the solemnity of advice
from the law officers; far less could he see the moral
claims of the men who had, at the risk of life and
property, explored and occupied a country lying waste
and wild for ever before—a country which, were it not
for their untiring exertions, would yet be in its primitive
state of unproductiveness; and the wonderful golden
treasures of Australia would yet be undiscovered. But,
in the seventy-fourth paragraph, His Excellency comes to
the conclusion that “if the Orders in Council, when
properly interpreted, are seen to have given to the stock-
holder rights which cannot now be justly taken away, I
believe I speak the sentiments of the Colonists as a body
—let compensation be made at any sacrifice, but at every
risk let these exclusive rights, where they are seen to
operate to the public disadvantage in appearance, if not in
reality, be done away with.” The opinions of the Crown
law officers are, that the Crown tenants have such
exclusive rights; why, therefore, not come to the point
at once, and say that as these exclusive rights are ap-
parently disadvantageous, take them away and give
compensation for them.
The Duke of Newcastle, in the sixth paragraph, of the


despatch, (App. 54,) writes, “they seem to have en-
joyed up to this time the full benefit of leases;” in which
he is greatly in error, as they were denied their privilege
of the option to purchase. His Grace is much in error
again in the seventh paragraph, and is evidently misled
when he writes, “It was not intended to give them
advantages beyond other members of the community
towards becoming purchasers of land, except to the very
limited extent required for their actual accommodation.”
His Grace could not have made himself acquainted with
the “ Order in Council,” or the 9th and 10th Victoria,
or he would not have penned such a sentence. The words
in the 6th section of the Order in Council are, “ any
portion not less than 160 acres;” the minimum is limited,
but the maximum is certainly not: if the quantity be less
than 320 acres, the purchaser to have to pay the expense
of survey, so that the Order in Council, in place of
restricting the sale, offered a premium to any one buying
not less than 320 acres.
The Duke, in the fifteenth paragraph of the unfor-
tunate despatch so often referred to, says, “In the next
place, although the lessee in an unsettled district has an
exclusive right of purchase during the currency of his actual
or assumed lease , I find no provision in Section 6 com-
pelling the Governor to sell such lessee any land on his
demanding it.” But how can the lessee have an “ exclusive
right to purchase,” if the Governor is not bound to sell ?
No barrister retained to plead could use more quibbling
arguments. If His Grace had referred to the 7th section
of the Order in Council, he would have found that such
lands as the Govenor can refuse to sell are described in
that section; and, with the exception of such lands, the


Governor is clearly bound to sell all or any of the lands
the lessee may require upon his run.
Yet, in the tenth paragraph, His Grace appears to
admit almost every claim of the lessee. He says, ‘‘they
appear to be entitled to demand leases, for terms not
exceeding eight and fourteen years respectively—the
right of pre-emption in the intermediate district—ex-
clusive right of purchase in the unsettled district—and
renewal of the lease.”
But the only point which His Grace arrives definitely
at, is the antedating of the leases to the 7th April, 1848;
and had the occupants had the full benefit of leases as
His Grace inferred they had—had their applications to
purchase under the pre-emptive right been approved of
—there would be less to complain of the antedating of the
leases; but that right was denied to them, and lands
which of right ought to have been theirs were illegally sold
by auction to speculators, who are now enriched by the
increased value of these lands. Parties who have
suffered in that way may appeal to the courts of law,
unless the Crown affords them redress.
In the seventeenth paragraph, His Grace says, “It
was intended to prevent land comprised in these runs
from being sold by Government to parties purchasing
for mere speculative purposes.” Exactly; such was the
intention of the Act: and if land is sold by auction, how
can the Government prevent speculators from purchasing
it ?It is utterly impossible. And it is well known that
nearly all the lands sold by Government are purchased
on speculation; in confirmation of which, see (App. 64)
sales of land at Melbourne and Geelong, in June, 1854.
In the Melbourne list of land sold, near the Mount
Alexander road, and only “from eleven to sixteen miles


from Melbourne/’ the first purchaser is Mr. Taylor, a
large landed proprietor, down for 7 lots, of 640 acres
each ; again, in the same list, there is Mr, Clarke, the
largest landholder in the Australian Colonies, and perhaps
the richest man in the southern hemisphere, adding 10
lots to his princely domain. Take the Geelong list, and
out of 46 lots sold, Mr. William Harding, another large
landholder, has bought 15 lots, or nearly one-third of
the sale. These gentlemen have a perfect right to buy
as much as they can for any purpose; but the system
shows that it is as perfect an absurdity for the Govern-
ment to say, that land sold by public auction to the
highest bidder is a sale for public purposes—such as are
enumerated in the 9th section of the Order in Council—
as the buyer can apply the lands to the most worthless
purposes. It may be in place to add here, that a great
deal of lands illegally sold upon the licensed runs are not
used for any purpose whatever; they are merely held for
a rise in price. The sale of the lands ought to be en-
couraged as much as possible ; but in selling the lands
there is no necessity for infringing vested rights. Let
the Government put a fair price upon the land, and
require the Crown tenant to exercise his option of pur-
chase within sixty days; or, if more satisfactory to the
public feeling, extinguish the leases and the pre-emptive
right by a fair compensation, when the lands would be
legally open for sale.
On the 22nd March, 1848, the Colonial Secretary,
under instructions from the Governor, and advice of the
Executive Council, wrote to the Superintendent of Port-
Phillip, “ If Mr. Coghill’s run be brought within the class
of intermediate lands, the Governor may sell any portion
of it at the end of each year, on giving sixty days’ notice,


but Mr. Coghill will be entitled to exercise the pre-emptive
right conferred on lessees” (App. 32.) Nothing could be
clearer than the interpretation thus given of the power of
the Crown, and the privileges of the tenant, and nothing
can justify the illegal encroachments made by the Super-
intendent, in direct opposition to the views of the
superior Government.
It is very remarkable, that, although the settled district
is of very limited extent, and the pre-emptive right limited
to a single section upon each run, that there has been
nearly as much land sold within it, under the pre-emptive
right, as has been sold in both the intermediate and
unsettled districts; and that at a lower price. (App. 49,50.)


CHAPTER V.
EFFECTS OF THE GOLD DISCOVERY.
Gold discovered in Yictoria on the Bth July, 1851—Derangement of
the industry of the Colony—Agricultural decrease—High prices—lm-
policy of refusing the pre-emptive right—Bad faith of the Executive—
Sufficient land legally open for Sale—Leases due long before gold was
discovered —Crown tenant entitled to the increased value. of lands
applied for—Population quadrupled—High "Wages diverted many from
the Gold fields—Gold fields inexhaustible—Auriferous soil not adapted
for agriculture—Eich volcanic soil convenient—Produce of bulky articles
practicable—Gold exchanged for Flour—Expense of farming—Squatters
the principal agriculturists near the Gold fields—Their importance
acknowledged.
The discovery of the first gold field in Victoria was made
known to the Government and the public on the Bth
July, 1851. In the month of September following, there
were 532 licences issued. During the latter months of
1851, and the whole of 1852, there was a regular rush
of people, first from the distant parts of the Colony and
the neighbouring Colonies, and afterwards from all parts
of the world, racing to the diggings. Doctors left their
patients—lawyers their clients—shepherds their flocks—
farmers their crops—merchants their stores—builders


their contracts—sailors their ships; and all joined in the
scramble at the gold fields. At one time there must have
been three-fourths at least of the male adult population
at the gold fields. Some of the smaller townships were
said to have been left entirely to the care of the women
and children. Agriculture decreased 40 per cent, in 1852.
Prices of hay, flour, and potatoes rose to <£loo per ton.
The Melbourne press blamed the squatters and the land
system, when they ought to have blamed the Government,
and those who deserted their farms in their scramble for
gold. Tho Executive listened to the clamours of the
press, and, in place of granting the homestead sections to
the squatters at once, which would have gone far to have
met the agricultural wants, it left their applications under
the withering delay and uncertainty of the “ considera-
tion of the Land Board ” for years; and it was not until
1854 that some of these applications for land close to the
gold fields were approved of.
In bad faith the Executive, notwithstanding the
reference of the question to the Home authorities, sold
the lands; and in place of complying with the law, as
interpreted by the Imperial Government, the Crown
law officers and the Legislature, it invaded the sacred
precincts of the law, violated the rights of property, and
repudiated the promises and contracts of the Crown, as
has been proved in the first chapter.
The Executive may shelter itself under the miserable
plea of expediency; but, with a firm, decided, energetic
Government, there would have been no such plea for ex-
pediency. For had the leases been granted, and the lands
thrown open for sale under the Order in Council, as
pointed out by the Legislature, (App. 45,) there would
have been ten times—yea, an hundred times—more land in


the market than was required, and the law would at least
have been respected. It was not the place of the Govern-
ment to exact the uttermost farthing for the land; but if
the land had peculiar advantages, the Governor had the
legal power of exacting full value for it. Why then
should the Government not have taken the legal mode of
disposing of it? Because it was an “impracticable
Government,” and perhaps because it was jealous of the
wealth and respectability of the Crown tenants as a class.
The Crown tenants ought to have been in possession
of their leases years before gold digging was known in
Victoria; indeed His Grace of Newcastle held them to
have been in possession of their leases since 1848, by his
instructions to have the leases antedated. (App. 54.)
They had, at all events, both a moral and a legal right to
have had their leases: and it is hard that, through the
' 7 O
delay and indecision of the Executive, they have been
precluded from the benefits of the leases. Assuming
that they had their leases, and that their pre-emptive
applications had been “approved of,” when made years
ago, (which ought to have been,) would they not be as
much entitled to the recent rise in the value of property
as those who hold property in Melbourne and the settled
districts are ? Most decidedly they would; but their
applications were received ( not refused'), and left to the
slumbering “ consideration of the Law Board ” for years,
during which time their expectations of purchase pre-
vented them from otherwise investing their capital in
land.
A migratory people, consisting chiefly of males, col-
lected from all parts of the world at the gold fields, and
the population of Victoria, from some 70,000 in 1851,
quadrupled itself in the three following years: it being


now estimated at 280,000. The high rate of wages
abstracted a large proportion from gold digging pursuits
in 1853 and 1854; and although the population of the
Colony has been greatly augmented during these years,
the real gold mining population has increased but very
little during that period, which accounts for the apparent
falling off in the produce of the gold fields; but which
are still steadily yielding up their treasures in abundance,
are increasing in extent, and are likely to occupy the
labour of ages to exhaust them. New South Wales,
though not hitherto so rich as Victoria in auriferous
deposits, is of much larger extent, and the probability is
that an equally rich gold field will yet be discovered in
that Colony, where the gold is known to be widely
spread over its surface, and where the geological forma-
tion is very similar. The auriferous soil is generally very
poor, and ill adapted for agriculture; but there are
generally patches of rich volcanic soil on the margin of
the auriferous formation, where it is desirable that
agricultural farms should be established, to supply the
gold mining population with the bulkier articles of
produce, such as potatoes, hay, &c. &c. But Foreign
growers, having cheap labour, can undersell the Colonial
grower in portable articles, such as flour; and the pro-
ducer of gold, like his predecessor the producer of wool,
will find it to his advantage to exchange his gold for
flour; and his doing so will increase the exports and
imports, and so add to the commercial importance and
wealth of the country ; for while the Victorian can dig
twenty shillings worth of gold per day, which he can do
on an average, his labour would be otherwise misapplied in
digging on agricultural lands for less. The expense of
erecting buildings and fences, clearing and breaking up


new land upon a farm, purchasing seed, working cattle and
horses, drays, ploughs, harness, furniture, &c. &c. is so
great, that it requires a much larger capital than is gene-
rally supposed to establish a moderately-sized farm; and
a farm on a small scale is in proportion much more expen-
sive. The price of the land is small compared with the
outlayrequiredinfarmingit. Thefortunate gold-digger who
has the means of working a farm, generally prefers re-
turning to the locality he came from. The sale of lands
should have been encouraged in place of having been locked
up through the unjust indecision of Government; and it
was of little consequence to the public whether the lands
were purchased by the occupant, or, as they now are, by
the land-speculator. But had the occupants been allowed
to purchase the lands at a fair value when they applied to
do so, they would, from their practical knowledge of the
country, and the command of means , have long since
established farms, and so have met in a great measure the
agricultural wants; indeed, they were then the only class
that could at all provide for such wants; and, even with
their limited purchases, wdiich have been tardily allowed
to them, they are the principal agriculturists in the neigh-
bourhood of the gold fields; and, to use the language of
the late Lieutenant-Governor, in the 73d paragraph of
that dispatch so often referred to in previous observations,
their importance is justly verified. “That the pastoral
interest should be protected requires no demonstration.
Its due maintenance is for the present as necessary to the
welfare and prosperity of the provinces as for the advan-
tage of the mother country. It never can be overlooked,
that but for the supplies which it has been enabled to
pour into the gold districts, to the assistance of the thou-
sands upon thousands rushing, without due preparation and


foresight, beyond the reach of the ordinary means of sus-
tenance, the riches of the gold fields themselves could
never have been developed as they have been. The pe-
culiar and embarrassing circumstances in which this great
interest is seen to be placed, in consequence of these very
gold discoveries, may present further argument why it
should meet with every degree of consideration.” In the
paragraph just quoted, and in the 74th paragraph of the
same despatch, proposing compensation, which has been
already referred to, it must be admitted that his late
Excellency has, in justice, in a great measure, acknow-
ledged the damage, with the view of repairing the acts of
his own administration.


CHAPTER YI.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS IN CONCLUSION.
First Settlement of Port Phillip in 1835 —Difficulties of the Early
Settlers —Result of their success—Created Commercial Prosperity—
Provided Means for the development of the Gold Fields —Led to the
Discovery of Gold—Production of Enormous Exports—Ex-Squatters
greatest Opponents to the Pastoral Interest—Mr. Foster’s interpretation of
the rights of the Squatters, in 1851—" Wages in Victoria in August, 1854
—Duke of Newcastle’s application of the same Law differently—Opinions
of eminent Barristers—Mr. Robert Lowe’s interpretation, in 1847 —
Second Edition of the “Order in Council” proposed—the People mis-
guided by the Press—Produce of Two Millions’ worth of Animal Food
—Modification of the Land Regulations—Scheme of compensation by
the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce—Condemnation of the Procrasti-
nation of the Lieutenant-Governor, and the Despatch of the Duke of
Newcastle—Home Government’s responsibility—Legal Proceedings in
defence of Rights—Prevention of a state of Anarchy—Settlement
of the Question before the control of the Crown Lands is given to the
Local Legislature—Representation of Pastoral Interest swamped—
Dictation of the Press—Honour of the Crown pledged—Legal and
Moral Claims entitle the Crown Tenants to a recognition of their
rights—Abstract Conclusions.
It is only nineteen years since the first settler, Mr. Bate-
man, landed on the shores of Victoria, then Port Phillip;
and the result of that settlement is wonderful in the
extreme. Without any assistance from the Government,


the settlers risked their all—their lives, their proper-
ties; and, amidst hidden dangers, weary toils, endless
cares, and sore annoyances, they spent the best part of
their lifetime away in a comfortless, friendless, homeless
wilderness; where not a few lost their lives at the treacher-
ous hands of the savage; where many lost their capital;
and where those who succeeded, did so only by long-
continued exertions and severe privations. However,
time and perseverance overcame many of their difficulties:
their flocks increased under careful management; so that,
in fifteen years from their first settlement, they exported a
larger quantity of wool from Port Phillip than did any
other port in the known world—a result almost pro-
phetically foretold by Captain Macarthur—a result so
beneficial to the mother country and to the Colonies
a result which created a commercial community, employed
a large shipping, and built a city at Melbourne—a result
which now providentially provides food for the multitudes
rushing from all nations to reap the golden harvest, and
which led even to the discoveries of these long-hidden
treasures, and to the production of exports amounting
annually to about 12 millions, and that from about a
quarter of a million of people, being a rate of <£4B per head
for every man, woman , and child in the Colony —a produc-
tion certainly unparalleled in any age or country before.
If such results are not morally worthy of gratitude, they
ought at least to secure the lawful recognition of the rights
of those whose energy and perseverance produced them.
For, were it not for the squatters, Melbourne would yet
have been a small straggling village, and the gold fields
still an unproductive hunting-ground, under a few bar-
barous, cannibal savages.
It is a most remarkable fact, that the most unreasonable


opponents of the pastoral interest—whether as members
of the Legislative Council or as editors of local news-
papers—are those who were unsuccessful squatters them-
selves, and who would not battle out the difficulties of
the “bush.” On retiring, they of course sold their
runs at the best price they could get. Is it, therefore,
consistent with any principle of justice or honour, on their
part, to advocate the confiscation of those very runs for
which they received a consideration ?—in short, to induce
one to buy a commodity, and then turn round and try to
destroy it. No terms can be too strong to condemn
such acts.
The following quotation from a work written in 1851,
by J. F. L. Foster, Esq. formerly member of the Legis-
lative Council of New South Wales, now the honourable
the Colonial Secretary of Victoria, justly ascribes the
cause and foundation of the prosperity of Victoria to the
“energy of the squatters.” It also interprets the condi-
tions upon which the squatters hold their “ improved tenure
of land;” which interpretation, coming, as it does, from one
of great acuteness, who had ten years’ experience in
Australia, who had been bred to the legal profession, and
who now holds the most important office under the local
government, may be considered valuable, and thoroughly
disinterested, as it was given at a time when that gentle-
man was untrammelled with the chains of office; and who
it is hoped will not now forget his interpretation of 1851,
which is as follows :
“To the pastoral resources of the Colony however must
be assigned the first place, as the cause and foundation of
the prosperity above described. Of the exports, accord-
ing to the official returns for 1848, out of a total of
£658,511, £654,938 were strictly the produce of the


flocks. Due importance must therefore be ascribed to
the energy of the squatters, and to the nature of their
pursuits, which enables them at once, without expense, to
make the land available for man.
“ In this body may be found men of a description little
to be expected from the barbarous appellation of ‘squatter,’
adapted by them from the Americans, who used it to de-
signate a very different class. Among them may be found
men retired from their professions, whether clerical, mili-
tary, naval, legal, or medical; younger sons of good, even
of noble families, who prefer seeking an active indepen-
dence to pursuing the lounging life of drones in the mother
country. Rough, no doubt, was at first their mode of
living, and many were the privations of the early settlers;
but a great change in their condition has taken place,
partly from the increase of their means, partly from the
improved tenure of land, which has been lately granted
to them by the Government. Formerly all Crown lands were
held by annual licence, the charge for which rested with the
Governor. These by usage were renewable and transfer-
able, but were liable to, and sometimes were, the subject
of arbitrary decision. At present the country is leased for
terms of one, eight, or fourteen years; compensation for im-
provement is secured to the tenant, the right of pre-emption
is granted to him, and his rent is ascertained.”
The above quotation is a very clear interpretation of
the “ Order in Council.” The charge formerly made rested
entirely with the Governor, who could raise the charge,
and even withhold a renewal of the licence, at his pleasure.
But the “ Order in Council,” so often referred to, “secured
to the tenant the right of pre-emption, and his rent is
ascertained.” It so rendered him independent of an


Michael Haulm, shepherd,
... £60
Mrs. M. Hanlin, hut-keeper,
. . 50
Michael Hardin, junior, stock-keeper,
. . 75
John Hanlin, shepherd, (lad about 16,)
. . 60
Edward Hanlin, hut-keeper, (boy,)
. . 60
£295
Eichard Spence, hut-keeper at head station,. .
65
Eichard Day, general servant,
80
“arbitrary decision ” of a Crown Land Commissioner, or a
whim of an irresponsible Governor.
In illustration of the expenses of a sheep station in
Victoria, the following return of wages, with hoard and
lodging, is extracted from a letter from that Colony, dated
20th August, 1854. Shearers obtained 30s. per 100 ;
ploughmen and bullock drivers 40s. per week, with board
and lodging; day labourers, 10s. without rations, last
season. It need scarcely be said, that the production of
wool requires encouragement.
Mrs. McLeod and three Sons,..
Donald M'Leod, shepherd, /
lVOT.nrkrl rlrv 1 £2OO
Duncan MtLeod, do. hoy,.
Murdoch McLeod, do. adult,
Roderick Gillies, Wife, and three Sons (two of them
hoys), all employed hut-keeping and shepherding, 250
£B9O
It is publicly reported that the Duke of Newcastle has
addressed a despatch to the Governor-General of Austra-
lia, to say that his despatch to the Lieutenant-Governor
of Victoria, on the land question, is not applicable to
New South Wales. But his Grace ought to know that
Victoria was a district of New South Wales at the time,
and for several years after the promulgation of the “ Or-
der in Council,” and that the rights accruing therefrom
are common to the occupiers of Crown lands in both Co-
lonies. Why, therefore, should the colonists on the south
bank of the Murray be placed at a disadvantage with those


on the north bank of that river, when they are all subject
to the same law, which conferred equal rights to both.
The Resolutions adopted at a meeting, on the 2d of
September, 1852 (App. 51), and the Petition (App. 53),
are much to the point, and the opinions of the Crown
tenants as a body are thereby fairly expressed.
The opinions of three eminent barristers, Messrs, Pal-
mer, Fellowes, and Lowe, (App. 55, 56, and 57,) are
clearly in favour of the claims of the Crown tenants. The
opinion of the latter was voluntarily given before any ag-
gression was contemplated by the authorities; and it is
trusted that that gentleman, who now holds an honoura-
ble office under the British government, may, if consulted
on colonial matters, see cause to adhere to the disinte-
rested interpretation publicly given by him before any
question was raised. Indeed, the “ Order in Council ”
is so explicit, that it cannot fairly bear any other inter-
pretation.
It is rather amusing to observe avowed opponents of
the present squatting system —the candidates for the re-
presentation of Geelong, on giving their views on the set-
tlement of the land question—unwittingly proposing a
second edition of the present system. Mr. Carr “ consi-
dered that the land should be surveyed far and wide, and
that new arrivals should be enabled to take possession of
the land at once, at a reasonable rent , with a right to pur-
chase.” “ Mr. Fife’s views coincided with those of Mr.
Carr.” The inference to be drawn from the expression
of such views by public men, in opposition to each other
upon the hustings, is, that if there was no “ Order in
Council ” establishing rights to leases, or pre-emptive
rights to purchase, that the Colonial Legislature would


establish such rights. Mr. Fife has been returned, and
may produce the new edition.
The incessant clamours of the Melbourne press misled
the people, and especially the new arrivals at the gold
fields, to look upon the preferable rights, justly conceded
by law to the first occupiers, as unfair towards themselves.
They were easily led to believe that they had every right
which the Crown tenants had. They were left ignorant
of the fact that the squatters provided two millions’ worth
of animal food for them. They can import flour cheaper
than they can produce it; but they cannot import but-
cher’s meat, without which they cannot well exist. It is
therefore their interest to encourage the production of
that essential article of diet as much as possible, and not
to be misled by demagogues.
The press knew that it was palatable to the great bulk
of the people, as well as to the land speculator, to cry
down the Crown tenants as obstructive monopolists, and it
pandered to their feelings in a mercenary spirit. The people
knew not the legal nor the moral claims which the Crown
tenants had, otherwise they would not have looked upon
them with a jealous eye. Under such a state of things,
first brought about by the obstacles thrown in the w~ay by
the Lieutenant-Governor’s illegal refusal to grant the
pre-emptive right; and, latterly, by the influx of people
to the gold fields; it may be judicious to modify the
waste lands act, so that provision may be made from the
Crown lands for compensation for the abrogation of exist-
ing rights. But, in any modification that may be made,
it will be well to bear in view, that, in a pastoral country
like that of the greater part of Victoria, it is absolutely
necessary that the lands in the pastoral districts be held
in large blocks of say not less than eight sections, or 5120


acres , each. The present mode of selling not more than
640 acres in one lot may suit the agricultural districts ;
but, for pastoral purposes, large blocks are absolutely
essential. Practical experience has proved that small
blocks are in a manner worthless for pastoral purposes;
and the “ Order in Council ” wisely made a rule that no
run should be less than sufficient to hold 4000 sheep.
Even in the United Kingdom, where lands are dear and
labour cheap, it is found requisite to have the grazing
farms large in extent, and even to increase the size of the
smaller agricultural farms.
On the 10th August last, according to public report,
the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce adopted a Re-
port, by a majority of 12 to 2, recommending compensa-
tion, by remission land orders, to be given to the squatters
in lieu of their leases and pre-emptive right. (App. 58.)
Such report, emanating from a commercial body, and
from a chairman who has publicly declared himself in op-
position to the pastoral interest, is of much signification.
The chairman very candidly admitted “ that the result of
that inquiry was to stagger him, and he believed the rest
of the committee.” The Report condemns the procrasti-
nation of the late Lieutenant-Governor; and it severely
censures the Duke of Newcastle for shrinking from the
responsibility of deciding, and for writing such an eva-
sive despatch.
The principle enunciated in the Report is sound in the
abstract, but the uniform rate of compensation is practi-
cally wrong; because a short lease in the intermediate
district, liable to be terminated at the end of every year,
is not nearly so valuable as a long lease for a fixed term,
with an exclusive right of purchase, in the unsettled district.
The rate suggested by the committee may be a fair


rate for indifferent runs in the intermediate, though not
half enough for good runs in the unsettled districts.
It was not formerly the part of the Crown tenants to
suggest any modification of the land regulations, to meet
an apparent exigency; but it was certainly the part of
the executive, before it invaded the rights of property, to
make provision for the indemnification of the destruction
of such rights; and now even, it is only those who have
actually suffered direct losses, from the illegal sale of their
runs, who have legal recourse against the authorities;
though all have suffered, and all are suffering, from a
want of security of fixed tenure. Those who have suffered
directly, from the illegal sale of their runs, are sure to
institute proceedings in defence of their rights; and, un-
less the Government abide by the law, or provide for the
indemnification of those who suffer from a breach of the
law, a state of anarchy will ensue, which will be detrimen-
tal to all the parties concerned, alike disgraceful to the
Government, and injurious to the Colony at large. But
if it is deemed desirable to take away such rights, and to
grant an indemnity in lieu of them from the land fund,
let the necessary arrangements be finally completed by the
Crown , before the control of the management of the
Crown lands is handed over to the local Legislature (as
is justly proposed to be done under the new constitution);
for however favourable the views of that body have hitherto
been, relative to the claims of the pastoral interest, the
formation of townships and agricultural settlements within
the pastoral districts has destroyed the representation of
that interest. It would therefore be most repugnant to
the principles of British jurisprudence, and manifestly
unjust, to refer the arbitration of such claims to a body
interested, and principally constituted in hostile opposition


to the establishment of such claims; and, besides, it would
never satisfy the claimants.
This long vexed question once settled, the Crown
tenants could fraternise with the other classes, and all that
rancour of class interests would soon be absorbed in a
common interest, so essential to the peace and prosperity
of the Colony.
The eternal principles of truth and justice, inherent in
humanity, will undoubtedly, sooner or later, require that
justice be done the injured pioneers of Australian wealth
and civilisation; and Government will yet feel that it is
wiser, and safer in the end, to follow out a direct course
of justice, than to succumb to the dictation of a mercenary
press, and so be carried downward in the dark polluted
stream of base expediency.
If the Government wishes to maintain the pledged
honour of the Crown—to respect the purity of justice—
to uphold the power of the law—to protect the rights of
property —and to prevent a state of anarchy in the colo-
nies, it will immediately interpose its authority, and award
that justice to the despoiled tenants of the Crown, which
both their legal and moral claims entitle them, as loyal
subjects, to demand.
From the evidence of the documents embodied in the
Appendix, the writer assumes that he has fully demon-
strated the following conclusions:—
1. The legality of the rights claimed by the Crown
tenants.
2. The illegal infringement of such rights by the
Government.
3. The impolicy and the injustice of infringing and of
withholding the exercise of such rights.


4, The justice of compensating those tenants who have
already suffered by the illegal sale of their runs.
5. The expediency of either modifying the law, to
provide an indemnification for the abrogation of existing
rights, or a strict adherence to the law in security of such
rights.
Having demonstrated such facts, the writer confides in
the justice and wisdom of the Government, in speedily
redressing the grievances of a great and important interest,
which are thus represented.


HINTS UPON EMIGRATION
The Australian Colonies are of the greatest importance,
as an outlet for the surplus population of the mother
country, and even of that of the whole of Europe. And
as emigration may be diverted from these colonies, through
the prevalence of erroneous impressions regarding the
claims of the Crown tenants, it may be desirable, in order
to completely remove such impressions, to extinguish such
claims, and to throw the whole of the Crown lands open
to the highest bidder, compensating, of course, the present
occupants for the surrender of their rights: not that there
is really any thing in the present system to prevent suffi-
cient land being sold, but to get rid of all dissatisfaction,
however unjust it may be, and to encourage emigration.
It is the scarcity of labour, and not the scarcity of land, that
keeps agriculture in the background; indeed, there is not
one-twentieth of the land already sold under cultivation.
There is an abundance of the finest land in the world, in
the three colonies of N. S. Wales, Victoria, and South
Australia; and Victoria, whether as regards pastures,
agricultural soil, or gold deposits, is unquestionably the
richest country of equal extent in the known world. Any
delay or mismanagement of the development of such
brilliant resources, is a loss to the British empire.


The climate is healthy, and well adapted for Europeans;
and, with the exception of a few weeks of hot winds an-
nually, it is on the whole very agreeable in the country
districts; but in the city of Melbourne, from the want of
sewerage, and the proximity of a large extent of low
marshy ground, it is not so healthy, and young children
suffer much from the miasmata, wffiich drainage may re-
move: the country, on the contrary, is remarkably healthy.
The clouds of dust whirling in the streets of Melbourne,
during the hot months of summer, are most disagreeable
to the eye; yet, strange to say, that organ is less subject to
opthalmia than it generally is in warm climates. A light
frost frequently occurs in the winter months in Melbourne.
Snow falls very seldom, and never lies long.
The writer has been often applied to for advice to in-
tending emigrants; and, as many pitiful cases of unsuitable
immigrants came under his notice in the Colonies, he
considers it a charitable duty to point out the difficulties
that lie in the way of some classes: and the advantages
to others. For instance, those of the middle classes, with
young families under ten years of age, either without capi-
tal or with a little capital, have no inducement to go to
Australia. The high rates paid for house rent, fuel,
water, provisions, &c. even without the luxury of servants,
soon swallow up a little capital; indeed, it is better to be
without capital than to place dependence upon a little
capital. The man, again, without any capital, however
respectable he may have been in his native country, must
be prepared for immediate difficulties and disagreeables on
landing: probably to break stones upon the public roads,
at 10s. or 12s. per day, having his wife and helpless chil-
dren cooped up in a small hovel, or huddled together under
the shelter of a tent, without sufficient fuel or water, and,
56


perhaps, without proper food; the youth of his children,
if they exceed two or three in number, prevents him from
being employed far up the country on sheep stations,
where he would at least get sufficient food and shelter,
and where, probably, his services would be appreciated.
Letters of recommendation are worth very little. Again,
young men of idle and unsettled habits cannot go to a
worse place, as, ten to one, they will become more dissi-
pated, from being able to spend more, from the receipt of
high wages.
On the other hand, single men or women, or married
couples with not more than three children under ten years
of age, cannot fail of bettering their condition in life, if
they are steady and industrious. But those who are most
suitable, and who cannot well fail of speedily realising an
independence, are families the parents of which have
reached or passed middle age, with their children nearly
grown up, that is, from 10 years and upwards. A steady
man with his wife, and 3 or 4 boys above 12 years of age,
can readily get employed upon a sheep station, at wages
from £2OO to <£3oo per annum, with board and lodging;
a careful boy of 12 being well able to shepherd a flock of
sheep on a level open country. Such families are able to
save nearly all their wages, and are thereby soon enabled
to purchase a small farm; and, from having labour within
themselves, very soon reach a state of great independence.
The able-bodied labourer has a good field for his labour,
either upon the roads or public works, at about 12s. per
day, or at the gold-fields, where, if steady and industrious,
he may calculate, on an average, of obtaining £l worth
of gold per day.
The skilful mechanic gets much higher wages, the rate
of which fluctuates with the extent of building operations


in progress, now much reduced through commercial diffi-
culties. The great glut of merchandise, blindly poured
into Australia, has nominally damaged the reputation of
it as a field for emigration; though really such commercial
losses are a profit to the emigrant, who can get supplies
and accommodation on reasonable terms now; and al-
though building operations may be suspended in Mel-
bourne for a temporary time, the railways and water
works in progress, and the average yield of gold, will
prevent wages from falling much; indeed, the emigrant’s
prospects are better than ever.
Provisions are much cheaper at Melbourne than at the
gold fields, where the prices depend upon the state of the
roads, and upon the rate of carriage. In summer, goods
are carried from Melbourne to the gold fields for about <£lo
per ton ; in winter the rate is about £4O; it even reached
£lOO per ton before the roads were made. Butcher meat
is about the same price both at Melbourne, Geelong, and
the gold fields, recently about 9d. per lb. From the
great glut of goods now in the Australian market, clothing
must be obtainable on very reasonable terms.
New arrivals cannot expect such high wages at Mel-
bourne or Geelong as are given up the country, because
it is better for the employer to give a higher rate to men
upon the ground, than to be at the expense and risk of
carrying new arrivals up the country. The following
quotation from the “Geelong Advertiser,” of the 23d
Sept. 1854, may be considered correct, and new arrivals
may expect such rates at Melbourne or Geelong.
“ Austealian Laboue Maeket.—Geelong, Sept. 23. —Instead of an
increasing demand for hands, as was anticipated from the advanced sea-
son of the year, engagements have been fewer than during the preceding
week, and both the mechanic and the labourer now reluctantly admit


wages must inevitably fall, and the more reasonable consider that
reduced wages, with diminished prices for rent and food, and more con-
stant and certain employment, would be to their advantage. Wages are
as under:—viz. Married couples for home stations, with rations, per
annum, 80/. to 90/.; ditto, for out stations, ditto, 65/. to 75/.; ditto, with
two flocks, ditto, 80/. to 100/.; shepherds, 40/. to 50/.; hut-keepers, 30/.
to 40/.; married couples for hotels, 90/. to 100/. ; ditto for private fami-
lies—man as groom, woman as house-servant, with rations—Bo/. to 90/.;
labourers on the roads and other works, 10s. to 13s. per day, without
rations; carters for town, without rations, 3/. to 4/. per week; carters
for ditto, with rations, 355. to 50s. per week; ditto for roads, with
rations, 21. to 3/. per week; shearers, 11. per 100, with rations; bullock
drivers for the roads, with rations, 50s. to 3/. per week; ditto for stations,
30s, to 21. per week; gardeners, with rations, 60/. to 80/. per annum;
grooms, ditto, 70/. to 90/. ditto; farm servants, 20s. to 30s. per week;
ploughmen, 30s. to 355. per week; general useful station servants, 20s.
to 255. per week; bush carpenters, -with rations, 21. 10s. to 3/. per
week; carpenters for town work, best hands, 20s. to 225. 6 d. per day,
without rations ; slaters and plasterers, 30s. to 355. per day, good hands,
ditto; men cooks for hotels, 21. to 4/. per week, with rations; waiters
for hotels, with rations, 11. 10s. to 21. ; seamen, for the run to London,
30/. to 40/.; ditto, Madras, Singapore, Callao, Mauritius, 25/. to 30/.;
coasting (A. B.) per month, 8/.; ditto (0. S.) ditto, 6/. 10s.; monthly
wages to India, London, &c. 61. to 71. 10s.; bay labourers, with rations,
10s. to 13s. per day; female servants, thorough general servants, 25/. to
30/.; housemaids, 25/.; laundresses, 30/.; cooks, 30/. to 35/.; nurse-
maids, 18/. to 20/.— Geelong Advertiser .”
The winter is so mild that the live stock require no ar-
tificial feeding; and both sheep and cattle fatten on the
natural herbage. The only demand for fodder is within
the towns, and upon the thoroughfares, where working
cattle and horses require to be kept.
Melbourne and Geelong are the best ports to disembark
at, on account of the proximity of the gold fields and the
public works in progress. And Victoria is unquestionably
the best field for the emigrant, as wages are about 30 per
cent, higher than in the neighbouring colonies of New


South Wales and South Australia, but where there is also
a fine field for the emigrant, though far inferior to
Victoria.
Western Australia is a poor miserable place, with a
hungry sandy soil, ill adapted for either pasture or culti-
vation ; and it is much to be regretted that a British
community should be left to pine in such a place, when
there are millions of acres of rich lands on the same con-
tinent lying waste for the lack of occupants. If punish-
ment was the only object in transporting offenders there,
it would certainly be attained with a vengeance. The
emigrant will do well to avoid such a place, both on ac-
count of the poverty of the soil, and of its being a penal
settlement.
The rate of labour in Victoria is regulated by the yield
of the gold fields, though it is generally cheaper in winter
than in summer. Hitherto the yield of gold has been,
upon the whole, very steady in Victoria; and, from the
great extent of auriferous ground already discovered, there
is no risk of its being exhausted for many generations to
come: besides, more discoveries are sure to follow. The
writer, from his knowledge of the country, both in New
South Wales and Victoria, is convinced, from the geolo-
gical features of both colonies, that one tithe of the gold
deposits in Australia are not yet discovered. And the
writer, as the original discoverer of the Victorian gold
fields, may be presumed to be somewhat of an authority
upon that subject. His claim to the discovery was proved
before a Select Committee of the Legislative Council of
Victoria last session.
The emigrant, unless he has the means of supporting
himself for a few months at the diggings, had better ac-
cept employment at once on landing. Let him avoid en-


cumbering himself with more things than he requires on
the voyage.
In Victoria there is a first-rate field for the investment
of capital, either in the purchase of land, of stock and
stations, of bank stock, of mortgages, and in various other
ways. Ten per cent, is considered a vesry moderate
return, and, under judicious management, a much higher
rate may be calculated on.
Fifteen years’ practical experience in Australia has
enabled the writer to offer these few observations, which
he trusts may be useful to intending emigrants.




APPENDIX.
No. 4.
At the Court at Osborne House, Isle of Wight, the 9th day
of March, 1847.
PRESENT:—
The Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty,
His Royal Highness Prince Albert,
Lord President,
Lord Privy Seal,
Lord Chamberlain,
Earl of Auckland,
Viscount Palmerston,
Blshop of London,
Lord Campbell.
Whereas by an Act passed in the present year of Her Majesty,
intituled, An Act to amend an Act for regulating the Sale of
Waste Land belonging to the Crown in the Australian Colonies,
and to make further provision for the management thereof, after
reciting that it might be expedient that various rules and regula-
tions should be made, respecting the more effectually making
demises or licences, for any term of years not exceeding four-
teen, of any such Waste Lands as therein mentioned, and respect-
ing the reservation on such demises or licences, of any such rents
or other pecuniary services, and respecting the insertion therein
of such conditions and clauses of forfeiture as are therein men-
tioned, and respecting the division of the said Colonies into dis-
tricts, within which alone such demises or licences might be made
to take effect, and respecting the renewal of any such demises or
licences, and respecting the conflicting claims of different persons
to obtain any such demise or licence, and respecting any right of
pre-emption which it might be proper to give to the holders of any
such demise or licence, and respecting the forfeiture of any such
demises or licences, on the conviction of any holders thereof, of


certain offences in any such Colony, and respecting any other
matters and things which might be requisite, either for carrying
into more complete effect the occupation, in manner therein men-
tioned, of such Waste Lands as aforesaid, or for preventing the
abuses incident thereto; it was enacted, that it should be lawful
for Her Majesty, by any Order in Council, to make and establish
all such rules and regulations as to Her Majesty should seem
meet for the purposes aforesaid, or for any of them, and any such
rules and regulations, again to repeal, renew, alter, and amend;
and that all such orders in Council should have the force and
effect of law in the Colonies aforesaid; and whereas it is expe-
dient that the rules and regulations hereinafter contained should
now be made and established, for regulating the occupation of the
Waste Lands of the Crown in the Colony of New South Wales,
it is hereby ordered by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the advice of the Privy Council, that within the said
Colony of New South Wales, the rules and regulations comprised
in the following chapters shall henceforth be observed, and have
the force and effect of law.
CHAPTER I.
AS TO THE DIVISION OF THE LANDS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Sect. 1. —The lands in the Colony of New South Wales shall,
for the purposes of the present Order, be considered as divided
into three classes, and be dealt with accordingly, as they may
be situated in districts to be denominated respectively as the set-
tled, the intermediate, and the unsettled districts.
Sect. 2.— The settled districts of the Colony shall compre-
hend—
First—The nineteen contiguous counties, the boundaries of
which were settled and proclaimed before the Ist January, 1838.
Second—The counties or reputed counties of Macquarie and
Stanley.
Third—The lands which may be within a distance of twenty-
five miles, to be measured or reckoned from any point of the
corporate limits of the Town of Melbourne, in the county of
Bourke.
Fourth—The lands which may be within the distance of fifteen


miles from any point of the outward limits of the Town of
Geelong, in the County of Grant.
Fifth—The lands which may lie within the distance of ten miles
from any point of the outward limits of each of the following
towns or townships, viz.:
Portland, in the County of Normanby; Alberton, in the dis-
trict of Gipps Land; Eden, in the County of Auckland; Bathurst,
in the County of Roxburgh; Wellington, in the County of the
same name.
The town which has been established at the head of the navi-
gation of the River Clarence.
The Town of Macquarie, in the County of Macquarie.
The Town of Ipswich, in the County of Stanley.
Sixth—The lands which may lie within the distance of three
miles from any part of the sea, throughout the extent of the
Colony, measured in a straight line.
Seventh—The lands which may lie within the distance of two
miles from either of the two opposite banks of any of the
following rivers, viz. :
The Glenelg, from a point to be fixed by the Governor, not
lower than where the Glenelg receives the waters of the Crawford,
nor higher than where it receives the waters of the Wannon.
The Clarence, from a point to be fixed by the Governor, at a
distance not less than ten miles above the Government township,
at the head of the navigation, and not less than fifty miles from
the sea, measured in a straight line.
The river now known by the name of the Richmond, from a
point to be fixed by the Governor, at a distance not less than
twenty miles from the sea, measured along the course of the river.
Sect. 3.—As to the intermediate districts.
The intermediate districts shall comprehend the lands lying
within the counties or reputed counties of Bourke, Grant, and
Normanby, in the district of Port-Phillip, which are not herein-
bore directed to be included in the settled lands; also all the
lands in the county or reputed county of Auckland, which are not
included in the settled lands as hereinbefore mentioned ; also the
entire district of Gipps Land, except the parts included in the
settled lands as hereinbefore mentioned; also the counties, either
already formed or intended to be formed, between the County of
Auckland and the County of St. Vincent; also any county or
65


counties of which the boundaries may be fixed and proclaimed
on or before the 31st December, 1848.
Sect. 4.—As to the unsettled districts.
The unsettled districts shall comprehend all the lands of New
South Wales, excepting such lands as are now, or hereafter law-
fully may be, comprehended within the limits of the settled and
intermediate lands within the said colony.
CHAPTER 11.
RULES TO BE ENFORCED WITHIN THE UNSETTLED DISTRICTS.
Sect. I. — lt shall be lawful for the Governor for the time
being of the said Colony, or the officer for the time being
administering the Government of the Colony, and he is hereby
empowered to grant leases of runs of land within the unsettled
districts, to such person or persons as he shall think fit, for any
term or terms of years, not exceeding fourteen years in dura-
tion, for pastoral purposes, with permission, nevertheless, for the
lessee to cultivate so much of the lands respectively comprised
in the said runs as may be necessary to provide such grain, hay,
vegetables, or fruit, for the use and supply of the family and
establishment of such lessee, but not for the purposes of sale or
barter; and so, nevertheless, that such leases shall in no case
prejudice, interrupt, or interfere with the right of the Governor
or other officer for the time being administering the Government
of the said Colony, to enter upon any of the lands comprised in
the said leases, for any purpose of public defence, safety, im-
provement, convenience, utility, or enjoyment, agreeably to the
provisions for those purposes contained in the 9th section of the
second chapter of this Order in Council, or otherwise.
Sect. 2.— The rent to be paid for each several run of land
shall be proportioned to the number of sheep, or equivalent
number of cattle, which the run shall be estimated as capable
of carrying, according to a scale to be established for the purpose
by authority of the Governor. Each run shall be capable of
carrying, at least, four thousand sheep, or equivalent number of
cattle, according to the scale aforesaid, and not in any case to be
let at a lower rent than ten pounds per annum, to which two
pounds ten shillings per annum shall be added for every


additional thousand sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, which
the run shall be estimated as capable of carrying.
Sect. 3.—ln order to estimate the number of sheep or cattle
which each run will carry, before the granting of the said lease
as hereinbefore mentioned, the intended lessee or occupier shall
name a valuer, and the Commissioner of Crown Lands shall
either act as valuer, or name one to act for him; and these two
valuers shall have power to choose, if necessary, an umpire; but
if they cannot agree in the choice of an umpire, he shall be
appointed by the Governor or the officer for the time being
administering the Government of the said Colony.
Sect. 4.— The rents to be paid, according to the scale above
mentioned, are to be reserved exclusively of any existing assess-
ments of taxes or rates on sheep and cattle, and are to be paid
without abatement on account of the existing or any future
assessments of taxes or rates on sheep and cattle, and in no way
to interfere with the right of the Colonial Legislature to impose,
from time to time, such assessments as may be deemed advisable.
Sect. s.— The rent for each run shall be payable yearly in
advance, at such time and place as shall be respectively specified
in the lease of the said run of land. In the event of default
being made in the payment of the rent, the lease shall be for-
feited, but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the forfeiture,
and prevent its becoming absolute and indefeasible, by payment,
within sixty days from the date of the original rent day, of the
full annual rent, with the addition of a sum equal to one equal
fourth part of the yearly rent so due from him, by way of
penalty ; but unless the whole of the said yearly rent, with such
penalty as aforesaid, shall be duly paid within the term of sixty
days, counting from the original rent day inclusive, the lease
shall be absolutely and indefeasibly forfeited. And it shall be
competent to any individual to demand of the Governor, or of
the officer for the time being administering the Government of
the Colony, or of any officer or officers acting by his authority
for the present purpose, that a fresh lease of the run so forfeited
be offered to sale, under the general rule hereinafter provided for
that purpose, in section 12 of this chapter.
Sect. 6.— During the continuance of any lease of lands
occupied as a run, the same shall not be open to purchase by any
other person or persons except the lessee thereof. But it shall
67


bo lawful for the Governor, or the officer for the time being
administering the Government of the said Colony, to sell to such
lessee any of the lands comprised in the lease granted to such
lessee, provided that the quantity of the lands sold to such lessee
shall not be less than one hundred and sixty acres, and that the
price to be paid for the same shall not be below the general
minimum price of one pound for each acre : Provided also, that
if the portion or lot of any such run sold to such lessee be less
in extent than three hundred and twenty acres, the expenses of
the survey of the portion so sold shall be paid by the purchaser.
Sect. 7. —Every lot to be sold under the provisions before
mentioned shall be subject to the following conditions:—
First—Each lot must be rectangular, unless the features of the
country, or the course of any river or stream, render a deviation
from the rectangular course necessary; and, in every case, two
sides at least of the lot must be directed to the cardinal points of
the compass.
Second—The two opposite sides of any stream or watercourse
which, according to the practice of the department of the Sur-
veyor General, ought to form a boundary between different
sections or lots, shall in no case be included in the same lot.
Third—No single lot shall have more than four hundred and
forty yards of water frontage for one hundred and sixty acres,
or more than a like proportion of water frontage for any quantity
greater than one hundred and sixty acres, but the water frontage
shall be reckoned according to the distance from one extreme
point thereof to the other in a right line, and not according
to the bendings of the watercourse or river; and the Governor,
or Officer for the time being administering the Government of
the said Colony, shall have the right of refusing to sell any lot or
lots, in every case where it may appear to him that the sale of
such lot or lots respectively might give an undue command over
water required for the beneficial occupation and cultivation of the
lands adjoining either side of any stream or watercourse.
Sect. B.—lt shall be lawful for the Governor, or Officer for
the time being administering the Government of the said Colony,
to except, out of any such sale or sales as aforesaid, all such lands
as it may appear to him expedient to reserve for any of the public
uses for which it is enacted, by the third clause of the Act passed
in the fifth and sixth years of Her Majesty, chapter 36, intituled


An Act for regulating the Sale of Waste Lands belonging to the
Crown in the Australian Colonies, that lands required for public
uses may be excepted from sales authorised by that Act, and if
there be reason to suppose that any of the lands applied for
under the regulations hereby expressed possess peculiar advan-
tages, whether of water frontage or otherwise, which would
render it fit that a higher price should be paid for such lands, the
Governor, or the Officer for the time being administering the
Government of the said Colony, or any Officer authorised by him
for the purpose, may require the said lands to be assessed by
valuers appointed, in manner provided in section 3 of the second
chapter of this Order in Council, in order that the value, if esti-
mated by them or their umpire at more than one pound per acre,
the higher amount may be paid for such lands accordingly.
Sect. 9.'— That nothing in these regulations, or in any lease to
be granted under the powers hereby vested in the Governor,
shall prevent the said Governor, or Officer for the time being
administering the Government of the said Colony, from making
grants or sales of any lands within the limits of the run or lands
comprised in such lease for public purposes, or disposing of, in
such other manner as for the public interest may seem best, such
lands as may be required for the sites of churches, schools, or
parsonages, or for the construction of highroads or railways and
railway stations, or other internal communications, whether by
land or water, or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal inhabi-
tants of the country, or for public buildings, or as places for the
interment of the dead, or places for the recreation and amuse-
ment of the inhabitants of any town or village, or as the sites of
public quays, or landing places on the sea coast or shores of navi-
gable streams, or for the purpose of sinking shafts and digging for
coal, iron, copper, lead, or other minerals, and effectually working
coal, or iron, or copper, lead, or other minerals, or for any other
purpose of public defence, safety, utility, convenience, or enjoy-
ment, or for otherwise facilitating the improvement and settlement
of the Colony; but so that the quantity of land which may be
granted or sold to any railway company shall not exceed in all
the rate of one hundred acres for every mile thereof in length.
Sect. 10. —That if at any future period a railroad be made
through or near to the districts comprising unsettled lands, all
lands within the distance of two miles of the railroad shall, not-


withstanding any lease of the run within which such lands shall
be situated, be liable to be sold at the end of each successive
year from the date of the said lease : Provided that at least sixty
days previous notice shall have been given to the lessee, and so
that such lessee shall be entitled to all the same conditions,
reserving to the previous lessee the right of pre-emption, and the
value of improvements as are hereinafter mentioned with reference
to the case of a sale at the expiration of the full term of such lease.
Sect. 11.— All occupants of Crown Lands, who shall have been
in licensed occupation of the same for at least one year at the time
when this Order in Council shall come into effect, are to be
entitled to demand leases of their respective runs under the pre-
sent regulations, within six months from the date of the publica-
tion of this Order in Council by the Governor, or other Officer
administering the Government of the said Colony, but not after-
wards ; and all occupants who have been in licensed occupation of
their lands for a shorter period than the term of one year, shall be
entitled, upon the expiration of the same term of one year,
without having forfeited their respective licences, to demand leases
of their respective runs, under the regulations herein contained :
Provided such lease shall be lawfully demanded within six months
after the expiration of the said term of one year, but not after-
wards.
Sect. 12. —When any run of lands, after being occupied, shall
be forfeited, or become vacant without the previous occupant’s
having exercised his right of renewal hereinafter reserved, it shall
be competent for any person desirous of acquiring a lease of such
run of lands, to give notice to the Governor, or Officer for the
time being administering the Government of the said Colony, of
his, her, or their desire to purchase anew the lease of such run of
lands, and immediately after such notice the Governor, or Officer
administering the Government of the said Colony, shall direct
sealed tenders to be sent in at such time and place, and in such
form as he shall think fit, by the person giving such notice as
aforesaid; and also by such other person (if any) as may be dis-
posed to enter into competition for the said lease; and every
tender so to be made shall state the term of years for which it is
proposed to take the said run, and whether, in addition to the
minimum rents required agreeably to the provisions contained in
sections 2 and 3 of the second chapter of this Order in Council,


it is proposed to offer any, and, if any, what amount of premium
for the lease ; and the said tender or tenders shall be opened in
the presence of two or more persons authorised by the Governor,
or Officer for the time being administering the Government of the
said Colony for that purpose; and if there shall be more than one
tender, the tenders shall be opened at the same time, and if there
shall be only one tender, the lease of the run shall be given to the
person making such tender, provided the rent offered shall be
admissible under the provisions contained in sections 2 and 3 of
this chapter of the Order in Council; but if there shall be more
competitors than one, the lease of the run shall be given to such
person or persons as shall tender the highest amount of premium
for the same; but if two or more tenders shall be made for the
same run, and no one of them be higher than all the rest, a future
day shall be announced by the persons who open the tenders, on
which day it shall again be competent to all persons to offer fresh
tenders, in the same manner as hereinbefore provided in regard to
the first tenders.
Sect. 13.—1 f any individual be desirous to acquire a new run
of land which has never been occupied before, he shall be at
liberty to send in a sealed tender, at such time and place, and in
such form, as may be appointed by the Governor, or Officer
administering the Government of the said Colony, for receiving
tenders for new runs, and shall set forth in his tender a clear
description of the run for which he applies, and of the boundaries
of the same, and shall state whether, beyond the amount of rent
to he ascertained, as hereinbefore provided, he is willing to offer
any, and if any, what amount of premium for the lease, and such
tenders shall be in all respects dealt with as hereinbefore provided
in section 12 of this Order in Council for tenders for runs which
have been forfeited or fallen vacant, save and except that if it
shall occur that two or more persons have thus applied for different
runs, of which part of one run would include part or the whole
of another run, the Governor, or Officer for the time being admi-
nistering the Government of the said Colony, or the person or
persons authorised by him to act in this behalf, shall declare what
shall be the several runs for which it shall be competent to parties
to tender, and another day shall then be named, at which the pre-
vious applicants, and all other persons, shall be at liberty to offer
fresh tenders for the runs so delivered.


Sect. 14.—Alease shall be liable to forfeiture in three modes:—
First—lt shall be forfeited for non-payment of rent, as provided
in section 5 of the 2d chapter of this Order in Council.
Second—lt shall be forfeited absolutely immediately upon any
conviction for felony against the lessee; and
Third—ln the event of his conviction by a Justice of the dis-
trict for any offence against the law, the case may be inquired
into within three months after the conviction, by two or more
Justices, who, if they think fit, may adjudge the lease to be for-
feited, with or without compensation for the value of the improve-
ments, according to the nature of the offence : Provided always,
that no such adjudication of forfeiture pronounced by the Justices
shall take effect until confirmed by the Governor, or Officer
administering the Government of the said Colony.
Sect. 15.— Upon the expiration of a lease, it shall be competent
for the Governor, or Officer administering the Government of the
said Colony, to put up all or any part of the lands included in a
run for sale, subject to the following conditions :
First—The previous lessee shall have the option of purchasing
the land for its fair value in an unimproved state, which shall
never be estimited at less than £1 per acre.
Second —If declined by the previous lessee, the value of any
improvements on the land offered for sale shall be ascertained by
valuers appointed under the provisions contained in section 3 of
the second chapter of this Order in Council : Provided neverthe-
less, that the sum so to be estimated and allowed for, is in no case
to exceed the amount of the actual outlay made by the lessee.
Third—The upset price shall then consist of the joint value of
the land and the improvements, and, if the land be sold, the amount
of the improvements shall be paid over to the previous lessee, and
only the balance be retained by the Government.
Sect. 16.—1 fno part of the run be sold, the previous lessee
shall be entitled to a renewal of the lease of the whole, or if any
part of the run, not amounting in all to one equal fourth thereof,
be sold, such lessee shall be entitled to a renewal of the lease for
the remaining parts of the land comprised in his run, subject to the
reservation of an increased rent described in the next hereinafter
following section of these rules and regulations; and provided,
nevertheless, that the boundaries of the different classes of land
in the Colony shall not in the meanwhile have been so far extended


as to bring the said run within the class of settled lands ; and
provided also, that if brought within the class of intermediate
lands, the lessee shall only obtain a renewed lease of the said run
under the rules hereinafter laid down as applicable to that class of
lands.
Sect. 18.— The rent of every lease of a run of land, after the
expiration of the first lease granted under this Order in Council,
is to be paid by any new lessee on the number of sheep and
cattle which the run shall be estimated to carry in its improved,
instead of its unimproved state, in the same manner as provided
for in sect. 3 of the second chapter of this Order in Council;
but, as an encouragement to improve, the lessee whose lease
shall be renewed is to be exempt from paying any increase
beyond fifty per cent, upon the amount of rent reserved under
the expired lease.
CHAPTER 111.
RULES APPLICABLE TO INTERMEDIATE LANDS.
Sect. I.— Within lands coming under the description of in-
termediate lands the interests in runs shall be acquired, held,
and determined upon the same terms and conditions as above
laid down for unsettled lands, excepting that the leases shall
not be made for more than eight years in duration, and that
at the end of each successive year from the date of the lease, it
shall be competent for the Governor, or Officer for the time
being administering the Government of the said Colony, pro-
vided he shall have given sixty days previous notice, to offer
for sale all or any part of the lands within any such run,
subject to the same conditions in favour of the lessee as are
above laid down in case of a sale at the expiration of the full
term of a lease of unsettled lands.
CHAPTER IV.
RULES APPLICABLE TO SETTLED LANDS.
Sect. 1. —Within the boundaries of the settled lands, it shall
be competent for the Governor or Officer for the time being
administering the Government of the said Colony, to grant
leases of lands exclusively for pastoral purposes, for terms not
exceeding one year; and it shall further be competent for the
73


Governor, or Officer for the time being administering the
Government of the said Colony, if he deem it expedient, to
make general rules, under which the holders of purchased lands
within such districts of settled lands may be permitted to
depasture, free of charge, any adjacent Crown Lands: Pro-
vided that the depasturage of such unsettled lands, free of
charge, shall in no way interfere with the right of the Govern-
ment at any time to dispose of the same, either by sale or by
lease for one year as above mentioned.
And the Eight Honourable Earl Grey, one of Her Majesty’s
Principal Secretaries of State, shall give the necessary directions
herein accordingly.
Wm. L. BATHURST.
No. 7.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, Ist January, 1848.
(Tenders for Runs.)
His Excellency the Governor, in pursuance of Her Majesty’s
Order in Council, bearing date the 9th day of March, 1847, has
been pleased, with the advice of the Executive Council, to estab-
lish the following Regulations for the receipt and disposal of
Tenders, as well for forfeited or vacated runs as for new runs.
I. —Forfeited or Vacated Runs,
1. On the receipt of a notice from any person of his desire to
purchase the lease of a run, which, after having leen occupied,
may have fallen vacant, either by forfeiture or surrender, and to
the leasing anew of which no objection shall arise, a notice will be
issued in the Government Gazette, describing the boundaries and
grazing capability of the run applied for, stating the maximum
number of years for which a lease thereof will be granted, and
fixing a time and place at which sealed tenders, in a prescribed
form, will be received from the applicant, and from any other
persons desirous to enter into competition with him, for the pur-
chase of the lease of the described run.
2. Every such tender must state the term of years within the
74


limit mentioned in the notice for which it is proposed to take the
run, and whether, in addition to the rent required by the Order
in Council, it is intended to offer any, and, if any, what amount of
premium for the lease.
3. The tenders will be opened in the presence of a Board of
officers appointed by the Governor, and will be disposed of in the
manner directed in the 12th section of chapter IL of her Majesty’s
Order in Council, a copy of which is annexed to this notice for
more easy reference.
4. The lease will be made out as soon after the acceptance of
the tender as may be practicable; and the intending lessee will be
required to take up the lease by payment of the first year’s rent,
and the premium (if any) within sixty days from the date of the
notification of the acceptance of his tender; in default of which,
the run will be again declared open to public competition.
5. Until the lease has been actually taken out, the intending
lessee will acquire no title whatsoever to the occupation of the
land tendered for.
ll.— Tenders for New Runs.
1. Sealed tenders for new runs will be received on the first
Monday in every month—commencing on Monday the 7th day
of February next.
2. The tenders in the prescribed form are to be addressed to
this office, if the land be situated in the Middle District, or to the
office of His Honour the Superintendent at Melbourne, if situated
in the Port Phillip District.
3. The tenders will be opened in the presence of a Board of
Officers appointed by the Governor, and a record will be made in
each case of the name of the highest tenderer, so as to secure him
the lease, in the event of the land applied for proving to be
available.
4. The description of each run tendered for will then be for-
warded to the Commissioner of the district in which it is situated,
with instructions to report whether it comprises any land leased
or under promise of lease, or applied for in any other tender, and,
if it does not comprise any such land, that he shall state what
should be the run for which it shall be declared competent to
parties to tender.


5. If the run applied for be available, the acceptance of the
tender will be duly notified to the applicant; and the premium
(if.,any) and first year’s rent, computed in the manner hereinafter
described, will require to be paid within sixty days from the date
of such notification; in default whereof, the run will be declared,
by advertisement in the Government Gazette, to be open for
selection, and a day for the receipt of fresh tenders for it will at
the same time be announced.
6. Until the first year’s rent and premium (if any) shall have
been actually paid, the intending lessee will acquire no right what-
ever to the occupation of the land tendered for.
7. It is also to be distinctly understood, that the Government
reserves to itself the right of excluding from any such run, any
lands which it may be deemed proper to reserve for any of the
purposes referred to in the 9th section of chapter 11. of the Order
in Council.
8, In any case in which the boundaries of the run tendered for
may require to be adjusted, so as to exclude from it any land
leased, or under promise of lease, or applied for by another party,
the amended description of the run, and the day on which fresh
tenders will be received for it, will be publicly notified, in con-
formity with the provisions in that behalf contained in the 13th
section of chapter 11. of the Order in Council, a copy of which is
annexed to the notice for more easy reference. The interval
between such notification, and the day on which the tenders will
be received, will not be less than one calendar month.
9. As a considerable interval must be expected to occur in every
case between the acceptance of a tender for a new run, and the
survey of its boundaries, and the valuation of its grazing capabili-
ties, which will be requisite for the purposes of a formal lease and
the final adjustment of the rent, the following general rules have
been laid down, under which the occupancy of the run during such
interval may be granted to the successful tenderer, and the receipt
of rent secured to the public.
(1.) Tenders for new runs must contain not only “a clear
description of the run applied for, and the boundaries of the same,”
but also an estimate of its grazing capabilities; and the tenderer
should state that, in addition to any premium which he may offer,
he will be prepared to pay a yearly rent of ten pounds, with two
pounds ten shillings added for every thousand sheep, or their


equivalent in cattle, above four thousand sheep, or their equivalent,
which the run shall be estimated as capable of carrying.
(2.) Until the number of sheep or cattle which the run can
carry shall have been determined by valuation, in the manner
prescribed in Her Majesty’s Order in Council, thedntendiug lessee
will be required to pay according to his own estimate, as given in
his tender; and in the event of the rent so paid, according to his
own estimate, proving to have been less than that determined by
valuation, he will be required to make up the difference previously
to the execution of the lease.
10. Printed forms of tender for forfeited or vacated runs, and
for new runs respectively, may be obtained from the several Com-
missioners of Crown Lands beyond the Settled Districts, as well
as at the Office of the Superintendent of Port-Philip, and at this
office. By His Excellency’s Command,
E. DBAS THOMSON.
No. 10.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, Ist January, 1818.
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to establish the following rules respect-
ing the transfer of runs beyond the Settled Districts, previously
to the issue of leases, under Her Majesty’s Order in Council, dated
9th March, 1847.
1. Demands for leases of runs under the 11th section of chapter
2 of the Order in Council, will (with the exceptions mentioned in
the 2d paragraph of this notice) be received from those persons
only who were the licensed occupants of the runs at the date of
the publication of the Order in Council by the Governor. But
in consideration of the delay that must necessarily take place in
the issue of the leases, any licensed occupant, who, after having
demanded his lease, may desire to part with his interest in the
same, will he allowed to have the lease made out in favour of
any person recommended hy the Commissioner of the District, on
making written application to that effect to the Colonial Secretary,
in Sydney, or to the Superintendent of Port Phillip, at Mel-


78
bourne, as the case may be, such application to bear the appli-
cant’s own signature, attested by a magistrate or a Commissioner
of the Supreme Court, In this case the original applicant will
be debarred from all further claim to the lease, the right of which
will he thenceforth held to he vested in the person in whose favour
he requested that it should issue.
2. If, however, a person who had a right to demand a lease of
a run in his occupation, under the terms of the 11th section of
chapter 2 of the Order in Council, shall have died or become
insolvent without having exercised such right, the demand for the
lease will be received by the Government from his representative,
or from any one coming forward on his representative’s behalf.
The issue of the lease, however, will, in such case, be sus-
pended, until the claimant thereof shall have satisfactorily proved
himself to be the legal representative of the deceased or insolvent
person ; and, in the meantime, the rent must be regularly paid, in
default whereof, the run will be held to have become vacant, and
the lease of it will be exposed to sale.
3. The transfer of portions of existing runs will, in no way, be
allowed by the Government. For each run, now recognised as
such, but one lease will issue ; and any portion of such run which
may not be demised to the lessee of the remainder, will be held
to have become vacant, and to be at the disposal of the Govern-
ment.
By His Excellency’s Command,
E. DBAS THOMSON.
M T M. EADIE AND CO. PRINTERS.




