

EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XIII.
THE
SUNDAY-SCHOOL BOY
IN
AUSTRALIA.
BY THE AUTHOR OF
“THE EMIGRANT FAMILY,” “REMARKS FOR THE
USE OF EMIGRANTS.”
Published under the Direction of
The Committee of General Literature and Education ,
appointed by the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge,
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS,
NO. 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
And by all Booksellers.
1851.








EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XIII.
THE
SUNDAY-SCHOOL BOY
IN
AUSTRALIA.
UV THE AUTHOR OF
< THE EMIGRANT FAMILY,” “ REMARKS FOR THE USE
OF EMIGRANTS.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
APPOINTED BY THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS,
NO. 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE}
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


London :
Printed by James Truscott, Nelson Square.


THE
SUNDAY-SCHOOL BOY
IN
AUSTRALIA.
1 was born in one of the courts running out
of Jews’ Row. My father got his living by
selling vegetables about the streets; and my
mother assisted to make a little money when
she was able, by keejiing a stall for the sale
of nuts, oysters, radishes, or anything of that
sort which happened to be in season, and
which she thought most likely to attract
customers. I believe that she was at heart,
what is commonly called “ a very good
woman but poverty, the trouble of getting
a livelihood, and, more than all, the want of
proper training in her youth, and want of
command over her passions and feelings,
made her at times very harsh and unreason-
able. I recollect a constant struggle on her
part to acquire a small sum of money to set
a 3


up in a larger way ; but somehow or other,
although she often had put by a small store,
something always came in the way to waste
it all again. Either she was taken ill, and
obliged to use her savings for food or lodg-
ing while she could not work; or she had “ a
fit of pleasure,” as she called it, and spent it
in extravagant eating or drinking; or my
father would call upon her for money to
make, up his losses or extravagancies.
I believe he loved my mother very much;
and when things went on well with him,
nothing could be more affectionate and kind
than his behaviour. Every now and then,
however, he broke out into fits of extrava-
gance and dissipation ; and though, during
that time, he was always very kind to us,
and, if we chose to join him, paid for us wil-
lingly so long as the money lasted; yet when
the fit was over, and he came to his senses
again, he was so angry and spiteful, that we
were really in danger of our lives, until some
days of sobriety had brought him round
again. The great difficulty on these occa-
sions was, to get money to purchase the
various articles necessary to carry on their
little trade. Sometimes my mother would
save it unknown to my father. Sometimes
it was borrowed; and I have known my
father on these occasions both borrow and


lend. Sometimes the people with whom he
was in the habit of dealing, would give him
credit for a part; but he always managed
somehow, and afterwards he would be sober
and reasonable for a long time.
What I believe tended more than any
other thing to keep them poor, was the want
of comfort at home. The court in which we
lived was only entered from the street by
a narrow passage covered over head, and
always had a close, disagreeable smell. In
the room it was worse. My parents had no
resource but smoking. They could both read;
but they had no books. They now and then
got some tracts; but after their hard day’s
work (for they often went out at daylight on
a summer’s morning, and did not return till
late at night), they were too tired to read or
enjoy anything, unless it excited their feel-
ings very much ; and the only books they
felt an interest in were such as contained
accounts of murders, or very shocking sto-
ries. My father and mother often came
home early, and used to sit together recount-
ing their adventures: but in a short time
they would feel the want of something more
stirring, and would then go out into the
street to see what was going on. Of course
they were too tired to stand long, and then
must go into some place where they could


sit down; perhaps to a public-house. The
neighbours in the court were certainly not
better off' than ourselves, and were too much
occupied witli their own troubles to do more
than speak kindly to us : indeed I believe
we were as well off as any of the others
about us.
I recollect very well, while playing with
other children, that the mothers would some-
times remark in my hearing, what a fortu-
nate thing it was that my mother had only
one child, and what a drawback and difficulty
it was to have a large family to provide for.
Every now and then there were violent dis-
sensions in the court; sometimes among the
women, quarrelling about their children;
sometimes among the men, when there would
be a call for the police.
Religious gentlemen and ladies sometimes
came into the court, and distributed tracts to
the people about. Idle people would scoff
sometimes; but I observed that they all
liked to be taken notice of, and to have
tracts given to them. One day I purposely
put myself in the way of a gentleman who
came in, when he entered into conversation
with me; inquired if I could read; asked
about my father and mother, who were both
out; inquired if they could read, and gave
me a tract for each of them; asked me if I


would like to go to the Sunday-school and
learn, and promised that, if I would come, I
should be taught. He inquired when my
father and mother would be at home, and
said he would come in the evening and see
them about it. He came as he promised,
and advised my father to send me ; but he,
to my great sorrow, objected very much : he
said he could not afford to dress me smart
enough, and that he did not like to have his
child go ragged among smart children. The
kind gentleman asked him where he had
learned to read, when he found that he had
been to a Sunday-school himself; and he
pointed out that it was very wicked for him
to refuse his son the same opportunity to
learn that he himself had, and turning to my
mother, said he hoped she would prevail on
my father to let me come. After he had
gone, my parents had a great deal of conver-
sation about sending me to the school; and
after much talk, my mother settled it by de-
ciding that I should go, ragged or not, but
that she would make me as tidy as she
could.
My parents had not been fortunate in their
speculations that week, and when Sunday
came I could get no new clothes, which 1
had hoped for; but my mother mended up
my old ones, made me wash very clean, tied


a new bright red handkerchief round my
neck, kissed me, and sent me off to the
school. When I got to the school, which
was in a room near the church, I found a
great many boys collected, and several ladies
and gentlemen assembled to teach them. 1
was put into a class with five others, and we
were made to stand in a row before a very
nice young lady, who was to teach us our
letters. - Each of us had a card given to us,
and we were made to repeat the letters after
her one at a time. I was very much tired
with my lesson, which lasted about an hour;
but we were told to take the card away with
us, and study it at home.
When we were all let out, the other boys,
who had been longer at the school, began to
make great fun of me, teased me very much
about my bright handkerchief, and began to
pull me about; one pulled my handkerchief,
another teased me behind, so that at last I
was obliged to run away.
When I got home 1 found my father and
mother anxiously waiting my arrival—a thing
they had never done before. I shewed them
the card I had got, and told them all about
it. I told them about the handkerchief too,
when my father was very angry, and said
that that was just what he had expected, and
that my mother had made a “ regular Guy”


of me. However lie took the card from me,
and gave me a lesson himself.
I took the card with me wherever I went,
and shewed it to the other hoys, some of
whom would repeat the letters, some would
teach me, and at the end of the first week I
had learnt the names of the letters as far
as L.
By next Sunday I got some better clothes.
My mother took a great deal of pride in my
appearance, and changed the bright handker-
chief for one of soberer hue ; so that my ap-
pearance was not so remarkable as on the
first occasion. My kind teacher was very
much pleased with my progress, gave me a
mark, and promised that when I got twelve
such marks I should have a reading-book
given me as a prize.
During the next week I did not make
much progress; I had only learnt as far as
Q quite correctly. I found it very difficult
to recollect so many letters at once.
On the third Sunday I had all my letters
learnt, and repeated them over to my mother
before I started for the school; and I was in
great glee, hoping to get another mark : but
when I came to repeat my lesson, I felt
greatly flurried, and I confounded one letter
with another. I was much vexed and mor-
tified at this. However, by the next Sunday


I found I had all my letters learnt quite cor-
rectly, and got a mark in consequence.
I went on working very hard, learning my
spelling; and in about six months I was able
to read a little, had several books given me
as prizes, and had begun to write. I was,
however, growing bigger, and steadier per-
haps ; and my mother thought I would be of
some use to her, so she took me out with her
to help to mind the basket, while she was
occasionally away for a short time.
This at first put me out very much ; but I
soon found that I could read the various bills
and notices about, so that I got on quite fast.
Now and then a customer would come while
my mother was away, and I would have the
honour, as I thought it then, of serving
them, which sharpened my intellect very
much.
I was soon able to take a basket on my
own account; and I felt a great deal of pride
in making as good a bargain as I could both
in buying and selling. I had a great deal of
trouble, however, to induce the people to
have confidence in me as I was so young ;
and they were always trying to impose
upon me.
One day, however, my mother was taken
very ill, and the doctor, who was brought in
by one of the neighbours, gave us no hopes


that she would ever recover. This was a
great blow both to my father and myself,
and was a dreadful discomfort in the room in
which we lived ; so much so, that we were
obliged to exert ourselves to get her sent
to the hospital. And here my Sunday-school
friends gave us great assistance. In a few
weeks she died. This melancholy event quite
upset my school arrangements, and was the
first great affliction I had suffered.
After my mother’s death, my father fell
into much worse habits than before, and I
was soon turned quite adrift to shift for my-
self. I used to seek work in the neighbour-
hood of the Docks; sometimes selling fruit or
oysters, or helping to carry luggage for the
passengers of the various ships. I often as-
sisted emigrants with their baggage ; and
from talking to them a good deal about the
place they were going to, I became so excited
and enthusiastic about Australia, that I looked
with envy on everybody I saw going out in
the numerous ships then about to sail.
How to manage to get out I did not know.
The passage-money was a far larger sum
than I had ever any chance of possessing. I
was telling an old man with whom I lodged
about this, when he advised me to work my
passage out as a sailor. But I found that
no one would give me a passage for my
B


labour; there were plenty of people very
willing to pay as well as work on board ship
for the sake of getting out. I found out my
father; but he would do nothing for me.
However, I always sought employment as
earnestly as I could on board ship, and
acquired a good deal of knowledge of the
names of the various parts of a vessel, and, as
I fancied, something of the gait and manner
of a sailor. I also found out that there were
some people called “ crimps,” who made it
their business to supply captains of ships with
crews; and I found an opportunity to take
up my lodging with one of these men, who
very readily entered into my views, and pro-
mised that I should be put on board one of
the first ships bound to Sydney.
I had not long to wait; I was soon en-
gaged on board a fine large ship bound to
Australia at the wages of thirty shillings a
month. I got two months’ pay in advance,
part of which I laid out in some clothes for
an outfit, and part I paid to the crimp for
getting me the ship.
I did very well working on board the ship
for the first day; but when they went out of
dock, and began to work the sails of the
ship, I found my inferiority, and the rest of
the crew soon found it out too, and called me
“ a blood-sucker,” “ a lubber,” and other


opprobrious names; they said I was in the
place of a better man, and altogether made
me repent of the step I had taken. I was
also very sea-sick; and this in the narrow
apartment called the forecastle, that was
allotted to the sailors on board, was a very
great nuisance to everybody, and I found
that I was an object of universal contempt
and dislike. However there was no help for
it; I submitted as quietly as I could, and
hoped they would get used to me.
After my sea-sickness was over I ate very
greedily of the salt provisions, particularly
the salt-pork. I felt so hungry that I used
to eat in my watch at night. The men
teazed me about it, and prophesied that I
would soon be ill; and, in a short time, I
found that it was true. I became much
bloated, had pains and stiffness in all my
limbs, and then boils broke out on my knees.
The doctor gave me some medicine without
effect; and I believe I should have died, if
the ship’s steward had not kindly advised
me to leave off meat, and gave me some
vinegar, which, with hard biscuit, was all
the food I took for some time, and I soon
got well.
I had often pictured to myself the pleasure
I should feel in sailing on the ocean in fine
weather, with nothing but the sky above and
n 2


the sea around, so calm and pleasant! But
I found my lot a very different one. The
only pleasant part was sometimes in the
night-watch when the rest of the crew were
asleep. I had then the opportunity of being
alone, and enjoying the motion of the ship,
and the mild, pleasant air.
As I was so little of a sailor, I had all
the disagreeable part of the duty to do—the
brass Tails to clean, to pass the ball for serv-
ing, and to turn the winch for making spun-
yarn, which was always my job. I was also
employed to wait on the mate, clean his
boots and shoes, make his bed, and clean his
cabin. I was very clumsy at first; but as I
got off some of the work on deck, I took
pains, and soon gave him satisfaction. He
took some trouble with me; but as at heart
I did not care to be a sailor, and did not
learn readily, he soon gave it up.
I did not mind the work ; it was the con-
temptible position I held in the ship that
annoyed me, and the constant insults I had
to put up with. However, I still dreamed
of Australia, and I contented myself with the
reflection that it was only for a short time,
and I should be ashore again.
The voyage was not particularly remark-
able for anything. Now and then we had a
storm; some very hot, and some very cold


weather; and we began to think of the end
of the voyage. The sailors did not know
much about navigation; but they had a sort
of inkling whereabouts we were, and began
to prepare for the land.
In talking over matters with one of my
shipmates, I found that, in my ignorance of
seafaring matters, I had signed an agreement
for the voyage out and home, and that I was
not at liberty to leave the ship in Sydney.
This was a great blow to all my hopes, and
made me feel very miserable.
We arrived in Sydney at last; and after
some little trouble in taking out the cargo,
we had some leisure to go on shore. I was
very much pleased with what I saw of the
town, and with the cheapness of everything ;
and I made up my mind to leave the ship at
all events. We were about four months and
a half coming out, so that I had some little
pay due to me ; but I thought nothing of the
loss of this, in comparison with the dread of
having to go back in the ship.
There was no cargo to be got for the ship
in Sydney, and they intended to leave in a
short time and go to India. I made up my
mind to leave the ship before she sailed. I
never told my purpose to anybody; but I
noticed that several of the crew had made up
their minds to do the same, as they were
b 3


packing up their clothes and taking them
ashore. I had not many clothes to take, so
I left everything till the last.
The crew began to leave one after the
other, so that in a very short time there were
very few left on board. I found, however,
that they did not leave for the sake of
settling in the country, but for the sake of
getting higher wages from captains who were
in want of crews to leave the port. I felt it
was very wrong to break my agreement;
but like most people who determine to do
what is wrong, 1 did not allow this thought
to trouble me much. Afterwards, for some
time, I suffered sadly for my crime. But to
return.
One of the men who had decamped was
caught by the police, and lodged in the jail;
so that it required some little skill to manage
properly. I had a few shillings with me ;
and the captain advanced me a few shillings
more to spend on shore: this little money I
carefully kept, and contented myself with a
drink of water and a ship’s biscuit.
I generally went on shore in the evening ;
and, instead of drinking about the public-
houses like the rest, I used to wander about
the town, see what was going on, and study
the localities. The ship lay alongside the
wharf, so that I had nothing to do but to


step on shore. All the hands in the ship
were busily employed refitting her, and pre-
paring her for the homeward voyage. As
this was a work 1 knew nothing about, I was
not of much use, and was employed for some
time as cook, and to wait on the officers.
At last it was quite evident that the ship
was about to go away. All the sails were
bent, ballast was got in, and nothing was
wanting but some more hands to replace
those who had absconded. I was looking
out very anxiously for my opportunity, which
I deferred to the last moment, in order that
there might be no time to catch me. I had
arranged my stock of clothes in a small
bundle, so as to be ready for a start.
One day a strange sailor came on board,
inquiring of me about the provisions, and
what sort of people the captain and officers
were; and I gathered from him, that he was
intending to come as a sailor for the voyage
home, and that the ship was expected to sail
immediately. Next evening he brought his
kit, and said the ship was to sail next day.
This I knew must be my opportunity; so I
waited until all was quiet and dark, watched
the mate off to his berth, and, taking my
bundle in my hand, stepped on shore. I
went at once straight for the road that I
knew led to the country, and walked until it


was near morning, when, being tired, I lay
down among some bushes, and fell fast
asleep.
I did not wake until the sun was very
high. I had some provisions with me which
I ate. I was very thirsty; but I could see
no water near. The ground was very dry
and dusty, and covered with strips of bark
curled up by the heat, dry leaves, and bits of
charcoal. Large trees were lying about
dead, and some were still standing. Here
and there young ones of all sizes were grow-
ing up to till the places of the dead ones.
The trees were all burned about the roots,
and some were covered with charcoal right
up to the branches. I was very much sur-
prised and interested at this; but I was so
thirsty, that the desire for water overpowered
every other sensation. There were a great
many tracks about; but I was fearful of
meeting anybody who might inform against
me. I now and then saw people passing ;
but I carefully avoided them.
1 wandered about for some time looking
for water; but everything was as dry and
dusty as it was possible to be. I saw a few
cattle, but looking thin and miserable. I
came to a fence that bordered the road, but
the road was as dry as everything else. A
team of bullocks and a man passed: the bul-


locks with their tongues hanging out; and
the driver, with every fold of his shirt and
trowsers, and every crevice on the dray, filled
with dust; it seemed as if dust in Australia
occupied the place of damp and moisture in
England. I came at last to water, and
stooped eagerly down; but the water was as
bitter as soot: it was a small pool that had
been left by the tide. All round the edge
the salt was white and glistening, and the
water was concentrated by the evaporation
to an intensity of bitterness and saltness that
I recollect even now with horror. I knew
from this, however, that I was near the sea,
and that the fresh water would most likely
be found in the other direction. I therefore
kept up a little hollow that was there for a
mile or two, until I came to a small pond
which was fortunately drinkable, though far
from being sweet. This refreshed me very
much, I ate some biscuit and meat, deter-
mined to keep where I was for a day or two,
until I was sure the ship had sailed without
me. I lay down on the ground; but it was
so hot that I could not lie still. The ground
was covered with ants of different colours and
sizes, which bit me most cruelly. I tried to
find shelter from the sun, but there was none;
look up in what direction I would, there
was the bright blue sky, and the blazing


sun. The few leaves on the trees sparkled
and glittered, and seemed to reflect down
the heat from their shining glossy surfaces.
I would get on the shady side of a large
tree ; but the sun appeared to chase me, the
shadow moved so quickly.
There was a large tree lying on the ground,
which had fallen so as to leave a considerable
space under it, and I got under this and lay
down Tor some time; but still the sun seemed
to find me out, and I had to move often.
Fortunately no one came near; all was silent
and still as death.
I had never calculated on the effect the
being alone would have on me. It was quite
a new sensation, and a most overpowering
one. As I lay on the ground I watched
the insects crawling about the decayed
bark of the tree, and took an interest in
them individually. However, no thought
of going back to the ship ever entered into
my head; I was only fearful of being found
out.
The sun began to go down at last, and I
took another draught of water, ate some
food, and lay down, with my bundle for a
pillow. The brackish water I had drunk
disagreed witli me, and I was very ill in the
night, and felt very chilly and wretched. I
determined to wait only one more day before


-1 went out. This day passed very much
like the last, —the same sun, the stinging in-
sects, the dreadful silence, my illness, all
tended to make me feel very low-spirited,
and I began seriously to doubt whether I had
made a good exchange.
Even in the ship I had plenty to eat, and
somebody to talk to, and I was getting used
to the people and the work. I slept toler-
ably well, rose with the sun, and breakfasted,
and, taking a clean shirt and trowsers out of
my bundle, prepared to seek my fortune in
Australia.
I thought it would be better to go away
from Sydney for fear the ship should not
have sailed. I walked along the road for
some time without meeting anybody, until I
came to a small public-house by the road
side, where I went in to get something to
drink. Several people were hanging about,
with whom I entered into conversation, and
inquired if there was any chance of my gut-
ting any work in that neighbourhood. I
learnt that there was a boiling-down estab-
lishment a short distance off the road where
they would be very likely to want a lad
to help,
I heard many remarks passed on me as to
whether I had taken the bush, and I found
that I was suspected to be a run-away con


vict. All this was not very agreeable cer-
tainly ; but I could not help feeling that it
was a, just punishment for my deceptive con-
duct in leaving the ship. This was another
incident I did not expect, and tended to make
me rather nervous. I met a man on the
way, and inquired of him which was the
nearest road to the boiling-down place. I
received for answer that I had only to follow
my nose, and I should get safe there. I soon
understood what was meant, for I imme-
diately became sensible of a nasty smell,
which increased as I got to the place where
the work was going on.
The boiling-down establishment was si-
tuated among the trees. It consisted of a
number of huts for the men, stock-yards for
the cattle, several very large cauldrons for
boiling down the meat for the sake of the
fat and tallow ; and some enclosures, partly
covered with bark, in which numerous pigs
were wallowing about. Many casks and hoops
were heaped up in one place; and there was
a dreadful smell about the place.
The men were busy chopping up meat,
and putting it into one of the cauldrons to
boil. At my coming up they looked round,
and I went up to one who appeared to be
the chief person; said I was in want of work,
and asked him if he could not give me some


tiling to do. “ Do! ” said the man, “ why
you look like a ghost; the best thing you
can do is to take a lump of that beef there,
go into one of the huts and fry it, and after
you have had a feed you can come and talk
about work.” One of the men accordingly
cut me off a nice fat piece of the beef, and,
pointing to a hut, told me that there was a
damper on the shelf, some tea and sugar,
and a frying-pan, and to help myself.
When I went to the hut I saw by a small
three-cornered piece of looking-glass nailed
up to the side, that my appearance fully jus-
tified their remark, that I looked like a ghost.
After I had eaten enough, and had drank
my tea, I found myself very much refreshed,
and went to where the men were at work.
I found that they had the same suspicion as
the others, but I do not think that it was
much in my disfavour. They began to joke
me about it, when I told them at once that I
had run away from a ship in the harbour,
and that I wanted employment away from
the shore till the ship was gone. They said
I could not have come to a better place;
that the place stunk too badly for any con-
stable to come near that could help it; and
that, though there was no work for me, if I
would cook for them I should have my grub
for nothing,
c


This suited me very well for the time ; and
I set to work cleaning up the hut and cook-
ing, I felt my ideas of Australia rather
realized, when I saw the quantities of fine fat
beef put into the boilers for no other purpose
than to extract the tallow. I recollected the
position of my own parents, and the great
difficulty they had in living, very seldom
tasting a beef-steak except after a week of
very'great luck; and the trouble I had to
get a living about the Docks, the number of
poor wretches about London who hardly ever
tasted meat; and I felt that I had come to a
land of plenty.
I took some interest in the work that was
going on. The bullocks were driven into a
stock-yard; at one end of which there was an
opening into an enclosure covered overhead,
which was the slaughter-house. Several bul-
locks were let into this at one time, and were
killed by a man stationed upon a platform
above, with a kind of spear having a point
like a chisel, which he dropped so as to strike
the bullocks in the pith of the neck, when
they fell instantly. When all the bullocks
were killed, they were skinned and cleaned,
and the carcases, cut up into pieces, were put
into the pots and boiled down for the fat,
which floated on the top. The meat was
boiled until the bones were so soft as to be


easily crushed under foot, when all the animal
matter was supposed to be extracted from
them. The hides were salted; and some of
the soup remaining, thickened with Indian
corn, was used to fatten pigs, which were
again boiled down for lard.
I remained here for a week or two, assist-
ing now and then at the works, and always
cooking and cleaning, until I began, as the
danger of detection became less imminent, to
be tired of working for nothing, and to be
discontented with my position. I therefore
took the opportunity one Saturday night,
when the work was over, to go into Sydney
to see whether the ship was gone, and also
to see whether any other employment could
be procured.
I saw no sign of the ship, and walked
about for some time. I saw several notices
in the windows of “ a boy wantedbut my
appearance evidently did not suit. At one
shop, however, where I inquired, the people
referred me to a lodging-house where a boy
was wanted to clean the knives and forks,
the shoes, &c. The house was kept by an
old widow lady, who had been the wife of a
merchant captain who had died in the port.
We had great bargaining about the terms,
and here my experience as a costermonger
stood me in good stead. We agreed at last
c 2


that I was to get eight shillings a week and
my food, and to make myself generally
useful.
This was quite a new line of life. I had a
great deal to do. My mistress was always
up at sunrise; and I had to sit up at night
to let in the lodgers, some of whom came
staggering in, and had to be helped to bed.
I did my best, however; and as there was
no sthit of food, I had not much to complain
of: I had often worked much harder in
London and not been paid nearly so well,
and certainly was never so well fed.
The most disagreeable part was the sitting
up at night. Some of the gentlemen boarders
who had come down from the country, would
stay out all night; so that, perhaps, I had all
my sitting up for nothing, and sometimes I
was almost too tired to do my work next
day. Sometimes I would get a shilling or
two for sitting up ; and acting upon this hint,
I made it a rule, whenever I had to sit up
beyond twelve o’clock, to ask for a small
gratuity, and I was very seldom refused.
This gave me a little money, and I was very
saving, and took care never to go to the
public-house.
I was sitting up one night half asleep,
thinking over my old experiences, when it
occurred to me that I had never been to


church in the colony, and I felt curious to
see how the church-service was performed.
I therefore took the opportunity, when my
mistress was in good humour, to get an un-
willing leave to go the next Sunday after-
noon.
I found the nearest church very much
crowded, and was told rudely by the pew-
opener that there was no room for me.
There was room, however, in the Roman Ca-
tholic cathedral; but I felt, that, although
the people were civil, or rather indifferent, it
was not my church, and went away, seeing
clearly that, if I would go to church, I must
pay for a seat, and that nobody cared whe-
ther I went or not. In fact, the population
increased so fast, that it was hardly possible
to procure church room for those who were
willing and able to pay for it.
My situation was not by any means a dis-
agreeable one. My old mistress was some-
times very cross and exacting, as old women
generally are, and I was very often required
to do odd jobbs at inconvenient times for the
boarders ; but this I generally got paid for.
What annoyed me most was, never being my
own master, never having any time to myself.
However I managed to make a few acquaint-
ance, from whom I learned that I was not
paid the current wages for servants in my
c 3


capacity. This made me very much discon-
tented, and I longed to go into the hush to
try the life there.
Many of the gentlemen coming to the
house sounded me about my willingness to
go into the interior; but none that I had any
confidence in. Now and then they brought
men with them from the country, who lived
in the kitchen, and told me long stories about
hunting wild cattle, chasing kangaroos, and
killing native dogs, until I was quite excited,
and desirous of becoming a stockman. I
had become acquainted with the characters
of the various settlers frequenting the house,
and I looked out for one that would suit me.
At last the opportunity occurred. A gen-
tleman from the New England district was
looking out for a man ; and as there were no
emigrant ships in the harbour, he was rather
at a loss and sounded me; but I rather held
aloof, as I wanted to get good wages. But,
after humming and hawing for some time, I
agreed, if my passage was paid, to go for the
wages of £25 a year, to be increased to £3O
if I gave satisfaction. I gave my old mis-
tress a week’s warning (at which she was very
angry), and took my passage in the steamer
for Port Macquarie, the nearest harbour to
the place where my employer resided.
We had a very pleasant passage; and, on


my arrival, I had some rations given me by
an agent of my master, and was directed
how to go to the station, about seventy miles
off. I made up my clothes and rations in a
bundle, and started in great spirits for my
destination. The weather was rather warm,
but clear and dry; and I walked the first
day about twenty miles, part of it over a very
uneven road.
I had never seen hills or mountains before
in my life; and I was so pleased with the
novelty, and the constantly changing appear-
ance of the scenery around, that I did not
feel much fatigued. I stopped at a hut by
the side of the road, and, finding it was one
I was recommended to stop at, I asked per-
mission to stay the night; which was readily
granted, with an expression of wonder that I
should ask such a question. I was asked to
light a pipe while a tin-pot was put down to
boil for my tea. I offered to take from my
own supplies, but they would not hear of it;
and was good-humouredly advised, that a good
bushman always kept his own provisions
when travelling as a stand-by in case of
accidents.
After I had supped, all hands lighted their
pipes and gathered round me, to hear the
news from Sydney and the Port. In this I
found I was not well informed. I did not


know any of the crack public-houses, nor
any of the notorious individuals either at the
Port or at Sydney sufficiently well to make
my news interesting.
They soon found out that I was a towney
like one of themselves; and here we had
more in common. Many were the anxious
wishes for a draught of London porter, or a
drop of blue ruin, or cream of the valley.
We bad a great talk about London, and I
was sufficiently well up in that topic to give
very interesting and entertaining accounts;
so much so, that I kept everybody amused
till it was very late.
Several of the men had led much the same
sort of life that I had so recently quitted, and
they did not really believe that I. had come
out a free man; and when I began to con-
sider, 1 felt almost surprised myself, that, in
all my poverty and difficulty, I had never
put myself under the power of the law. 1
verily believe it was the little training I had
got at the Sunday-school that had shewn me
the sin and folly of giving way to temptation.
Both my father and mother, however, were
honest people, and I never knew them to
countenance a dishonest act.
Several of the men here were prisoners
assigned out to their master for a certain
time according to their sentence: but they


did not appear to suffer very much; and ex-
cept that they received no wages, hut were
fed and clothed entirely at their master’s ex-
pense, and could not change their service,
they were quite as well off as the free men:
indeed they looked much better; they had
only one care, that was, to keep themselves
quiet, or, as they termed it, “ to do their
lagging” with as much ease to themselves
as possible. I believe, however, that they
counted every hour until the time they were
free. One of the men was due for his ticket
of leave very shortly, and I could not help
noticing how very careful and circumspect he
was in his behaviour, and what a control he
exercised over the other men to keep them
in order, for fear of any row or disturbance
that might jeopardise his much coveted
liberty. They wanted me to stay at the hut
for a day or two; but I was anxious to get
to my journey’s end, and to begin my new
work.
I started, accordingly, shortly after sunrise,
and walked quietly along the road, not feel-
ing it necessary to fatigue myself, as I had
the whole day before me, and but twenty-
five miles to walk to reach the next stage.
I was looking at the strange plants and
flowers that grew by the road-side, and watch-
ing the beautiful parrots and cockatoos that


flew screaming from tree to tree, their bril-
liant plumage glancing in tbe sunshine. Now
and then 1 disturbed a sharp little lizard,
which would cock up its head, and look at
me in such a knowing way that I felt quite
amused. I saw a snake too, the first I had
ever seen, lying right in the middle of the
track on a patch of hot sand, with its head in
the middle of the coil. It was asleep, and
did not stir until I was almost upon it, when
it glided off amongst the trees.
The road was very hilly, and the weather
very hot, so that I sauntered quite leisurely
along. I had not gone very far in this way,
however, before 1 found the track cease, and
all my endeavours to find it again were un-
successful. I walked as I thought back,
round and round, and in every direction;
fancied 1 knew the hills before me, went up
to them, and still no road. I sat down upon
a fallen tree, and then got up and walked on
for about two hours, until I thought I should
like to take rest again, and sat down upon a
tree that seemed very convenient; and I was
surprised to find that it was the identical tree
I had sat upon two hours before ! This fairly
puzzled me : I thought the place must be
enchanted; and then the horrible idea came
across me, that perhaps it was I who was
mad. However, the recollection of what


they had told me at the hut about the neces-
sity of keeping my provisions, recurred to
me, and convinced me that it was not an un-
common occurrence. In my doubt, and
almost despair, I had walked and run until I
was quite exhausted, and felt quite faint.
As the weather was warm and dry, and I
had food with me, I was not in any great
fear of starvation, I concluded that the best
thing I could do would be to stop and rest
where I was until the next morning. I ac-
cordingly went to the bottom of a hill, where
I found some nice cool water, which refreshed
me very much. I had fortunately a tinder-
box with me ; and though I did not want to
cook, I felt it would be amusement and com-
pany for me to light a fire, which I did very
soon, there being plenty of dry -wood about.
The sun was getting low by the time I had
eaten my supper; and I was surprised, when
it went down, to observe how very soon it
became dark ; in a few minutes afterwards it
was night.
I let my fire get quite low, and lay down,
trying to sleep; but I could not. As I lay
down, however, I heard a rustling noise, and
found it proceeded from the birds coming to
drink. I lay quite still, and watched for
some time. Some small animals came also,
but it was too dark for me to distinguish


them. I made my fire blaze up brightly,
and it scared some away; but some I saw
were too thirsty to be frightened, and drank
eagerly.
I at length fell fast asleep, and did not
wake until daylight, when the noise of the
birds aroused me. I sat munching my break-
fast for some time, ruminating on what I
should do ; but all my cogitating ended in
nothing. I did not know where I was, nor
which way to go. I thought, therefore, the
best way would be, to go to the top of one of
the nearest hills to try if I could see any-
thing. I accordingly marched up to the top;
but it was so completely covered with trees,
that I could get no view at all.
I determined, therefore, to climb no more,
but to keep along the hollows, as it was much
easier and cooler. I accordingly went back
to the water where I had slept, and kept
along the hollow. I had not gone very far
before I heard the barking of a dog. A most
gladsome sound ; and shortly afterwards I
saw the smoke of a hut, built on a small flat
between the creek and the hill, which rose
above it to a considerable height. I walked
quietly towards the hut; but as soon as I
came near, a whole troop of dogs rushed at
me, barking most furiously. A woman came
out, and eyed me most scrutinizingly, with


out, however, attempting to appease the
dogs, which were so ferocious that I was
afraid to go any nearer. I stopped, how-
ever, and shouted, and presently a man came
out and walked towards me. I called to
him, and told him I had lost my way, and
desired to know how to get on the road
again.
The man called the dogs off; and after in-
quiring where I was going to, asked me in,
and gave me some milk to drink. The
people and place had not a very honest look.
After resting a while, they gave me the
direction for the road, which fortunately was
not very far off, and seemed very glad to
be rid of me. I had been wandering round
and round, and the wonder was that I had
never hit the road. I must have been very
close to it two or three times; but, not
knowing on which side of me it was, I
missed it.
When I got on the road, I was very care-
ful not to allow my senses to go wool-gather-
ing again, but kept sturdily along the middle
of the track, too anxious about being right to
take much notice of the objects around me.
I called at several other huts on my road,
and took a great deal of trouble to inquire
my way, and keep on the proper track; and
at length I arrived at the station.
D


The station was on the table-land of New
England, beautifully situated on a slightly
rising ground, with a small creek running
before it, and facing a fine grassy plain about
a mile wide, and running right and left as
far as the eye could see. The ground behind
rose gradually to a small hill covered with
timber, which bounded the plain on both
sides. The station had not long: been occu-
pied, and everything was in a very rough
state. The master’s hut was made of slabs,
and consisted of only two divisions. The
hut for the men had the side walls finished;
but the bark for the roof was not on, on ac-
count of the difficulty of procuring it owing
to the dry weather : it was merely covered
temporarily with a tarpaulin. A good deal
of split wood was lying about, which I was
told was for the purpose of making a stock-
yard, and fencing in a paddock. I could
not have come to a better place to learn the
ways of the bush.
I reported myself to my master, and ex-
cused myself for not coming up before, by
telling him about my having lost the road:
at which he was not surprised ; but he de-
sired me, after I had had some refreshment,
to go and look for the bullocks, which were
somewhere over the range behind; and to
be careful I did not lose myself, as the wild


blacks were very troublesome in the neigh-
bourhood, and had killed several men. Ac-
cordingly, after I had refreshed myself, I
got a direction to the most likely place to
find the bullocks, and started over the hill to
seek them, I had gone, I suppose, about a
mile and a half from the hut, when I saw a
flock of sheep feeding; they were very far
apart, and I was going right through the
midst of them, when I heard a man shout
out, not in the most refined way possible,
desiring me to mind what I was about, or I
should drive the sheep to the devil. I did
not at first see the individual who saluted me
in this way; but after a while I saw a dog,
and presently made out a man sitting on a
log very comfortably, carving a stick into a
whip-handle. I went up to him, when he
gave me a great rowing for going through a
flock of sheep feeding in the bush ; I ought
to have gone round them. He guessed,
however, he said, the moment he saw me,
that I was the new chum that was expected,
and asked what I was looking for. I told
him. He had seen the bullocks, and directed
me to them. This man had his gun by his
side loaded, in case the blacks should be
near, of whom, however, he did not seem to
be in much fear.
I brought the bullocks up to the hut quite
d 2


safe; and so went through my first experi-
ment in bush-craft quite satisfactorily.
I had my rations served out to me in the
evening; and was from that time considered
a part of the establishment.
My first work was digging post-holes on
the side of a hill for a stock-yard, and very
hard work I found it, as the ground was dry
and hard, and chosen on that account. How-
ever I did not much mind it, but set heartily
at Work, and in a few days had them done.
I was then asked if I could handle an axe;
but, at any rate, I was told that I must try,
and mortice the posts to be put up round the
yard. My master fancied himself a bit of a
carpenter, and worked with me, so that I
had no opportunity of shirking. The posts
had been split out of some Jogs cut from a
large tree on the range, and were all of the
proper length. We had to cut the holes in
them to put the rails in. We had a pattern
to mark the proper places for the cuts, which
we chopped out with a narrow-bladed axe.
My master shewed me how to put the posts
so as to have them firm ; but the axe jarred
my hand very much. With all his science I
saw he did not make a very much better fist
of it than I did; but we chopped away ob-
stinately. I had rather the best of it, as I
was always sent away a little before break-
fast and dinner to prepare the meals.


I found my master a very different man
here from what he was in Sydney. In town
he did nothing but walk about and see every-
thing, and enjoy himself; but on his farm he
thought of nothing but work. His dress was
also very different. When the posts were all
done we set them up, and fitted the rails
into them, to the great satisfaction of my
master; who, I believe, considered he had
achieved a much greater work than Sir Chris-
topher Wren, or anybody else. I suppose it
was the spirit of contradiction in me; but I
believed that any hedge carpenter would
have done it better.
When that was done, we began to clear
and burn off some of the trees on a piece of
land that had been chosen for a wheat pad-
dock, and I liked the work exceedingly. We
cut down the trees with a cross-cut saw, then
cut them into lengths, and rolled them up
together to burn. It was great fun to see a
large tree come tumbling down; and the
altered appearance the clearing gave to the
place was very curious. The logs were kept
burning all night; and we had to go out the
last thing and make up the fires, so as to
consume the wood as quickly as possible.
All this time the sheep, which were the sup-
port of the whole establishment, were taken
out to feed every day, and brought home by
d 3


the shepherds without any trouble. They
were never brought very near the hut, as
our master said that they ate the place bare,
and would make it look very ugly.
We never worked on Sunday. In the
morning our master was generally occupied
in reading some religious book; and in the
afternoon he rode out to see the sheep on
the run. When riding home alone he had
the, habit of repeating the prayers and
Church - service in a loud voice; and he
usually finished with the Evening Hymn,
which he sang, or rather shouted, at the top
of his voice, so as to make the woods ring
again, and served as a signal to me to make
ready his supper.
Many things struck me as very curious in
the life here. The blacks, as I said before,
were very troublesome. Nowand then they
killed a shepherd, and stole the sheep, and
were, in consequence, punished by the settlers
unmercifully when they could be caught;
w T hich was but seldom. And any man going
any distance from a hut was always well
armed ; some people carried a complete load
of guns and pistols. Every shepherd had at
least one gun, and a considerable supply of
ammunition; and although, with the excep-
tion of a few proprietors of stations, nearly
all the inhabitants either were or had been


convicts, yet crimes were very infrequent.
There was such a perfect equality between
everybody in the way of eating, and drink-
ing, and clothing, that I suppose there was
no great temptation. The equal way in
which everybody was exposed to danger from
the blacks, I believe served as a great bond
of union. Many of the convicts really liked
the excitement of the thing, and wished for
nothing so much as the chance of coming
into contact with them. I used to help to
serve out rations to the men, and had to
carry them to an out-station on a horse. I
became quite a handy man in the various
work to be done; and was now and then
employed about the sheep when a shepherd
was ill, or when there was no other employ-
ment.
Lambing season was the most important
time to my master. During that time every
hand was employed about the sheep, and
every other work was given up. The ewe
flocks that were lambing had the choicest
parts of the run reserved for their use; and
the men attending upon them had an extra
allowance of tea and sugar served out to
them, and were expected to be up and vigi-
lant all night.
My master was constantly with the sheep,
and looked anxiously out for a good increase,
d 4


in which he was not disappointed. Our
greatest trouble was with the young ewes
who had lambs for the first time, many of
them would run away frightened from their
lambs, and we had to tie them up together
for some time until they took to one another.
Some of the stronger lambs would try and
rob the weaker ones, by watching when the
mother was not looking, and sucking her so
as to- starve her own lamb ; and it would,
perhaps, be some time before she found out
that it was not her own offspring. When
first the ewes were driven into the pens, there
was such a bleating and confusion—mothers
losing their lambs, and lambs their mothers—-
that it would appear quite a hopeless task for
them to get right; yet somehow, after a little
space, they would all become settled. Many
of the ewes lost their lambs by accident or
death almost immediately after they were
born; and these we had to catch and hold,
so that the weaker lambs might suck them,
and so relieve them of their milk, and
strengthen themselves.
When the lambs got stronger, it was very
amusing to watch then’ tricks and gambols;
no person having only seen old sheep can
form any idea of the activity and liveliness of
the young ones. They have always a great
objection to be shut up at night; and some


times they would combine, it would almost
appear, for the purpose of annoying their
mothers and the shepherds, and when they
came near the hurdles would start off simul-
taneously at some signal, and all run off, per-
haps, to some little eminence, and crowd on
the top quite regardless of the cries of their
mothers, and give a great deal of trouble to
get them in. Sometimes they would make
for the water-hole, and keep running round
and round.
The lambing time lasted a month; and
after that was over, there was a spell again
for some time until the shearing time came
on and harvest. My master had two or
three hundred head of cattle; and after I
had learned to ride, I liked the employment
of looking after them very well; but I felt
that pastoral pursuits was not my vocation.
Not that I had any difficulty in doing any-
thing that might be necessary ; but I had no
particular liking for the animals themselves.
Some of the shepherds felt a great deal of
pleasure in seeing the animals they tended
eat, and drink, and get fat; but I must con-
fess that it was not any very great pleasure
to me. I took a great deal of pains to learn
how everything was done; but more as a
matter of pride than from any pleasure in it.
Some of the shepherds, on the contrary,
d 5


made, as it were, a personal acquaintance
with some of the sheep, and would pet them,
and give them names, and teach them to
come when they were called, and know them
individually; but I had not that taste. Look-
ing after the cattle pleased me very ranch at
first, on account of the riding and galloping;
but after the first novelty was over, I felt that
I did not care two-pence whether the cattle
were fat or lean, except for my master’s
sake.
1 had to assist in making hurdles for the
sheep; and this I liked very well: hut I
suppose it was because I had been used to it
in my childhood, I fancied I should do better
at buying and selling than at anything else.
The only chance of my coming out in that
way was by being employed in a country
store. There was for some time no such
thing nearer than the Port; however the
country was fast becoming settled, and the
want of such an establishment was very much
felt. Many travellers pushing forward to
occupy the fine country of the Darling
Downs beyond us, were passing, and needing
some stores and repairs, which were not to
be had except from settlers who had only
provided for their own wants, and could not
spare any. I had broached the subject to
my master, and advised him to set up a store


and accommodation-house on his run. But
whether he could not spare the money, or
whether, as he said, and with some truth, his
run was not a suitable place, I do not know :
perhaps he thought it was not proper to
combine two different trades.
He talked and inquired a good deal about
the subject, and I believe made the first stir
about it; and it was not very long before a
man came up from the Port to see about a
suitable location. He chose a place about
two miles off, where two roads met, a very
proper place, and soon had a store built, and
everything going on. Whenever I had the
chance I went over to see it; and the mo-
ment I saw what was going on, I felt that
that was just what would suit me. I had no
chance of being employed as yet; but I saw
that the storekeeper rather liked my looks.
I felt that when he needed any help, I had a
much better chance than anybody else. I
therefore worked on with my master cheer-
fully, improving myself in my reading and
writing at every opportunity.
There was sometimes very exciting work,
hunting kangaroos, or emus, or native dogs.
The kangaroos we ate ; and although rather
dry, they were an agreeable change. The
emus we hunted for their oil, which is reck-
oned in the bush a sovereign specific for
d 6


bruises or sprains. We used to skin them,
and hanging the skin up before the fire, the
oil would trickle down into a vessel placed to
receive it.
One day I saw a very curious scene. I
was standing at the hut-door delivering a
message to my master, when I saw a flock of
five emus coming slowly up the plain; they
were playing and gambolling together in a
very droll way, turning their heads on one
side, and running at and round each other,
until coming abreast of the hut, which they
had evidently never seen before, they drew
up, and took a leisurely survey of the pre-
mises. They were peering about, and look-
ing at one another and at the hut, and were
evidently bent on making a full examination
of the hut which had usurped part of their
domain, when unfortunately a man from the
other side of the plain, who had been looking
for horses, came in sight and frightened them
away.
My time passed pleasantly enough; and I
found that I had quite gained the confidence
of my master, and gained such a character
among the neighbours, that I had no longer
any fear of want of employment. When my
master went to Sydney, he left me in charge
of the place, and I took great care to merit
his confidence.


Everything was going on very smoothly
and comfortably, when I got a message from
the storekeeper that he wished to speak with
me. I found that he wanted somebody to
take charge of the accommodation-house at-
tached to his store, and he offered me the
berth. Although this was not exactly the
sort of thing I should have wished, yet I saw
it would bring me nearer to it; and I agreed,
as soon as I could leave my present situation,
to go there. When I told my master of it
he was very sorry, and in some degree hurt.
He felt that he had used me so well, that
there was something of ingratitude in my
leaving him; and begged me to consider of
it seriously, and judge whether it would be
prudent in me to leave him. He pointed
out to me that I should have very disagree-
able work attending on the travellers, and
should not be much better off than with him.
But I felt very differently; and I told him,
that though I should always feel very grate-
ful to him, yet that I had made up my mind
and determined to go. He kept me, how-
ever, to the very last day of my term; and
though he paid me my wages, yet he did not
give me any kind wishes, nor say “ God
speed.” I went off to my new employment;
not, however, in very good spirits. I felt
that, perhaps, I ought not to have left so


good a master without a cause; yet still
there was a duty I owed to myself, to raise
myself by every means in my power; and
this I felt I was doing now.
The accommodation-house I had charge of
was a sort of inn, but without a license to sell
spirits, which were not allowed on the pre-
mises. It was intended to be subordinate to,
and a means of bringing business to the
store which was adjacent. The building con-
sisted' of one room about twenty feet long,
intended for a public room for dining and
living in, and several small chambers, or
rather cells, partitioned off; a skillion, or
leanto, attached to it. The furniture was
very simple. Two rough tables, covered with
oil-cloth, two clumsy sofas, and a few Ame-
rican chairs. The w T alls were lined with
Osnaburgh, a common sort of linen; and the
room was w T armed in winter by a huge fire
at one end. The bed-rooms w r ere each fur-
nished with two stretchers, on which were
mattresses and blankets, and a small looking-
glass. The kitchen was detached, and very
ill-furnished with utensils for cooking. My
duty was to attend to this place, to wait on
the visitors, supply their wants, and to give
an account of what they had to my employer,
who made the charges. If there were not
many people to attend upon, I had to cook


for them too; but if there was much com-
pany, some one was sent to assist me. We
had no hay or corn, which was a great draw-
back at first, as the horses had to be turned
out into the bush, and some of them were
lost in consequence, which kept the place
back; but after that want was supplied, it
became rather a favourable specimen of a
house of its class. I spared no pains to make
everything as comfortable as the building
and the charges would allow; and in a short
time, I believe my employer made nearly as
much by the accommodation as by the store.
I had the whole management to myself.
After the first day or two my employer never
came near me ; and I soon found myself of
very great consequence. The house and
store became quite the centre of the district,
where every kind of news was known and
discussed; where stray horses and bullocks
were advertised, and rewards offered for
them. I had great opportunities of making
myself known and useful by giving messages
and information. I had often opportunities
of obliging my old master in this way, which
always gave me great pleasure.
After some time we—for I considered my-
self an important part of the establishment—
found the whole business so thriving, that
my employer thought it would be a good


plan to change his business, by starting an-
other similar establishment some miles far-
ther on, where the want was much felt, and
giving me charge of this one. He accord-
ingly went- down to Sydney to make the
necessary arrangements, leaving me in full
charge of everything. Here I was, then,
master, only temporarily certainly, but still
master of a considerable establishment, with
a great deal of property under my charge,
and, iii some measure, looked up to by every-
body. My old master came sometimes to
the store and the accommodation-house. I
felt an honest pride, as I hope it may be
called, in shewing him every attention, and
making him as comfortable as possible.
During the time the new store was in pro-
gress, I had all the business to attend to, as
my employer was always there. And when
it was all ready, he determined to go and see
after it himself, as he was more experienced,
and leave the old one altogether in my
charge; and, at the same time, he made me
an offer of payment on such terms as I could
not fail to be satisfied with. We worked to-
gether for some time; and, if it depended on
ourselves alone, I am sure we should never
have had any dispute; but idle gossipping
people would be constantly misunderstanding
some of my doings, and mis-reporting them;


and although every time I shewed all their
reports to be false, yet, after being repeated
several times, I found they had made an im-
pression, and that there was not the same
confidence between my master and me as
before. This was dreadfully annoying; and
although my employer still treated me very
kindly, I felt it would be better to come to
some arrangement which would completely
prevent any possibility of misconstruction. I
accordingly offered to pay him a certain
annual sum for a certain terra of years, if he
would at the end of that time give up all
right to the place. This offer he took into
consideration; and after suggesting some
modifications, which I agreed to, the bargain
was settled. If at any time during the term
I failed in my payments, the good-will, build-
ings, &c,, were to revert back to him; and if
I performed faithfully my part of the con-
tract, at the end of the stipulated time I was
to be in full possession of the whole. This
was quite as good a bargain for him as for
me: he was insured a certain sum without
any trouble to himself, and he could give his
undivided attention to his own business, which
promised to be considerable.
I had a great deal of trouble to manage
in the first instance. I did not understand
the purchase of the necessary articles, which


I could only do by writing to Sydney. The
people I dealt with could only judge of me
by my letters, which, as I had not had much
experience in writing, were, I dare say, very
contemptible. They tried to- impose upon
me, and I had great difficulty in getting jus-
tice done me. Altogether the first year I
had very up-hill work, and found it no easy
matter to make the necessary payments.
However I did manage that; and I was, of
course, much more comfortable, as I had the
whole year before me, and much greater
experience.
The second year went on smoothly ; and
before the half of it was over, I found that I
could have paid my rent with ease ; and by
the end of the year I was in such a position,
that I felt a moral certainty that 1 should
succeed. I began, however, to feel a want
of some kindred spirit, some one to tell my
hopes and fears to; some one to rejoice with
me when I was glad, and to condole with me
when I was low-spirited ; some being whose
interests were identical with mine, and who
could feel and appreciate my successful
efforts, and who would help me to bear the
disappointments and crosses inseparable even
from the greatest success.
I had made friends of many of the neigh-
bours, but there was something selfish in all


their sympathy : our interests would inevita-
bly clash in some way or other; and there
could not be the communion between us that
I began to feel was a necessary want to me.
In fact I wanted a wife, and made up my
mind to look out for one. I was quite in the
position of a marrying man. I had, for the
bush, a capital house; I was obliged to have
several servants; and I had a thriving busi-
ness : all I wanted to complete my happiness
was, that some kind female spirit should
minister to me.
My store and accommodation-house, which
I had managed to procure a license for,
and let at a good rent as a public-house,
brought a great many people about, and
several small tradesmen were induced to
settle near. A blacksmith, a wheelwright, a
jack-of-all-trades, who professed to be a sad-
dler, and others. They were all poor people,
and looked to me for the various articles,
tools, iron, &c. they needed for their trade.
Several of them were married. One of them
was a doctor, who had settled there with a
large family. They were very poor, but very
well conducted; and though they were not
by any means good customers, yet I felt
their respectability was a credit to the place,
and I took a great deal of trouble to assist
them and make them comfortable. They


were a couple, of about forty-five years of
age, with five children.
The eldest girl, about nineteen, had a very
good education, and very pleasing manners.
I took every possible pains to make myself
agreeable to her, but for some time with
little success. As I never shewed any relax-
ation in my attention, at last it was arranged
that we should be married. There was no
clergyman near; so that we were obliged to
go to Port Macquarie. I did not like leav-
ing my business; but as I had never had a
holiday, and one expects to be married only
once in one’s life-time, I made up my mind
to go. I travelled in a horse and gig', and
some of the neighbours came with us. When
I got to the Port and was married, I intended
to have stayed a fortnight; but living in the
inn in such a small place I found very un-
comfortable, and, after a week’s stay, both
my wife and I agreed we should be much
more comfortable in our own home. I did
some good, however, having made some ar-
rangements, and formed some acquaintances,
which would be of use to me in my business.
We got back all safe, and set about
making ourselves comfortable for life. I had
a garden made and a well dug. My garden
I took a great deal of pleasure in. I got
seeds and slips of plants at considerable ex


pense, and many from a great distance, as
there was no garden for some miles round.
I had afterwards the pleasure to find, that I
had introduced a very beneficial change in
that respect; for many of the neighbouring
settlers, when they found how mine throve,
made gardens for themselves; and I felt
great pleasure in assisting them from mine
with slips and seeds.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands, seeing
that a village was rising, advised the Govern-
ment to send up a surveyor to lay out a
township, which was accordingly done. Al-
lotments for a court-house, church, burying-
ground, glebe, and parsonage being reserved.
The streets were named after the principal
inhabitants of the neighbourhood, and I had
the pleasure of seeing my name down on the
plan. I was only a squatter before this, pay-
ing a yearly sum; but when the township
was laid out, I purchased, with the consent
of my former master, the allotment on which
my house stood, and several adjoining, at the
rate of five pounds an acre, and was now on
my own freehold. I still had my yearly rent
to pay for the good-will, &c., but the time
was gradually drawing to a close.
I was very anxious to get a church built;
and for this purpose I solicited subscriptions,
but not with much success at first; but as


the place began to increase, the necessity of
it was more apparent. The great difficulty
was, the different creeds of the various inha-
bitants. They were so divided into Roman
Catholics, Church of England people, Dis-
senters, &c., that, although there was quite
enough of religious zeal, it was impossible
they could combine for a religious purpose.
It was some years, therefore, before the
church was built, and principally through
my exertions; some people assisting by cut-
ting timber, some by sending bullocks to
draw it to the place, and some with money.
When we had collected a certain sum, the
Government, through the bishop, advanced
as much more, and we set earnestly to work
to get it finished.
When it was roofed in, the bishop came
up to consecrate it, the clergyman appointed
assisting. The first duty performed was the
baptizing of two of my children. I was made
the first churchwarden; and I looked upon
the building with very great satisfaction, as
the successful result of my earnest endeavours
to promote the best interests of a little com-
munity of which I felt myself to be the centre.
I became quite a patriarch in the place. I
had seen the arrival and settling of every in-
dividual, and was quite an authority in all
public matters.


I might have been made a magistrate
amongst a batcli that were appointed ; but I
felt that I should only be in the way of more
educated and intelligent men, and declined
the honour. After a while we got a school-
master, who acted as clerk and sexton; then
a miller came; and so the place kept on in-
creasing. I had my troubles, however. New
hands opened stores, and for a time took a
good deal of business from me; but I ma-
naged to brush up and regain my position.
My children were growing up, and I found
an opportunity of buying a station, and sheep,
as some provision for them. I now felt
keenly the want of early education. During
the time I was raising myself, the activity
and busy life I led did not so much make
me feel the want; but when I began to rest
a little, and enjoy my ease and position, I
felt that there was a great distance between
me and those people with whom I should
have been glad to associate. However I did
my best to do my duty in that state of life
to which it had pleased God to call me ; and
I have a lively sense of thankfulness for the
many mercies I have received at His hands.
FINIS.


London:
Printed by James Truscots Nelson Square.




