





Presented to the [?]








THE
CYCLOPEDIA OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
VOL. I.












THE
CYCLOPEDIA
OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
(ILLUSTRATED)
IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. L
AN HISTORICAL AND COMMERCIAL REVIEW
DESCRIPTIVE AND BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS
FIGURES AND ILLUSTRATIONS
AN EPITOME OF PROGRESS
EDITED BY
J. S. BATTYE, B.A., LL.B. (M ELB.)
Public Librarian to the State of Western Australia
WESTERN AUSTRALIA :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR THE CYCLOPEDIA COMPANY, 29, BARRACK STREET PERTH
BY HUSSEY & GILLINGHAM LIMITED, 106 & 108, CURRIE STREET ADELAIDE
MCMXII.




Preface
The object of this Cyclopedia is to present as comprehensive an account as possible
of the State of Western Australia in all its varied aspects and interests—historical,
descriptive, industrial, agricultural, and other. Twenty years ago the Western State
ridl rested in the mist of obscurity, hut when with a touch of the Magicians wand
its golden treasures were revealed, a change came o’er the scene, and to-day, in point
, °j im P°rtance and prosperity, Western Australia stands second to no State in the
. 9 rea t Gommonirealth of Australia.
_ ln the com pdation of the volume every care has been exercised, and though fully
conscious of its defects I have endeavoured so far as possible to avoid error and
secure accuracy, so that in the days to come it may be used with confidence as a
work of reference. For the historical portion all responsibility must rest with vie.
Wherever possible 1 have taken advantage of previous publications, and desire to
acknowledge my indebtedness to them all, more particularly to Kimberley’s “ History
of Western Australia,” the “Twentieth Century Impressions of Western Australia}’
Calvert’s “ Discovery of Australia,” Dr. J. E. Heeres’ “Part played by the Dutch
in the Discovery of Australia,” and to the excellent historical summary prepared
for the “Year Book, 1903.” Newspaper files, official reports, and all those avenues
of research open to one with the treasures of a large Public Library at his disposal
have also been drawn upon, in the hope of presenting a full and true account
of the history of the State.
lor contributed articles I am indebted to the Government Geologist for the
article on Geology, Mineralogy, and Palaeontology; to Mr. J. J. East fur those on
the launa and Flora; to Mr. G. Pattye for those on the Governors, the Federal
Parliament, and the Press, to Lieut.-Colonel Collett for that on the Military and
Laval Forces; to Mr. J. F. Gonigrave for the sketch of the Commerce of the State:
Do Mr. W. Somerville for the article on Industrial Arbitration; and to M& George I
| SfficjU forjhat on the Metropolitan Municipalities. To all these 1 desire to render
my thanks, as well as to the many public officials who have always been ready to
renter whatever assistance lay in their power, and without whose help the task of
compilation would have been extremely difficult.
JAS. S. SATTYE,
Editor.


PUBLISHERS’ NOTE.
While the following pages were passing through the press certain changes
occurred affecting the positions held by a few of those whose biographies are recorded-
Where these are of sufficient importance the necessary alterations will be made in
the Second Volume, in which, too, any errors discovered in the Historical portion
will be corrected.
Trustee Chambers , 29, Barrack Street , Perth .


contents of Vol.1.
PAGE
Aborigines ... ... ... ... ... ... 502
Aborigines of AVestern Australia, The ... 45
Accountants and Auditors ... ... ... 640
Administration of Justice, The ... ... 367
Arbitration Court ... ... ... ... 372
Children’s Courts ... ... ... ... 367
Minor Courts ... ... ... ... ... 366
Supreme Court ... ... 361
Agricultural Bank 443
Agriculture, Department of ... ... ... 435
Albany Advertiser, The ... ... ... ... 590
Architects ... ... ... ... ... ... 622
Audit Office ... ... ... ... ... 419
Banking, Insurance, and Finance ... ... 610
Bedford, Admiral Sir Frederick George Den-
ham, G.C.8., G.C.M.G 301
Biographical Index ... ... ... ... 769
Broome, Sir Frederick Napier, K.C.M.G. ... 298
Bunbury Harbour Trust ... ... 723
Bunbury Herald, The ... ... .. ... 590
Chamber of Manufactures, The ... ... ... 727
Claremont ... ... ... ... ... ... 555
Clarke, Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew, K.H. ... 290
Climate of Western Australia, The ... ... 9
Colonial Secretary’s Department 502
Commerce and Industry ... ... ... ... 661
Consular ... ... ... ... ... 592
Copyright ... ... ... ... ... 415
Cottesloe ... ... ... ... ... 555
Crown Law Department ... ... ... ... 479
Customs ... ... ... ... ... ... 411
Daily News, The ... ... ... ... ... 534
Defence, Department of ... ... ... ... 387
Dental 599
Eastern Districts Chronicle, The (York) ... ... 590
East Fremantle 555
Education Department ... ... ... ... 482
Engineers, Architects, and Surveyors ... 622
Evening Star, The (Boulder) ... 591
PAGE
Fauna of Western Australia, The 28
Federal Government Departments ... ... 375
Fisheries Department ... ... ... ... 507
Fitzgerald, Captain Charles, R.N 291
Flora of AVestern Australia, The ... ... 37
Fremantle ... 547
Fremantle Harbour Trust ... ... ... 717
Gaols 508
General 745
Geography of Western Australia, The ... 1
Geological Survey ... ... ... ... 454
Geology of Western Australia, The ... ... 12
Geraldton Express, The ... ... ... ... 591
Government Printing Office ... ... ... 423
Government Savings Bank ... ... ... 421
Government Stores ... ... ... ... 423
Governors, Lieutenant-Governors, and Admin-
istrators of AVestern Australia ... 286
Bedford, Admiral Sir Frederick George Den-
ham, G.C.8., G.C.M.G 301
Broome, Sir Frederick Napier, K.C.M.G. ... 298
Clarke, Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew, K.H. 290
Fitzgerald, Captain Charles, R.N. ... ... 291
Hampton, John Stephen, M.D. ... ... 294
Hutt, John ... ... ... ... ... 289
Irwin, Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Chidley,
K.H 291
Kennedy, Sir Arthur Edward, G.C.M.G., C.B. 293
Lawley, Hon. Sir Arthur, G.C.1.E.,
K.C.M.G 300
Ord, Major-General Sir Harry St. George,
R.E., K.C.M.G., C.B 297
Robinson, Sir William Cleaver Francis,
G.C.M.G 296
Smith, Sir Gerard, K.C.M.G. ... ... 299
Stirling, Sir James ... ... ... ... 287
Strickland, Sir Gerald, K.C.M.G. ... ... 301
AVeld, Sir Frederick Aloysius, G.C.M.G. ... 295
Guildford 555
Hampton, John Stephen, M.D. ... ... ... 294
Harbour and Light ... ... ... 510


page
History of Western Australia .. . ■ 63
CHAP.
i. Discovery of and Early Voyages to
Australia ... ... ... ... 63
it. Discovery and Early Voyages (con-
tinued) ... ... ... ... 75
in. Annexation of Western Australia ... 84
iv. Colonization and Early Settlement ... 88
v. 1831-1838. Administration of Sir
James Stirling ... ... ... 103
vi. 1839-1842. Governor Hutt’s Adminis-
tration Land Regulations Pro-
jected Settlement at Australind —
Aborigines —Explorations ... ... 119
vii. 1843-1849. Depression —Labour Pro-
blems —Financial Condition —Ques-
tion of Convict Labour —Establish-
ment of Penal Settlement ... ... 127
viii. The Convict System ... ... ... 143
ix. 1850-1853. Transition Period: Free
Colony to Penal Establishment —
Government Land Laws —Financial
Conditions Industries General
Development ... ... ... ... 147
x. 1854-1860. Constitution and Govern-
ment —Improvement in Land Regu-
lations and consequent Agricultural
and Pastoral Expansion —Develop-
ment and Extension of the Convict
System —Growth of the Colony dur-
ing the Period ... ... ... 155
xi. 1861-1868. Resignation of Governor
Kennedy and Arrival of Dr. J. S.
Hampton —Convict Administration —
Incidents of the System —Progressive
Public Works Policy —Cessation of
Transportation —Effects on the Sys-
tem reviewed ... ... ... ... 164
xn. 1861-1868 (continued) . Explorations —
Opening up of the North-West —
Trade and Industry —Native Troubles
—Agitation for Representative Gov-
ernment ... ... ... ... 174
xiit. 1869-1875. Administration of Gover-
nor Weld —Constitutional Changes—
Progressive Legislation —Land Laws
—Railways and Telegraphs —General
Development —Exploration ... ... 186
xiv. 1875-1883. Agitation for Alteration
of Constitution —Legislation —Land
Laws and Regulations —Immigration
—Railway Development —Resources
and Industries —Convict Establish-
ment —Explorations —Miscellaneous 201
PAGE
History of Western Australia ( continued)-
CHAP.
xv. 1883-1890. Governor Broome’s Admin-
istration —Land Regulations Tariff
Revision —Finances —Resources, In-
dustries, and Trade —Public Works:
Railway and Telegraph Exten-
sion—Gold Discoveries: Kimberley
and Yilgarn Goldfields—Agitation
for Autonomy continued —Respon-
sible Government ... ... ••• 212
xvi. 1891-1900. First Ten Years of Respon-
sible Government —Constitutional and
Political Occurrences Phenomenal
Development of the Goldfields —Re-
sources, Industries, and Trade —Land
Laws and Agricultural Development
—General ... ... ••• ••• 238
xvn. Federal Movement in Western Aus-
tralia ... ... ... ... ••• 261
xvi it. 1901-1912. Federal and State Politics
—Constitutional Questions —Agricul-
ture —Mining —Resources, Industries,
and Trade Finances General
Conclusion ... ... ... ... 269
Hospital for the Insane ... ... ... 517
House of Assembly, The ... ... ... ... 338
House of Representatives, The ... ... ... 308
Hutt, John ... ... ... ... ... ... 289
Immigration Office and Tourist Agency ... 510
Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration ... 714
Industrial Schools ... ... ... ... 505
Inquirer , The ... ... ... ... ... ••• 584
Inquirer , The Daily News , and The Morning
Herald , The 584
Insurance ... ... ... ... ... ... 610
Irwin, Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Chid-
ley, K.H 291
Kalgoorlie Miner , Th e ... ... ... ... 588
Kennedy, Sir Arthur Edward, G.C.M.G., C.B. 293
King’s Park ... ... ... ... ... ... 534
Lands and Surveys, Department of ... ... 428
Lands Department ... ... ... ... ... 428
Lawley, Hon. Sir Arthur, G.C.1.E., K.C.M.G. 300
Leederville ... ... ... ... ... 554
Legislative Council, The... ... ... 313,324
Legislature, The Federal ... ... ... 304
Lithographic Office ... ... ... ... 423
Master Builders and Contractors’ Association 648
Medical ... ... ... ... ... ... 597


page
Medical and Public Health ... ... ... 521
Midland Junction ... ... ... 556
Midland Railway Company ... ... ... 474
Military Forces ... ... ... 339
Mines Department ... ... ... ... 446
Ministry, The 318
Morning Herald, The ... ... 584
Municipal ... ... ... ... ... 535
Museum and Art Gallery ... ... ... ... 531
Naval Forces ... ... ... 337
Northnm Advertiser, The ... ... ... 591
North Fremantle ... ... ... ... 555
North Perth ... ... ... 554
Observatory ... ... ... ... 521
Ord, Major-General Sir Harry St. George,
R.E., K.C.M.G., C.B. ... 297
Osborne Park ... ... ... ... 554
Other Services ... ... ... ... 425
Patents, Trade Marks, and Copyright ... ... 415
Peppermint Grove Roads Board 574
Perth and Environs ... ... ... ... 536
Perth Roads Board ... ... ... ... 574
Pharmaceutical ... ... ... 603
Police 526
Postmaster-General’s Department ... ... 377
Premier’s Office ... ... ... ... 417
Press of Western Australia, The ... ... 578
Public Charities ... ... ... ... 503
Public Gardens ... ... ... ... ... 513
Public Library ... ... ... ... 530
Public Library, Museum, and Art Gallery of
Western Australia ... ... ... 530
Public Service Commissioner (Commonwealth) 375
Public Service Commissioner (State) ... ... 418
Public Works Department ... ... ... 490
Queen’s Park ... ... ... 556
~ Si
>
Railways of Western Australia, The ... ... 460
Registrar-General’s Office ... ... ... 512
Registrar of Friendly Societies ... ... 508
Roads Boards in the Metropolitan Area ... 574
Peppermint Grove Roads Board 574
Perth Roads Board ... ... ... ... 574
West Guildford Roads Board ... ... ... 574
Robinson, Sir William Cleaver Francis,
G.C.M.G 296
Royal Mint, The (Perth Branch) 535
Scenery of Western Australia, The ... ... 5
Senate, The 305
Shipping 726
PAGE
Smith, Sik Gerard, K.C.M.G 299
Southern Gross Times, The ... ... ... ... 591
Southern Times, The (Bunbury) ... ... ... 590
South Perth ... ... ... ... ... ... 554
State Children’s Department 504
State Government Departments ... ... ... 417
State Institutions Governed by Boards ... 530
State Labour Bureau ... ... ... ... 507
State Legislature, The ... ... ... ... 312
Executive Council, The ... ... ... 312
House of Assembly, The 338
Legislative Council, The 313, 324
Responsible Government ... ... ... 316
Stirling, Sir James ... ... ... ... ... 287
Stock Exchange, The ... ... ... ... 618
Strickland, Sir Gerald, K.C.M.G. ... ... 301
Subiaco ... ... ... ... 553
Suburban Municipalities ... ... ... 553
Claremont ... ... ... ... 555
Cottesloe ... ... ... 555
East Fremantle ... ... ... 555
Guildford ... ... ... ... 55 g
Leederville ... ... ... ... 554
Midland Junction ... ... ... 555
North Fremantle ... ... ... 555
North Perth ... ... ... 554
Osborne Park ... ... ... 554
Queen’s Park ... ... , 555
South Perth ... ... ... ... 554
Subiaco ... ... ... ... 553
Victoria Park ... ... ... 554
Sun, The ... ... ... ... 537
Sunday Times and The Sun, The ... ... ... 537
Survey Branch ... ... ... ... 434
Surveyors ... ... ... ggo
Taxation Department ... .. 424
Telegraph System ... ... ... 333
Telephone System ... ... ... 335
Trade and Customs ... ... ... ... 411
Trade Marks ... ... ... ... 425
Trans-Australian Railway, The ... 476
Treasury, The ... ... ... 421
Truth, The ... 591
Victoria Park ... ... ... 554
Water Supply Department ... ... 500
Weld, Sir Frederick Aloysius, G.C.M.G., ... 295
West Australian, The ... ... 579
West Guildford Roads Board ... ... 574
Woods and Forests ... ... ... ... 430
Yallingup and Margaret River Caves ... ... 6
Zoological Gardens ... ... 533




The Cyclopedia of Western Australia.
THE GEOGRAPHY Of WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
T}
(now the State) of Western Australia
was defined in the instructions issued by
William TV. to Captain Stirling as “extend-
ing from Cape Londonderry in latitude 13°
44 south to West Cape Howe in latitude
35° S' south, and from Hartog Island, on the
western coast, in longitude 112° 52' to 129° of east
longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Greenwich,
including all the islands adjacent in the Indian and
Southern Oceans within the latitudes aforesaid of
13° 44' south and 35° 8' south, and within the longi-
tudes aforesaid of 112° 52' and 129° east from the said
meridian of Greenwich.”
This was altered in some slight measure bv the
Commission of Her Late Majesty Queen Victoria, dated
July 10, 1873, which extended the northern boundary
from 13° 44' southern latitude to 13° 30' southern
latitude. Briefly, therefore, Western Australia con-
sists of all that part of Australia, with adjacent
islands, tying west of 129° east longitude, and is
bounded on the west and north by the Indian Ocean
%/
and on the south by the Great Southern Ocean.
Though the official designation from the date of
colonization has been “Western Australia,” the fact
that the first settlement (excluding the penal station at
King George Sound) and, of course, the seat of gov-
ernment were in the neighbourhood of the Swan caused
the new colony to be identified with the name of that
river, and it was for some years known, colloquially at
any rate, as the Swan River colony or the Swan River
J *
settlement.
The coastline seems to fall into two divisions, run-
ning north and south of the 18th parallel of latitude.
As we go northward from that point we find that it is
deeply indented by gulfs, bays, and smaller inlets, while
a glance at the map will show the portion to the south
stretching out in long lines, almost unbroken by in-
dentations of any kind. The general appearance, too,
of the coast seems to change at about the same parallel,
and while we go north we see rugged and almost moun-
tainous bluffs; to the south our eyes meet as a rule,
B
except along the south-west round the Leeuwin, long
low-lying stretches of sandy shore raised but little above
sea-level. The total length of coastline, taking into
calculation the numerous bays and inlets mentioned, is
approximately 5,200 miles.
The greatest length of the territory is that mea-
sured from Cape Londonderry to Peak Head, amount-
ing to 1,480 miles, while at its broadest part, from
Dirk Hartog Island to the boundary of South Aus-
tralia, it stretches for about 1,000 miles. The area of
the whole State is set down as 975,920 square miles, or
624,588,800 acres.
Until a few years ago the only part of the State
that could be termed occupied consisted of a narrow
strip of about 150 miles in width stretching from Albany
to Wyndharn, and the greater part of that could boast
only of isolated townships here and there along the
coast. The large expansion following upon the dis-
covery of gold has, however, made a great difference
during the past decade or two, and now there are
settled communities, so far as any mining community
may be called settled, some 400 or 500 miles inland.
The general contour of the territory north of the
19th parallel of latitude is of a mountainous character,
consisting of alternating high and low plateaux, prin-
cipally sandstone in formation, changing, as we go far-
ther north into the Kimberley and Gascoyne country,
to a series of rugged mountains which are to a large
extent granitic in character.
South of that parallel the structure is practically
a vast plateau of Archaean rocks, giving evidence that
this part of the State must have been submerged
to
until the most recent geological epoch. With a fairly
steep western face, coming in places to within 20 or
30 miles of the coast, this plateau continues eastward
across the South Australian border at a height varying
from 1,000 to 2,000 ft. above sea-level. Its most
southerly point is right on the coast at Point d’Entre-
casteaux, from which it sweeps inward, being separated
from the sea along the southern shore by a belt of low-
iyi ng sandy country, and by the limestone Nullabor


plains stretching along the edge of the Great Australian
Bight. The scarcity and uncertainty of the rainfall
over the greater part of the plateau, more particularly
over that lying east of the 119th meridian, make it
unsuitable for settlement of an agricultural or pastoral
nature, and the towns and townships that do exist are
those which have grown up round the great mining
industry
The coastal areas on the west are principally of a
flat and sandy nature, sparsely covered with vegetation,
except in the south-west, where we find large forests
of karri, jarrah, gum, and other timbers of great com-
mercial value. The southern seaboard is of much the
same character until we get farther eastward, where we
meet the well-grassed limestone plains between the
edge of the plateau and the sea, which await only the
discovery of artesian water to make them among the
most productive in the State.
There are no mountains of any considerable height
in Western Australia. Those best known are scarps of
the plateau, rising above the coastal plains. Of them
the most important is the Darling Range, which runs
almost due north and south from Yatheroo to Point
d’Entrecasteaux. It lies about 18 or 20 miles from the
west coast, with which it is practically parallel, and
though never rising above 1,700 ft. from sea-level
exercises a great effect upon the climatic conditions of
the most settled portion of the State. The Stirling
Range, to the north-east of Albany, forms the western
end of the southern face of the plateau. This is the
loftiest range in the south of Western Australia, at
Bluff Knoll reaching a height of 3,640 ft. Rising
abruptly from the plain, perfectly isolated, it is visible
for a very considerable distance, and forms the most-
striking landmark in the southern districts. In the
northern part we find the Princess May, King Leopold,
and Hamersley Ranges. In the lastnamed we have
Mount Bruce, which, possessing an altitude of 3,800 ft.,
is the highest known point on the western side of the
continent. There are no active volcanoes, but extinct
craters are said to exist in the neighbourhood of the
Princess May Range in the extreme north. All these
mountains are fairly close to the coastline. The in-
terior of the State, so far as is known, does not possess
any eminence that may be dignified with the title of a
mountain. Isolated hills occur at intervals, which from
the flatness of the surrounding desert appear unduly
prominent, but none of them can boast of an altitude
of even 1,000 ft.
No portion of the continent is so badly provided
with rivers as the west. The whole interior, embraced
by the plateau previously mentioned, does not possess
a single river draining into the sea or into any inland
lake. Such rivers as exist in the State are confined to
the strip of land between the edges of the tableland
and the sea, and are formed by the drainage from the
scarp side of the elevation. Many of them are not able
to boast either of considerable length or consistent
depth of water, except during the rainy season
Commencing at the far north, there are (excluding
tributaries) the Ord and the Pentecost emptying into
Cambridge Gulf, with the Chamberlain and Durack pos-
sibly debouching in the same inlet; the Drysdale and
King Edward into Napier Broome Bay; the Prince
Regent and Sale into bays along the coast; and Cham-
ley into Collier Bay. Coming down the north-west
coast we meet the Fitzroy, De Grey, Yule, Fortescue,
and Ashburton; along the west there are the Gas-
coyne, Wooramel, Murchison, Greenough, Swan, Mur-
ray, Collie, and Preston. The principal of all these--
in fact, the chief river of the State —is the Swan, which
above tidal waters is called the Avon. On it are situ-
ated the oldest towns in Western Australia, as the
colonization of the country was commenced at that
point. For a considerable distance from the mouth it
partakes more of the nature of an estuary, being sub-
ject to tidal fluctuations and the water being conse-
quently salt in character. On the southern coast the
principal streams are the Blackwood, Frankland, War-
ren, Denmark, and Phillips, none of which possesses any
characteristics calling for special mention.
There are no lakes worthy of the name throughout
the State. As regard the great interior, this may be
explained by the arid nature of the country due to the
slight and irregular rainfall, and the rapid evapora-
tion of moisture caused by the intense heat of the sun.
The so-called lakes of this great region, in many cases
considerable in extent, are, except after occasional heavy
rains, merely immense salt marshes or claypans. But
even between the ranges and the sea, where we might
expect to find sheets of permanent water, there are very
few, and these, except during the rainy season, are little
better than swamps or marshes. Salt lagoons occur in
places, but they have little or no economic value.
Owing to the deeply indented coastline north of
the 19th parallel of latitude there are innumerable bays,
gulfs, and inlets in that portion of the State. To men-
tion them all would be wearisome, but the chief are
Cambridge Gulf, Napier Broome Bay, Vansittart Bay,
Admiralty Gulf, Montague and York Sounds, Bruns-
wick Bay, Camden Sound, Collier Bay, King Sound,
Beagle Bay (at which is established an aboriginal mis-
sion), Roebuck and La Grange Bays, Point Walcott,
Nickol Bay, and Exmouth Gulf. On the west and
south coasts there are Shark Bay, Champion Bay, Cock-
burn Sound, Koombana, Geographe, and Flinders Bay,
King George Sound, and Esperance Bay. While many
of them afford safe anchorage, Princess Royal Harbour
(within King George Sound) and Cambridge Gulf are




the principal natural harbours, but excellent and com-
modious artificial harbours have been formed at Fre-
mantle within the mouth of the Swan River and at
Bunbury in Koombana Bay.
The most prominent capes along the coast are Capes
Dome! and Dussejour, on the opposite sides of the
entrance to Cambridge Gulf; Cape Londonderry, the
most northerly point of the State : Cape Talbot, at the
entrance to Napier Broome Bay ; Cape Bougainville to
the east, and Cape Voltaire to the west, of Admiralty
Gulf; Cape Leveque, at the western entrance to King
Sound; Cape Latouche Treville ; Sloping Head, near
Nickol Bay, a place of considerable importance to
pearlers; North-West Cape, forming the western side of
Exmouth Gulf ; Steep Point, to the south of Dirk Har-
tog Island, and the most westerly point of the main-
land; Capes Naturaliste and Leeuwin, at the south-
west corner, that area of extreme danger to naviga-
tion ; Point d’Entrecasteaux, and Capes West Cane
Howe, Peak Head, Hood Point, Legrande, and Arid,
along the southern coast.
Along the north and north-west coasts there are
islands almost without number, many of which have
not been closely examined, but which appear to present
the same characteristics as the adjacent mainland.
Bigge and Augustus Islands are the largest in extent
in the extreme north, and Barrow Island, to the north
of Onslow, on the north-west. Opposite King Sound
we find the Buccaneer Archipelago, and west of Cossack
the Dampier Archipelago, both names reminiscent of
that great buccaneering Englishman, William Dampier.
On the west coast are Dirk Hartog Island and the
Houtman Abrolhos, which share the honour of being
the first Australian land seen by civilized man. The
latter, which now are noted for guano deposits, were
the bugbear of the early navigators, and on them more
than one rich Dutch trading vessel came to an untimely
end. Opposite Fremantle are Rottnest and Garden
Islands, the first of which was named by Vlaming, while
the latter was the depot for stores in the infancy of
the State. Along the south coast are Chatham Island,
Breaksea Island (upon which a signalling station and
lighthouse for passing vessels have been erected), and
the Recherche Archipelago.
The cities and towns will be more fully dealt with
elsewhere : they may be divided into two classes —those
that arose gradually after the colonization of the State
in 1829 and those that sprang up almost magically after
the great gold discoveries of the early nineties. Of
the first, Perth (1829), Fremantle (1829), Guildford
(1830), Albany (1831), and Northarn (1833) stand as
types, while of the second, Coolgardie (1893), Kalgoorlie
(1894), and Boulder (1896) are prominent examples.
How great a part gold has played in the development of
Western Australia may be gauged in some degree from
the fact that the largest towns in the State at present
are Perth and Kalgoorlie, the capital city and the piin-
cipal goldfields centre.
From an economic standpoint the geography of the
State is such that every indication points to the fact
that its development must rest on the great primary
industries —mining and agricultural, timber and pas-
toral, as well as pearling, which is so largely carried on
off the coast in the north-west. While the question of
rainfall has no connection with either mining or pearl-
ing, it is so great a factor in the other pursuits that an
article dealing with the geography and physical features
of the territory must make some reference to it. That
it varies considerably we may readily understand must
be the case in a country which stretches well up into the
tropics and far down into the temperate zone, with an
interior hundreds of miles from the sea, and absolutely
devoid of anything in the way of fresh-water rivers or
lakes.
In the extreme north we find the abundant rain-
fall usual in tropical coastal areas, bringing about a
luxurious growth of grass which makes that district so
fit a country for the development of every kind of pas-
toral pursuit. In the south-west the yearly average
rainfall varies from 30 to 40 in., according to locality,
thus producing those conditions necessary for the growth
of large timbers, most of which have a high commercial
value. As we go inland the amount of rain rapidly
decreases, but it is still sufficient in quantity and so
certain of appearance as to make practically the whole
western strip extending southward from the 28th
parallel of latitude and eastward for over a hundred
miles suitable for the production of cereals. Though
the fact has been recognized only during recent years
the work of opening up this vast area for agricultural
development has been sc steadily and enthusiastically
pursued bv the Government that in a very few years
the State bids fair to become one of the great wheat-
and fruit-producing countries of the world.
We have thus briefly outlined the geography of
Western Australia and incidentally referred to her
great resources. Captious critics have termed her the
Cinderella of the Group, the land of sand and barren-
ness : but “the wings of dawn are beating at the gates
of day.”
What is Western Australia? The largest of the six
States of the Commonwealth ; the nearest to the great
Eastern communities : the first and last port of call on
the great ocean highway between the Southern and
Northern Hemispheres. So situated and so endowed she
must in the ripeness of time become one of the greatest
of those great free communities privileged to carry on
under the Southern Cross the noblest traditions of the
British raoe.


THE SCENERY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The knowledge that Western Australia possesses
any scenery worth description will probably come as a
surprise to everyone outside the State and, indeed, to
many within its borders. The opinion so generally
expressed by the early navigators who visited the coast
that it was a land of sand, sterility, and desolation
seems to have become so fixed in the general mind that
to dislodge it is an almost superhuman task. The
statement of M. Arago at the beginning of the nine-
teenth century that
the
coast exhibited
nothing but a pic-
ture of desolation;
no rivulet consoled
the eye, no tree
attracted it, no
mountain gave var-
iety to the lands-
cape, no dwelling
enlivened it; every-
where reigned ster-
ility and death.
. . . At the first
view you take in
an immense dis-
tance, but beware
of looking for any
enjoyment; the
search would be
merely wasting
your strength,
without finding the
least relief
is merely in slightly
different language
the description that
one and all applied
to the country —a
description that
seems to have been
accepted until very
recently almost as
an article of faith.
Yet how untrue it
is. Certainly we can
not boast of snow-
capped mountains,
of deep ravines with
clustering ferns, of mighty waterfalls or broad majestic
rivers; but the light and shade of hill and dale, the
iridescent blue of an almost perfect atmosphere, the
stern and rugged coastline with intermediate stretches
of glistening beach, and, above all, those marvellous
jewel houses of Nature, the South-West Caves, are our
glory and our pride.
if views are wanted, gaze upon the panorama of
the Swan unveiled before us from the summit of Mount
Eliza, upon the wonderful bird's-eye view of King George
Sound, or upon the forbidding face of Cape Leeuwin,
where the icy current of the Antarctic meets the
warming glow of the Indian Ocean in riotous and never-
ceasing tumult.
In and around Perth itself there is much that not
only delights the eye of the visitor, but caters for the
pleasure and enjoyment of the citizens. The capital
of Western Australia is in many ways more fortunately
situated than any
other chief city in
the Commonwealth.
Sydney, indeed,
possesses her won-
derful harbour, but
Perth can lay equal
claim to beauty in
her noble and com-
manding river, the
broad stretches of
which below the city
are unsurpassed for
all forms of aquatic
sports. How deeply
appreciated these
are may be seen
from a view at any
time during the
season, when the
myriads of yachts
make so charming a
scene upon the wide
expanse of water.
Above the city too,
in the higher
reaches extending
into the hills, are
spots peculiarly
favoured by Na-
ture, scenes of syl-
van beauty and of
a profusion of
delightful flowers
that have not yet
gained the attention they deserve. They only await
that facility of access which ought to be one of the first-
efforts of the newly-formed Tourist Department.
Within easy approach of the capital, Rottnest, Man-
durah, and Bunbury have many attractions for those
who delight to be near the sea, while nearer still the
beach at Cottesloe offers to the jaded worker from the
city all the pleasures of a seaside resort.
For folk who love the sea and yet desire a cooler
FOLDED SHAWL, YALLONGUP CAVE.


climate than those mentioned can afford the pleasant
town of Albany, nestling amid the hills at the head of
King George Sound, may be made the starting-point of
many pleasant excursions. The Sound itself forms a
never-failing attraction. Notwithstanding the fact that
there is supposed to be but one beautiful harbour in
Australia, there are few more charming experiences to a
lover of Nature than to enter King George Sound in the
early dawn of a perfect spring morning. All around are
rugged hills untouched by art of man, and from the
shore is wafted the sweet scent of that glorious blossom
of Western Australia, the Boronia. The deep-blue of
the water, mingling with the changing colours of the
surrounding foliage, aids in completing a scene that is
not excelled, if indeed rivalled, in any harbour on the
Australian coast.
Those who seek for health and pleasure away from
the sea and yet not far from Perth usually find their
way to Kalamunda or the Mundaring Weir. Both
situated in the Darling Ranges, while they cannot claim
that bracing air of higher peaks are still sufficiently
above the level of the plain to afford a pure and revivify-
ing atmosphere. From Kalamunda the valley of the
Swan stretches out in a vast panorama, and when the
day is clear the outlines of Rottnest Island in the far
distance are easily discernible. The great attraction of
Mundaring is, of course, the Weir from which the
Eastern goldfields and inland towns along the route are
supplied with water. Pleasant as a resort at any time,
it has an added interest toward the end of winter, when
the overflow is so majestic, giving to the tourist the
impression of a gigantic waterfall.
But the crowning glory of Western Australia from
a scenic point of view rests in her marvellous caves,
which those fitted by experience to speak upon the sub-
ject have pronounced the equal, if not the superior, of
any known to exist. These, as their importance demands,
we propose to treat in detail. The principal are those at
Yallingup and Margaret River, which, though a con-
siderable distance from Perth, are yet easier of
access and more thoroughly opened up than those at
Lake Yanchep, less than 40 miles from the capital.
YALLINGUP AND MARGARET RIVER CAVES.
These wonderful caves are situated in the south
west corner of the State, between the Leeuwin and Cape
Naturaliste, in undulating limestone country which
skirts the coast at a distance of from half a mile to three
miles. The whole of the district extending north and
south for some 50 miles is honeycombed with subter-
ranean galleries of marvellous beauty and variety, un-
rivalled by anything of the kind in Australia.
Though their existence has been known for nearly
thirty years little attention was paid to them until very
recently. The whole country in the vicinity has now,
however, been made a public reserve, and every effort
made to explore them and make them available for
public inspection and recreation. To reach them it is
necessary to proceed by train to Busselton, a pretty
little seaside town about 150 miles from Perth. The
distance from there to the caves is about 20 miles, made
by conveyance over a road that for the greater part of
the journey winds in and out among the luxurious
peppermint-trees, and then turns off into the forest until
it reaches the
YALLINGUP CAVE,
so named after a small rivulet in the vicinity. The
entrance to the cave is about 250 ft. above the stream,
and resembles a slightly inclined tunnel cut through
the limestone rock. From the landing at the end of
this shaft the cave branches away into two directions.
Immediately on the left we enter the “Theatre,” an
immense domelike chamber, circular in form and
spacious in area, the ceiling of which is beautifully
ornamented with thickly-studded stalactites of somewhat
massive formation. The proximity of this chamber to
the entrance and the consequent atmospheric effects have
in some measure dulled the brilliancy of the scene. On
the other side a smaller chamber, profusely decorated
with a finer and more delicate form of stalactite, forms
a marked contrast in its glittering lustre. These two
chambers, however, are only the introduction to the
marvels of the cave. As we go forward gallery after
gallery, each with its own peculiar charm, is opened to
our view. Nature has here been particularly lavish, and
every chamber is adorned with fragile and fantastic
stalactites of every conceivable shape and variety. From
the floors rise massive stalagmites, some over 30 ft. in
diameter, which have almost the appearance of columns
supporting the arches above, so that in whatever part
we may be the whole effect is wondrously beautiful and
magnificent.
The distinctive feature of Yallingup is perhaps the
“Shawl” formation, which admittedly has no equal any-
where. These shawls are varied in colour, some appear
ing to be pure pearl, while others are striped with cream
and scarlet. So regular are the stripes and colours and
so natural the folds and fringes that one almost needs
to touch them to be sure that they are not actual
articles. The most noted is the Folded Shawl, which is


about 6 ft. long and proportionately broad; it is
extended as though for inspection, and with its numer-
ous companions round about gives so curious and natural
an appearance that the chamber has been named the
Shawl shop. Passing on we see in the foreground the
Arab’s Tent, another shawl formation so cunningly
arranged that it seems to be the entrance to a tent. In
fact, wherever we go these beautiful shawl formations to
which distinctive names have been given hang all round
us, the whole producing an effect that is really indescrib-
able. Almost in the middle of the Cauliflower Chamber is
a curious freak of Nature. The root of a jarrah-tree grow-
ing on the hill above has descended in search of moisture
through the hill itself a distance of 50 ft., then the
whole height
of the cham-
ber (some 40
ft.), and is
finally lost
in the soil
some 30 ft.
below the
floor. There
are many
more forma-
tions — the
Crystal
Floor, the
Bedford
Hall, and
others which
we cannot
here describe
in detail.
In fact, to
give anything
like an ade
quate de-
scription of
the beauties
of Yallingup is almost beyond one's power. To be
appreciated they must be seen, and the oftener they
are viewed the more marvellous they appear.
MARGARET RIVER CAVES.
These are situated some distance south of Yallingup,
and are reached by a further coach journey. They are
equally rich in formation, and many of them possess
peculiar and distinctive features. In some the entrance
itself is unique, while in others, notably the Lake Cave,
every part aids in completing an almost perfect pictuie.
The first cave to be visited is the Wallcliffe,
situated close to the mouth of the Margaret River. This
is the oldest known cave which the hand of the vandal
has not marred. It is rather small in extent, but con-
tains several remarkable figures. The rushes used foj
lights by those first exploring it have in some measure
dimmed the brightness of the stalactites, but it possesses
two curious formations known as the Devil's Hand and
the Poultry and Fruit Show. To the south of Wall-
cliffe and on the coast lies the Blackboy Hollow, which
contains an interesting formation known as “cauliflower”
or “coral.” This is soft in character and pure white in
appearance, changing to a delicate hue when light is
thrown at the back of it. Many of its wonders have
received appropriate names —the Organ Pipe, the
Queen's Crown, the Broken Column, and the Mammoth
stalagmite. The Broken Column is a very fine
example of stalactite and stalagmite having been
joined to-
gether, only
to be torn
asunder by
some action
causing sub-
sidence of the
floor. The
tint is pale
amber, which
when com-
bined with
the newly-
forming
white stalac-
tites of the
ceiling pro-
duces a most
charming
effect. Next
comes the
Wit chdiffe
Cave, one of
the smallest
and unfortu-
nately the one
that has suffered most from early visitors. It is somewhat
difficult to reach the entrance, but extremely easy to ex-
plore. Its value lies rather in the extensive view of the
country gained from the entrance than from the actual
beauty of the cave itself. Perhaps the favourite, and cer-
tainly one of the most interesting, of all the caves is the
Calgardup. Most of the chambers in this vast cavern
are of an indescribable beauty. Within the main dome
innumerable stalactites, white and glittering, hang from
the ceiling and walls like icicles, while many of the older
formations are amber in colour like those of Blackboy
Hollow. One of the chief marvels of the cave is the
Suspended Dome, a large bell-shaped mass some 5 ft. in
diameter suspended in mid-air by a stalactite. This is
ANOTHER VIEW OF SHAWL FORMATION AT YALLINGUP


to be found at the entrance to the Belfry Chamber, so
named from the roots of trees which, like bell ropes,
hang from the roof above. The crowning glory is, how-
ever, the Meteoric Shower, thousands of pencil-like
stalactites of varying lengths, pendent from the ceiling
and each tipped with perfect star-shaped terminals,
giving the wonderful effect of a permanently arrested
shower of meteors.
The Mammoth Cave, as the name denotes, is remark-
able for its immensity and also for its age, as shown by
the massive nature
of its formations.
Among its most
interesting develop-
ments are the Cac-
tus Tree and the
Eagle's Wings, both
perfect representa-
tions in glistening
white of the objects
after which they are
named. In the same
chamber are the
Cathedral and Or-
gan Pipes, the latter
not only resembling
an organ in shape,
but giving forth
clear and melodious
sounds when struck.
The gem of the
district from a
purely artistic point
of view is the Lake
Cave. Like many
of the others, this is
reached by a some-
what precipitous
descent through a
sort of circular hol-
low, probably at
some time in the far-
distant past portion
of another chamber,
judging from the
huge pillars supporting arches with discoloured stalactites
that still surround it. The actual entrance is
extremely narrow, but, once within, we find ourselves
in a vast cavern, almost a perfect dome, the ceiling and
s : les of which scintillate with myriads of pointed
stalactites. The principal feature, however, is the
Suspended Table, a huge mass 15 ft. by 7 ft., and about
an inch suspended by two large stalactites, and reaching
to within a couple of feet of the -surface of the subter-
ranean lake from which the cave takes its name. By
means of magnesium light the magic beauty of the
formation is brilliantly reflected in the calm surface of
the water beneath, and the marvellous spectacle, which
resembles the dazzling oriental splendours of an Arabian
Nights' scene, is in itself sufficient to repay the tourist
for the distance travelled to see it. Words are totally
insufficient to convey an adequate idea of the sublime
magnificence of this great underground treasure-house.
The Bride’s Cave and the Giant's Cave have each
their special features. The first, which practically con-
sists of a single
chamber, takes its
name from a stalag-
mite in the gloom
of the entrance,
which to the roman-
tic mind has all the
appearance of a
charming bride. The
latter, as the title
implies, consists of
a series of gigantic
caverns, the princi-
pal of which has
been called the
Fairies' Ballroom.
A great deal of
interest attaches to
the Golgotha Cave
on account of its
name, which it owes
to the fact that
quite recently the
skull and part of the
skeleton of a human
being were dis-
covered in the inner-
most chamber. The
general opinion is
that these are the
remains of some
early Dutch or Por-
tuguese sailor who
had either wandered
accidentally into the
cave or sought shelter from natives or the weather, and in
trying to get out again had strayed farther and farther
inward until all hope was lost. The chamber in which
the remains were found has been termed the Skull
Chamber, and at the head of the stairway leading to it
there is a large and beautiful stalagmite some 20 ft. in
height, appropriately named The Sentinel.
During this year (1911) a cave known as the Moon-
dyne, near Karridale, has been explored and renamed
the Coronation Cave. Arrangements are now being
POULTRY SHOW, WALLCLIFFE CAVE.


made to construct the necessary guide rails so that it
may be opened to public inspection. In the opinion of
the Honourable the Colonial Secretary it is far superior
to any cavern yet discovered in Australia, and is situated
in a district remarkable for the beauty of its scenery
and for the inducements it offers to the sportsman and
the tourist.
Although we have mentioned the caves that are
open to inspection, they are only a few of the total
number existing. No doubt as time goes on and oppor-
tunity offers others will be made accessible, and probably
beauties even yet undreamt of will be unveiled to view.
At present, although the grandeur of the Lake Cave
will probably make the most lasting impression, the
attractions of each are so distinct in character and so
special in charm that comparison is difficult. While for a
single effect the universal verdict favours the Lake Cave,
to the Yallingup must be awarded the palm for diversity
of formation and for displaying the greatest variety of
exquisitely-shaped objects of delicate and fragile beauty.
We have confined ourselves to what can only claim to be
a more or less prosaic description of these marvels of
Nature. To attempt even feebly to do justice to their
wonderful beauty and incomparable charm requires
command of a language more romantic than English and
better supplied with superlative expressions. No others
known excel them andffer,w r , if any, rival them. The far-
famed Jenolan Caves of New South Wales do not equal
them. If nothing else existed in this State in the way
of scenery the caves are alone sufficient to dispel the
statement that Western Australia has no natural
advantages to interest the tourist and the visitor. All
the caves are thoroughly well ventilated, and widely-
knowm medical men of the highest standing in the State
have not only expressed the opinion that no constitution
can possibly suffer from an exploration of their wonder-
ful and mysterious recesses, but have gone farther and
stated that ' the country is the ideal health resort of
Australia.” At Yallingup a commodious and modern
hotel—the Cave House —has been erected, and suitable
provision for visitors made at Margaret River. Every
facility is offered to tourists by the Government in the
way of cheap fares and coupons covering all expenses
for the round trip. The w T hole of the caves may be
viewed in live days, and the expenses, inclusive of rail
and accommodation charges, need not exceed live guineas.
Nothing is left undone in the way of popularizing the
district, and it may safely be said there is no part of
Australia that will so amply repay a visit.
YANCHEP CAVES.
These are not more than 35 miles from Perth and
within four miles of the coast. Situated amid the hills,
they are picturesquely placed in a district abounding in
interest for the sportsman. They are neither so well
explored nor so convenient of approach as those farther
away from the capital, but there is little doubt that in
course of time they will be equally accessible and their
beauties as well known. So far as they have been
examined they exhibit practically the same features as
the caves of the south-west, with which in the opinion
of many they need not fear comparison. A feature of
some of them is their immense size, chambers having
been found that extend from 400 to 600 ft. in length.
From the general nature of the country, which the
resonance of the ground proves to be honeycombed with
caverns, it is more than probable that an extended search
will reveal many other caves of possibly even greater
beauty. So far the efforts of the authorities have been
almost entirely confined to the better known caves of
the south-west, but there is no doubt that they might
wisely extend their operations and make these interest-
ing curiosities of Nature available to the pleasure-
seeker.
Inland scenery of a natural character is no doubt
largely wanting in Western Australia. The flat and
uninteresting nature of the landscape and the absence
of permanent water combine to bring about the general
appearance of a desert. But there is a gradually widen-
ing belt of country stretching inland from the coast
that presents a scene of the greatest importance—the
view of cultivated fields, of extensive vineyards and
orchards, and of an ever-increasing acreage of wheat—
which not only rejoices the eye, but gives solace to the
mind in the knowledge that here is something possessing
beauty and utility together, bringing prosperity to the
State and happiness and comfort to its people.
THE CLIMATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The first record we have of a scientific climatologist
is that of the great astronomer and geographer Ptolemy.
He divided the surface of the globe, from the Equator
to the Arctic circle, into climates or parallel zones, cor-
responding to the successive increase of a quarter of an
hour in the length of midsummer day.
Climate in its modern acceptation signifies that
peculiar state of the atmosphere in regard to heat and
moisture which prevails in any given place, together
with the meteorological conditions generally, in so far as
they exert an influence on animal and vegetable life.
The infinitely diversified character which climate dis


plays may be referred to the combined operation of
different causes, which are reducible chiefly to these four
distance from the Equator, height above the sea,
distance from the sea, and prevailing winds, which may
thus be regarded as forming the gieat bases of the law
of climate. The history of meteorology in Aus-
tralia may be said to have been inaugurated by the late
Sir George Kingston in South Australia in the year
1839. Systematic rainfall observations were continued
«/
by this gentleman till 1878, the last 18 years being
concurrent with more systematic and complete observa-
tions at the Adelaide Observatory.
At Perth no official records of rainfall were taken
till 1875, when the observations were commenced at
the Government Gardens by the Surveyor-General (Sir
Malcolm Fraser), and where they are still continued.
Western Australia covers a vast area of 975,920
miles, and if we extend a line from Albany in the south,
latitude 35° 2', to Wyndham in the north, latitude 15°
27', it will be at once seen what a great diversity of
climate the largest of the six States of the Common-
wealth possesses. .In dealing with the climatic con-
ditions of the State the Editor wishes to express his
obligations to the State Government Astronomer, Mr.
W. E. Cooke, M.A., F.R.A.S., for most of the informa-
tion contained in this article.
During the first half of last century meteorological
observations were confined largely to rainfall only.
Systematic observations of pressure, temperature, rain-
fall, wind, and other meteorological elements began
with the foundation of the astronomical observatories
in the capitals of the different States. The Perth
Observatory owes its birth to the foresight of the For-
rest Government in 1896, Sir John Forrest laying the
foundation-stone of the principal building. Among the
many great observatories of the world few can surpass
it for beauty of position or perfectness of equipment.
In taking up the subject of the State’s climate
generally it will be best to divide it roughly into three
parts —(1) The climate of Perth and the south-west
and south coastal districts; (2) the climate within the
Tropics; and (3) the climate of the interior.
The first division may for practical purposes be
considered as bounded by the coastline and also by a
straight line drawn from Eucla to Geraldton, but if
for the sake of expediency we are to take Perth as
representing the whole, certain exceptions will have to
be made.
The rainfall is heaviest in the extreme south-west,
diminishing thence both northward and eastward. It
also falls off from the coast and coastal ranges in all
directions inland. Between Bunbury and Albany the
summer temperature is considerably cooler than else-
where. The sea breeze which compensates so much for
the oppressive heat of summer in the coastal districts
does not reach far inland. With these exceptions we
can regard the climate of Perth as typical of our first
climatic division and proceed to discuss it
PERTH CLIMATE
Just as there are two distinct types of weather,
Mr. Cooke remarks, “so there are two distinct seasons—
winter and summer/' The former sets in, as a rule,
rather abruptly. From May to the end of October may
be considered the winter months, and the weather dur-
ing that period is dominated by the passage of the
“highs" and “lows." The average rainfall for each
month is as follows :
Points.
May ... ... ... ••• 476
June ... ... ... ... 654
July 604
August ... ... ... ... 571
September ... ... ... 320
October ... ... ... 205
These figures might convey the impression that
Perth is a very wet place during the winter, but the
reverse is the fact.
Owing to the tendency for the rain to fall
principally in heavy showers and at night, and to the
sandy nature of the soil which rapidly absorbs it, the
general impression of the Perth winter is that of a suc-
cession of fine, bright, calm days, varied occasionally by
a severe but brief storm. The weather is, on the whole,
delightful, but it may perhaps be too mild. One misses
the keen frosty feeling that is experienced in other
places, and its absence probably justifies to some extent
the popular statement that the climate is enervating.
At night it is frequently cold, July showing an
average of five nights during which the minimum
thermometer in the screen registers below 40°. (As this
description of Perth is to be taken as representing more
or less the whole of th§ South-West district, it must
be stated that severe frosts are by no means uncommon
inland. The coldest parts of the State at night are
Southern Cross and Katanning, and here the ther-
mometer frequently falls below 32°, especially if exposed
to radiation. The mean minimum in the Stevenson
screen for July is 38’7° at Southern Cross and 40° at
Katanning.)
Very severe Hoods have been occasionally experi-
enced at Perth and elsewhere in the past, but for a
long time there has been an almost entire absence of
these; in fact, during all the years that systematic
records have now been kept no great floods have
occurred.
The summer does not set in quite so abruptly as
the winter. With an occasional hot day in October it
commences generally in November, but does not as a


rule become really noticeable until after Christmas.
Taking a temperature of 90° in the shade as the
criterion of a hot day, we find an average of less than
1 in October, 3 in November, 7 in December, 11 in
January, 11 in February, 8 in March, and 2 in April.
This number (43 in all) seems rather formidable, but
generally the heat is not felt oppressively on account
of the short portion of the day during which it lasts
on each occasion. On a normal hot summer day a
sea breeze always sets in about noon on the coast and
reaches Perth about 2 p.m. The temperature then
commences to fall, and the evening and night are
delightfully cool and pleasant. Occasionally a pro-
tracted spell of hot weather is experienced, but even
then the nights are generally cool. The longest of these
spells without a break occurred in 1896, when the
maximum exceeded 90° on every date between January
25 and February 12 —19 in all. But the severest heat
was apparently in January and February, 1880.
The highest reading that has so far been recorded in
Perth is 116*7°, which occurred in January, 1878.
Notwithstanding the fact that the monthly means
are usually higher than those for the principal cities in
South Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales, and
that we are in a lower latitude than any of these, the
same remark may be applied to the summer climate as
to the winter. It appears to be ftiilder than the others.
One notices the absence here of those violent changes
which are sometimes experienced in the other States.
When a cool change comes after a spell of hot weather
it seems to steal upon the land gradually. The appear-
ance of soft, watery cumulus clouds in the west generally
about sunset announces the arrival of the welcome
change. That evening will be cooler than the preceding
ones, but not remarkably so, and next day it may be
more or less cloudy, but only moderately cool. At night
probably a few light showers, and we realize that a
definite change has occurred. Whether or not the
sudden changes experienced elsewhere act as a tonic it
is difficult to say, but at all events they rarely if ever
occur in Perth.
CLIMATE WITHIN THE TROPICS.
A lengthy description of this is unnecessary; and,
unfortunately, our knowledge is derived mainly from
coastal stations. The year may be divided into two
seasons—wet and dry —the former lasting from the
middle or the end of November to the end of March.
During this period the weather is very unpleasant, the
maximum temperature every day being close to or above
100°. Records of 110° are by no means infrequent, and
the thermometer has even reached 120°, the highest
reading ever registered in the State being 123° at
Onslow in February, 1896.
Thunderstorms, accompanied by heavy rain, are
frequently experienced, and it is during this season that
the willy-willy occasionally visits the north-west coast. A
moderate rainfall can generally be relied upon down to
about latitude 20°, but south of that it is uncertain.
Sometimes it will be very heavy and at other times
hardly a drop will fall. The heaviest ever recorded was
36*49 in. at Whim Creek, near Cossack, on April 2-3,
1898.
The severest drought occurred between June,
1890, and January, 1892, during the whole of which
period (20 months) only 73 points of rain were recorded
as the mean for the Cossack District.
In the winter months or dry season the climate is
considered by the inhabitants to be most enjoyable.
An occasional wet day is experienced, but the weather
is for the most part fine, clear, calm, and pleasant.
CLIMATE OF THE INTERIOR.
It is only within the last few years that any
meteorological records have been obtainable from the
interior districts of the State, and upon these it is
hazardous to found a very definite opinion as to the
climate. Up to the end of 1899, for instance, the
possible occurrence of such a succession of wet, stormy
days as were actually experienced in 1900 would scarcely
be credited.
The climate is a mixture of the two already
described. Sometimes the tropical rains come across;
sometimes the winter storms of the South-West and
Southern districts extend well inland, and sometimes
both sources of rain fail and a drought ensues. In the
summer it is a climate to be endured as patiently as
possible. On the Coolgardie goldfields the heat waves
are varied by the cool changes which pass from west to
east along the south coast; but from the Murchison
northwards the heat is very disagreeable indeed, while
the inhabitants frequently find all the recognized
languages quite inadequate for a description of the flies
and dust.
As a kind of compensation, the winter season is
delightful. Very little rain falls and the weather is
cold, clear, and bracing.
All through the summer occasional thunderstorms
may be looked for, and it sometimes happens, as already
described, that monsoonal rains come right through this
district from the north-west to south-east. The severest
and most continuous of which we have any record occurred
in March and April, 1900, but geological signs seem to
indicate that heavy floods have occurred in past years.
To summarize briefly we may take Perth as a fair
and general indication of the climate of Western Aus


tralia. The climate of Quito, the capital of the South
American republic of Ecuador, practically on the line
of the Equator, on a plateau over 9,000 ft. above the
sea, has been described as the most perfect in the world
—the climate of perpetual spring. But its advocates
forget the rapid chills at night that cause so much
pneumonia, the scourge of these lofty sites.
We have already alluded to the popular impression
that the climate of Perth is enervating, yet just as
there is no such thing as a perfect man, so from a
medical point of view there is no such thing as a perfect
climate. But if the climates of the world were grouped
together that of Perth and its environs should easily
hold its own against them all.
Government publications and the Press of Australia
have from time to time clearly shown that our Island
Continent climatically and otherwise offers greater
advantages to the settler on the land and the pros-
pective immigrant than does Canada and other portions
of our Empire’s oversea dominions. But we can go
farther and show that the climate of Western Australia
has advantages which her sister Eastern States do not
possess.
Our soil, as a rule, may be poorer and less uniform
in quality, but this deficiency is more than compensated
by the regularity of our seasons. We have never had,
and from our geographical position can never have,
those devastating droughts which periodically visit the
eastern portion of the continent.
Thus we never have anything approaching a failure
of crops or a decimation of herds such as those failures
of Nature which visited the Eastern States in the years
1902, 1903, and 1908, bringing in their train privation,
misery, and disaster.
THE GEOLOGY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Contributed by A. GIBB MAITLAND, F.G.S., Government Geologist.
SYSTEMATIC GEOLOGY.
Considering the geographical extent of Western
Australia, the numerical strength of the Geological
Survey Staff, and the paramount necessity of atten-
tion being concentrated upon examinations in and
round important mining centres or other districts
of potentially economic value, geological inquiry
has up to the present consisted merely of a series
of unconnected observations, to the co-ordination of
which we must look to the future. Despite this circum-
stance work has now been so widely extended as to per-
mit of a more or less broad, generalized account of the
salient geological features of the State being prepared,
though no attempt has been made to enter into minute
details.
History. —As the preparation of this account is to
a large extent based upon the work of previous official
geologists it is not out of place to give a succinct account
of their labours.
Dr. Ferdinand von Sommer would appear to have
been the first official geologist employed in Western
Australia. This gentleman travelled extensively
throughout the State during the years 1847 to 1851
He geologically examined the Victoria, Toodyay, and
York districts, and extended his observations to the
country lying between the last named and Mount Barren,
on the south coast. Neither the maps nor the reports
of this observer have ever been published, although
three articles from his pen bearing upon the geology
of the State have appeared in the current literature
during the years 1848 and 1849.
After an interval of 21 years, during which much
excellent geological work was accomplished by the
Gregory Brothers, Mr. 11. Y. L. Brown was appointed
to the post of Government Geologist. This gentleman
during the years 1870 to 1873 prepared three geological
maps and ten reports (now out of print), which referred
principally to the southern and coastal portions of the
State. Mr. Brown’s appointment was not continued
beyond 1873 owing to the disinclination of the Legis-
lature to expend money on a scientific department.
In 1882 —nine years after Mr. Brown’s retirement
—Mr. E. T. Hardman, of the Geological Survey of
Ireland, was appointed to the post of Government
Geologist. His labours were confined chiefly to the
Kimberley district, in which he was the pioneer geo-
logical observer, and his field work carried out during
the years 1883-4 laid the foundation of our knowledge
of the geology of this portion of Western Australia,
and played an important part in the opening up of the
State’s first declared goldfield. This officer examined
the neighbourhood of Bunbury and Blackwood, and the
metropolitan area with reference to the question of its
water supply from underground sources.
Very shortly after Mr. Hardman’s term of service
in Western Australia came to an end a motion was
brought forward in the Legislative Council in 1885
having for its object '‘the establishment of a permanent




geological department of the colony. . . .” After
a vigorous debate, however, the motion was defeated,
principally on the question of ways and means.
The late Rev. C. G. Nicolay contributed in many
ways to the knowledge of the geology of the State,
and was in charge of the Geological Museum at Fre-
mantle founded by Mr. Hardman, which ultimately
became merged into the National Museum.
It was not, however, until 1887 that the Govern-
ment found itself able to provide the necessary funds
for the post of Government Geologist. The appoint-
ment was conferred upon Mr, H. P. Woodward, who
held the position from 1887 to 1895. During this
gentleman’s tenure of office he had for his associate
Mr. B. H. Woodward, who acted as Curator of the
Geological Museum and Assayer to the Department,
while in 1893 Mr. S. Goczel was added to the staff as
Field Geologist and Mining Engineer. The work of the
survey during Mr. Woodward’s term of office extended
from Albany to Kimberley, though the issue of geo-
logical maps in illustration of the various reports seems
to have been confined to the later years of the survey.
With a limited staff, still more limited appropriation,
and the difficulties presented by the vast area of the
State the survey under Mr. Woodward was able to
issue 21 reports and six geological maps. The work
of organizing a more or less systematic geological
survey was commenced in 1896, its object being the
investigation of the geological structure, mineral
resources, mining industries, and underground water
supplies of the State. These objects, so far as the
resources available will admit, are carried out by means
of:— (a) Reconnaissance surveys of those portions of
the State about the structure and resources of which
little is known ; (h) detailed geological surveys of min-
ing centres under active development; (c) chemical
and mineralogical examinations of soils, rocks, minerals,
and natural waters collected bv the field staff, and
• 7
under certain specified conditions by prospectors and
others; (d) palaeontological investigations; (e) the
maintenance of a geological museum : and ff) the pub-
lication of the data acquired in this way.
Topography. —ln its broader topographical features
Western Australia falls naturally into three geographi-
cal divisions;
The Coastal Plain consists in reality of a fringe
round the coast with a more or less gentle slope to the
seaward. The plain is formed for the most part of
shallow water deposits, sandstones, conglomerates, and
thin shales, with occasionally incoherent sands and clays.
The plain has a width of 60 or 70 miles in places on
the western coast, though in the country at the head
of the Great Australian Bight the plain, absolutely
devoid of rivers, extends some 200 miles into the in-
terior. The inner margin of the Coastal Plain reaches
an altitude of 600 ft. above sea-level in certain locali-
ties. The Coastal Plain is separated from the interior
by a belt of Hill Ranges.
The Hill Ranges form what may be called the
escarpment of the plateau and plains of the interior.
They have an average elevation of about 1,200 ft.,
though isolated ranges reach altitudes of 4,000 ft. above
sea-level. This escarpment has either a short or steep
slope down to the edge of the Coastal Plain, into which
it gradually merges. This belt of country, drained by
the rivers of the State, is principally formed of granitic
and metamorphic rocks, the decay of which produces
excellent soil; it comprises, owing to its rainfall, the
principal agricultural districts of the State.
The Plateaux and Plains of the Interior consist of
a broken tableland, from which rise isolated hills and
ridges of metamorphic rocks, often separated by sand-
plains of some considerable extent and containing
depressions occujoied by saline marshes, clay flats, brine
lakes, or deposits of salt. There are no rivers and the
rainfall is slight. This plateau, which forms the chief
mineral region of the State, is mantled by superficial
deposits, concealing the underlying rocks, over very
wide areas.
Pre-Cambrian, Archaean (?). —The oldest forma-
tion in Western Australia is that comprising those
granitic, gneissic, and schistose rocks which occupy about
one-half of the superficial extent of the State, which
is 975,920 square miles, and form the floor upon which
the newer strata have been laid down. To the whole
of these rocks observers have invariably assigned an
Archaean age; this, however, is more inferred than
proved. There is only one instance on record at the
present time upon which this classification may be
considered to have been determined by palaeontological
evidence. In the Kimberley district certain limestones,
sandstones, quartzites, etc., have yielded Lower Cam-
brian fossils, viz., Salterella Hardmani and Oleuellus (?)
Forresti; these fossiliferous beds are considered, and
may probably be, newer than the gneissic and schistose
rocks in the vicinity. So far as observations have at
present been carried no actual junction has been noticed
between the schists and the fossiliferous strata, and
there is nothing already in the evidence available in-
compatible with the supposition that the talcose and
mica schists and other associated rocks represent much
more highly metamorphosed portions of the Lower Cam-
brian strata. In the absence of direct stratigraphies 1
or palaeontological evidence it is convenient for descrip-
tive purposes to adhere to a purely lithological classifi-
cation and to separate the gneissic, granitoid, and
schistose rocks from those in which metamorphism has
not been carried sufficiently far to entirely obliterate
their clastic character. The great bulk of the interior


plateau is granite and gneiss, the remainder being
formed of the metamorphic rocks. The major portion
of the surface of the plateau occupied by these granitic-
rocks forms broad expanses of flat or rolling country
from which occasionally rise huge agglomerates of
immense boulders of fantastic-shaped “tors.” The
schists and allied rocks which constitute the auriferous
belts of the State occur as broad bands or patches in
the granite, and present a characteristic type of scenery.
The various auriferous zones, so far as we know them,
are arranged in very long bands of varying width, the
limits of which are marked by tolerably well-defined
parallels in a general north-west and south-east direc-
tion. This marked linear arrangement is not only con-
fined to the metalliferous zones themselves, but to their
component beds and veins. The outcrops of these more
or less parallel elongated strips are due to the folding of
the strata which originated during the efforts of the
crust of the earth to
adjust itself to the
contraction resulting
from the gradual
cooling of the in-
terior.
There are prob-
ably few parts of
the Australian con-
tinent which can
boast of a finer de-
velopment of these
older rocks than
Western Australia.
They consist of
rocks of very dif-
ferent types; many
of them are in
a crystalline condition and form coarse crystalline
schists and gneiss, as well as basic rocks, which have
been more or less crushed, foliated, and completely con-
verted into greenstone schists. The basic rocks com-
prise gabbro, dolerite, epidiorite, pyroxenite, hyper-
sthenite, amphibolite, etc. In some localities these
basic rocks can be seen passing by scarcely perceptible
gradations into hornblende schists and allied rocks. Some
of these older rocks are of sedimentary origin and are
practically unaltered; others are quartz and mica schists,
and in certain localities are cleaved conglomerates, some
of the pebbles in which consist of a pre-existing con-
glomerate from a much older series of which no trace has
yet been found. The less altered members of these ancient
sediments make their appearance in many portions of the
State. The rocks consist of a great variety of types of
indurated slates, quartzites, and conglomerates, together
with igneous rocks, some of which there are good grounds
for believing to have been originally lavas and ashes.
A remarkable and very noticeable feature of these
•/
older rocks are those bands of laminated cherts and
jaspers, which often contain oxide of iron to such an
extent as to warrant their being classed as iron-ores.
These extend as roughly parallel bands, sometimes
several miles in length, in the form of attenuated lenses,
which, owing to their serrated ridges, stand out in bold
relief, thus acquiring a conspicuousness all out of pro-
portion to their real stratigraphical importance. These
bands are often intersected by numerous faults, which
in some districts are of considerable economic import-
ance, for it is along these fault lines that rich shoots
of gold often occur.
These older rocks are invaded by masses and veins
of granite and allied rocks, which in many parts of the
State occupy very large areas, sometimes embracing
hundreds of square miles. The old granitic rocks are
traversed by many large icelike quartz reefs, which rise
to considerable alti-
tudes above the sur-
face like a wall, and
which can in some
cases be traced across
country with more or
less interruption for
miles. These older
granitic rocks are of
some considerable
importance by rea-
son of the fact that
they form the mat-
rices of tin and allied
deposits in the State.
These old Pre-
Cambrian rocks
are remarkable for
the variety of useful and valuable minerals they
contain. The plateau in which these older rocks occur
has been remarkably quiescent since early geological
times, and having had such a peaceful history the areas
may be said to possess almost limitless mining pos-
sibilities.
Cambrian. —Strata of undoubted Cambrian age
are known to occur in the Kimberley district, and were
discovered by Mr. E. T. Hardman in 18S3-4. In the
course of his explorations this observer gatheied a
suite of fossils which were critically examined by Mr.
R. Etheridge, Mr. W. H. Foord, and Dr. Hy. Wood-
ward. Among the disjecta membra were the head and
spine of a trilobite belonging to the characteristic Cam-
brian family Olenellus , 0. Forresti , and numerous
pteropods, Salterella Hardmani . These came from a
locality which, unfortunately, cannot now be identified.
The strata with which these fossils were associated consist
of limestones, sandstones, quartzites, clay slates, and
OUTCROP OF LAMINATED QUARTZITE


sandy flags. Very little is known of these Cambrian
strata at present. Their superficial area, however,
would seem to be extensive, for they have been proved
to extend in a north east and south-west direction from
the Burt Range and for some distance to the southward
of Mount Ddckrell. The strata have been tilted in such
a way that the principal axis of folding is north-west
and south-east.
No estimate has yet been made of the thickness of
these the oldest fossiliferous beds yet found in Western
Australia. Despite the poor localization of Mr. Hard-
man’s fossils it may be considered as proved that Cam-
brian strata do occur somewhere in Kimberley about
18° southern latitude. The discovery of Olenellns and
SaltereMfi in the limestones of the Daly River, in the
Northern Territory, is of considerable geological import-
ance, indicating as it does a somewhat wide distribution
of Cambrian strata in the northern portion of Aus-
tralia.
-■ '' f r ■ «
Nullagtne Series. —Age undetermined. A for-
matioh which has been designated the Nullagine Series,
and which cannot be exactly correlated with anv defined
geological horizon in Western Australia, has a very
wide distribution in the North-West Division of the
State. The series consists of a great thickness of sand-
stones, grits, conglomerates, and limestones, some of
which are magnesian, together with a series of lavas,
ashes, and agglomerates. The formation is of some
economic importance, by reason of the fact that the
basal members of the series have proved to be auriferous
in two localities, viz., Nullagine and Just-in-Time.
The beds of the Nullagine Series make a very
prominent feature in the landscape in the districts in
which it is developed, and play a very important part
in the geology of the north-west. The series may be
followed from the Oakover River, across the upper
reaches of the Nullagine, the Coongan, and the Shaw
Rivers, as far as the western boundary of the Pilbara
goldfield on the Yule River, near Cangan Pool, from
which locality it can be followed without a break to
Roebourne, and southward to the Fortescue River. The
same series constitutes the Hamersley Range, which
contains Mount Bruce, the highest summit in the State.
The Nullagine beds are continuous as far south as the
Lyons River, where at Mount Phillips the conglomerate
at the base of the series is seen to rest with a violent
unconformity upon an uneven floor of ancient crystal-
line rocks.
In its lithological characters and general behaviour
the Nullagine Series bears a very strong resemblance to
the quartzites, etc., which constitute that continuous
formation which extends from Wyndham to Mount
Hart, a prominent summit in the King Leopold Range
in the Kimberley Division. This formation as deve-
loped in Kimberley consists of a series of quartzites,
sandstones, fine conglomerates, and shales, disposed in a
series of broad anticlinal folds. Associated with the
sediments is a series of bedded and intrusive igneous
rocks, some of which are distinctly amygdaloidal, and
contain zeolites and agates in the cavities. Beds of
volcanic ash and breccia are common in certain locali-
ties. In certain portions of the King Leopold Plateau
are many excellent sections showing the intrusive
nature of some of the igneous rocks. The sandstones
are sometimes altered into hard compact quartzite, por-
tions of which have been caught up in the body of the
igneous rock. Other sections indicate quite clearly that
some of the igneous rocks have found an easy passage
along the bedding planes of the sedimentary rocks, and
evidently occur in the form of sills. The lavas are
traversed by almost vertical dykes of epidosite, which
are traceable across country for long distances; while
both the sedimentary and igneous rocks are intersected
by numerous segregation veins of quartz, some of which
are of considerable size and horizontal in extent.
The recognition of the position of the beds of the
Nullagine Series in the stratigraphical succession is of
considerable importance ; the entire absence of fossils
throughout the series renders correlation extremely diffi-
cult. The beds forming the King Leopold Plateau
have been claimed by previous observers as being of
Cambrian age. If the lithological and stratigraphical
resemblance between beds of the King Leopold Plateau
and those of the Nullagine Series, as developed in Pil-
bara and the Ashburton, should prove to possess greater
significance than at present appears, a Cambrian age
for the Nullagine Series would have strong claims to
acceptance.
Silurian. — The occurrence of Silurian rocks in
Western Australia has been more inferred than proved.
Mr. F. J. Gregory described in 1861 certain rocks occur-
ring in the Mount Barren Range as being probably of
Silurian age, though the evidence upon which this
determination was based was not given. The strata
forming the Stirling Range, which lies about 50 miles
north of Albany, have been claimed as Silurian. The
beds consist of quartzites, sandstones, and shales, the
whole being traversed by quartz veins ; they are highly
folded, contorted, and faulted in places. According to
the researches of Mr. H. P. Woodward the rocks at the
western end of the range, near Mondinup, have been
thrown into three sharp anticlinal and synclinal folds,
in a distance north and south of about ten miles, by a
lateral compression from the south.
The strata chiefly developed in the Leopold and
Mueller Ranges of Kimberley have been provisionally
classed by Mr. E. T. Hardman as Silurian, more on
account of their lithological character than on any
stratigraphical or palaeontological evidence. The beds


consist of pure crystalline quartzites, indurated grits,
and quartzose conglomerates, interbedded with purple
slates and soft sandstones. Much detailed fieldwork is,
however, required before the occurrence of undoubted
Silurian rocks can be considered to have been definitely
proved in Western Australia.
Devonian. —The occurrence of Devonian rocks has
as yet been definitely proved only in one district of the
State —the Kimberley Division, where this formation
appears to be largely developed. The beds consist of
hard grits, conglomerates, indurated limestones, and
shales, associated with which are contemporaneous lava
flows, breccias, and ashes. In the Napier Range the
Devonian rocks are represented by solid crystalline lime-
stones, with at the base of the formation a calcareous
breccia and conglomerate. These beds are seen in the
Barker River Gorge to pass beneath a series of sand-
stones and shales of what are believed to be Car-
boniferous age.
Permo-Carboniferous. —The Permo-Carboniferous
rocks cover a wide extent of country and bid fair to
become of considerable economic importance. There are
four regions in which fossiliferous Permo-Carboniferous
rocks are known in the State, viz., Kimberley, Gas-
coyne, Irwin River, and Collie districts.
The beds as exposed in the Kimberley district are
divisible into a lower or limestone series (in which lime-
stones predominate) and an upper or sandstone series
(made up largely of sandstones and other sedimentary
beds). The two series are seen to succeed each other
conformably in the Ilaughton Range. Both series have
yielded a rich assemblage of fossils. The Kimberley
Carboniferous beds underlie nearly the whole of the
so-called Great Sandy Desert, which extends from the
Ninety-Mile Beach westward to the Northern Territory
frontier.
The Gascoyne beds cover a very large area between
the 22nd and 26th parallels of southern latitude, and
JUNCTION OF METAMORPHIC AND DEVONIAN ROCKS, ELVIRE RIVER.
Among the fossils found in the Napier Range beds
are a Coccostean fish, a new species of Proetus; remains
of Loxonema, sp.; Pjuomphalus , sp.; Rhynchondla,
allied to It. Timorensis; Pachypora, sp.; Phillipsas-
trcca, sp. ; and Goniatites, sp., which clearly indicate a
Devonian age for the strata.
The following fossils have also been found occur-
ring in the Kimberley Devonian rocks:
Anthozoa. Gyathophyllum vergatum, Hinde; Phil-
lipsastrcea, sp. ; Favosites Goldfussi, Edw. and Haime.
Brachiopoda. Productus, sp.; A try pa reticularis,
Linn.; Ehynchondln cuboid es, Sow.; U. pugnus, Mar-
tin: cf. Timorensis, Beyr; Spirifera Musakhey-
lensis, var. Australis, Foord.
Gastropoda. Goniatites (Prancoceras), cf. rota-
torius, De Kon.
Crustacea. Proetus, sp. nov.
c
excellent sections of them may be seen in the valleys of
the Wooramel, Gascoyne, Lyons, Minilya, and Lyndon
Rivers. Like their representatives in Kimberley, the
strata are divisible into an upper or sandstone and a
lower or limestone series. The sandstone series, which
is seen resting conformably upon the limestone, is well
exposed in the Corandibby, Kennedy, and Moogooloo
Ranges. These Permo-Carboniferous rocks have been
pierced in the pioneer borehole at Pelican Hill, near
Carnarvon, which had been carried down to a depth of
3,011 ft. These strata, which comprised calcareous
shales and limestone, were encountered beneath the
fossiliferous mesozoic rocks at a depth of 1,406 ft. ; and
continued to the bottom of the borehole, which, how-
ever, was not carried deep enough to reach the floor of
more ancient rocks upon which they rest.
Interbedded with these Permo-Carboniferous rocks


is a very persistent boulder bed, the component pebbles
of which are covered with striae of such a nature as to
suggest that they owe their origin to ice action. Sec-
tions occur which show that this bed does not attain
any great thickness, and that it is crowded with pebbles
and boulders of granite, etc., embedded in a cal-
careous, fossiliferous matrix, which contains fragments of
Spirifera , Productus, and Polyzoa, in addition to
Aviculopecten tenuicollis. The fossil contents imply a
marine origin for the boulder bed. It, therefore, can
hardly be a glacial moraine, and it is more than likely
that the materials were transported by floating ice,
which deposited its burden on the sea floor. Wherever
seen /?? it lias been found that this glacial boulder
bed (the Lyons Conglomerate) does not lie quite at the
base of the Permo-Carboniferous rocks as developed in
Western Australia. The Lyons Conglomerate marks an
important geological horizon, which has been proved to
extend for a distance of about 200 miles.
In the Irwin River district the Permo-Carboniferous
rocks present an uninterrupted series of shales, clays,
and sandstones, with occasional beds of limestone which
are arranged in a very broad anticlinal fold, the axis of
which trends generally north and south. About the
middle of the series there occurs a zone of argillaceous
limestones, containing a heterogeneous collection of
striated boulders such as ice action alone can produce.
The stratigraphical position of the boulder bed shows
the horizon to be interbedded with marine strata, the
equivalents of those in the Gascoyne.
The Collie River beds, which attain a thickness of
at least 2,000 ft., are of considerable importance by
reason of the fact that they contain coal seams to a
total thickness of over 140 ft. The beds, which cover
an area of about 500 square miles, consist of shales,
sandstones, and grits. The boundary of the field is,
with one local exception, everywhere defined by faults,
one of which has been estimated to have a downthrow
bo the north-east of at least 2,000 ft. The Collie River
beds have yielded the following plants: — Glossopteris
browniana; G. browniana, var. indica; G. browniana,
var. communis; G. browniana, var. anyustifolia; G.
browniana ganyamopteraides; and the following Fora-
minifera: Endothyra , Valvulina plicata, Bulimina
Truncafulina haidinyeri, and Pulvinulina exigua.
The Permo-Carboniferous rocks of Western Aus-
tralia have yielded a rich assemblage of fossils, among
which are:
Rhizopoda. Nubecularia Stephensi, How.
Anthozoa. Amplexus pustulosus, Hudl. ; A. Sel-
wyni, De Kon.; Cyathophyllum depressum, Hinde; C.
virgatum, Hinde; Pleurophyllum Australe , Hinde; P.
sulcatum, Hinde; Alveolites obscurus, De Kon.; Hexa-
yonella (Evactinopora) crucialis, Hudl. ; 77. dendroidea ,
Hudl.; Syrinyopora reticulata, var. patula.
Crinoidea. A ctinocrinus, sp. ; Flatycrinus , sp.
Tubicola. Spirorbis ambiyuus, Flem.
Bryozoa. Fcuestella plebeia; I*, fossula; Poly •
pora Australis, Hinde ; Protoretepora ampla, Lonsd.
Brachiopoda. Aid ost eyes Baracoodensts, Eth. fils;
Ghonetes Pratti , Davidson; Derhyia cf. senilis, Phill.;
Orthis cf. Michelini, Martin; Orthotetes (Strepto-
rhynchus) senilis, Phill. ; Productus hrachytheerus,
Sow.; P. cf. Cora, d’Orb; P. cf. maryaritaceux, Phill.;
7 J . scabriculus, Martin :P. semireticulatus , Mar
tin; P. puyilis, Phill.; P. suhqnadratus , Morris; P.
tenuistriatus, De Vern; P. Foordi, Eth. fils; 7
undatus, Defr. ; Strophalosia Clarkei , Eth. fils; Strop-
homena analoya, Phill.; Actinoconchus cf. planosul-
cat us, Phill.; Gleiothyris (Athyris) Macleayana , Eth.
fils; (7. var. Baracoodensis, Eth. fils; C. Itoysii , Lev.;
Gyrtina carbonaria, var. Australasica, Eth. fils; 7PV
lasma (Terehratula) nohilis, Eth. fils; 77. sacculus,
Martin; 77. kastata, Sow.; 77. amygdala, Dana; 77.
cymbalformis, Morris; Reticularia crebristria, Morris;
P. lineata, Martin; Rhynchonella ( Hypothyris)
cuboides, Sow. ; 77. pleurodon , Phill. ; 77. puynus,
Martin; Seminula subtilita, Hall; Spirifera avicnla,
Sow. ; $. convoluta; S. disjunct a, Sow. ; 5. glabra,
Martin ; 5-. Hardmani , Foord : 5. Kimberleyensis ,
Foord ; $. lata, McCoy; >S f . Musakheylensis , var.
trolis , Foord; striata , Martin; $. Stutchburii, Eth.
fils; £. trigonalisy Martin: >9. vespertilio , Sow.;
Syrinyothyris exsuperans , De Kon.
Pelecypoda. Aviculopecten multiradiata , Eth.
pere ; .4. sprenti , Johns; tenmcollis, Gardiomorpha
oblonya , Sow. ; TJeltopecten (Aviculopecten) Illawar-
ensisy Morris; 77. tenuisulcus , Dana; 77. leinceformxs ,
Morris; 77. subquinquelineatus , McCoy; Myalina
Mingenewensis, Eth. fils; ParaUelodon (Palcearca)
subaryuta, De Kon. ; Stutchburia cf. Rand si , Eth. fils :
Pleurophorus ( Pachydornus) carinatus y Morris.
Gastropoda. Baylea (1 vania) Levellii, De Kon. ;
Bellerophon costatus, Sow. ; 7?. decussatus , Flem. ;
Ptychomphalina Maitlandi, Eth. fils.
Cephalopoda. Gcelonautilus Chesterensis , De Kon. ;
Discites cf. Omalianus, De Kon. ; Gastrioceras Jacksoni,
Eth. fils ; (7. sphcericum, Goldf. ; Agathiceras microm-
phalum, Morris.
Crustacea. Phillipsia grand is, Eth. fils.
Pisces. Edestus Davisii, H. Wood.
Jurassic. The Jurassic rocks of the State have a
fairly wide extent, especially in the Champion Bay
district, near Geraldton. Rocks of this age have also
been recorded from Shark Bay and also from Cape
Riche to the east of Albany. From this latter locality
Ammonites (Perisphinctes) Championensis, sp. nov., has
been recorded, but there is some doubt as to whether
or not this specimen has been correctly localized, or that
it really came from Champion Bay. The Champion


Bay beds cover a fairly large area of country to the
south, in the neighbourhood of the coastline. They
are seen to rest with a marked unconformity on the
Permo-Carboniferous rocks of the Irwin River valley.
They also extend northward, having been met with at
Shark Bay and on the Gascoyne River, near the Ken-
nedy Range. The Jurassic beds of the State are repre-
sented by oolitic limestones, clays, sandstones (which
are often ferruginous), grits, conglomerates, and
lignites. Some of the ferruginous sandstones contain
abundant plant remains. As a rule the strata are
horizontal or but gently undulating, and have probably
been deposited along the then coast during a long period
of depression. No estimate can as yet be made of the
thickness of the Jurassic beds; they have, however, been
pierced by four boreholes in the Champion Bay dis-
trict which have proved the thickness to be not less
than 2,000 ft. The plant remains occurring in these
beds near Minginew
seem to indicate that
the beds are the equiva-
lents of those at
Talgai and Rosewood,
in Queensland. The
beds have yielded a
rich Jurassic fauna, in-
cluding the follow-
ing:—
Crinoidea. Penta-
crinus, sp.
Tubicola. Serpula
ronformis , Goldf.
Bryozoa. Bryozoa , sp.
Brachiopoda. Rhyn-
chonella variabilis , Schl.;
Rhynchonella solitaria ,
Moore.
Pelecypoda. Area, sp. ; Alectryonia, Ostrea,
Marshi, Sow.; Avicula cequalis , Moore: Avicula
(MacGoyella) Barklyi , Moore; Avicula ecMnata ,
Sow. ; A vicula incequivalvis , Sow. ; Avicula Mun-
steri, Bronn. ; Gtenostreon (Lima) pecteniformis ,
Schl. ; Gucullcea infata , Moore; Cucnllcca ob-
longa, Sow.; Gucullcea semistriata; Gucullcea tibrad-
donensis, Eth. fils; Gryphcea, sp. ; Tlinnites , sp. ;
Lima Gordonii , Moore; Lima proboscidea, Sow.; Lima
punctata , Sow.; Modiola Maitlandi , Eth. fils; J/y-
-tilus cf. gygerensis , d’Orb ; Nucula , sp. ; Ostrea tholi-
formis, Eth. fils; Pecten colons, Goldf.; Pecten duc-
tus, Sow. ; Pecten cf. frontalis , Dum. ; Pecten Green-
oughiensis, Moore; Pecten valoniensis, Defr. ; Pecten
cf. vesicularis; Perna , sp.; Plicatula , sp. ; Radula
(Lima) duplicator Sow.; Trigonia Moorei , Lycett;
Trigonia costata , Clarke ; Gresslya donaciformis , Phill. ;
Myacites liassianus, Gueust; Myacites Sanfordii,
c 2
Moore; Pholadomya ovulum , Agassz : Pleuromya , sp. ;
Astarte apicalis , Moore; Astarte Cliftoni , Moore;
Gardium , sp.; Gypricardia , sp. ; Isocardia , sp. ;
Lucina , sp. ; Opis, sp.; Panopcea (Glycimeris) rugosa ,
Moore; Tancredia plana (I), Moore; Teredo (Pholas)
Australis, Moore; Unicardiumo, sp. ; Dentalium , sp. ;
Amberleya, sp. ; Phasianella, sp. ; Pleurotomaria
Greenougfiiensis, Eth. fils; Trochus; "Turbo Aus-
tralis, Moore; Turbo Icevigatus, Sow.; Gerithium
Greenoughtensis, Moore; Chemnitzia, sp.; Nerincea,
sp.; Rissoina Australis, Moore; Actceon depressus,
Moore.
Cephalopoda. Nautilus perornatus, Crick; Nauti-
lus sinuatus, Sow. ; Ammonites lautus; Ammonites
Walcottii, Sow.; Ammonites (Dorset ensia) Glarkei,
Crick; Ammonites (Dumortieria) Moorei, Lycett;
Ammonites (Macrocephalites) macrocephalus, Schl ;
Ammonites (Perisphinctes) Ghampionensis, Crick ;
Ammonites ( Peris-
phinctes ) robiginosus,
Crick; Ammonites
( Sphoeoroceras ) semior-
natus, Crick; Amm on-
lies ( Sphoeoroceras )
Woodwardi , Crick; A /?? -
monifes (Stephanoceras)
Australis , Crick; im-
monites ( Normannites )
Australis , Crick; Belem-
nites canaliculatus , Schl.;
B elemni tes Can ha mi ,
Tate; Gy there corrosa,
v a r. grossepuncfata ,
Chap. ; Gy there dru-
pacea, yar. fort i or,
Chap. ; Cyfhere lobatula ,
Chap.; Gytheropteron
Australiense, Chap. ; Lotoconcha elongata , Chap. ;
Lotoconcha Jurassica, Chap, ; P aradotorhyn cha foveo-
lata, Chap.
Plants. Cf. Araucaria peregrina, Kurr; Cun-
ninghamites Australis, Ten.-Woods; cf. Pagiophyllum ,
sp.; Otozamites Feistmanteli, Zigno ; fern fronds and
seed-vessels.
Cretaceous. —The presence of Cretaceous strata in
Western Australia appears to have been known for
pretty well half a century, having been first recorded
by Mr. F. T. Gregory as occurring near Gin Gin. This
same observer stated that the Cretaceous strata were
the most extensively developed of the sedimentary rocks
of Western Australia, and that the beds were very
closely connected with the Jurassic rocks of the Green -
ough River. The boundary between the two series,
however, has not as yet been satisfactorily traced.
Fossiliferous Cretaceous rocks have been proved in
GLACIATED GEANITE BOULDER, EMBEDDED IN BLUE CLAY, IRWIN RIVER


three districts, viz., Eucla, the Metropolitan Area, and
Gin Gin, and there are good grounds for believing that
beds of this age occur in the valleys of the Gascoyne,
Lyndon, and the Minilya Rivers.
The results of the recent boring in that enormous
limestone plateau which extends from the South Aus-
tralian border to the neighbourhood of Israelite Bay
has proved the occurrence of Cretaceous strata lying
beneath the Eucla limestone, which is supposed to be
of Eocene age. In bore No. 3, put down at the 337
miles 61 chains peg on the surveyed route of the Wes-
tern Union Railway, at an altitude of 576 ft. above
sea-level, the following strata were passed through:-
Eucla limestone, 603 ft. ; shales (sometimes glauconitic),
667 ft. ; fine and coarse sandstone and conglomerate,
74 ft.; and granite, 28 ft. ; the total depth of the bore
being 1,372 ft. The beds beneath the limestone have
yielded two of the most characteristic fossils found in
the lower Cretaceous strata of South Australia and
Queensland, viz., Aucella Tlughendensis , Eth. ; and
MacCoyella Gorbrensis , Moore, together with portions
of a bivalve shell, possibly Fissihinula, which is found
in the lower Cretaceous beds of Eastern Australia,
there is, therefore, little doubt that the strata pierced
in No. 3 bore are the equivalents of the Rolling Downs
beds of Queensland.
In view of this discovery it is important to note
that Cretaceous rocks occurring as table-topped hills
were noticed in 1893, in the country to the north of
No. 3 bore, by the geologist attached to the Elder
Exploring Expedition.
The Cretaceous rocks of Gin Gin consist of a white
chalky limestone without flints, which passes downward
into a greenish glauconite marl, and below that into a
clay shale. Above the limestone is a bed of very ferru-
ginous sandstone, the whole series dipping to the north-
ward at an angle of 8° to 9°.
A series of fragmentary fossils was collected in
1903, and contained ostreet , allied to O. vesicularis ,
Lam.; a crushed Magellania; a doubtful Terebratu -
Una; an undescribed Serpula , allied to S. Bognoriensis;
spines of two species of Fhyllacanthus , together with a
fragment of Flacunanomia. There were in addition
thirty-seven species of Forammifera, eight of which are
confined to Cretaceous strata elsewhere and four to the
upper Tertiaries, while the other twenty - seven are
known to have existed in Cretaceous times. A further
collection was obtained by Mr. W. R. Philbey in 1897,
and although not in good condition is now undergoing
critical examination. The collection comprises spines
of Echinoderms, three genera of Brachiopoda, frag-
ments of Lamellibranchs, two genera of Cephalopoda,
one Cnoceras , (?) and a shark's tooth Odontaspis-like
in shape. There seems little doubt that the
Gin Gin chalky limestone and its associated beds are
of the Cretaceous age.
Farther north, in the neighbourhood of Dandaragan,
is a belt of white chalky limestone, at the base of which
lies a phosphatized bone bed, which there seem some
sound reasons for believing to be the northern extension
of the Gin Gin beds.
Tertiary. —Owing to the absence of valuable
mineral deposits the Tertiary strata have not as yet
received much attention at the hands of the Survey.
The basal beds of what are believed to be Tertiary
strata are seen to rest unconformably on the eroded
surface of the Jurassic beds in the Champion Bay dis-
trict. The beds consist of limestones, sandy shales, and
sandstones, which form a relatively narrow strip of
country along the coastline.
Similar strata occur at Shark Bay and to the south-
ward of Perth, extending as far as the South Aus-
tralian border, where the chalky limestone that bulks
largely in the formation contains fossils which seem to
point to its being of the Eocene age.
In the south-western portion of the State the Ter-
tiary strata are associated with basaltic lavas as well
as basaltic dykes. These basaltic lavas may be seen at
Bunbury, at several places in the Blackwood River, at
Black Point on the south coast, and near Silver Mount
between the Warren and Donnelly Rivers. They were
also cut in two of the bores put down in the search for
petroleum on the Warren River.
In the Kimberley Division basic lavas and ashes
occur in great force. These Tertiary lavas and ashes
appear in the valleys of the Ord and the Bow Rivers to
have levelled up the depressions formed therein, except
certain knife-edged ridges of the older rocks which still
protrude above the general level. On the Behn River,
just above what is known as the Gorge, a dome or puy
of basalt, which apparently formed one of the focii from
which some of these lavas issued, has been described.
At Norseman remnants of an extensive dolomitic
limestone formation at an altitude of 900 ft. above sea-
level and 100 miles distant from the coast have been
discovered. This bed at Norseman contains species of
Turitella , allied to T. terehra , Pecten, Cardium (or
Gardita), Magellania , and fragments of Polyzoa .
Latertte. —No account of the geology of Western
Australia would be complete without some reference to
that extensive development of residual deposits which
occur in nearly all portions of the State and for which
the term laterite has been adopted. The laterites consist
largely of hydrated oxide of iron and alumina, pro-
ducing on the one hand deposits of iron ore, and on the
other bauxite. In some localities the deposition of
secondary silica in the lateritic deposits produces what
are practically quartzites. These, by an increase in the
ferruginous colouring matter, pass into a jasperoid form


of late rite. There are thus three forms of laterite: an
aluminous, a ferruginous, and a siliceous, the composi-
tion being liable to vary considerably over a small area,
it being governed largely by the nature of the under-
lying rocks. The laterites pass gradually into the
underlying rocks without any sharp line of demarca-
tion. The ferruginous and siliceous laterites are much
commoner than the aluminous variety. This arises
from the fact that the former types are better able to
resist disintegrating influences; they thus not only
remain themselves, but act as a protecting cover for the
rocks beneath. The lateritic deposits occur as discon-
nected outliers which once formed part of a continuous
deposit. It is difficult to escape the conviction that
the laterites are of some geological antiquity, of which
(a) Veins and lodes; (b) alluvial deposits; and
fcj residual deposits.
The metal itself has been found to occur under
several different conditions, viz., (a) native metal; (h)
compounds with tellurium and other elements; and
(c) in association with other minerals.
Since the first discoveries the gold yield of the
State has increased very rapidly. In 1886 an output
of 270 fine oz. followed the discovery of the Kimberley
goldfield. Since that date the production gradually
increased until the year 1903, when it reached
1,962,360*83 oz., from which the yield steadily de-
clined to 1,470,632*02 fine oz. The total gold yield,
however, up to the close of 1910 was 23,077,599 63 fine
oz., valued at £98,027,412.
LIMESTONE CLIFFS, NEAT TWILIGHT COVE, EYRE.
possibly the thickness and state of consolidation may be
some measure. On such geological evidence as is avail-
able the laterites seem to be of earlier age than Late
Tertiary, though there is but little doubt that similar
deposits are forming at the present time in the State.
ECONOMIC GEOLOGY.
Gold. — The auriferous deposits of Western Aus-
tralia, which up to the end of 1910 have been respon-
sible for the production of 23,077,599*63 oz. of fine
gold, when viewed in the light of their geological rela-
tionships, are divisible into three distinct classes: -
The alluvial gold won in Western Australia is, so
far as is disclosed by official figures, 254,864*52 fine oz.
The yield reached its zenith in 1898, when 66,849 27
fine oz. were recorded, while in 1910 it totalled 5,725*85
oz. Ultimately the alluvial deposits will become ex-
hausted, though it is more than likely that fresh dis-
coveries may yet be made and thus add to the yield
from other sources.
The auriferous deposits of the State occur in areas
generally as more or less parallel belts of relatively
narrow lateral dimensions, though in certain localities
they occur as small isolated areas or patches. These
narrow, well-defined belts have a general north-west and


south-east direction. The geological formations in
which the gold deposits of the State occur are among
the most ancient in Western Australia, and possibly
among the oldest of all the formations of the Australian
continent.
The distribution of the major portion of the
auriferous deposits is in relatively narrow parallel belts,
having an almost identical trend, which coincides with
that which make up the fundamental complex of the
plateaux of the interior. Wherever the auriferous
deposits have been examined it has been invariably
found that granite or rocks allied thereto are of fre-
quent occurrence, either immediately contiguous to the
lodes or sufficiently near to have exercised some influ-
ence on the genesis of the gold. In some fields the
auriferous veins are closely associated with, and appear
to pass gradually into, pegmatite dykes or rocks of
similar character.
In addition to the gold derived from quartz reefs,
lode formations, etc., the conglomerates at the base of
the Nullagine Series have been mined in two localities
—Nullagine and Just-in-Time. The auriferous bands
occur throughout a thickness of 300 ft. of grits, sand-
stones, and conglomerate, which form the lowest por-
tion of the series. Those portions of the strata which
have proved to be gold-bearing are those largely im-
pregnated with the oxides and sulphides of iron which
lie between a well-marked fault and a greenstone dyke.
Mining operations have up to the present time been
confined exclusively to the oxidized zone and to very
limited and shallow depths. The gold in this deposit
is a secondary and not an original constituent of the
conglomerates.
The deepest gold mines in Western Australia are now
more than 2,600 ft. below the surface, and show little
diminution in the value or the size of the lodes. There
are no reasons for believing that the lodes of the State
have, even at the greatest depth yet attained, by any
means reached the limits of ore deposition, or that the
lodes will not prove productive in depth.
Copper. —The history of mining in Western Aus-
tralia began with the discovery of the Waneranooka
copper lode at Northampton in the year 1842. Since
that date copper mining cannot be said to have made
continuous progress, though the State’s total produc-
tion of copper ore amounts to 139,392*58 tons, valued
at £849,966.
Copper ores, however, are plentifully distributed
throughout the length and breadth of the State, but so
far, on account chiefly of their not carrying any gold,
have been worked only in a few districts, notably
Marble Bar, West Pilbara, Ashburton, Lawlers, Nan-
nine, Day Dawn, Yalgoo, Northampton, Yandanooka,
Mount Morgan, Mount Margaret, Menzies, East Cool-
gardie, and Phillips River.
The principal sources of copper ore have been in
the districts of West Pilbara, Mount Morgan, and the
Phillips River; the largest output 57,30 b tons being
from Phillips River, 47,857 tons from Mount Morgan,
and that of West Pilbara 32,806 tons.
Tne Phillips River field consists of a series of highly
metarnorphic sedimentary beds, associated with a com-
plex series of crystalline rocks, the whole being uncom-
formably overlaid by a newer, though still old, series
of sandstones, quartzites, and conglomerates. The
crystalline rocks are of igneous origin and range from
granite to serpentine with their foliated or schistose
varieties.
The lodes of the field, which strike east-north-east
and west-south-west, are of two types, the first being
basic cupriferous dykes and the second siliceous and
ferruginous deposits, which apparently fill leaching
channels along the rock joints. Many of the deposits
give promise of being of fair size but of low grade, while
the remainder, which attain considerable dimensions,
promise to yield a large quantity of lowgrade ore suit-
able for concentration. The field may be expected to
produce a fair quantity of copper ore in the future as
systematic mining operations proceed.
The Mount Malcolm Copper Mine at Eulaminna
(late Anaconda), in the Mount Morgan district, has
yielded nearly one-third of the copper production of
the State. The whole of the mineral belt is greenstone,
with quartz, jasper, and ironstone veins, which show
little or no copper at the surface. The ore channel has
been opened up at three points in a length of 1,300 ft.
The ore has been concentrated into zones of enrichment,
in reality bonanzas, three of which have been worked
at the surface by open-cuts for lengths of 130, 110, and
200 ft. and to depths of 30, 20, and 180 ft. in width,
and in value from 5 to 70 per cent. The oxidized zone,
rich in carbonates, extends downwards to the ground
water-level, which varies from 90 to 110 ft., and below
this the ore changes into black sulphides with iron
pyrites. Nothing very definite is known of the exact
geological relationships of this important copper
deposit.
The West Pilbara field has been a large producer
of copper, which, however, has been obtained principally
from one property —the Whim Well Copper Mine. This
copper lode has proved to be the largest and richest
ore body yet discovered in Western Australia in the
oxidized zone. The country rock in which the deposit
is situated is a weathered talcose schist, the
foliation of which runs a little north of west and south
of east. The ore deposit is a very flat-lying lode,
conforming to the bedding of the enclosing schist
country. The lode is traceable for at least 50 chains
in length and has been cut into by a number of open-
cuts and workings from shallow tunnels. These have


proved the ore body to be irregular in thickness, vary-
ing from 2 to 30 ft.
There are many other promising copper lodes in
the West Pilbara field which cannot be worked owing
to the fact that at the present ruling price of copper
only ores of a value between 20 and 30 per cent, will
pay to work on a small scale.
Copper deposits other than those mentioned cover
a wide extent of country, and under more favourable
mining conditions seem to be capable of yielding in the
future a considerable quantity of copper ore.
Lead. —The production of lead in Western Aus
tralia, though at one time giving indication of rising to
the dignity of an important industry, has not come
up to the highest expectations owing to much of the
ore not containing sufficient silver to pay for extraction.
The year 1848 saw the first discovery of lead ore on
the Murchison
River, at what is
now known as the
Geraldine River.
The chief sources of
supply have been
from the mines in
the Northampton
district, which pro-
duced practically
the whole of the
lead ore in the
State. Up to the
close of 1910 33,644
tons of lead ore
valued at <£364,756
have been ex-
ported from that
district, while up
to the same date
602*85 tons of lead
ore, containing 290
tuns of metallic lead valued at £3,811, have been re-
ported to the Mines Department.
The lead ores of the Northampton district are
found in the ancient crystalline rocks which make up
the fundamental complex. These are traversed by a
series of basic dykes, which bear an intimate relation
to the lead lodes.
Lead ores also occur in the Ashburton district, and
a deposit of some promise has been more or less per-
functorily worked at Uaroo. The ore deposit of Uaroo
lies just to the west of the junction of a large area of
granite, which occupies an extensive tract of country
in this portion of the State. The ore-bearing area of
Uaroo is occupied by one geological formation, which
consists of a continuous series of sedimentary rocks,
some bands in which have undergone more or less
mechanical deformation. The beds consist of quartzite
and phyllite, which have a steep dip to the north-east.
The lead lode is a quartz reef of very variable dimen-
sions which runs generally north and south. The
deposit has yielded up to the close of 1910 1,224 tons
of lead ore (chiefly galena), which has been valued at
£10,863.
It is more than probable that other lead lodes
will be active!} 7 exploited when transport and other ex-
penses have been materially reduced.
Tin. —The development of the tin deposits of the
State has been considerably retarded by conditions
tending against operations on a large scale. Such dis-
advantages, however, are in some localities being
gradually overcome.
The total quantity of tin ore raised in Western
Australia up to the close of 1910 amounts to 12,252
tons valued at
£920,011. Tin ap-
pears to have first
been discovered in
Western Australia
toward the end
of 1888, and has
since been found
to occur in several
widely - separated
localities in the
Kimberley district,
the Pilbara gold-
field, the Thomas
River in the Gas-
coyne Valley, the
Murchison, Cool-
gardie, and Green-
bushes.
There are, how-
ever, only two dis-
tricts in the State
from, which any considerable output of tin has been
reported —Greenbushes and the Pilbara goldfield.
From the former locality 7,635'99 tons of tin ore have
been raised, of which 7,486 05 tons represent the yield
of stream tin and 149*94 tons of lode tin. Pilbara has
produced 4,614 69 tons of tin, of which amount
4,327 47 tons represent the output of stream tin and
287 22 tons of lode tin.
Wherever the tin deposits of Western Australia
have been examined they are invariably found to fall
naturally into two distinct geological categories:—(l)
Superficial deposits, which include (a) the alluvial
deposits and (h) the residual sands, gravels, etc. ; and
(2) deposits in country rock, which embrace (c) tin-
bearing granite and allied rocks and (d) tin-bearing
dykes.
BASAL CONGLOMERATE NULLAGINE SERIES, GOONANARRINA POOL, SHERLOCK RIVER.


The alluvial deposits are the most important of
any yet opened out in the State, having yielded
11,815 04 tons. They vary very largely in nature and
range from an extremely hard ferruginous conglom-
erate to a stiff clay or loose sand or gravel. The tin
stone in the first named is often extremely coarse,
though generally one-tenth of an inch or less in
diameter, while that in the softer material is almost
uniformly fine. Assays of ten samples of this class of
ore from the Greenbushes field varied from ‘9 up to
33*3 per cent, of the metal, the average being 101 per
cent. The associated minerals are quartz, kaolin,
limonite, ilmenite, tourmaline, tantalite, stibiotantalite,
garnet, zircon, gold, magnetite, rutile, and topaz.
On the Greenbushes field the alluvial deposits
may be divided into two main groups, the older
being the old river courses or deep leads and the newer
being represented by the existing channels. In the
latter the tin-bearing gravels often lie at from 10 to
40 ft. from the present stream bottoms. The older
deep leads attain considerable depths, the deepest being
96 ft. The tracing of
the course of these
deep leads is a mat-
ter of considerable
economic importance
to the future of
Greenbushes.
The residual de-
posits are either lat-
eritic ironstone or
sands, clays, etc., de-
rived from the de-
composition in situ of
igneous rocks. These
are frequently stanniferous. The chief minerals accom-
panying the tin are limonite, quartz, tourmaline, clay,
and mica.
The tin-bearing granites consist of granite passing
in places into a highly-foliated and highly-micaceous
granite, with little or no felspar. This granite (greisen)
contains tin, tourmaline, zircon, garnet, etc., as acces-
sory constituents.
In many of the tin-bearing districts of the State
the granites, gneisses, and allied rocks are traversed by
numerous dykes of a pegmatite composed mainly of
quartz and albite, with subordinate mica, garnet, and
cassiterite. Considerable quantities of the stream and
a little (lode) tin owe their origin to the disintegration
of veins of this nature.
Tantalum. —Quite a number of different ores of
tantalum have been recorded from various parts of the
State, viz., tantalite, oolumbite, stibiotantalite, micro-
lite, and euxenite. Tantalite was first discovered in
Western Australia at Greenbushes in 1893, and since
that date tantalum ore has been raised for the market
at Wodgina and neighbourhood in the Pilbara gold-
field and at Greenbushes, in the South-West Division.
At Wodgina there is a number of pegmatite veins which
pass from the granite into the schists and more solid
hornblende rocks. Within the area of the latter the
pegmatites contain ores of tantalum, mainly mangano-
tantalite, and it is these dykes which constitute the
tantalum lodes of the district. Large quantities of
detrital ore have been recovered from the shallow sur-
face soil in the immediate vicinity of the outcrops of
the pegmatite veins, and more or less waterworn alluvial
ore has also been won from many of the adjoining
gullies.
At Greenbushes only 3'19 tons of tantalite have
been raised. It is not by any means common, but is
practically confined to the southern half of the dis-
trict. The whole of the output is from alluvial deposits ;
the tonnage, however, is probably far short of the true
total of the ore raised, for much may not have been
officially reported to the Government.
There have been
up to the close of
1910 89*24 tons of
tantalito raised in
the State, and
valued at £13,486,
and of this quantity
only tons are
from lodes.
Iron. — The ores of
iron are very widely
distributed through-
out Western Aus-
tralia, but, save in
one or two instances, the area in which the exploitation of
such deposits is actively prosecuted is very limited, such
areas being, with the single exception of Koolan Island,
Yampi Sound, at present confined to localities where ore
used as a flux in copper- and lead-smelting can be
readily obtained.
The large iron deposits of the State, some of which
are probably equal in size to any others in the world,
have not been worked, and are, owing to their geo-
graphical situation and the absence of suitable coal-
fields, under present conditions practically valueless.
The iron deposits of the Murchison stand out promin-
ently before any of the others so far discovered, and
though at present neglected are destined to form a very
important State asset. No detailed geological surveys
have yet been made of any of the iron deposits of the
State, hence even an inventory of the available iron ore
supplies can be only a mere approximation.
The iron deposits of Western Australia, when
viewed from the standpoint of their geological relation-
LAVE FLOW, BUNBURY.


ships and mode of occurrence, fall naturally into two
main classes:— (a) Ores associated with the crystalline
schists and other allied rocks and (h) superficial de-
posits of limonite (laterite), which occupy extensive
areas in many and widely - separated portions of the
State; and the soft porous deposits of bog ore of com-
paratively recent origin. The deposits associated with
the crystalline schists, which are by far the most im-
portant, appear to be very largely developed in the
Murchison district. The most important deposits are
those at the Wilgie Mia (Weld Range), Mounts Hale,
Taylor, and Matthews, and Gabanintha. In addition
to these places, however, iron-bearing schists are found
almost all over the Murchison goldfield and at numerous
other centres in Kimberley, Pilbara, Ashburton, Gas-
coyne, Peakhill, East Murchison, Mount Margaret,
North Coolgardie, Yilgarn, and Phillips River fields, as
well as from other localities outside the limits of any
legally-defined mining field. The deposits of this type
consist of highly-
inclined beds, bands
and lenses of
almost pure hema-
tite (and magnetite),
or admixtures in all
proportions of hema-
tite and quartz,
usually laminated,
some of which seem
to be the result of
the chemical altera-
tion of highly-
foliated and crushed
belts of greenstone.
The siliceous bands
very often attain a width of as much as 10 chains, and can
often be followed across country for a great many miles.
The superficial iron deposits comprise the laterite
ores and the bog iron ores.
The laterite ores, together with the gravel result-
ing from their denudation, are the most widely-
distributed ores in the State, but unfortunately
they vary greatly in their composition, ranging from a
ferruginous bauxite to an almost pure limonite or
turgite. The ores are developed mostly on the tops of
hills or ranges; in depth they pass gradually without
any distinct line of demarcation into the underlying
rock, and nowhere do they attain any great thickness.
The composition of the ores naturally varies within very
wide limits, and is very largely determined by the
nature of the underlying rocks. When these belong to
the basic series (amphibolites, dolerites, etc.) the over-
lying ores are relatively rich in iron; but when the
underlying rocks are of the acidic series (granite, etc.)
the ores are poorer in iron and proportionately richer
in alumina.
The ores of this class have been used principally
for fluxing purposes, for which 57,270 tons valued at
£36,148 have been raised.
The bog iron ores consist of soft porous deposits
of hydrated oxide of iron of comparatively recent forma-
tion, and are known to occur at one or two places along
the southern and western coastline. So far no deposits
of this class have been worked in any way.
Coal. —The Collie coalfield is the only one upon
which any active operations are being carried on,
though there are other districts in the State in which
lignites and brown coals occur. The Collie coalfield
lies to the east of Bunbury and south of Perth, near
the north-western edge of the tableland which succeeds
the Coastal Plain. The area occupied by the Collie
River coal measures is approximately 50 square miles.
The beds consist of alternations of shales, sandstones,
and grits of Permo-
Carboniferous age,
which rest directly
upon granite, schists,
and other crystal-
line rocks. The
boundary of the
field is, with one ex-
ception , everywhere
defined by faults.
On the south-
western side of the
field the boundary
fault has been
estimated to have a
downthrow to the
north-east of at least 2,000 ft. There are several coal
seams on the field; these are of variable thickness and
consist, in descending order, of:
Cardiff No. 1 seam, 9 to 12 ft.
Cardiff No. 2 (or Boulder) seam, 7 ft.
Collieburn No. 1 seam, 9 ft.
Collieburn No. 2 seam, 6 to 7 ft. 10 in.
Coal (no name), 8 ft.
Proprietary No. 1 seam, 4 to 8 ft.
Proprietary No. 2 seam, 5 to 7 ft. 6 in.
Wallsend seam, 9 to 17 ft.
In addition to these beds a further series of seams in
the north-east corner of the field has been discovered,
but which cannot at present be correlated with any of
those referred to. The seams from this new locality
consist, in descending order, of (omitting all those under
3 ft. in thickness): —Coal, 3 ft.; coal, 4 ft.; coal,
6 ft.; coal, 6 ft. 4 in. ; coal, 5 ft. 4 in. ; coal, 4 ft. ;
and coal, 5 ft.
LAKE WAY, EAST MURCHISON GOLDFIELDS.


Seams.
Tons.
Cardiff No
. i
... . .
. 18,175,104
Cardiff No
. 2
...
. 17,547,840
Collieburn
No.
1
46,433,088
Collieburn
No.
2
. 38,996,640
Eight-feet
seam
(no name) .
.. 50,683,968
Wallsend
...
...
. 138,843,936
310,680,576
The coals of the Collie field are hydrous, semi-
bituminous, non-caking coals, which approach very
closely to lignite in some parts; between the various
varieties the differences are only of degree. So far as
departmental analyses indicate it appears that the
average calorific value of the Collie coal is about 10,000
British thermal units. According to estimates which
have been made it seems that, omitting the seams of
trifling thickness, there is about 137 ft. of coal in the
2,072 ft. of strata so far explored by mining and boring
operations.
Estimates have been made as to the quantity of
coal available in the seams so far known, and these are
given in the following table:
The coal production of the State up to the end of 1910
—which is entirely that of the Collie coalfield —
amounts to 1,778,158 tons valued at £822,424.
Jurassic, Tertiary, and Post Tertiary lignites and
brown coals, mostly of poor quality, are known to
occur in various portions of the State, but so far little
active work has been done upon any of them. No
geological surveys have yet been undertaken such as
would enable even an approximate estimate to be made
of the area or quantity of coal available in these
Mesozoic, Tertiary, and recent strata.
Salt. —Salt is obtained from certain depressions
in the calcareous sandstones of the coast, which are
filled to a shallow depth in winter with salt water. In
summer lakes of this type dry up completely, leaving a
layer of salt 2 or 3 in. thick, which is collected and
either consumed locally or exported both as a fine and
a crude product. The four localities where salt col-
lecting has been carried on are at Rottnest Island, off
Fremantle; Middle Islands, near Esperance; Yarra
Yarra Lakes, near Three Springs; and Lynton, near
Port Gregory.
There is a very large number of salt and brine
lakes in many districts in the State, but their geo-
graphical situation and other causes place them at
present beyond the reach of profitable enterprise. So
far as records are available it appears that about 3,500
tons of salt valued at £8,525 have been produced in the
State up to the close of 1910.
Phosphate Deposits. —The occurrence of phos-
phatic fertilizers has such an important bearing on the
future of the agricultural industry that considerable
attention has recently been paid to the discovery of
these substances. The known phosphate deposits of
Western Australia are distributed principally in two
localities: — (a) The islands along the coast and (b) a
portion of the Coastal Plain between Dongara and
Perth.
Up to the present time the chief source of the
guano raised is in Iloutman’s Abrolhos Islands, which
lie about 30 miles north-west of Geraldton. That the
importance of these deposits is considerable may be
judged by the fact that up to the end of 1903 86,165 25
tons of guano valued at £335,591 were exported from
the State and a royalty of £41,955 paid to the Govern-
ment. The guano deposits in these islands are nowhere
very thick, varying from 4 to 27 in.
No estimate of the supply of guano on these islands
is available, though the last surveys made some years
ago showed the available tonnage on several of the
islands to amount in the aggregate to 100,490.
Christmas Island in the Recherche Archipelago,
about 20 miles south-east of Israelite Bay, contains a
fairly large area of phosphatized limestone, which rests
upon a foundation of granite. The phosphatized lime-
stone has an average thickness of about 2 ft.
In the neighbourhood of Dandaragan, about 22
miles to the west of Moora, is a series of low hills con-
taining phosphate deposits. These occur in beds which
have been followed across countrv for a distance of
about 22 miles, and the rock phosphate is exposed in
several places. There appear to be three distinct classes
of material among the phosphate deposits, viz., (a)
weathered rocks containing from 0 54 to 2 10 per cent,
of phosphoric acid; (h) ferruginous sandstones con-
taining phosphates mainly of iron, with from 7'25 to
15 13 per cent, of phosphoric acid, the iron phosphates
occurring as dufrenite and vivianite ; and (c) fossil
bone and coprolite rock containing from 15 32 to 39 34
per cent, of phosphoric acid. The bone-bed has been
proved to be about 3 ft. thick, and the underlying fer-
ruginous sandstone, which has been more or less phos-
phatized by the interaction of ironstone and phosphoric
acid derived from the bone-bed, is at least 7 ft. in
thickness. The bone-bed is the most important of the
deposits, and it is possible that judicious prospecting
may result in the discovery of portions much richer in
phosphoric acid than any of the outcrops yet tested.
In addition to these rock phosphates there are at
Watheroo some cave deposits consisting of evacuations
of wallabies, bats, and birds, some of which is of high-
grade quality. The value of deposits of this nature
depends upon the extent of the caverns and the quan-
tity and quality of the accumulations contained in them.
The comparatively recent cave limestone country which
extends practically from Geraldton southward along the


coast as far as Albany contains numerous caves that
have been proved to contain varying quantities of
guano, but which yet remain to be worked. Without
more or less detailed surveys it is obviously an impossi-
bility to make even a rough estimate of the available
deposits, which, of course, are exhaustible, or to attempt
any forecast as to the life of the phosphate deposits.
Artesian Waters. Western Australia possesses a
large tract of country which actual boring operations
have shown to be artesian water-bearing. Artesian
water has been found in tiie Eucla, South-West, North-
West, and Kimberley Divisions. The water-bearing
strata in the Eucla Division consist of sandstones, sandy
shales, glauconitic marls, etc., lying beneath a great
thickness of white limestone. These beds have been
proved by their fossil contents to be the equivalents of
the Lower Cretaceous strata of Eastern Australia. Five
bores have been put down in this plateau, and the water
rises in them to a height equal to that of sea-level.
The first bore, situated not far from the sea coast at
the foot of the tableland, was carried down to a depth
of 2,041 ft. At a depth of 900 ft. the strata pierced con-
sisted of limestone, the remainder being mud, stones,
shales, etc. At 2,041 ft. a supply of good stock water
was encountered, which issued from a standpipe 2 ft.
above the surface, at the rate of 5,700 gal. per diem.
The water-carrying beds in the Eucla Plateau have a
prevailing dip toward the Great Australian Bight.
The most important portion of the South-West
Division when viewed in the light of the occurrence of
artesian water is the Coastal Plain, which practically
extends from 29° to 33° southern latitude. The plain
is really formed by a fringe of strata round the coast,
with a more or less gentle slope to the seaward. It is
from the strata underlying this plain that the supplies
of artesian water have been obtained. The structure of
the Coastal Plain differs in many important respects
from the typical areas in which artesian water has
been obtained in other portions of Australia. The
strata are horizontal, or nearly so, though occasionally
there is a slight local dip of about 5 to 8 deg. The
effect of this horizontality is shown in the fact that the
water - carrying beds do not crop out on the surface
near the eastern margin of the plain, but impinge
directly against that portion of the main range which
is concealed from view. The strata do not attain a
uniform thickness throughout, but are disposed in the
form of lenticular beds, some of which appear to be
of exceptionally absorptive properties. The mean
annual rainfall of the Coastal Plain is from 20 to 30
in., a precipitation which is considerable. No system-
atic observations have as yet been undertaken to ascer-
tain the actual discharge of the numerous rivers which
flow across the plain, so that no estimate of the amount
of water available for absorption can be even arrived
at. That such must be considerable is obvious from
the data collected and tabulated with reference to the
discharge of the Helena River, near Perth. The ob-
servations were made at two stations —one near Mid-
land Junction, the other near Greenmount. The
westernmost locality is situated on the outcrop of the
permeable strata of the Coastal Plain and the other
on the crystalline (or impermeable) rocks. From the
figures obtained it appears that about 22,000,000,000
gall, of water per annum disappeared underground and
is capable of being reached by wells. The conditions
which prevail over large areas of the Coastal Plain
demonstrate that rivers of a much larger catchment dis-
charge their drainage into the plain, and it is therefore
only reasonable to assume that a large proportion of
the water from the catchments also disappears beneath
the surface and helps to feed the artesian reservoir
below. So far as the latest official data with reference
to the extent of boring operations show there are forty-
eight artesian wells in the South-West Division reach-
ing an aggregate depth of 39,378 ft. and yielding a
total flow of 15,521,800 gall, per diem.
A considerable portion of what may be called the
coastal area of the North-West Division is of consider-
able economic importance by reason of the fact that
artesian water has been found to occur over a wide area,
and in consequence of the discovery of which the stock-
carrying capacity of this excellent pastoral district has
been materially increased. This artesian area extends,
so far as determined by such geological mapping as
has been carried out, from the mouth of the Murchison
River to somewhere about North-West Cape, thus cover-
ing about 6° of latitude with a maximum width of
over 130 miles. The strata occurring in the valley of
the Gascoyne River consist of representatives of the
Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, Tertiary, and Post-Tertiary ages,
all of which are of importance from the hydrological
standpoint. The basal beds of the Palaeozoic strata,
which carry a considerable portion of the artesian water
in this part of the State, consist of conglomerates,
sandstones, and limestones. These when viewed broadly
are found to have a very gentle dip to the westward,
which carries them below the level of Shark Bay.
These beds have been pierced in the experimental bore
put down at Pelican Hill (Bibbawarra), near Carnar-
von, and which was carried down to a depth of 3,011 ft.
The record of this importnat bore showed that the first
150 ft. comprised clays and limestone of newer or Post-
Tertiary age; Middle Tertiary marls and shales were
passed through to a depth of 1,238 ft.; Mesozoic (and
possibly Cretaceous) clay shale and glauconitic sand
stone down to 1,361 ft. ; while the balance of the beds,
1,650 ft. in thickness, revealed limestone, black shale,
and sandstone as determined by the organic remains of
Permo-Carboniferous age. This Pelican Hill bore is of


importance owing to the fact that it yields an over-
flowing supply of artesian water at the rate of 520,000
gall, per day drawn from a bed of sandstone 448 ft. in
thickness, and forming the lowest bed of the Car-
boniferous Series penetrated. The basal beds of this
formation which constitute the catchment area are well
exposed in the headwaters of the Wooramel, Gascoyne,
Minilya, and Lyndon River valleys. According to the
latest data available there are in all twenty bores in
the North-West, reaching an aggregate depth of 32,096
ft. and having a total output of 11,151,620 gal. of water
per diem.
The large area of sedimentary rocks sufficiently
porous to absorb and transmit water occurring in the
Kimberley Division has led to some more or less suc-
cessful boring operations. The Great Sandy Desert as
shown on the maps of Australia is made up of sedi-
mentary rocks disposed in such a way as to form an
ideal artesian water-bearing basin. This country ex-
tends from Flora Valley to somewhere about the neigh-
bourhood of Lake Disappointment. These sandy beds
doubtless continue westward and form the low country
J
which flanks the Ninety-Mile Beach between La Grange
Bay and Poissonier Point. The basal beds of the
Carboniferous Series, which form the intake of what
may be called the desert artesian area, outcrop along
the northern flanks of the valley of the Fitzroy, where
the rainfall is greatest. The few bores which have been
put down in this perhaps the largest of the Western
Australian basins prove that the occurrence of artesian
water in the Kimberley Division is no longer a matter
of theory.
The following is a summary of the flowing and
non-flowing artesian wells in the State, so far as can be
gathered from official data:
A. Completed Bokes.
1. Artesian or flowing wells ... ... 54
2. Sub - artesian or non-flowing wells
which can be pumped ... ... 9
3. Abandoned bores which did not
strike potable water ... ... ... 6
B. Non-Completed Bores.
1. Flowing ... ... ... ... ... 3
2. Non-flowing ... ... ... ... 7
3. Dry or nearly dry ... ... ... 1
THE FAUNA OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The natural history of Western Australia cannot
be studied apart from that of the Australasian region
as a whole. Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand
are islands now, but in far-back times had a more
or less direct land connection with Asia and South
America. A map of ocean depths to the 1,500-fathom
line shows the position of these former connecting lands
very clearly. Along these old connections came the
first living creatures, which became the ancestors of the
present Australasian land fauna. Geologists can tell us
something regarding the period when these now sunken
lands were above sea-level, for crystalline rocks occur
in Fiji and clay slate in the Marquesas group ; and
such rocks do not appear in islands which have never
formed part of a continental mass. During the
Palaeozoic period there was assuredly a large continent
stretching from Asia across the South Pacific Ocean,
but at the close of that period a big climatal change
occurred over a large part of the Southern Hemisphere.
All the southern half of Australia went through a severe
glacial epoch, the evidences of which are still to be
distinctly seen in the North-West Division of Western
Australia and in the Irwin River basin of that
State; on Kangaroo Island and the shores of St.
Vincent Gulf, in South Australia; and at Bacchus
Marsh, in Victoria. During the succeeding Mesozoic
period the configuration of land and sea within the
Australasian region became greatly changed. There were
great dislocations and subsidences; along the coast of
New South Wales it is estimated that the downthrow
was at least 12,000 ft. Such a subsidence must have
involved the ocean bed far out eastward, and it seems
probable that New Zealand became dissevered from the
continental mass about this period. Western Australia
also became a large island, and Eastern Australia and
Tasmania a long narrow peninsula. During the Creta-
ceous age the sea stretched uninterruptedly right across
Australia from north to south and was of great depth,
for the sediments in the Lake Eyre basin have by
artesian-water bores been proved a mile in thickness.
At the close of the Cretaceous epoch a great uplifting
of the land began which finally established dry land
from west to east, and brought Lake Eyre itself within
39 ft. of the present sea-level. With occasional oscil-
lations this uprising is still going on along the south of
the continent, but in the north there is a corresponding
subsidence taking place and deepening the shallow sea
which separates Australia from New Guinea. Toward
the close of the Tertiary period this uprising was accom-
panied by intense volcanic activity along the western
side of the former long peninsula, and immense flows of
lava occurred over wide areas in Victoria, New South
Wales, and Queensland. The old land connection with
Asia was now finally broken up, and the configuration


of the continent became substantially that which it at
present appears.
It was while this old connection with Asia, and
perhaps South America, lasted that Australia and New
Zealand received along that route the ancestral types
of their present native faunas. The reptilian forms of
life which dominated the earth’s surface during the
Mesozoic period had then passed their prime ; the birds
of the air had become an important feature and the
beasts of the field had begun to put in an appearance.
These latter were lowly-organized animals and laid eggs.
They were the Prototheria, a division now surviving
only in Australia, the Platypus and the Echidna, or
“native porcupine,” being its representatives. The
Metatheria (a more highly-organized division of the
mammalia which bring forth their young in a partially-
developed condition only, and nourish them at breasts
encased in a marsupia or “pouch” until completely deve-
loped) became ex-
tensively spread
over the world dur-
ing the Tertiary
period, but to-day
survive only in
the Australasian re-
gion, and—as the
opossum family—in
North and South
America. After the
arrival of the Meta-
the r i a Australia
became separated
from the northern
land mass, and has
remained an island
ever since. New
Zealand became
separated still earlier (apparently about the time of
greatest bird life development), but Tasmania, Kangaroo
Island, and the islands of west and north-west Australia
remained part of Australia long after the arrival of the
Metatheria—until quite recent times, in fact. Except
bats, rats, and mice, whose means for dispersal over
wide areas and across seas are quite exceptional, none
of the Eutheria, or true placental mammalia, ever
reached Australia until introduced by man. The dingo
is a near ally of the dhole of India, though rather more
wolf-like and now absolutely untamable permanently.
Among the progenitors of the present marsupial
fauna were some giant forms, now known only more
or less fully by their fossil remains. There was the
Diprotodon, a kind of wombat as large as a rhinoceros,
the casts of whose complete skeleton are now in all the
principal Australian museums; there was the Noto-
therium —an animal as large as (and in some respects
OCEAN DEPTHS AROUND AUSTRALASIA.
The shaded portion is deeper than 1,500 fathoms.
resembling) the Tapirs—a gigantic kangaroo which stood
about 12 ft. in height. These were vegetable feeders,
but there are remains of large extinct carnivora also,
one being named Thylacoleo, because supposed to have
been a kind of ‘'pouched" lion. The Thylacinus or
“pouched hyena" and the Sarcophilus or “devil" —two
species now surviving only in Tasmania —existed on the
mainland along with the gigantic creatures just men-
tioned. There were also struthious birds, allied to the
moa of New Zealand, and as large as the ostrich, whose
skeletons have been recovered along with the Diprotodon
in the dried-up swamps of the Lake Eyre basin.
Enormous alligators ranged southward far outside of the
tropics, and a land lizard (Megalania), very nearly akin
to the present-day “goanna,” but upwards of 20 ft. in
length, was the terror of the dry-land creatures. Some
giant turtles and tortoises also appear in the life of this
ancient period, and as a part of the present-day fauna,
including some of
the frogs, have their
closest affinities now
in South America,
it would seem that
their ancestors came
here while the now
submerged South
Pacific continent
reached as far east
as Patagonia.
The changes which
caused the extinc-
tion of the Dipro-
todon and his con-
geners, leaving only
their fossil remains
distributed fro m
Cape Leuwin to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, must be held to have exer-
cised the influence accountable for the distribution of
the present fauna as now observed in each of the
Australian States. That fauna which is isolated from
the rest of the world will still compete within itself
for advantages in the battle for existence. A difference
in climate, of food supply, or predaceous foes must neces-
sarily lead to modifications of form or habit to contend
with such change, or, in the alternative, must cause
that fauna to become extinct. It is thus that in Aus-
tralia, as throughout the world in general, the life
regions are zoologically impoverished regions from which
all the largest and fiercest creatures have died out; and
it is well for man that it should be so.
MAMMALIA.
Of the total mammalian fauna of Australia that
part which is now to be found dwelling within the


All Australia
Western
and
Australia
Tasmania.
on
>y-
No. of
No. of
No. of
No. of
Genera
Species
Genera
Species
Phototheria.
Monolremes : —
Ornithorhynchida
ft Platypus
1
1
—
—
Echidnidoe
Native Porcupine
1
2
1
1
Metathekia.
Marsupials : —
Peramelidae
Bandicoots
3
10
3
6
Notoryctidae
Mole Ant-eater
1
1
1
I
Dasyuridae
Native Cats, etc.
8
26
4
10
Phascolomyidae
Wombats
1
3
—
—
Phalangistidae
Opossums, etc.
11
21
5
6
Macropodidae
Kangaroos
11
48
7
24
Eutheria.
Land animals : —
Cheiroptera
Bats ...
16
33
4
5
Rodentia
Mice and Rats
6
18
3
15
Canidae
Dingo ...
I
1
1
1
Total land mammals
60
164
29
69
Sea animals : —
Sirenia
Dugong
I
1
1
1
Cetacea :
Bahenidai
Whales
4
5
1
1
Physeteridae
Toothed Whales
4
6
—
—
Delphynidie
Dolphins, etc.
7
7
1
1
Carnivora :
Phocidae
Sea Leopard
1
1
—
—
Otariidas
Seals, Sea-Bear
2
o
mmd
1
1
19
22
4
4
Grand total land and marine
79
186
33
73
ORDER I.—MONOTREMATA.
Family. -
-Echidnidre.
Echidna aculeata (Shaw)
Native Porcupine
..
—
NW
C
sw
ORDER II.—
MARSUPIAL! A.
Family I.
— Dasyuridre.
Sub-Family 1
—Myrmecobiinre.
Myrmecobius fasciatus (Waterh.)
... Banded Ant-Eater
• • •
.
c
sw
Sub-Family 2. —Dasyurinte.
Sminthopsis crassicaudata (Old.)
... Fat-tailed Pouched Mouse
n
,, murina (Waterh.)
Common Pouched Mouse
o
sw
Phascologale Blighi (Woodw.)
Bligh’s Phascologale
NW
,, calura (Old.)
,, penicillata (Shaw)
... Lesser brush-tailed Phascologale
Brush-tailed Phascologale
—
—
sw
sw
sw
sw
,, Havipes (Gray)
... Yellow-footed Pouched Mouse
,, apical is (Gray)
Dasyurus hallucatus (Old.)
Freckled Phascologale
North Aust. Dasyurus
N
—
,, Geoftroyi (Gld.)
... Geoffroy’s Dasyure
___
z.
sw
Sub-Order I.—
-Polyprotodontia.
Family 1.
-Notoryctidaj.
Notoryctus typhlops (Stirl.)
Blind Mole Ant-Eater
...
•—
NW
c
State of Western Australia is only about one-third of
the whole number of species. This fact is significant,
as the conditions for animal existence in the west are
essentially the same as in the eastern half of the con-
tinent. The rainfall map of Australia suggests at once
the cause of this difference in animal life, for it is the
food obtainable which governs the routes the occupying
animals must travel in order to reach the areas in which
they settle. The “fruit-eating” bats will keep to fruit-
producing forests —unless man by planting orchards fur-
nishes the desired source of supply —and such forests in
Australia occur only within the rainfall zone of 30 in.
and upwards. The large species of kangaroo keep to
the great plains and grassy open scrubs, while the
smaller species of this family, known as “wallabies,”
have their haunts amid brushwood or in rocky places.
The insect-eating animals find their prey everywhere,
especially the “ant-eaters.” The Echidna and the
Myrmecobius are the principal ant-eaters in the south,
while small “pouched mice” and a blind mole
(Notoryctus), which latter is found only in sandhill
country, are also “ant-eaters.” The rainfall zones of
Western Australia naturally divide the State into four
divisions, officially known as the north, north-west, cen-
tral, and south-west, and the distribution of mammalian
species within these divisions and along the sea-coast is
strikingly brought out in the following tables. The.
first table summarizes the whole Australian and Tas-
manian mammalia, in genera and species, and the pro-
portion of them contained within Western Australia :
the second is a detailed list of the western species as
distributed through the divisions mentioned.
Table comparing distribution of Australian Mammalia
and their occurrence in Western Australia:
Full list of Western Australian Mammals, showing their distribution throughout the North, North-West,
Central, and South-West Divisions of the State:


Family 2.-
-Peramelidie.
Choeropus castanotis (Gray)
Pig-footed Bandicoot
N
NW
c
sw
Perameles Barrowensis (Tlios
)
Barrow Id. Bandicoot
NW
—
—
>> Bougainvillei (Q. and G.)
Striped Bandicoot
—
—
—
sw
,, macrura (Gld.)
... North-West Baudicoot
NW
—
—
,, obesula (Shaw)
Short-nose Bandicoot
—
—
sw
Peragale lagotis (Reid)
... Rabbit-eared Bandicoot
—
sw
Family 3.
Phalangistidse.
Sub-Family 3
—Phalangerime.
Trichosurus vulpecula (Kerr)
... Common Opossum
—
—
—
sw
,, ,, var. fuliginosus (Ogilby) Sooty Opossum
—
—
—
sw
Pseudocheirus occideutalis (Thus.)
Ring-tailed Opossum
—
—
—
sw
Petaurus breviceps (Waterh.)
... Lesser Flying Opossum
—
NW
—
—
Dromicia concinna (Gld.)
. . Lesser Dormouse Phalanger
—
—
—
sw
Sub-Family 4
. —Tarsi pedime.
Tarsipes rostratus (Gerv. and Verr.)
... The Tarsipes
—
—
—
sw
Sub-Order II.
—Diprotodontia.
Family 1.—
-Macropodidse.
Sub-Kami 1} T
1. —Potoroina*.
Potorous Gilberti (Gld.)
... Gilbert’s Rat-Kangaroo
N
NW
C
sw
,, platyops (Gld.)
... Broad-face Rat-Kangaroo
N
NW
c
sw
Bettongia Lesueuri (Q. and G.)
Lesueur’s Rat Kangaroo
—
—
—
sw
,, penicillata (Gray)
... Brush-tailed Rat-Kangaroo
—
—
—
sw
Sub-Family 2
— Macropodime.
Lagostrophus fasciatus (P. and L.)
... Banded Wallaby
NW
—
Lagorchestes hirsutus (Gld.)
... Rufous Hare Wallaby
NW
,, conspicillatus var. Leichardti (Gld.) Spectacled Wallaby
N
—
—
—
„ „ (Gld.)
Barrow Id. Spectacled Wallaby
—
NW
—
—
Onychogale unguifera (Gld.)
Nail-tailed Wallaby
N
—
lunata (Gld.)
Crescent Wallaby
—
—
sw
Petrogale inornata (Gld.)
Plain coloured Rock Wallaby
N
NW
c
sw
,, concinna (Gld.)
... Little Rock Wallaby
N
NW
c
sw
,, brachyotis (Gld.)
Short-eared Rock Wallaby
N
NW
c
sw
,, lateralis (Gld.)
Western Australian Rock Wallaby
N
—
Macropus brachyurus (Q. and G.)
... Short-tailed Wallaby
—
—
—
sw
,, Eugenei (Desm.)
Dama Wallaby
—
—
—
sw
,, irma (Jourd.)
... Black-gloved Wallaby
sw
,, agilis (Gld.)
Agi le Wallaby
N
—
—
,, rufus (Desm.)
... Red Kangaroo
—
NW
c
—
,, isabellinus (Gld.)
... Barrow Id. Isabelline-coloured Kangaroo
*—
NW
—
—
,, robustus (Gld.)
... The Wallaroo or Great K angaroo
c
,, ,, var. cervinus (Thos.)
Hill Kangaroo
—
c
,, ,, var. Wood ward i (Tlios.)
Woodward’s Kangaroo
N
—
,, giganteus (Zimm.)
... Great Grey Kangaroo
—
—
sw
ORDER IV
.—CETACEA.
Bahenoptera Sibbaldi (Gray)
... Sibbald’s Fin Whale
NW
—
sw
Delphinus delphis (Linn.)
... Dolphin
—
NW
—
sw
ORDER V. —SIRENIA.
Halicore Australis (Owen)
... The Dugong
N
NW
—
—
ORDER VII.
— RODENTIA.
Sub-Order II.—
-Simplicidentata.
Family.-
—Murid se,
Mus Burtoui (Ram.)
Burton’s Rat
N
,, albocinereus (Gld.)
Greyish-white Mouse
c
,, nanus (Gld.)
Little Rat
N
NW
c
sw
,, assimilis (Gld.)
Allied Rat
N
NW
c
sw
,, fuscipes (Waterh.)
... Dusky-sooted Rat
—
sw
,, delicatulus (Gld.)
Lagrange Ray Pigmy Mouse
N
,, ferculinus (Thos.)
Barrow' Id. Mouse
NW
,, sp. nov.
Kimberley Mouse
N
Hydromys fuliginosus (Gld.)
Sooty Beaver-Rat
sw
Conilurus longicaudatus (Gld.)
Long-tailed Jerboa-Rat
c
,, Mitchelli (Ogilby)
... Mitchell’s Jerboa-Rat
sw
,, macrurus (Peters)
... Peters’Jerboa-Rat
NW
, f Boweri (Ramsay)
... Bower’s Jerboa-Rat
NW
,, Gouldi (Gray)
... Gould’s Jerboa-Rat
N
NW
c
sw
,, Cervinus (Gld.)
... Fawn-coloured Jerboa-Rat
N
ORDER IV.—
CHEIROPTERA.
Sub-Order I.—
M egacheiroptera.
Family. —'
Pteropus Gouldi (Peters)
... Red-naped Kalong or Flying Fox
N
—
—


Sub-Order II. —Microcheiroptera.
Family. —Vespertilionidae.
Vesperugo pumilus (Gray) ... Little Bat of Pertli
sw
Chalinolobus morio (Gray)
... Chocolate Bat of Perth
—
—
—
svv
,, Gouldi (Gray)
Gould’s Bat
—
—
—
sw
Nyctophilus Geoffroyi (Leach)
... Geoffrey’s Bat
—
—
—
sw
,, timoriensis (Geoff) Western Nyctophilus
—
—
—
sw
Nyctinomus Australis (Gray)
Family. — Embal lonuridae.
White-striped Bat
N
C
Otaria Forsteri (Lesson)
ORDER XL —CARNIVORA.
Sub-Order I.—Pinnipedia.
... Sea-bear or Seal
sw
Canis Dingo (Blum.)
Sub-Order II —Fissipedia.
Family. —Canidae.
Dingo or Wild Dog
N
NW
c
sw
Of the total of seventy-two species in the list given, sixty-eight are land animals, and of these latter nineteen are
to be found in the central division or dry interior having an annual rainfall of less than 10 in. Ten of these species,
viz., the dingo, three rats, three wallabies, two rat-kangaroos, and a bandicoot, have spread to all the other divisions;
four other species are divided with the north-west and south-west divisions; and five species are restricted within the
central division only.
In the north and north-west there are thirty-five
species, twenty-one of which do not extend southward,
ten of them being restricted absolutely to the north and
ten to the north-west. In the south-west division there
are thirty-nine species, of which one extends to the cen-
tral and one through the central to the north-west; while
no fewer than twenty-seven are absolutely restricted
to the south-west division itself. Such facts demon-
strate conclusively that it was not from the north,
nor from the central division of the continent, that
Western Australia received its mammals, but by all
three routes and principally along that of the south
coast. That ancient coastline (formerly extending to
Tasmania, and with extensive lakes and marsh lands
behind it) has now broken up, and the Great Bight
takes its place save for the extreme south-west corner of
the continent. It was due to these ancient marsh lands
that the Diprotodon, the Sthenurus, the Koala or
“native bear,” and the wombat once reached and dwelt
in this south-west division, but where only their fossil-
ized remains now occur.
This breakdown of the southern coastline was co-
eval with the intense volcanic activity in south-eastern
Australia. Did man see these volcanic fires? And was
that man the now extinct, woolly-headed type which
survived till a few years ago in Tasmania ? The answers
are yes. The dingo is an alien introduced into the fauna
by man, and its competition with the pouched hyena
(Thylacinus) and the “devil” (Sarcophilus) caused their
extinction on the mainland, while the remnant cut off
in Tasmania still survives in that island. The dingo
bones have been found under the volcanic ashbeds of
Mount Gambler, in South Australia, and from that
same district the fossil bones of an extinct bird of the
emu type were found to have been scarred by some cut-
ting instruments.
Economically the mammalia of Australia is of small
service to man. The skins of the opossum and the kan-
garoo form articles of trade, but the flesh of none is
much esteemed. The dingo being untamable and
destructive to sheep is shot or poisoned as vermin. In
the old days of gold digging in Victoria kangaroo hams
were a staple commodity of tlie Melbourne markets. In
view of the reputation Victorian pork-ham curers still
maintain it may be of interest to publish here the recipe
used in the golden days for curing kangaroo hams in lots
of fifty at a time (it may be useful to the new settlers in
the West) : —Common salt, 15ft).; treacle, 2 ft).; coarse
brown sugar, 3 lb. ; saltpetre, 3 oz. ;. and carbonate of
soda, 4 oz. These were mixed in a tub of cold water
until a potato would just float in the brine, which must
never be boiled. The hams were then soaked in the
brine for five days, with occasional turning. They were
afterwards hung up to dry, and when properly dried
were smoked for three or four days in a smokehouse
made of boughs of the tea-tree, constructed over a small
pit in the ground, in which banksia cones and wood
were kept smouldering. The kangaroo hams prepared
in this way became a staple article of diet in Melbourne
and on the goldfields, and were said to be indistinguish-
able from the best reindeer hams of Europe.
BIRDS.
The latest published list of Australian birds enum-
erates 873 species, inclusive of those ocean-flying species
which visit the coasts only at intervals. These ocean
fliers and the birds which frequent only the inlets and
estuaries along the coast number eighty-nine species


table summarizing the distribution
OF WESTERN AUSTRALIAN BIRDS.
Land-birds
Common to all Australia
88
Common to all Western Australia only
71
Species restricted to one division—
Restricted to N. Division
104
,, N.W. Division ...
11
,, ,, C. Division
21
,» ,, S.W. Division ...
63
—
199
Species only partially restricted—
Common to N. and N.W.
26
,, ,, N. and N.W. and C.
5
,, ,, N. and C
5
,, ,, N.W. and C.
2
*, ,, N.W. and C. and
S.W
2
,, ,, N.W. and S.W. ...
5
,, ,, S.W. and C.
35
80
Total land-birds
438
Ska-birds
...
53
Grand total for State
491
all told, which leaves 784 forms that may be distinct-
ively termed “land-birds,” and whose distribution over
the continent is more or less governed by the existence
of a continuous land surface. Of these 784 species only
438, or less than 56 per cent, of the whole, are to be
found in the western half of Australia, and only
eighty-eight of these are common over both halves of
the continent. Although the conditions for living are
not greatly different in east and west, it is seen that
no less than 44 per cent, of the forms of bird life still
cling to that long narrow tract of Eastern Australia
which, with the exception of Bass Strait, extends
unbroken from Cape York on Torres Strait to the
southernmost point of Tasmania. In that long and
mountainous tract two very distinct sub-regions of bird
life appear. One is the Cape York Peninsula, which
contains many forms of both mammalian and bird life
that do not occur in the Northern Territory on the
western side of the Carpentaria Gulf. Zoologically it is
closely allied to New Guinea and contains two small
tree-climbing kangaroos, three “birds of Paradise,” a
“cassowary,” two “brush turkeys,” and a host of fruit-
eating pigeons. The other district or sub-region is
practically the coast slopes of New South Wales, in
which occur the famous lyre bird family, an enormous
development of sea-coast birds, and a relative paucity
of variety among the parrots and cockatoos. Inland
from the ocean slopes of Queensland and New South
Wales the bird life of the plains and the scattered scrubs
begins; the forest bird life is absent ; the watercourses
and occasional swamps develop a fauna of remarkable
sameness, and this feature is characteristic right across
Central Australia to the shores of the Indian Ocean.
The bird life of the western half of Australia is far
older in origin than its mammalian life, but, like the
latter, has spread to the Western Australian coast by
three distinct routes. One stream has come down from
the Northern Territory through the Kimberley dis-
trict, and sent a few stragglers as far southward as the
North-AVest Cape. From Central Australia most of the
forms common to the whole western region have come,
a few forms only reaching right to the nor’-west coast.
Along the south coast, as formerly existent, the third
stream came; and in the extreme south-west corner of
the continent can now be witnessed the extent of varia-
tion into peculiarly restricted species which have evolved
as the result of long isolation from the original family
groups in the east. Of 264 species of land-birds in this
south-west corner no fewer than 193 have come from
South Australia —that is to say, from the land round
Spencer Gulf and the lower reaches of the Murray River,
a region itself possessing but 323 species of land- and
river-birds. From Central Australia and Western
Queensland —a region containing 186 characteristic bird
forms—fifty-two species have passed into Western Aus-
D
tralia. Of the 297 species of land birds recorded as
occurring in the Kimberley and nor’-west divisions of
the State there are 138 species directly common with
that part of North Australia west of the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, and have their closest affinities with Indian
and Indo-Malayan forms. The three streams of immi-
gration —the northern, central, and southern—are thus
equally clearly marked. The total number of land- and
sea-birds recorded for Western Australia (and at the
present time regarded as well-established species) is 491.
Of this total fifty-three are sea-birds and 438 land-birds.
Of the latter some 383 species have come in as
colonists from North or East Australia, leaving but
forty-five species, or some per cent., as autochthonous
species or variants evolved within the State itself.
It is the number of species restricted to particular
districts or regions which marks off the distinctive life-
regions of the world or of a country. The complete
separation between the northern, western, and southern
parts of Western Australia from its central portion is
clearly shown in the following tabulation:
r ihe distinction between the north and south parts
of the State is thus seen to be a strongly marked one,
and without any well-defined intermediate or mixed
zone. In the north there are 104 species which do not
spread southward, and in the south there are sixty-three
species which do not spread northward. The little red-
breasts or “robins of the south are not identical with
the “robins” of the north, nor are they with those of
the interior or central region. Neither are the mag-
pies, the shrike-tits, or the tree-creepers identical. Even


among that widely-distributed and large order of the
Psittaci or parrot group there are only the five forms
which are spread over all Australia that are common
to north and south. These are the ‘ red-collared Lori-
keet” (Triclioglossis ruhriforques) , which feeds on honey
of the eucalyptus-trees; the “white cockatoo’’ (Cacatua
(jalerita), which ranges out of Australia into the Malay
Archipelago as far as the Moluccas; the ‘many-coloured
parrakeet” (Psepkofis multicolour); the little ’shell-
parrot” (Melopsittacus undulatus), known also as the
“betcherrygah” and “warbling grass-parrakeet”; and
the “cockatiel” or “cockatoo parrot” (Galopsittacus
Novce Hollandce) y a beautiful and common cage bird pet.
In pigeons, ibises, and egrets the north division is the
richer, but the south is richer in quails, moorhens, and
wild ducks. The emu, the crane, the wild “turkey”
(Eupodotis Atistxalis), the plovers, and the sandpipers
are so well known and general in distribution as to call
for no comment. The drongo is a northern bird which
ranges from Madagascar through India and China to
North Australia.
In viewing the distribution of sea-birds along the
Western Australian coasts the Antarctic and Indian
birds are seen to be much more prominent than they
appear in the richer bird fauna of Eastern Australia.
The “King Albatross,” which accompanies every ship
crossing the Great Australian Bight, does not come up
the coast north of Cape Leeuwin, but Carter’s Albatross
is an ocean flier often seen at the North-West Cape.
The small penguin (Eudyptula minor) is not uncommon
along the south coast, and the frigate-bird and the
“red-tailed” and the “white-tailed” tropic-birds are
common on the north coast. Gannets are restricted to
the north coast, but grebes and cormorants are very
generally distributed.
Of distinct menace to the continuance of many
forms of Australian bird life—if not to their ultimate
extinction altogether —is the trade in ornamental bird
skins. To this is superadded the wanton destructive-
ness of the sportsman and the ill-advised efforts of the
agriculturists and fruit-growers, who regard certain
species as pests to their industry. The trade in bird
skins for the sake of plumage sadly needs legal regula-
tion, and the different State Governments are now
wakening to the fact. Emu skins have sold in London
this year at 17s. 6d. each, and whole consignments of
skins of the bower-bird were marketed there at Is. 7d.
per skin. The lyre-bird is now getting so scarce that
only fifty-two tails were catalogued for sale in London
during the first half of this year. Pigeons in North and
East Australia and the small birds such as the “silver-
eye” (Zosterops) and the parrots certainly do inter-
fere with fruit- and grain-growing, but not nearly to
the same extent as the introduced sparrows and starlings.
Furthermore, the native bird never forsakes entirely
the quest of its natural prey, the native insects, and
its services to man in this respect are incalculable.
The grasshopper and the caterpillar pests are kept down
wholly by insect-eating birds such as the wild turkey
and the ibis, yet these birds are shot whenever oppor-
tunity is afforded. The plumed egret (M esophoyx piumi-
fera) for the sake of its plumage is shot down by the
thousand every year, and unless the millinery craze
for its plumage is diminished a few years more will
practically see these birds extinct in Australia. In each
of the Australian States there is now a Government
reserve area for the preservation of the native fauna
and flora, but a more rigorous enforcement of the laws
regulating the shooting of wild birds and a ‘‘close”
season each year is an immediate want, and one severely
felt.
REPTILIA AND AMPHIBIA.
The reptilia and amphibia of any region are always
interesting subjects for study on account of the very
ancient lineage of these creatures. Their advent into
the animal kingdom far antedates that of birds and
mammals, hence their present distribution and develop-
ment furnish a valuable clue to a country's past geo-
logical history. The simpler or more elementary is the
organization either in plant or animal life the more
widespread will it be found to have been in area and
the more ancient in geologic time. Reptile life requires
very little oxygen, the digestion is remarkably slow, and
the blood temperature is almost the same as the atmo-
sphere or watery environment in which it dwells.
Warmth and moisture are its two great requisites for
existence, and as a normal feature the abundance of
such life is greater toward the equatorial regions than
in the reverse direction. It is a notable fact, however,
in this connection that, though individually the snakes
in temperate climates are less numerous than in hot
regions, the number of poisonous species of snakes in
proportion to the non-venomous kinds seems to increase
in cold climates.
Crocodiles. —There are two varieties of crocodiles
in Australia, and both are met with in the rivers of
the north coast of Western Australia. One is the com-
mon Indian crocodile, which ranges eastward in the
tropics, occasionally as far as the Fiji Islands. The
other is the Crocodilus Johnsfoni , and is an inoffensive
creature.
Lizards. Australia has some 300 species of lizards,
and 105 of them occur in Western Australia. Of these
species fifty-one are credited with being generally dis-
tributed throughout the State, but of the remainder no
fewer than thirty-two are found within the north-west
division, and fourteen of them absolutely restricted to
it. There are twenty-seven species in the south-west
division, of which fourteen are in like manner restricted


Only one species is restricted to the central division and
only three to the extreme north division, so that it
would appear the western coast district of the State is
the principal home of the lizard family in the western
half of the continent. The Gecko family, numbering
tw r enty-seven species, is most strongly representative of
the northern lizards; the Agamidae—in which family
are the well-knowui “Mountain Devil” (Moloch horridus)
and the “frilled lizard” (Chlamydosarus Kingi)—con-
tains tw r enty-five species, and is most representative of
the north-west division ; and the Scincidae or “Skinks”
with forty species—among which is the “stump-tailed
lizard”—is mainly characteristic of the south-west
division. The “long-tailed iguana” or “goanna” (Vara-
nus variiis) is one of a family of seven species only,
and its largest representative is to be found in the north.
Snakes. —Australia has
about 100 species of
snakes, of which three-
quarters of the number
belong to the venomous
kinds. Only four or five
of them are, however,
really dangerous, and it
has been laid down as a
fact that no snake, how-
ever long it be, which
does not bulk thicker
than a man’s little finger
can by its bite endanger
the life of an adult
human being. The num-
ber of snake species
recorded for Western
Australia is sixty-five.
Sea-snakes, all venom-
ous, number twelve
species, and are fairly
plentiful in the tropical seas and different estuaries
of the north coast. They spend all their exist-
ence in the sea-water. Six species are “blind snakes,”
perfectly harmless, which burrow after white ants
beneath decaying timber. They are distributed through
all the coast districts from south to north. Six other
species belong to the Pythonidae or “Boa” family, and
are also non-venornous. They obtain their largest size
in the tropical coast divisions, often being 11 ft. in
length and 14 in. in girth. Their haunts are the fring-
ing reeds of large water-pools and permanent springs.
The Elapidae family, which numbers thirty-three species,
contains the most venomous snakes in Australia, the
red-bellied black snake (Pseudechis), the brown snake
(Diemenia), and the death adder (Acanthophis) being the
three most rightly dreaded. The little “white- and
black-ringed snake” of this family (V dr micella annu-
d2
lata) is the other extreme of this poisonous group, and
its bite is no more harmful than the sting of a bee.
This venomous group contains fifteen species, commonly
ranging over the whole State; ten others arc restricted
to the south-west division, and eight are confined to
the north and north-west divisions.
Turtles and Tortoises. —The “green turtle” (Ghel-
onia Midas) of the nor’-west coast has attracted com-
mercial attention latterly, and samples of its Calipee
and Calipash have been officially reported by London
dealers to be worth Is. 6d. per lb. Queensland samples
sell at from 6d. to Is. 9d., but the best West Indian
fetches as much as 4s. The Western Australian “long-
neck tortoise” (Chelodina ohlonga) is specifically dis-
tinct from the two other forms found in the swamps
and rivers of Eastern Australia. There are no
tortoises in Tasmania.
Frogs..- —There are five
species of frogs in the
State, two of the species
being tree-frogs (Hyla
aures on the mainland
and Hyla rubella on the
Abrolhos Islands). The
tree-frogs will invade
houses and wage de-
structive war on cock-
roaches. The frogs of
the Swan River (Myo-
hatrachivs paradoxus) is
not a croaker like ordin-
ary frogs, but emits
a high-pitched groan
which sounds like a
human being in distress,
and has a weird effect on
listeners. It is even said
that the perfunctory ex-
ploration of the Swan River made by the French
expedition early in the last century was due to the boat-
men becoming terrified by the ear-piercing groans of
these frogs. At any rate, the French ascended the
river no farther than the site of Perth, though there is
navigable water for a full score of miles beyond it.
FISHES.
Fishes have a still more ancient lineage than any
o •/
land animal and have been widely distributed from
very early ages. Hence it is not remarkable that in
the fish fauna of Australia there should be very little
which is distinctively Australian in character. Along
the south coast and extending to Tasmania and New
Zealand the fish life is principally that characteristic
of the temperate portion of the whole South Pacific


Ocean. Down the east and west coasts of Australia
spread fishes from the warmer equatorial waters. On
the Western Australian coast a mixture of these warm
and cold water faunas is met with all the way from
Mandurah, some 40 miles south of Perth, right up to
Shark Bay, and possibly as far as the North-West Cape
itself. The number of species of fish at present recorded
for Western Australian waters is about 220, but our
knowledge in this respect is still very incomplete. In
fact, the systematic study of the occurrence and dis-
tribution of fishes in the West has scarcely yet been
begun, and the economical aspect of the question has
been left mainly to chance as an industry which would
develop of itself somehow, like the industry of gold-
digging. The Department of Fisheries has this year
been completely reorganized, with a view of system-
atic development of the State’s fish resources. As an
index of what may be learnt by further research in
Western Australia it is significant to compare the pro-
portion of “table fishes” to the total number of species
catalogued. The British seas have 208 species, of which
forty only rank as edible; New Zealand has 243 species
and thirty-three edible; Tasmania, 207, of which one-
third is really edible, but only twenty-one ordinarily
sold in the markets; while Western Australia has
already some forty marketable species out of the 220
now known. During a Government-conducted trawling
expedition from Fremantle to Shark Bay, about five
years ago, the trawl was cast 100 times, and on an
average three out of every four casts brought up a
species new to the coast; and ten of these were new to
Science both in species and genera. The fresh-water
fishes of the State, owing to the absence of large rivers,
can never be important economically; but the sea-fishes
which visit the coasts in search of a favourite food have
their distribution governed by the warm or cold water
currents bearing that food. Swarms of medusae, mol-
lusca, and larval Crustacea crowd along the coast accord-
ing to season and attract shoals of small fishes, which
in turn are pursued by enemies usually inhabiting
waters elsewhere. The study of the ocean temperatures
which regulate the lower forms of life on which the
fishes feed has as yet not even been attempted as far as
Westralian seas are concerned, though the data could
easily be obtained from the engine-room records of the
trading steamers. That a big fishing industry is pos-
sible and will yet be developed along the Western Aus-
tralian coast is certain, and must attain to great export
dimensions. Even such countries as Italy and Spain
draw over one and a half millions sterling every year
from their “Harvest of the Sea.” The total “catch”
of Western Australia each year is about 1,500 tons,
worth about £52,000, while nearly an equal sum of
money is spent on importing cured fish from abroad.
MOLLUSCA, ETC.
Space does not. admit of any extended discussion
of the minor marine organisms of the Westralian seas.
There is nothing distinctively Australian about them,
except those along the south coast. Northward the
characteristic forms of the tropical waters occur. The
pearling industry (which begins at Shark Bay and
extends to the extreme north coast) produces about
1,000 tons of pearl-shell (worth over £150,000) and
about £50,000 worth of pearls annually. Good sponges
occur freely at all points where the sea bottom is com-
posed of the crystalline rocks, but, so far, have been neg-
lected.
ENTOMOLOGY.
Insects with a world-wide range are rare in Aus-
tralia, but the insect fauna of the continent is a par-
ticularly large one. It is enormously rich in beetles,
flies, wasps, bugs, and, to a slightly lesser extent, in
butterflies and moths. The peculiar characteristics of
the Australian insects are so marked that it is claimed
an expert in such matters would at once recognize any
specimen as from Australia. From New South Wales
northward there is, as was to be expected, an increasing
analogy with the insect fauna of the Malayan Archi-
pelago and Southern India, and even a slight admixture
of species. From New South Wales to Tasmania the
insect fauna has its nearest affinities with that of New
Zealand and Western Polynesia. In the open sandy
plains of the interior of Australia, and extending to the
heath and tangled scrubs of the West, the affinities are
strongest with the insect fauna of South Africa, but the
differences are all strongly marked.
It is estimated that a full catalogue of Western
Australian insects would run to quite 30,000 species, but
only the barest fringe of this great field of work has
yet been entered. The three distant relationships of the
Australian to other insect faunas, and its own pecu-
liarly distinctive character, attest the long-continued
isolation to which it has been subjected and the
extremely early period of its origin. The development
of this fauna has, however, proceeded under the same
forces as those pertaining to other parts of the world ;
hence all the familiar forms of northern hemisphere
insect life and its province in the economy of Nature
have 'representative forms” in Australia. Thus there
are dragon-flies by the sides of streams; there are wasps,
hornets, bees (all small and no larger than the common
house-fly), mosquitoes, flies, fleas, cockroaches, spiders,
etc., all fulfilling their natural work and appearing
almost identical with the northern familiar forms. That
the competition for existence between the different
forms of insect life had long ago reached a normal level
or balance in Australia is also attested by the general


rule that its insect distribution is governed by the
distribution of plants; where certain plants are wide-
spread the insects which live upon them are widespread
also, though absent from the intermediate areas in which
the plants do not occur.
These are significant facts and very suggestive of
valuable results if carefully pursued. Scarcity of food
or the destroying influence of parasites and insect-
devourers could alone have brought about this long-
continuing balance. Hence it is in Australia that a
unique opportunity is afforded for the study of economic
entomology, uncomplicated very far as yet by man’s
introduction of competing forms from abroad. All the
Australian Governments are now giving this matter
attention, for though the introduced destructive pests
are many, there are several native pests which are
equally able to work mischief to farm, garden, and
orchard. The settlers who in Western Australia are
now clearing away some 400 square miles of native
vegetation annually are also destroying the natural food
of the native insects in those parts. The plant life
grown in its place may prove quite as acceptable for
insect food as that which was cleared off —at least for
some forms of vegetable-feeders —and as the parasites
have been destroyed and an abundance of one particular
kind of food provided where once the native special
food was relatively scarce the farmer finds he has made
a pest of what was formerly no pest. This is now one
of the great insect problems of Western Australia.
Speaking in general terms, the insect life of Wes-
tern Australia is not of very great discomfort to human
life, nor is it dangerous to the domestic animals.
THE FLORA OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
HISTORICAL NOTICES.
The flora of Western Australia, like the fauna of
that State, cannot be studied apart from that of all
Australia.
The study of Australian botany is marked by three
very distinct phases.
The continent being an island, without navigable
rivers to give access its vegetation became
first known along the whole circuit of its coast-
line, and before even a glimmer of knowledge had been
obtained concerning the character of its inland regions.
The second phase began after the Blue Mountains
had been successfully crossed and exploring expeditions
had examined the head waters of the numerous rivers
which drain the inland slopes and flow out into the
great plains to the west.
The third phase began when the Eastern States
became self-governing and appropriated portions of
their revenues to maintaining State gardens under
expert botanical direction. A close study of the native
flora ensued, its distribution became ascertained, and its
economic limitations clearly defined. By means of the
precise information thus acquired colonists were helped
to a knowledge of the correct lines on which to cultivate
to economic advantage such other plants as they found
it necessary to introduce from abroad.
The English knowledge of the Australian flora, curi-
ously enough, begins with the visit of William Dampier
to the coast of Western Australia in the year 1688, or
nineteen years before the birth of Carolus Linnaeus, the
founder of botanical science. Dampier in 1697 published
the narrative of his voyage and illustrated it with draw-
ings of some of the new plants brought home by him.
Crude as these drawings are, and ill-preserved the
specimens from which they were taken, those familiar
with Australian botany find little difficulty in recognizing
most of the plants figured. The casuarina, the tea-tree,
the Sturt pea, and a prickly solanum are among those
most easily distinguishable.
Eighty-two years after Dampier’s first visit to
north-west Australia Captain Cook’s expedition, having
the botanists Banks and Solander on board, discovered
the coast of east Australia; and at Botany Bay they
made the first collection of Australian plants gathered
by scientists. Altogether about 1,000 species were ob-
tained while on the Australian coast and the beginnings
of Australian botany were firmly laid. Menzies, who
was botanist of Vancouver’s expedition in 1771, made a
further collection of plants when Vancouver discovered
King George Sound, and a year later Labillardiere, the
naturalist with D’Entrecasteaux's expedition, again
augmented the list of known plants by the collections
gathered by him on the south coast of Tasmania.
When Flinders in 1802 started his exploration of
the Australian south coast there had by that time
become scientifically known about 1,300 species of Aus-
tralian plants. Flinders had with his expedition the
now famous botanist Robert Brown, and so assiduously
did Brown collect that he raised the total number ol


flowering species to nearly 4,000, a truly splendid
achievement. This collection was, by a strange coin-
cidence, representative of the two great gulf systems of
Australia —that from the south coast being from the
east end of the Great Bight to St. Vincent Gulf and
Kangaroo Island, and that from the north including all
the flat shores round the Gulf of Carpentaria and the
escarpment of desert tableland along the north coast
of the Northern Territory. Flinders’ voyages ter-
minated in 1803, but it was not till 1814 that his narra-
tive was published. Baudin, the French explorer whom
Flinders met in Encounter Bay, had meanwhile pirated
all Flinders’ discoveries, incorporating them with his
own work down the north-west and west coast of Aus-
tralia. Leschenault de la Tour, the botanist of his
expedition, had, however, but few opportunities to add
to collections until the expedition put into the Geo-
SPIDER ORCHID.
graphe Bay and discovered Leschenault Inlet, where
now the town of Bunbury stands.
The botany of the west, south-east, and north coasts
had become fairly known as the results of the foregoing
discovery voyages. When Flinders’ narrative was pub-
lished in 1814 the British Government decided to have
the unknown north-west coast also surveyed and thus
complete the outline of the map of Australia. Lieuten-
ant King’s voyages from 1817 to 1821 were made with
this object, and as his landings promised to be frequent
the famous botanist, Allan Cunningham, having been
specially sent out from Kew Gardens to study Australia’s
flora, was attached to the expedition. One of King’s
other officers was Lieutenant Roe, afterwards Surveyor-
General of Western Australia, and in this connection it
is interesting to note that just as Lieutenant Roe’s sur-
veying work completed the Australian coastline, so the
work of his successor as Surveyor-General, Mr. (now
Right Honourable Sir John) Forrest, completed the line
of exploration across the centre of Australia from east
to west. Cunningham’s collections during King’s
voyages brings to an end the first phase of our know-
ledge of the Australian flora, the flora of a region
isolated from the rest of the world, its own natural vege-
tation protected from intruders by
“The long wash of Australian seas.”
The second phase of Australian botanical explora-
tions —that of the region inland —did not begin until
after King’s last voyage. Allan Cunningham remained
in Australia to pursue his studies at the cost of the
Home Government, and in 1823 he led an exploring
expedition northward along the western foot of the Blue
Mountains, crossed the Liverpool Plains in a subse-
quent journey, and reached as far north as the latitude
SPIDER ORCHID.
of Brisbane. Cunningham added 1,300 new species to
the flora, and his death when accompanying Mitchell’s
expedition in 1835 was an irreparable loss. The work
done by others also increased the list considerably.
Captain Stirling, when founding the Swan River colony
in 1829, had introduced a staff of gardeners with James
Drummond in charge, and planted Government gardens.
Drummond became a permanent settler in the colonv
and made extensive collections of the native plants,
which collections he sent to Europe. 11 is assistants—
Gilbert, Morrison, and Mangles—also made extensive
collections and disposed of them. Wilson, Baxter, and
Collie gathered largely in the Cape Leeuwin corner and
along the south coast, while Surveyor-General Roe
always collected extensively during his journeys inland.
Much of the material thus collected passed into Cun-
ningham s hands, and in 1833 the Austrian traveller
FLANNEL FRLWER


Baron Huegel visited the Swan River colony and made
a big collection. Altogether, at the time of Cunning-
ham s death the tabulated flora had reached to about
6,000 species of flowering plants, and some considerable
progress had been made in systematically grouping them.
Thenceforth and until the era of the gold discoveries
many collectors were at work in the more accessible or
settled parts. Ludwig Preiss in 1838, and Backhouse a
little later, made extensive collections in both Eastern
and Western Australia; Lawrence, Caley, Hooker, and
Ronald Gunn added extensively to the eastern flora—
Gunn essaying a complete collection of all the plants of
Tasmania. At Albany in 1848 Maxwell established him-
self in business as a collector and exporter of native
plants and seeds.
With the era of gold-digging came a prosperity
which enabled the colonies to expend money for scien-
HOVEA.
tific or aesthetic purposes. The State garden established
in Melbourne was fortunate in having appointed to it
as Director and Colonial Botanist the late Baron von
Mueller. For the development of Australian botany
this was a most happy appointment, for the hour and
the man had both arrived. The Baron’s work in Vic-
toria, supplemented by the work of Dr. Woolls in Syd-
ney and of Professor Tate in Adelaide, practically com-
pleted the pioneer work in Australian botany and estab-
lished it on a sound natural basis, which further woikeis
may expand, but which further discoveries are little
likely to alter. In ail the Australian States now there
are established botanic gardens maintained at the
Government expense, and each State has a departmeiu
of botanv. The economic phase has been developed
in forestry and agriculture, and the Technological
Museums and the Public Libraries are so well stocked
with specimens and botanical literature that the study
of Australian botany is now easy to cultivate, either in
its purely scientific aspect or as science applied to
industry.
The full flora of Australia, inclusive of the
higher seaweeds and fungi, probably runs to over
10,000 species. Of the vasculare or veined - leal
plants the list of authoritatively - established
and fully-recognized species approaches 9,000 and
new discoveries continually increase the number.
The complete working up of all this material we owe
to many hands working more or less independently;
from which circumstance many species have been several
times named and new systems of classification and
groupings frequently introduced. Botany is a pro-
gressive science, and it is well to remember that the
BORONIA.
systematic stud} 7 of Australian plants grew with the
schools founded by the giants of the eighteenth century.
Sir Joseph Banks was not a botanical writer, but he
was a great collector and helper of other botanical
workers. Solander, his fellow-traveller, was a British
Museum official who had but little time for writing,
though as a pupil of the great Linnseus he was well able
to do so. Another pupil of Linnseus, named J. Rheinold
Forster, was botanist of Cook’s second voyage, and on
his return he wrote much concerning Australian
botany. Sir J. E. Smith published a small number of
illustrations of Australian plants in 1793, and De la
Billiardiere (or Labilliardiere) published in Paris in
1804-6 a summary of Australian results to that date,
including his own work as naturalist to the D’Entre-
casteaux expedition.
GREVILLEA.


But it was not until Robert Brown (the botanist of
blinders’ voyage), working up the vast material collected
by himself and Banks, began in 1810 to publish a prod-
romus of the Australian flora that progress worthy of
the subject was really attained. Sir Joseph Banks has
been called the ‘ Father of Australia,” but in a much
truer sense Robert Brown was the ‘ Father of Aus-
tralian Botany. As late as 1830 Brown brought out a
supplementary volume to his prodromus, and the first
paper published by the Royal Geographical Society is by
him, and is a discussion of the botany of the Swan
River district of Western Australia. Bauer, who was
Brown s draughtsman during Flinders’ voyage, and who
afterwards remained some years in New South Wales,
published in 1813 a volume of illustrations of the Aus-
tralian flora, and Robert Sweet did a similar work in
1827.
Of Western Australian botany in particular the
collection made by Huegel in 1837 was worked out by
Endlicher, Fenzl, Bentham, and Schott and the results
published in Vienna. The collections which Ludwig
Preiss made in Western and Eastern Australia during
the years 1844-7 were worked at by different specialists
and the results embodied in two volumes edited by
Lehman. The botany of Western Australia underwent a
critical revision at the hands of Baron von Mueller,
who accompanied Gregory’s expedition across North
Australia and afterwards exhaustively investigated the
forest resources of the south-western division of Western
Australia on behalf of the Government. His report
is beautifully illustrated with a figure of every one
of the timber forest trees in that division of the State,
and is still a textbook on the subject. The opening up
of the Western Australian goldfields rendered accessible
to collectors a strip of back country nearly 300 miles
wide, and this great increase of new ground tempted
Spencer LeM. Moore and Diehls and Pritzel to make
special collecting tours in search of new forms or the
acquisition of new facts. Government exploring ex-
peditions into the Kimberley division during recent
years have also extended our knowledge of Western
Australian tropical vegetation. All these later results
have not yet been fully worked up, nor are they incor-
porated in the list published in a special natural his-
tory volume oi the State issued by the Registrar-
General in 1904.
Where so much Work has been independently done,
and where the results have been published in such a
scattered manner, it is difficult and even impossible for
Australian students to refer to all the works in which
the plants were originally described and figured. In the
absence of herbariums and published local floras this is
a grave impediment to the student, and the number of
species of which good drawings exist is still all too few
—probably less than 25 per cent, of the whole. To
obtain descriptive characters in a handy compendium
is possible by consulting the ‘ Flora Australiensis,” a
work in seven volumes by George Bentham ; but the last
volume of this work was published in 1876. The British
Government bore the cost of this great publication,
Bent ham’s remuneration being £l5O per volume. Baron
von Mueller carried on the labour of recording new dis-
coveries after Bentham, and his “Fragmenta Phyto-
graphia Australia” is the standard reference work since
Bentham’s time. Floras have been recently published
by all the Eastern Australian States, but as they are
not based on one common system of naming and group-
ing the data contained within their pages help the
student of one State’s flora very little in comparing it
with the floras of other States. For such purposes the
"Census” prepared by Baron von Mueller in 1889 is
still practically the only single work available. It will
therefore be both interesting and helpful to enumerate
the chief older works in which the Australian plants
were first described and figured, and copies of which are
to be found in some of the Public Libraries of the Aus-
tralian States. Those marked * are in the Perth Public
Library.
*1697. Dampier. A voyage to New Holland.
1776. Forster. Charactered generum plantarum
quas in itinere ad insulas maris australis colle-
gerunt. London, lb., 76 pp., 75 plates.
1786. Forster. Floruhe insnlarum Australium Procl-
romus. Gottingen, 1786, Bvo.
*1793. J. E. Smith. A specimen of the botany of New
Holland.. London, 4to, 16 col. plates, by
James Edward Smith, President of the
Linnean Society.
1797. Forster. Herbarium Australe. Gottingen,
Bvo.
1804-6. De la Billiardiere. Novae Hollandiae plant-
arum specimen. Paris, 4to, 2 vols., 112 pp.
and 130 pp. and 265 plates.
*lBlO. Cox. Illustrations of the botany of Cook’s
voyage. Parts 1. and II.: “Australian
Plants,” a series of 243 copperplate engrav-
ings made at the private cost of Sir Joseph
Banks and published in two large volumes in
1900 by the British Museum.
1310. Robt. Brown. Prodromus Florae Novae
Hollandiae et insulae van Diemen. London, Bvo.
1813. Bauer, Ferdinand. Ulustrationes Florae Novae
Hollandiae.
1814. Robt. Brown. General remarks on the (geog.
and system) botany of Terra Australis. 4to,
84 pp., 10 plates.
1824-5. De la Billiardiere. Sertum Austro cale-
donicus. Paris, fo., 2 parts, 83 pp., 80 plates.
: T825. Cunningham. Botany of the mountain
country between the colony round Port Jack-
son and the settlement of Bathurst. Bvo.
(This is one of the papers in Baron Field's
Memoirs on New South Wales.)
1827. Guillemin. leones plantarum Australasias
variorum. Paris, small fo., 2 parts, 20 pp.,
14 plates.
"1827. Robt. Sweet. Flora Australasica. Large Bvo.,
56 col. plates.


1830. Robt. Brown. Supplementum primum Prod-
ronii Florae Novae Hollandiae. Bvo., 40 pp.,
describing the plants collected by Baxter,
Caley, Cunningham, Fraser, and Sicker.
1837. Emumeratio plantarnm qnas in Nova llol-
landia collegit K. von Huegel. Vienna, 4to.
1838. Endlicher. Stirpium Australasicarum decades
tres. Vienna, 4to, 23 pp.
*lB3B. J. Bindley. 77 Nova sp. plantarnm. (In Mit-
chell’s “Three Expeditions.”)
1839. J. Bindley. Sketch of the vegetation of the
Swan River colony. Bvo., 58 pp., 18 col.
figures. (Supplement to 23rd vol. of Edwarde’s
Botanical Register.)
*1844-7. F. Behman. Plantae Preissianae.
In addition to the above it is well to note that the
appendices in the narrative volumes of the voyages of
ANIGOZANTHUS MANLKESII KANGAROO PAW
discovery and the inland exploring expeditions give many
botanical details.
ORIGIN OF THE AUSTRALIAN FLORA.
Baron von Mueller’s “Census of Australian Plants,
1889” enumerates 8,839 Australian plants which, after
critical revision, he admits as well-founded and estab-
lished species. These lie grouped into 156 natural
orders comprising 1,409 genera. Additions since made
to this flora have perhaps raised the total number of
species to about 9,000, but in discussing the charac-
teristics of Australian vegetation these additions raise
no material issues.
Briefly stated, the Australian flora is constituted of
three elements, viz, —(1) The autochthonous or original
Australian vegetation more or less spread over the
whole continent, but with many of its species very
localized. (2) An immigrant element, mainly Oriental,
which dominates the tropical northern coasts, but does
not obliterate the distinctively Australian characteris-
tics of those coastal regions. (3) An alpine or cold
region flora, also immigrant, and typical of the Andes
Mountains of South America. This element survives
now only on the highest mountains of Tasmania, Vic-
toria, and New South Wales.
For the ancestral types of each of these elements
search must be made far back in the rocks of the geolo-
gical record. The two immigrant floras are descendants
of families of relatively recent date and are as yet com-
paratively little modified. The autochthonous element,
on the contrary, is descended from families so ancient
that many of the types have become extinct in other
parts of the world, and but for their survival in Aus-
tralia many genera would to-day be known only by
their fossil forms. Some fifty species found fossil in
Australia still survive in the world’s flora, but of this
number no fewer than seventeen survive only in the
Australian region. They belong to the genera Byblis,
Casuarina, Cephalotus, Santalum, Nuytsia, Polyom-
pholyx, Persoonia, Grevillea, Piakea, Lomatia, Banksia,
Dryandra, Callicoma, Ceratopetalum, Boronia, Eucalyp-
tus, and Phylloglossum. All of these, except Persoonia,
Hakea, and Boronia, occur as fossils in Europe, some of
them as far north as Greenland and Spitsbergen. Of
the other species (or species very closely akin to them),
seven live in North America and two in Brazil. Sixteen
range among East Indian islands, three are in Japan,
one in the African island of Bourbon, one in the Hima-
layas, one in Syria, three in Europe, and two in New
Zealand. Among the forms of plant life of the ancient
ages which still survive, but which now have forsaken
Australia, are Sequoias (pines), indistinguishable
from the giant pine of California and the lumber wood
which America exports to Australia from Oregon in
such immense quantities. The “cedar of Lebanon” and
the oak and the beech-trees also once had an Australian
home. Such facts suggest that in ancient days the
world’s climatic conditions favoured a far wider range
of specific plant life than now obtains, or that the plants
were better able to struggle in the battle for existence.
This is still better seen if the geological ages are traced
still farther back. New Zealand, for instance, shows
very little affinity with Australia during the Tertiary
period, but in the Mesozoic period she had in common
with Australia certain forms which still survive as
closely-allied species among living floras. The Gingko
pine of China and Japan, the Araucaria or “Norfolk
Island pine” and the Uamrnara or “Kauri” pine are


typical examples of these survivals. Among the coal-
beds of still older age in South Africa, India, Tonquin,
Australia, and New Zealand the fossil plants which are
identical (but of genera now extinct) are still more
numerous.
It is thus seen that the autochthonous flora of Aus-
tralia must have been long isolated from the rest of the
world. Even the immigrant forms which mixed the
flora of the eastern coast were cut off from reinforce-
ments, and in many cases have died out altogether.
The purity of the autochthonous flora still occupying the
south-west corner of Western Australia is proof that the
immigrant flora invaded eastern Australia while yet the
western half of the continent was a detached island. It
is further proof that since the period of the fusion of
this western island with the land mass in the east there
has existed an arid or '“Eremian” region dividing the
continent into a north coast section and a south coast
section, except for the narrow eastern belt formed by
the Blue Mountain cordillera in New South Wales.
Across this Eremian central region a large section of
the immigrant flora could not spread; while competi-
tion with the local forms in the east, reinforced con-
tinually by autochthonous forms from the west after
the continent had become one contact land-mass,
caused many of the immigrant families to die out alto-
gether and others to become much modified in structure
and in numbers.
What caused this great development of tree-life
throughout the world at the beginning of the Tertiary
period, and its shrinkage into highly-specialized forms
with restricted habitats later in the Tertiary period
(and continuing down to modern times), is a riddle yet
unsolved. It has been suggested that the development
of monocotyledons, especially the grasses, which took
place after the Miocene period and is still proceeding,
though not yet at culminating point, affords a sufficient
explanation of the modifications of both flora and fauna.
Certain it is that the teeth of the early land mammals
were better designed for twig-breaking, fruit-crunching,
gnawing, and root-grubbing than they were for brow-
sing on pastures. It is the mammals of to-day which
are specially adapted to browse on prairies, in meadows,
or in glades. But for their offices in keeping down
grass growth and insect life the most productive regions
of natural growth would be under the continual menace
of destruction by fire, and the fauna become the victims
of a holocaust when fires took place. It is due to the
outpouring of lava streams and their complete covering
of drift deposits over wide areas that most of the fossil
plants in eastern Australia have been preserved to us.
Tin ore and gold being also in the detrital matter thus
preserved the fossils have been brought to light by the
work of the mirjer’s pick. So little exploration has been
done as yet in the western half of the continent that
it is impossible to surmise the extent to which our
present knowledge may be supplemented from that
source when it shall be explored. The broad generaliza-
tions already established do not, however, seem likely
to be very much amended.
The character and aspect of the Australian flora
has been often described, and it is needless to repeat
the descriptions here. It was Robert Brown who first
drew attention to the shadeless character of the trees
owing to the leaves being set edgewise on the stems,
and that both sides of the leaves were alike in con-
sequence. It is a popular belief that all of the Aus-
tralian trees are evergreen, that the trees shed their
bark instead of their leaves. But there are a few which
are deciduous, though they are not all markedly so.
In the Cape York Peninsula the following deciduous
trees occur, and some of them also occur in tropical
Western Australia : —Cochlespermum Gillivrse, Bombax,
Malabarica (the silky cotton-tree), Sterculia quadrifolia,
Melia composite (white cedar), Cedrela toona (red
cedar), Sesbania grandiflora, Erythrina Indica, Cas-
tanospermum Australe (Moreton Bay chestnut or ' bean
tree’'), Albizzia procera, Sarcocephalus cordata
(Leichhardt-tree), Eucalyptus platyphylla (poplar gum-
tree), and Ficus colossa.
There are now some 200 naturalized plants in
Queensland which have made good a new home for
themselves in that tropical corner of Australia; while
South Australia, in the temperate region of the south,
has no fewer than 348.
THE WESTRALIAN SECTION.
The rainfall map exhibits very clearly the three
natural divisions of the floral regions of Western Aus-
tralia. There is the tropical north separated from the
temperate south-west by the dry Eremian region, which
extends from the west coast right across Central Aus-
tralia to the western foot of the eastern coast range.
This dry region, with its great extent, is due to the pre-
valence of south-east winds —really the south-east trade
wind —which normally blows right across Australia from
the Great Bight to the north-western coast. These winds
in their course go from a cool to a warmer latitude, and
as there are no high mountains to chill them they not
only retain the moisture they bring from the south
coast, but add to it by evaporation of any water met
with along their journey inland. The north-west coast
is therefore a region watered by rainfall only when the
cyclonic depressions in their passage down the Indian
Ocean on its Australian side (a passage which they
continue along the south coast after rounding Cape
Leeuwin) get drawn in to strike the coast above the
North-West Cape, and so take a ‘ short cut” across to


the Southern Ocean parallel to their more usual southern
track. It is by these incursions that the creek channels
in the Eremian region are occasionally flushed to over-
O J
flowing, that the claypans and so-called lakes are re-
plenished, and then truly ' the wilderness blossoms as
the rose.” The Eremian region is, in fact, a region in
which a “mild drought” is always reigning, and the
plant-life indigenous to it must necessarily be of a kind
adapted to withstand heat, cold, drought, or flood. Yet
no fewer than 942 species of plant-life have been
enumerated in the flora of this peculiar region. No
fewer than 208 of them reach the north tropical coast
and practically the whole of them the west and north-
west coasts. It is a fact, both interesting and instruc-
LEPTOSPERMUM FIRMUM.
COMMONLY KNOWN AS "TEA-TREE"
tive now to remember, that it was to reach this region
of prevailing south-east winds that the Dutchmen, in
their voyages to the East Indies so long ago, stood so
far eastw r ard after rounding the Cape of Good Hope
before bearing up northward for Java. Sometimes they
kept easterly too far, and thus discovered Australia
where they least expected —under their ship’s keel, as in
the case of Pelsart’s wreck on the Abrolhos. From
where the Dutchmen ordinarily made their Australian
landfalls, right along northward as far as navigation
toward Java or the Moluccas took them, the winds which
favoured them were the winds blowing over the west
end of the Eremian region, and the coast itself is the
least inviting portion of all-Australia. To this fact is
doubtless due the absence of Dutch desire to annex or
to colonize, and thus it came about that Britain, seek-
ing a new territory for new penal settlements to replace
those lost with the American colonies, settled first the
east coast and finally claimed all Australia. A better
knowledge of botany and meteorology would have saved
Australia to the Dutch, or, later, would certainly have
given it to the French. On very small issues does his-
tory thus sometimes pivot.
The Eremian Division. —The Eremian flora is that
which supports millions of sheep and cattle in eastern
Australia and on to which the flocks and herds of Wes-
tern Australia are continually expanding. Wherever
the stock can be provided with water in this so-called
“desert’' of Australia there Nature has provided food
for it. What is true of one part is true of all, and the
ultimate pastoral resources of Western Australia within
this region have not yet been even guessed at. Sheep,
cattle, and horses will thrive and multiply on even the
worst of the spinifex sandhills country, and the sustain-
ing character of the feed there is exemplified by the
work of the horses with which explorers have traversed
Australia from north to south and from west to east.
The region is essentially a grass region. Tree life occa-
sionally covers large areas, but succulent herbage is
always a local occurrence after rain or flooded creeks.
In tree life the acacias predominate. The Acacia aneura
or “mulga,” along with a few interspersed Myoporinae,
Casuarinae, Santalaceae, and Eucalypti, constitutes the
typical desert “scrub,” which has a thin undergrowth
of g rass at times. In the watercourses the only large
timber is to be found, and the sandy creek channels
sometimes look like broad drives through an avenue of
the Eucalyptus rostrata or “flood gum-tree.” The south
margin of this Eremian region, where it graduates into
the better forested lands of the temperate zone, is
dominated by dense tracts of eucalypti with slender
stems and having foliage only at the top. These trees
grow closely crowded and all about the same height
(say 25 ft.), and are about the thickness of a man’s
arm. In the Eastern States this is the typical “Mallee”
scrub, the trees in the Eastern States being the Eucalyp-
tus dumosa; in the West this “mallee” is chiefly
Eucalyptus oleosa. Toward the northern zone where
tropical vegetation begins to appear the fan-palm (Livis-
tona) and a fig-tree (Ficus platypoda) are the first im-
portant harbingers. The Livistona Mariae occurs south
of the Macdonnell Ranges in Central Australia, and its
almost identical congener, the L. Alfredi, occurs at Mill
Stream Station on the Fortescue River, near the North-
West Cape.
The North Division. —The north or tropical flora
of Western Australia is the diminishing progression
southward of the flora of Arnhem Land in the Nor-
thern Territory, mixing with the Eremian flora as dis


lance irom the coast and the Equator increases. The
last stragglers southward reach as far as the Fortescue
River, but the real aspect of a tropical flora does not
come south of the Fitzroy River. Along that river
there is a long stretch of forest country, but in general
terms the aspect of the Kimberley region is grass land
rather than forest land, and despite the abundant rain-
fall ferns are exceedingly rare. Phragmites Roxburgh!,
a tall bamboo-like reed, grows on pool margins to
heights of 10 to 12 ft., and the true rice grass (Oryza
sativa) occurs toward the South Australian border of
the State. The Adansonia or baobab tree is one of the
immigrant flora from the north, which looks strange
amid so much other vegetation purely and distinctively
Australian. On the east side of Cambridge Gulf a vast
tract is covered with pines (Callitris), which it is now
the object of a commercial company to exploit. The
true caper plant (and a true bean) occurs and has
spread down the nor’-west coast, and the ‘kapock” or
silky cotton-tree (Bombax Malabarica) of India is
among recent additions to the flora of this region. The
‘‘cajeput” is the Melaleuca leucodendron of India, and
this and the Callitris pine are the only two really
light-woods out of which the aboriginals might have
constructed rafts had they a suitable substitute for
cordage with which to bind the mass together. At
present in tidal waters the natives cross by means of
a floating log of “cajeput.”
The South-West Division. —This corner of Western
Australia, bounded inland by a line drawn from the
Gascoyne River at Shark Bay to Cape Arid on the south
coast, is at once the most distinctive and the most
interesting botanic region of all Australia. Within this
region are 2,013 species of plants which are never found
beyond it. It is the last remnant of the primitive flora,
and has survived because it is adapted to a season of
seven months of copious rains, followed by five months
of drought or very light coastal showers. This region
possesses the most valuable timber industry of
all Australia, the jarrah and the karri timbers being
now household words in Europe and America. The
forest trees, which reach to 30 ft. in height and
upwards, are of more than thirty species, and only three
of them occur elsewhere. The karri (Eucalyptus
diversicolour) is one which takes first rank among the
vegetable giants of the world. In extreme instances it
reaches 300 ft. high, but its average height is about
200 ft., the stem being without a branch for the first
three-fourths of its height, and 4 ft. in diameter when
starting to branch. It is in the most humid part of
the Cape Leeuwin Peninsula that the karri forest occurs
and such giants grow. With increasing distance inland
belt after belt of lesser rainfall is characterized by a more
varied and moderate growth of tree life. A line from Cape
Leeuwin north-east to the Kalgoorlie goldfield crosses
these belts at right angles, each belt marking, in effect,
the frequency of the incursions inland of the cyclonic
atmospheric depressions, which while rounding the Cape
bring rain in over the coast, the rain following in the
wake of the nor’-west and south-west quadrants of the
cyclonic depressions. The town of Kalgoorlie stands
within the Erernian division, but at a point where
the transition zone of mixed Erernian and southern
primitive flora is of great width. A traveller starting
from there to the coast is already 50 miles inside the
belt where the mallee (the Eucalyptus oleosa) has gained
ascendancy over the mulga and is itself dominated in
turn by the salmon-gum (Eucalyptus salmonophloia)
and Gimlet-tree (Eucalyptus salubris). If he keeps to
the railway line the almost continuous dense scrub is
seen to be mixed with morrell-gum (Eucalyptus longi-
cornis) as Southern Cross is approached, and here
(although the country is still Erernian in asjDect) he
meets with the first wheatfield, the croj) being cultivated
for hay. From Southern Cross the presence of the farmer
becomes more and more marked, and the great wheat-
growing belt of Western Australia which lasts to
Northam is fairly entered. From Northam to
the coast the whole route is amid the typical
flora of the south-western division. If the travel-
ler took a direct route from Kalgoorlie to Cape
Leeuwin he would meet each belt in succession earlier
in his journey, the autochthonous or primitive flora
being fairly entered when he reaches the line of railway
from York to Albany. One of the eucalypts (E. occi-
dental) met with along this York-Albany railway is
known as the mallet-bark tree, whose bark is so rich in
tannic acid that thousands of tons of it have been
stripped and sent to the coast for export. Passing the
mallet-bark belt the jarrah belt is entered. Thence to the
Cape the farmer’s country is left behind, an exuberant
tree growth is developed in the moist climate, and soil
and climate are best suited to root-crops or orchard-
trees. The jarrah becomes also a very large tree the
nearer the coast is approached, until it in turn is
dominated by the giant karri already mentioned. Grass
is not plentiful in this forest country; the dense under-
growth of many kinds of Proteaceae, Leguminosae, and
Myrtaceae effectually occupies all space between the large
trees. The Xanthorrhea and its near ally the Kingia or
Blackboy, along with Casuarina and Banksia, are
common where the soil is poorest and sandy, but
wherever the forest is sufficiently open to sunlight the
abundance of beautiful wild-flowers is simply amazing.
Much has been said and written about the poison-
ous plants which occur in the native flora of Western
Australia. Unquestionably the list of plants re-
putedly poisonous to stock is a long one. But they are
not all really dangerous. Those even with the worst
reputation kill the animals only when consumed in con


siderable quantity. Their potency is greatest after
flowering, and it is just at that time that other herbage
has been fed off. Stock do not eat the poison foliage
from choice, but from scarcity of other feed. Over-
crowding the animals at any one spot is therefore the
most fruitful cause of stock losses from poison plants.
Small paddocks with only one watering-place, or the
neighbourhood of frequent camps, are always danger-
points in a poison bush country. As a general rule all
the native herbage is good feed for stock, but in most
localities is thinly distributed. Hence the danger of
overstocking, even for a short period.
It is matter for great regret that successive Govern-
ments have so long neglected to develop the scientific
knowledge of the flora of the State. All the other
States have compiled and published floras, but that for
Western Australia has yet to be written. What is
known now is mainly the result of private enterprise
encouraged and directed by other State Administrations.
It is now nearly a quarter of a century since any full
discussion and review of Australian botanical results
has been attempted.
Summarizing all the data at present available the
conclusions to which they point are :
1. Descendants of the primitive Australian flora still
survive in the south-west division of Western Australia.
2. The Eremian region has a flora which is also dis-
tinctively Australian, but it originated out of the ele-
ments of the old flora in admixture with an ancient im-
migrant flora of a type now also mainly extinct.
3. A later immigrant flora from the Oriental
regions and Malay Islands has obtained a strong footing
along the tropical coasts of Australia. This flora is
strongly marked right down to Tasmania on the east
side of Australia, but on the west side its farthest
stragglers do not come as far south as Shark Bay.
4. The isolation of the south-west flora from the
flora in the cast dates far back and is still maintained.
Practically the connection between the south-west and
eastern Australia is limited to the Eremian plants;
less than a dozen truly south-west plants have as yet
been detected inside the typical Eremian area.
5. The artificial division of the Western Australian
flora into two sections only —the one extra-tropical and
the other inter-tropical —is misleading, because the
Eremian flora is mixed with both divisions. Mere
tropical and extra-tropical lists are therefore useless for
comparison.
6. The Eremian flora is very partially distributed
and localized; the greater number of its species appears
only during exceptional seasons or in special positions
About 942 species are believed to occur west of the east
boundary of the State. Of these some 208 species spread
north to the tropical coast of the Northern Territory,
830 species spread east into South Australia, 594 con-
tinue on into Victoria, and 200 still farther east into
Tasmania. These Victorian and Tasmanian species in-
clude the 236 species which intrude into the south-west
division of Western Australia, and they constitute the
only plant-link directly connecting the two southern
corners of the continent at this time.
7. There are 1,221 species at present assigned to the
north-coast flora or Kimberley division of Western Aus-
tralia. A consideration of the data at present available
for the whole State seems to justify the following
estimate of the species more or less restricted to each
division and constituting the present flora of the State :
South-west division, 2,239 species, of which 2,013
are endemic; Eremian or central division, 706 species,
of which 614 are endemic; north or Kimberley division,
1,221 species, of which 780 are endemic. Totals, 4,166
species, of which 3,407 are endemic.
THE ABORIGINES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
There are very few matters pertaining to Western
Australia of which it is more difficult to give a com-
prehensive account than the aborigines. Those of the
Eastern States have been more or less completely studied
and described by A. W. Howitt (the pioneer of Aus-
tralian aboriginal anthropology), the Rev. John Mathew,
Dr. Roth, Professor Spencer, F. J. Gillen, and others.
But except for vocabularies collected by George Fletcher
Moore and Sir George Grey little work in the direction
of obtaining a full knowledge of the Western Australian
aborigines has been so far undertaken. From time to
time explorers passing through various parts of the State
have collected information, none the less valuable be-
cause often incidental and disjointed, and there have
also been desultory attempts to gain some knowledge of
native life and customs in particular districts. So far,
however, no results of a comprehensive character have
been published. At present something in the way of
remedying our ignorance is being attempted by two
observers working in different fields. Mr. Alfred Brown,
in charge of an ethnological expedition from Cambridge
University, is conducting researches into the anthro-
pology of the natives of the north-west, while Mrs. Daisy
M. Bates is endeavouring to secure at first hand material
for a survey of the manners and customs, habits and lan-
guages of the aborigines generally throughout the State.
It will probably be several years before these researches
are completed. Meantime all that can be done is to
present in a concise form such information as may be
available. We do not, therefore, lay claim to any degree
of originality in this article, but desire to acknowledge
our indebtedness to all those who have previously written


upon the subject, more especially to the Registrar-
General of the State for the excellent information pub-
lished in his “Notes on the Natural History, etc., of
Western Australia,” and to Mrs. Bates for notes pub-
lished by her from time to time.
There is no doubt that the aboriginal inhabitants
of Australia furnish from many points of view an inter-
esting study. To ethnologists they form a link in the
chain of human growth and development the importance
of which is tardily being recognized. The question of
their origin is the cause of much speculation, and their
peculiar rites and ceremonies, so distinctive in character,
are beginning to engage scientific attention.
Untouched by civilization, the Australian abor-
iginal seems to approach very nearly to the primi-
tive type of humanity. He is a wanderer, without per-
manent habitation or settled abode. He has no arts or
manufacture —he does not even till the soil or tame
animals for domestic use; and while he has necessarily a
language he has no literature, and his ideas of art are
crude in the extreme. Religious sense, as we understand
the term, is practically absent, and he seems to have
no perception of conscience or of moral responsibility.
Yet he has a definite tribal organization, a vague family
life, some leaning toward the supernatural, and a most
intricate and elaborate social structure. He has diverse
methods of reckoning degrees of relationship, innumer-
able traditions and superstitions, curious customs, rites,
and ceremonies, and established habits, all of which well
repay inquiry.
Those actuated by a desire to civilize the natives
are baffled by their ineptitude and lack of intelligence.
The missionary finds his efforts to plant Christianity
upon them futile on account of the absence of a moral
and spiritual nature; the pioneer is compelled to recog-
nize and often to use their unerring instinct in matters
of bushcraft, but requires to be ever on guard against
their ingrained treachery. The Government, charged
with the material welfare of these people whom the
white man has dispossessed, and with the administration
of justice and prevention of criminal actions as between
them, is continually exercised not so much about the right
course to pursue as the best means to adopt in doing it.
All these phases give rise to problems that call
for solution. No doubt the rapid diminution in
numbers caused by the spread of civilization and the
adoption of some civilized vices will in many cases lead
to absolute extinction, and so solve some of the difficul-
ties. But those are the very facts that make the work
of the ethnologist more insistent, if such knowledge
now available is not to be for ever lost. “The inhabit-
ants of Australia,” wrote Sir William Flower, “have
long been a puzzle to ethnologists.” Fortunately of
late years efforts have been made to solve the
puzzle, and there is every hope that before the race
passes out of existence a complete record will be secured
of every phase of native life and character. In dealing
with the subject in this article it is proposed to discuss
as concisely as possible the following questions:
1. Origin and language.
2. Physical and mental characteristics.
3. Tribal or political organization.
4. Social organization, including marriage and
inheritance and the totemic system.
5. Superstitions, rites, and ceremonies, including
initiation ceremonies, etc.
6. Arts and manufactures.
7. Missions and other methods for improvement.
I.—ORIGIN AND LANGUAGE.
Origin.
To trace the origin of a race which possesses a history
and a literature is often a difficult problem, but the
difficulties are considerably increased when we attempt
to deal with the ancestry of a people without either
literature, history, or recognizable traditions of origin.
Such is the case with the aborigines of Australia, whom
even the most elementary phases of civilization seem
to have passed by. Though much speculation has taken
place with regard to the stock from which they have
sprung, the question cannot yet be regarded as satisfac-
torily decided. There are, however, perhaps three
points upon which scientists have arrived at something
like an agreement: — (a) That the various tribes have a
common ancestry; (j>) that the original race arrived by
immigration, though from what particular direction is un-
certain ; (c) that since the original inroad there has been
admixture by alien immigration from some second source.
One of the most important factors in discussing the
question of common origin is the examination of lan-
guage, and those who have made a careful analysis of the
dialects spoken agree that the aborigines throughout the
whole of Australia are traceable to a common ancestry.
The first investigator to remark this was Sir George
Grey, than whom no one is more fitted to speak upon the
subject with authority. After some years spent in the
collection of information he formed the opinion that no
matter what might be the apparent differences between
the tribes in various districts of the continent, their
common origin and fundamental unity must be admitted
on the following grounds:
(i.) A general similarity in sound and structure of
words used in different parts of Australia ;
(II.) The recurrence of the same word, with the
same significance in many instances, round the
entire continent, subject only to unimportant
modifications;
(Hi.) The frequent occurrence of the same names' of
natives at totally opposite portions of the colo-
nies, and the fact of children being named
from any remarkable circumstances attendant
on their birth.


Although some support is given by all ethnologists to
the enunciation, the premises have been questioned on the
ground that at the time they were put forth the science
of comparative philology was new, and therefore there
was a strong tendency to attach too much weight to it.
Professor A. H. Keane, however, in his “Man : Past and
Present/ written half a century later, appears to con-
firm Grey. “To the observer arriving on the north coast
of Australia from New Guinea,” he says, “this homo-
geneous character of the aborigines is very striking.
Strong support is given to this assumption by the
absolutely independent and uniform character of Aus-
tralian speech.” He points out that the divergences
from a common form are few, while the phonetic system
is everywhere identical. The absence of sibilant sounds
is also commented upon, and from the whole he deduces
that “here we have complete accord between linguistic
and anatomical characters, both alike arguing for a com-
mon racial origin.”
The theory is strengthened by little divergence in
physique between natives of different parts, and by the
fact that throughout the continent similar fundamental
ideas prevail in the system of tribal and social organiza-
tion, as well as in the various rites and ceremonies.
“The most striking fact,” according to Spencer and
Gillen, “in regard to them [the aborigines] at the present
day is that over the whole continent, so far as is known,
we can detect a community of customs and social
organization sufficient to show that all the tribes inhabit-
ing various parts are the offspring of ancestors who,
prior to their migrating in various directions across the
continent and thus giving rise to groups separated to
a great extent from one another by physical barriers,
already practised certain customs and had the germs of
an organization which has been developed along different
lines in different localities. The class and totem systems,
variously modified as we now find them in different
tribes, can only be adequately accounted for on the
hypothesis that, when the ancestors of the present natives
reached the country, they spread over it in different
directions, separated into local groups, and developed,
without the stimulus derived from contact with outside
peoples, along various lines, each group retaining
features in its customs and organizations such as can
only be explained by supposing them all to have had a
common ancestor.” As an instance of this the practice
of knocking out a tooth is mentioned. Along the
eastern side of the continent this has been retained as
an integral part of the initiation rites, while in districts
farther west only traces of it remain, yet agreement in
important details proves the common origin of the
custom. In this regard it seems certain that the pre-
sent numerous ceremonies were not introduced in the
forms that now exist, but have been evolved from the
early traditions with gradual local divergence. This
development probably took place before the interior of
Australia became a dry and thirsty desert, almost
devoid of water and animal life; when the climatic con-
ditions of the country made intercommunication between
the tribes easy and circumstances were favourable to
homogeneity. The changes in the physical conforma-
tion of the country caused diversion and isolation.
“With this gradual segregation, which really consisted
of a drawing in toward certain centres where in time of
drought physical conditions were more favourable than
elsewhere, intercommunication between the various
groups became less and less frequent on anything like an
extensive scale, and thus in time the various dialects
arose. While words can become modified and changed
with more or less ease in savage tribes, it is quite other-
wise in the case of customs and beliefs, more especially
those associated with sacred matters. When once they
have become settled then they are, of all things among
savage joeoples, the least liable to change.” The totemic
system affords evidence of this, and is further an indica-
tion of facility of intercourse in earlier times, as well as
of a common descent.
It thus seems certain that the aborigines of Aus-
tralia are descendants of a common ancestry. Whence
these ancestors catne is still a matter for debate, but it
is practically agreed that invasion occurred in the north,
and from there spread out in three distinct lines from
north to south, ultimately reaching Tasmania, which
must then have been portion of the mainland, or sepa-
rated only by shallows. Some ages afterwards a second
migration occurred, according to the opinion of those
best qualified to judge, which was of a type somewhat
higher in the scale of civilization. This in turn followed
the lines of dispersion already in existence, and arrived
at the Southern Ocean, but did not cross to Tasmania,
as in the meantime that island had become completely
separated by Bass Strait. This may be seen from the
traces that still remain of the aboriginal inhabitants of
that jiart, which prove them to have been of a lower
grade than those of Australia. The Tasmanian abori-
gines, now extinct, probably therefore represented the
pure original stock. The severance of the continent by
the formation of straits in the north then cut off any
further stream of immigration, so that our present Aus-
tralian black represents in all probability the result of
the admixture of these two migrations, modified by local
conditions in various parts, but wholly unaffected by
further alien immigration, except perhaps locally,
within historic times in the north, where traces of Malay
influence may be found.
The theory of a double migration, it may be said,
is not approved by all ethnologists, but it certainly
appears to rest upon evidence difficult to controvert. It
was put forward by Flower and Lydekker some twenty
years ago, and in a measure it meets the views of the
Rev. John Mathew, Professor Keane, and others who
base their contention, inter alia , on the facts that the


tribes are each divided into two sections or phratries,
designated by names signifying in every case “light-
blooded” and “dark-blooded,” and that these distinc-
tions are not restricted to human beings alone, but are
applied to all things concerning the tribe. These terms,
so absolutely a part of the tribal organization, are, in
their opinion, evidences that the Australian aboriginal
is a composite of two original strains, both of whom
would colloquially be termed black, but one of whom
was of a decidedly lighter complexion than the other.
With this we shall have to deal later when discussing
Mathew's theory in greater detail.
On the question of the particular ethnological divi-
sion to which the original race or races belonged Grey
does not put forward any theory beyond from time to
time drawing attention to certain physical character-
istics which appear to be similar to those of the Semitic
races, and instituting comparisons between various
native rites and customs and similar ceremonies
among the Jews. Many of the later investigators have
attempted to solve the problem, but have not yet secured
unanimity of opinion. Mr. Edmund Curr, in his
monumental compilation ‘The Australian Race,”
advances the theory, first suggested by Captain Fitzroy,
of H.M.S. “Beagle,” that the aborigines are descended
from the negro race of Africa, mainly on the ground
that both are without religion, while they exhibit
certain similarities in rites, customs, ceremonies, and
superstitions. He is inclined to think that the whole race
sprang from a single canoe-load of negroes who landed
somewhere on the coast in the north-west, and as their
numbers increased scattered over the whole continent.
The objection to the theory is that if the ancestors
arrived by canoe from so distant a country as Africa
they must necessarily have been an ocean-going people,
a suggestion which, so far as we know, is entirely foreign
to the character of the native inhabitants of Australia.
Curr admits that certain peculiarities would lead us to
suppose that there has been a cross with some other
race, and it is now almost wholly accepted by ethnologists
that the Australian is not a pure type, but is the result
of admixture of two, if not more, original races.' As a
result of considering the physical and physiological
characteristics Dr. Topinard came to the conclusion that
the aborigines were a mongrel race. “It is clear,” he
says, “that the Australians might very well be the result
of a cross between one race with smooth hair from some
other place and a really negro or .autochthonous race.”
The opinions expressed by Mr. Huxley are in harmony
with this hypothesis. He says “the Australians are
identical with the ancient inhabitants of the Deccan.”
Huxley and Topinard both relate the aborigines to the
Dravidians, the ancient inhabitants of the Deccan, but
do not arrive at any decision concerning the direction
from which the woolly-haired race with which they are
crossed may have come.
A. W. Hewitt, whose view necessarily carries con-
siderable weight, is of opinion that the Australian
ancestors must have reached the continent by some land
connection from the north or north-west at a time when
Tasmania was part of the mainland ; a conclusion which
involves a vast antiquity, but which nevertheless has the
balance of opinion in its favour. The hypothesis put
forward by Howitt as a possible theory of origin does not
meet with the same general acceptance. In his own
words, it is “an original Negrito population as repre-
sented by the wild tribes of Malaysia, a subsequent off-
shoot represented by the Andamanese and Tasmanians,
and another offshoot in a higher state of culture originat-
ing the Melanesians. As to the Australians, I may say
that the discussion of the problem as to the origin of
these savages and of the Tasmanians has led me to con-
clusions which require, as the original stock of the
former, such a race as would be supplied by The low
form of Caucasian Melanochroi’ suggested by Sir W. H.
Flower. From such a stock the Dravidians may be also
thought to have been in part derived.” Flower and
Lydekker, however, in their “Introduction to the Study
of Mammals” (1891), do not subscribe to the idea that
the Caucasian Melanochroi were the original stock.
Recognizing that the absence of frizzly hair in a people
presenting the features and skeletal characters of the
negro forms a stumbling-block in the way of every system
proposed, they proceed to point out that “the solution,
supported by many considerations . . . appears to lie
in the supposition that they are not a distinct race at all
—that is, not a homogeneous group formed by the
gradual modification of one of the primitive stocks, but
rather a cross between two already formed branches of
these stocks. According to this view Australia was
originally peopled by frizzly-haired Melanesians such as
those who still do, or did before the European invasion,
dwell in the smaller islands which surround the north,
east, and southern portions of the continent, but that a
strong infusion of some other race, probably a low form
of Caucasian Melanochroi, such as that which still
inhabits the interior of the southern parts of India, has
spread throughout the land from the north-west and
produced a modification of the physical characters,
especially the hair. This influence did not extend across
Bass Strait into Tasmania, where the Melanesian
element remained in its purity.”
This is the view which up to the present finds most
favour. Not only can fewer objections be urged against
it, but through it, without any undue effort of imagina-
tion, almost every phase of aboriginal existence may be
accounted for. A later theory has been advanced by
by the Rev. John Mathew. While it seems to differ in
some degree from the above on the question of the
original race, it admits a second invasion resulting in a
present crossed people. As it is the most recent solution
offered it may be worth extended notice. To quote Mr.


Mathew: —'The ancestors of the now extinct Tas-
manians were the original inhabitants of Australia,
they were a short, black, or very dark-brown curly-haired
race, congeners of the Papuans and Melanesians. But,
unlike these two races, the Tasmanians, being absolutely
separated from higher races, made virtually no advance
in culture. At a time when Tasmania formed part of
the mainland or was much more easily accessible from it
than in historic times it was occupied by the then Aus-
tralian race. There would not necessarily be absolute
uniformity in physical characters and language among
the primitive race in all places. There would be some
differences, and these would probably be graduated from
south to north so as to approximate to the Melanesians.
A superior race, akin perhaps to the Hravidians
of India, the Veddahs of Ceylon, and the Toalas of
corroboration he mentions a discovery made by him con-
cerning the Kabi tribe, and quotes Mrs. Langloh Parker
and Mrs. D. M. Bates, the one with regard to the
Euahlayi tribe and the other respecting the aborigines
of Western Australia. In all these cases the tribal
classes are said to correspond to the terms light-blooded
and dark-blooded. These blood distinctions have also
been referred to, though not so definitely, by Leichhardt
and Bunce.
The chief objection to Mr. Mathew’s solution appears
to be its vagueness. While contending for a crossed
origin, definition of the original stocks constituting the
cross seems to be lacking. His evidence would perhaps
be equally applicable to the solution proposed by Flower
and Lydekker.
His indication of a further infusion of the Malay
ABORIGINAL DWELLINGS.
Celebes, though not necessarily derived from one of these
lands, migrated into Australia from the north-east. The
newcomers were straight-haired, and though dark in
complexion were not so dark as their predecessors. They
pressed forward, gradually absorbing or exterminating
the lowlier, earlier inhabitants until they overran the
whole of Australia, the true autochthones leaving more
traces of their presence in some places than in others.
. . The Australians of historic times are therefore
a hybrid race, constituted mainly of the Tasmanian and
Asiatic elements.”
Mr. Mathew suggests that these two races are
represented by the two classes or phratries into which
Australian tribes are divided, generally designated by
names indicating contrast of colour —light and dark. As
E
race is, upon the evidence brought forward, worthy of
serious consideration. Mr. Howitt contends that the
extent of this must have been very slight, but in that
we cannot follow him. With some knowledge of the
north-west of Australia the writer has long held the
opinion that both the language and the physical and
mental characteristics of the Malays are discernible not
only in the aborigines of the extreme north of Western
Australia, but in varying degree in those farther south.
If detailed information concerning these tribes could be
secured it would, we feel convinced, strongly bear out
Mr. Mathew’s contention. The rock-drawings and
paintings of the north-west, to which reference will be
made later, certainly point to the presence in former
times in the northern portion of the State of a race


superior in every way to that now living. The existence
of individuals of a lighter complexion than usual —a fact
commented upon by several observers —seems also to con-
firm that opinion.
In conclusion, reference may be made to the opinion
of Dr. Klaatsch that the Australians are unitary in
origin, and that variations are the result of isolation
and local circumstances. This suggestion, however,
seems to disregard certain ethnological and biological
facts, all of which go to prove that the present Austra-
lian native is an admixture of at any rate two practically
pure stocks.
No more has been attempted on this question than
to give a resume of the various theories held by
different investigators. No new theory is advanced, as
that propounded by Sir William Flower and Mr.
Lydekker appears to meet most of the difficulties, and
in the present state of Australian ethnology seems to
rest upon the soundest evidence.
Language.
Closely allied to the question of origin is the con-
sideration of language, and, as we have already pointed
out, there is evidence all over Australia that the various
dialects are all derived from a common root. That the
dialects possess local peculiarities and differences owing
to local circumstances is only to be expected, but the
opinion expressed by Sir George Grey in his “Vocabulary
of the Dialects of South-Western Australia” is
apparently true of the whole continent. Referring to
the dialects of the country from Perth to King George
Sound he remarks: —“Throughout the whole of this
extensive range of country the language is radically the
same, though variations in dialect and in the use of
certain words by single tribes are very considerable, but
certainly not more than from the scattered and ignorant
state of the population, the little intercourse existing
between adjacent tribes, and the want of any fixed
standard of speech, we might have been led to expect.”
As a rule, the dialects are soft and melodious, being
marked by the absence of s, x, and z sounds, and in
many cases of j, g, and v. The absence of sibilant sounds
is general throughout the continent, and is one of the
factors of moment in the consideration of origin.
Grammatical construction of a kind exists, but so far
we do not know enough to speak definitely about it.
The structure is flexible and the emphasis usually on
the penultimate. No provision is made for the expres-
sion of abstract conceptions or for reckoning up
further than three, though there are ingenious methods,
for example, of fixing a future date more than three or
four days ahead. There is no written language, but
communications are conveyed by means of a messenger
or a message-stick. The hunting cries are wild and
strange, with a pronounced distinctness of sound, com-
mencing with a hard consonant, as “kau” and “kooee.”
The north-west dialects are more musical than those in
the south, and possess other differences due mainly to
altered local conditions. In addition to message-sticks
a sort of gesture language is also used, as well as
messengers who relate their news to the old men, to be
by them disseminated among the tribesmen.
Numbers.
To ascertain even approximately the number of
aborigines remaining in Western Australia is extremely
difficult. The estimate of 50,000, said to be the total
number at the date of the foundation of the State,
cannot be used as a basis, as it is quite evident that it
was purely an effort of imagination. Mr. Coghlan in
1898 estimated that there were 12,183 in contact with
whites, and the census of 1901 returned 6,181 full- and
half-caste aborigines civilized or semi-civilized “in
employment or living in proximity to settlements.”
Those living in a wild state were not included. The late
Protector of Aborigines (Mr. H. C. Prinsep) in 1906
estimated the number of the savage natives to be about
20,000, but the present Chief Protector, after visiting
the Kimberley district and having also the opinion of
Mr. Canning as to the desert tribes of the north, is
inclined to think the number overstated, and that 10,000
or 12,000 would be nearer the mark. On that basis the
total number of Western Australian aborigines would
be approximately 25,000.
11.-PHYSICAL AND MENTAL
CHARACTERISTICS.
Considering the very large extent of territory
embraced by Western Australia we can scarcely expect
physical uniformity among the tribes. Intermixture of
races, particularly in the north, where evidences of
Malay infusion exist, and local variations of climate and
food supply, must in the course of time have had a
definite influence on the bodily appearance. Proximity
to the white man wherever it occurs also leaves its mark,
generally in the direction of degeneracy, so that no
description of the aborigines limited to the specimens we
see about the various settlements may be considered
typical of the race. But though differences seem to be
marked when contrasting individuals, when comparing
tribe with tribe in their natural condition there are
certain pronounced similarities in build and general
appearance that enable a description to be given that
may be considered typical.
We are accustomed to speak of the aborigines as
black, but the skin is really of a dark copper colour,
changing to a dirty pink shade on the soles of the feet
and the palms of the hands. It is particularly soft and
velvety to the touch, emitting that strong odour
characteristic of dark peoples. The hair is generally
black, but instances of red and fair hair are met with,
combined with a lighter complexion, even in places where
peculiarity cannot be ascribed to alien infusion. It is


somewhat curly, without being woolly, and when cleansed
from grease and dirt is fine and glossy.
In stature the native is not far short of the average
European, but he is inferior to the latter in muscular
development. The limbs are longer in proportion than
those of the white man, but are lean and thin, with that
absence of calves to the legs usual in dark races, though
in some cases there is abnormal corpulency. Certain of
the tribes in the north-west might be described as tall
even in the European sense, and are splendid examples
of muscular development. These, however, are anoma-
lies of the general type, due in large measure to the
influences above noted.
The cranial formation, somewhat finer in the male
than in the female sex, is on the whole narrow and
lengthy, with high cheek bones, the lower portion of
the forehead about the eyebrows projecting, the upper
portion receding rapidly. The nose, narrow above,
giving the eyes the appearance of being drawn close to-
gether, becomes broader and somewhat squat lower down.
The eyes are dark and, except during moments of inte-
rest or excitement, dull and listless, but the sight is
quicker and longer than that of the European. The
ears are inclined slightly forward, the mouth is large
and unshapely, and the lips thick, though not so thick
as those of the African negro. The teeth are fine and
white, the upper row generally overlapping the lower.
The jawbone is contracted and the chin small.
In carriage the native is erect and graceful, his
movements being light and easy, free from the awkward
ness which so often distinguishes his more civilized
brother. The senses —taste, smell, hearing, and sight-
are particularly keen, a fact to which they owe their
value as guides and trackers.
The women, as a rule, are smaller than the men.
Some of them when young have nicely-rounded limbs,
but overwork and early child-bearing cause them to
quickly lose any appearance of beauty, and the majority
are distinguished even in early womanhood by pendulous
breasts and general want of figure.
The mental characteristics of the native are com-
paratively of a low order. His intelligence is narrow
and his reflective faculties are largely undeveloped,
though the perceptive faculties are preternaturally sharp,
making them invaluable as trackers and very useful
under white direction as shepherds, stockmen, and at
other callings not requiring heavy manual labour. To
this quickness of apprehension is added a keen sense of
the ridiculous and an excellent talent for mimicry. In
Mr. Curr’s opinion "the black is quicker in the action
of his mind, more observant, and more self-reliant than
the English peasant, but less steady, persevering, and
calculating.” Those who have been taught to read and
write are quite as apt as white children, but when they
return to a wandering life the results are not main-
tained. A native who has been educated and subjected
e 2
to the influences of civilization shows little or no inclina-
tion to give his children the same benefits in turn.
Whether a course of training maintained through succes-
sive generations would effect a permanent change we
have no means of knowing, but it is practically certain
that the native cannot be raised to the level of a civilized
being in one generation. A story is told of a philan-
thropic lady in Western Australia who had a native
carefully instructed in both English and French. Some
years later a traveller spoke to a lonely native shepherd
far out in the bush, and received an answer interlarded
with French expletives from the learned native scholar.
The lack of sustained interest may be due partly to the
fact that the black recognizes that he can never com-
pete on anything like equal terms with the white, and
that his chances of fraternal recognition are absolutely
nil as regards self-respecting white people. The prin-
cipal cause, however, doubtless lies in the deficient
quality of his intelligence. The absence of a reflective
faculty is shown by their improvidence and want of
forethought, as well as by the apparent inability to
connect cause and effect. This, perhaps, does not
altogether hold in the north-west, where they are said
to make excellent boatmen, an occupation that certainly
calls for some exercise of care and forethought.
Socially the aborigines are naturally polite, sunny
in disposition, and inclined to good-fellowship, but those
in contact with civilization often show a moroseness and
sulkiness of character that is at times the cause of
considerable trouble. From the standpoint of morality
there is little to be said for them. The sense of right
or wrong is not strongly developed; to lie costs them no
pang of conscience. Toward the whites they are often
treacherous and have little regard for human life. In
courage they are weak, and will rarely undertake an
expedition where death for some of the company is
almost sure to be the result; yet they will follow a party
of white men for days in the hope of getting the members
of it alone, so as to kill them.
Industry and thrift are unknown uo them, and
chastity, in the sense that we understand the term, is
entirely foreign to their natures. 'Hut though these
shortcomings seem pitiful to us, nurtured in the lap of
twentieth-century civilization, we have to remember that
it is scarcely fair to measure them by our standards.
Allowance must be made for heredity and environment,
for tribal law and immemorial custom, and above all for
a conscience that is little more than rudimentary. Low
as they undoubtedly are in the moral scale they are not
addicted to those cruel and barbarous practices that
have prevailed among many natives of a higher type.
The aborigines, too, have some redeeming qualities.
Most observers agree that they are possessed of the
virtues of hospitality, of reverence for age, and of
parental and filial love —three characteristics not always
a distinguishing feature of civilized life.


The amount of clothing worn by the natives varies
considerably, a state of things easily accounted for in a
country which extends over a large proportion of the
temperate and tropical zones. In the southern districts
kangaroo-skins are used by them as a cloak for the
shoulders, with loin-cloths of opossum fur to cover their
nakedness. Farther north the kangaroo-skins are dis-
pensed with and the opossum-cloths give way to a thin
strip of plaited grass rope, while among the wild tribes
of the interior of the north-west even that tribute to
decency is considered superfluous. In addition there is
an adornment of the hair characteristic of the various
tribes, and in some cases the bodies are painted with red-
and-white colours. Among the Ngurla tribe on the De
Grey River the men wear plumes in their hair and
suspend pearl-shells from the waist-girdle, while the
women hang pellets of gum on locks of their hair. The
Nickol Bay tribe ornament themselves with pearl-shells
and rat-tails, knot their beards, and smear their bodies
with grease and red ochre. The natives who resided in
the vicinity of the Swan River wore feathers in their
hair, clothed themselves in a plentiful coating of grease,
and used kangaroo-skins as cloaks, while the women wore
upon their backs a bag made of kangaroo-skins, in which
they stowed their babies and other impedimenta. The
natives, as a whole, grease the hair and body, probably
as a means of protection from the cold rather than as
ornament. Additional ornament is sometimes provided
by inserting bones in the septum of the nose and by
scarifying the breast and other parts of the body so as to
present an appearance of permanent weals.
A particularly concise, and at the same time fairly
accurate, description of the natives of the south-west
was given by Governor Hutt in a despatch to the Secre-
tary of State dated May 3, 1839, when suggesting a Bill
for the purpose of dealing with native offenders. Tie
points out that
the aborigines are an anomalous though a nmst interest-
ing race of people. Interesting, I mean, as offering
points of character totally at variance with anything I
have seen described of tribes or nations elsewhere. They
are active, handy, daring, intelligent, and faithful ;
impatient of restraint: utterly hateful of work, even
where rewards the most tempting and which they most
covet are offered; careless of all European arts and
comforts, remaining the same now as when the colonists
landed ten years ago on the beach at Fremantle : totally
free from the licentious courses of most savage peoples;
unoontaminated, with some few exceptions, by the vices
of their invaders ; regarding every stranger as an enemy
and therefore to be made away with on the first safe and
convenient occasion ; under no restraint even in childhood
(I speak, of course, of the men; the women, as in all
savage nations, being the household drudges, the slaves,
or servants of all work), having no acknowledged heads
of tribes or families; following no rule but the impulses
of their own caprices and passions, blood for blood being
their law, and every man the judge, jury, and execu-
tioner in his own quarrel; with no fixed place of resi-
dence, no habitations but those which the weather
temporarily necessitates them to erect; with no idea of
accumulation, whether as a means of barter or as a
provision for the future; no personal property but
their kangaroo cloaks and their implements of war or
the chase; no means of subsistence but such as Nature
affords them; they have, finally, a language in which
there is no word for either love, want, or gratitude, and
they live literally without God in the world. Not the
slightest vestige of any religious sentiment or ceremony
has yet been traced amongst them. From childhood to
the grave they propitiate neither God nor devil.
They have been brought up to look upon crimes not only
with indifference, but even as meritorious, which in
England would be punished with death.
Later knowledge has modified some of Governor
Hutt's opinions, but in the main they form a valuable
statement of the characteristics of that section of natives
which has practically now ceased to exist.
111.-TRIBAL OR POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION.
The Australian aborigines, at first probably con-
sisting of a single organization, have in the course of
centuries become, by reason of climatic and other
influences, separated into sections or tribes, each pos-
sessing a more or less definite area of country as its
location. As a result of this segregation we find that
the tribal organization is both simple and complex-
simple as to the principles which form the bases of tribal
law and custom, and complex by reason of local modifica-
tions which have brought about diversity in the applica-
tion of these principles. Though to a superficial observer
this organization may not seem apparent, there is no
doubt that, like other savage peoples, the Australian
blacks are subject to a system of tribal regulations that
allows but little individual freedom of action in any
department of life. According to Mr. Howitt a tribe
consists of an aggregation of individuals occupying a
certain territory in common, speaking the same language
with slight dialectic variations, and acknowledging
toward one another a relationship which is denied to the
members of surrounding tribes. Extent of country and
number of persons do not make any difference to this
tribal connection. A tribe may, however, be divided into
groups or clans, and these again into families, until we
finally arrive at the unit consisting of those of the same
blood, who possess their own portion (hoop) of the com-
mon territory and manage their own domestic concerns.
As a general rule the tribe is divided into two sec-
tions which, in the opinion of many, represent the
original stocks of which the present aborigines are the
result. Each of these sections is then split up into two
or more groups or clans, which again are subdivided into
families. Each group and family has its own peculiar
cognizance or family sign—the totem —known by the
natives as kobong , which is usually some natural object.
The functions of government rest generally in the
old or senior men of the tribe, one of whom is con-
sidered to be above the others and is for the time being
virtual ruler. There is no hereditary right to this


position. A son may succeed at times to his father’s
office as ruler, but in such cases it is only by consent
of the headman, because he possesses the necessary
qualifications, and not because he happens to be the heir
of the deceased chief.
The laws by which the members of the tribe are
governed are the result of those traditions which embody
the principles of the original stock. As one might expect,
they favour the strong as against the weak, the old and
influential as against the young, the man as against the
woman. One of the remarkable points about the
aboriginal laws is their general acceptance by the people
and the ready submission offered by them to the punish-
ments decreed upon violation. As an instance of this
we may quote an occurrence mentioned by the Rev. C.
G. Nicolay where two young persons in the Victoria dis-
trict were so enamoured of each other that they wil-
lingly suffered
severe punish-
ment, three
times repeat-
ed, in order
that, the law
being sat-
isfied, they
might live
togethe r.
Marriage laws
and regula-
tions are so
intricate and
involved and
form so in-
tegral a part
of the social
organization
that they are
treated fully
under that section. The laws regarding hunting and the
preservation of food are so strict that infringements of
them are visited with serious results to the evildoer.
Except by invitation no stranger is allowed to
enter a family's booja or preserve, and poaching
is often punished by death. No vegetable pro-
ducts used as food may be gathered at seed-time, and
in cases where the totem is a vegetable that particular
article is forbidden as food. In the matter of personal
offences punishment is based upon the lex talionis, with
the extension that a culprit's relatives are implicated in
his guilt. As a general rule, when a man is killed the
duty of avenging his death, whether caused by accident
or design, falls upon his nearest relative, who must
undertake the task or risk disgrace at the hands of the
family. Where it is not possible to kill the actual
culprit vicarious sacrifice in the person of some relative
or member of his family is sufficient to wipe out the
stain and fulfil the demands of the law. This explains
to some extent the murder of innocent settlers by the
natives. They have been made to suffer for the wrongs
committed by their predecessors. For seduction, incest,
and adultery the nominal punishment is death, but the
law is frequently satisfied with a less penalty. When-
ever a criminal runs away he is tracked with unrelenting
tenacity, and when found the trouble of catching him
does not detract from the punishment. The usual
penalty short of death is the infliction of spear wounds
in the fleshy portions of the body, the number and
extent varying with the gravity of the crime. As an
instance of inequality on the part of the law it may be
mentioned that unfaithfulness of a wife is not only
visited upon her, but often on the wife of her para-
mour as well, while the guilty man invariably escapes.
Crimes
against pro-
perty need
scarcely be
taken into ac-
count. Private
ownership of
land does not
exist, the
whole section
being the
common pro-
perty of the
family. On
the other
hand, the per-
sonalty of a
native is not
such as to give
rise to temp
tation on the
part of his fellow. It does occasionally happen that the
area of land held by a family or group is rich in some
commodity which is of value to the community. In that
case it is protected from spoliation by outsiders, who
can secure it only by giving some consideration in
exchange. This establishes a rude system of barter,
which, however, does not in any way modify the feel-
ings of hostility that often prevail between neighbouring
tribes.
IV.—SOCIAL ORGANIZATION.
This is one of the most important phases of
aboriginal life, as it is really the framework upon which
the elaborate and intricate system of marriage relation-
ships is based. Each tribe, as we have seen—and this
holds good for the whole of the continent —is divided
into two divisions or phratries, each of which is again
often subdivided into two and sometimes three or four
IN BATTLE ARRAY.


Husband.
Wife.
Children,
Bnrong
Banaka
Kaimera
Banaka
Burong
Paljeri
Kaimera
Paljeri
Burong
Paljeri
Kaimera
Banaka
Husband.
Wife.
Children.
Banaka
Kaimera
Paljeri
Kaimera
Banaka
Burong
Burong
Paljeri
Kaimera
Paljeri
Burong
Banaka
classes or groups, which are in turn broken up into
families. The whole fabric of the social organization
and marriage relationships depends on the two phratries
of the tribe, which constitute two exogamous inter-
marrying sections. Where the phratries consist of two
groups intermarriage between groups of the same
phratry is forbidden, but where there are three or four
groups in a phratry it is permitted among certain of them.
It will thus be seen that the question of marriage, which
is sufficiently intricate in the simplest form of tribal
organization, becomes exceedingly complex and difficult
to unravel when the classes or groups are more than
two in number. Sir George Grey, as the result of his
investigations in 1839, enunciated the following axioms:
— (a) That a man and his wife could not belong to the
same clan; (h) that the children take the clan or family
name of the mother. He did not, however, attempt
to solve the puzzle of matrimonial relationships
beyond that point. The credit of a full solution rests
with Messrs. Howitt and Fison, who conducted exhaus-
tive inquiries among some tribes in the Eastern States.
Subsequent observers in various parts have confirmed
their conclusions as far as the question of marriage is
concerned, but have made it apparent that descent may
be on the paternal as well as on the maternal side, and
that in some cases, as in the north-west tribes, the
children belong to a different clan than either parent.
These differences, the result of more or less local
modifications of the general system, affect the whole
system of relationship in succeeding generations.
Western Australia seems to be split into two divisions.
South of the 30th parallel of latitude descent follows,
with some uniformity, the maternal line, while north
of that parallel descent is reckoned from the paternal
side, but the children are, at the same time, members
of a different clan.
Our knowledge of the relationships of the northern
tribes is derived almost wholly from the investigations
of Sir John Forrest in 1878 and of Mr. A. Brown, of
the Cambridge ethnological expedition, who is at pre-
sent engaged in making inquiries. Both are agreed
that the tribes are divided into two phratries of two
clans each, making four clans in all, which are named
Burong, Banaka, Kaimera, and Paljeri. Sir John con-
tributed in 1891 the result of his observations on the
tribes round Nickol Bay to the Australasian Association
for the Advancement of Science, and they may be tabu-
lated as under: —
The terms Burong, etc., signify the clans to which
the husband, wife, and child must respectively belong.
From this it follows that Burongs and Kaimeras and
Banakas and Paljeris of both sexes mix together as
fathers and children of one family, though they may
never have seen one another before. The same applies
to Burongs and Paljeris and Banakas and Kaimeras as
mothers and children of one family; but Burongs and
Banakas and Kaimeras and Paljeris of opposite sexes
are greatly restricted in their intercourse, because
marriage is possible between them. Mr. Brown, as
the result of his researches into the customs of the
Buduna and Buruna tribe, places the clans in different
order, which alters the whole series of marriages, though
the same conclusion as to the children being of a
different clan from their parents is reached. We quote
his opinions as published in The West Australian: —
“As a typical example of the tribes I have been
studying I may mention the Buduna and Buruna tribe
on the Lyndon and Yannarie Rivers. The marriage laws
of this tribe are the same as those to be found over a
great part of Australia. The tribe is divided into four
parts, of which the names are Banaka, Burong, Kaimera,
and Paljeri. The marriage laws are that a Banaka man
may marry only a Kaimera woman and a Kaimera man
may marry only a Banaka woman. The children of a
Banaka man and Kaimera woman are Paljeri, and the
children of a Kaimera man and his Banaka wife are
Burong. This can be illustrated by a diagram:
“In former times there was a strong feeling of dis-
approval against any man who broke these laws and
took women of the wrong class, sometimes leading to
the death of the offender. Nowadays native morality
is relaxed wherever the blacks have come much in con-
tact with civilization, and wrong marriages frequently
occur and do not meet with so much public disapproval.
“A good deal has been written about the peculiar
marriage laws of the Australian native and various
theories to explain the origin of the system of four
classes have been put forward. My work among the
natives of Western Australia has satisfied me of the
falsity of a theory that I was formerly inclined to adopt.
At the same time it has enabled me to form a more
satisfactory theory for myself. Briefly, that theory is
that the marriage laws of the Australian tribes, with
the peculiar system of four intermarrying classes I have
just described, are due to an extension of family ties to
include the whole tribe. An Australian native uses
the word 'father* to denote not only his own father,
but his father’s brothers and a number of other men,
some of whom may not be related to him at all. In the
same way he uses the one word ‘mother* to denote any
woman who is the wife of any of the men he calls father.


Husband.
Wife.
Children.
Ballaruk
Tondarup or
Tondarup or
Didarrnk
Didarrnk
Nagarnook
Tondarup or
Tondarup or
Didarrnk
Didarrnk
Tondarup
Ballaruk or
Ballaruk or
Nagarnook
Nagarnook
Didarrnk
Ballaruk or
Ballaruk or
Nagarnook
Nagarnook
All the actions of the native are regulated on the basis
of this organization. A man owes certain duties to
the man he calls ‘father’ and others of a different nature
to those men he calls ‘uncle’ (mother’s brother). The
whole tribe may thus be regarded as a huge family, so
that if we choose a single individual all the men of the
tribe are either his grandfathers, fathers, maternal
ancles, brothers, cousins (maternal uncle’s sons), sons,
nephews (sister’s sons), or grandchildren. The women
are, of course, similarly divided. As for all social pur-
poses, a man’s own sister is not distinguished from the
other women he calls sisters, and as he may not marry
his own sister, the native laws prohibit him from marry-
ing any of his tribal sisters.’ The same applies to his
mothers and daughters and aunts and nieces. His
choice of a wife is restricted to his tribal cousins
(maternal uncle’s daughters).
“This form of social organization, based on an
extension of the ties of kinship to include the whole
tribe, is found all over Australia. In some parts, as
among the tribes I have been studying, it has been
systematized by means of the four class-names. Thus if a
man is Banaka his brothers and sisters are also Banaka,
his fathers and his sons are Paljeri, his mother’s
maternal uncles and his sister’s children are Burong,
and his cousins (the children of his maternal uncle) are
Kaimera. The law that he may marry only a tribal
cousin is, therefore, expressed in another way by saying
that a Banaka man may marry only a Kaimera woman.
Exactly the same form of social organization however,
may exist, and does exist in Western Australia without
the four class-names.”
We are not so much concerned here with the class-
names as with the general principle upon which the
marriage system is based. That, we find, is the same
in both cases, and brings the children into the father’s
section of the tribe, though not into his particular clan.
From the 30th parallel south to King George Sound,
and probably as far east as Eyre, the descent of the
children is on the maternal side. Mrs. Bates, who has
spent some years investigating these tribes, divides the
tribe into two phratries —Wordungmat and Manytch-
mat, and then further subdivides the Wordungmat into
Ballaruks and Nagarnooks and the Manytchmat into
Tondarups and Hidarruks. The marriage relations are
set out in the following table, from which it will be seen
that the choice is not quite so restricted, and, further,
that children belong to the same clan as the mother :
It is scarcely our province in this work to discuss
the various modifications and divergences that have
developed in different districts. The examples given
are broad types of the two classes of marriage relation-
ships, between which the whole social organization of
the Australian aborigines is divided. On the north of
the 30th parallel the one form holds, as a general rule,
and on the south of it the other. The main effect is
that in the former case the child follows the paternal
and in the latter the maternal line, with the con-
sequent necessary effect ujDon inheritance.
The tribe, from the point of view of the individual
native, is thus divided into two divisions —those whom
he can marry and those whom he regards as relations,
with whom marriage is prohibited. Among the
southern tribes of the State the former are Nooyung
and the latter are Ngunning. Curiously enough, this
idea prevails in tribal matters generally, and to an
individual member any particular object or thing is
either Nooyung or Ngunning. For example, as Mrs.
Bates points out, the red-gum is a male and belongs to
the Manytchmat, while the white-gum is a female and
of the Wordungmat division. Therefore to a Tondarup
the former would be Ngunning and the latter Nooyung.
As regards marriage itself, the female children are
almost invariably assigned at birth or soon after to
some particular man, who is usually one of the seniors.
These men, therefore, have generally a plurality of
wives, and the system results in a disparity between the
marriageable males and females, while it has the effect
of depriving the young men of wives until in turn they
become seniors. The result of this, as one may easily
see, is that seduction is a common crime, and is in-
directly the cause of many of the tribal disturbances.
A further cause of trouble is the custom by which, after
a man’s death, his wives are passed on to his brother.
The marriage ceremony itself is simple in the
extreme, and consists merely in the fact that the man
takes the woman to his hut. After that she becomes
his property, to sell, exchange, or mortgage as the
fancy takes him.
To the phratries and clan divisions of the tribe there
is added another series of classes due to the totems.
These are the totem kins —a different subdivision alto-
gether of the tribe —which are so closely interwoven in
the social fabric that they demand some attention.
Marriage relationships are not dependent on the
totems, but, on the other hand, whatever religious sense
the tribe may possess may be referred to them. Taking
the whole tribe as one family, the totem kins represent
the various branches of that family, a totem kin con-
sisting of those individuals who all- have the same totem.
A totem is some kind of animal, bird, fish, or plant,
or even some natural phenomenon as rain, sun, and so
on, between which and the person whose totem it is
there is deemed to be some peculiar religious or magical


relation. Among the southern tribes of Western Aus-
tralia, as among the tribes in the Eastern States, the
totem descends from mother to child, but among those
of the north and north-west it descends from father
to child. Among the eastern tribes, though a man
may kill and eat the totems of others he must not do
so as regards his own. This, however, does not hold
throughout the whole of Western Australia. In some
paiis a man may kill and eat his own totem, but in
these cases the connection between the kin and the totem
lies in its religious or magical significance. The
individuals of a particular totem are alone permitted
to perform those ceremonies without which the supply of
that particular object would fail. The kangaroo totem
men are responsible for a sufficient supply of that
animal, and in the same way the rain totem men can
alone prevent a drought.
The occurrence of the totem among the aborigines
of Australia was first noticed by Grey, who pointed
out that each family adopts as its crest or sign, which
it calls kohong , some animal or vegetable. At
the same time he drew attention to the fact that a
similar custom prevailed among some of the North
American Indians. The aboriginal term for “totem”
varies in different localities, and according to Mrs.
Bates the totem of a child among the southern tribes
is bestowed upon it by reason of some particular circum-
stance connected with or attendant upon its birth, and
does not follow any general law.
The curious aboriginal custom of the Too-ah —the
mutual avoidance of each other by mother-in-law and
son-in-law—seems to be fairly general throughout the
State. The husband is not allowed to speak to or
even look at his wife's mother. Neither may he enter
her house or eat food prepared by that lady; on her
part she must preserve the same strict attitude toward
her son-in-law. The men, as Mrs. Bates tells us, believe
that infringement of the law will cause them to become
bald, while the mother-in-law will go grey if she happens
to speak to her daughter's husband.
V. —SUPERSTITIONS, CUSTOMS, RITES,
AND CEREMONIES.
Measured by the standard of theological definition,
the natives (who, as Governor Hutt said, from the
cradle to grave feared neither God nor devil) can-
not be said to possess any religion; but if we take Dr.
Durckheim's contention that religion consists of
obligatory beliefs connected with obligatory acts, then
we must allow the Australian aborigines the possession
of something in the nature of a religions sense. They
have, however, no belief in a Supreme Being, either
as Creator or as One to whom they are responsible for
their acts. We do find such words as Piama and
Mamangurra used, but these signify the common
ancestor of the race, and do not, so far as is known,
relate to the Diety. Whatever religious sense they
possess must be looked ior in their superstitions and in
their various rites and ceremonies. Like those of the
Eastern States, the aborigines of Western Australia are
steeped in superstitions. Every evil or misfortune,
whether personal or communal (as epidemic, drought, or
want of food supply), they attribute to the action of
malevolent sjairits. These spirits have the forms of
men or animals, are human in their methods, but have
nothing sacred about them except their supernatural
powers. Their functions are exercised by sorcery and
magic, and their effects are overcome by the same means.
Some of these spirits are considered to be coeval with the
tribe itself, while others are looked upon as the spirits of
departed enemies. The only conception of a good spirit
is that of some tribal ancestor who may endeavour to
help them by causing supplies of food to be plentiful.
The native sorcerers or boolyas are always objects
of mysterious dread, and are believed to have the power
of becoming invisible to all except other boolyas, and
to be able to transport themselves through the air.
Sickness and disease are the result of their hostility to
a native, and can be cured only by disenchantment on
the part of another boolya. Death is due to their evil
influence. In the case of murder it is avenged on the
murderer or some near relative; in the case of accident
or disease upon some connection of the boolyas, who are
deemed responsible for the occurrence. Another evil
spirit is the Waugul of the south or Kajoorda of the
north, a sort of fresh-water serpent, which is endowed
with power to consume natives. It generally restricts it-
self to women, and its operation is shown by the fact that
the victim gradually pines away until death happens.
There is among the natives a belief in the survival
of the spirit after death. The native is supposed to
go to a country beyond the sea, and his spirit, which
has the power of returning until such time as the flesh
has fallen away from the bones, is called Kaanya or
Janga. Among the southern aborigines this country
is reached through the caves, where there stands a spirit
sentinel who requires of each an expressed wish to reach
that abode, failing which he cannot pass. In the north
the country is situated among the islands off the coast.
Various places called Winytch exist in the southern dis-
tricts which are held sacred to Kaanya or Janga, and
near which a native positively declines to go. To the
wandering at large of these spirits is due the intense fear
of travelling at night and the dislike of even leaving the
camp-fire for wood or water. The south-western natives
have also a deep respect for pieces of crystal, which they
call teyl. These are held by the sorcerers, and no un-
qualified native would touch them, while the greatest pre-
cautions are taken to prevent the women seeing them.
Among the most interesting of the aboriginal super-
stitious ceremonies are those connected with death and


burial. Variations of these exist in different parts, but
the following may be taken as typical:
“At the time of death professional female mourners
are introduced, and the women relatives and friends of
the deceased exhibit their grief by gashing the flesh on
their cheeks and forehead and covering their heads and
breasts with a kind of white pipeclay; while the men
put powdered charcoal on their foreheads. A curious
custom, somewhat similar to that prevalent at the pre-
sent time among the Bedouins, existed when the
deceased’s hut was torn up immediately after his death.
The funeral obsequies are performed to the accompani-
ment of dirges and lamentations. A shallow grave,
about 4 ft. by 3 ft., having been dug a bed of leaves
is placed at the bottom and the body is lowered, its
general position being a doubled-up one, with the knees
bent up to the breast and the arms crossed, the face
being turned toward the east. Those operations are
presided over
by a boolya or
native sor-
cerer, whose
duty, in addi-
tion to the
general super-
intendence of
the work, is
to ascertain
what particu-
] a r spirit,
boolya, or
family is re-
sponsible for
his clansman’s
death, and to
see that the
grave lies due
east and west.
Earth and
boughs are then placed on the body and the deceased s
weapons on top of them. A heap of bushes or mound is
generally placed over all, and a fire lighted to attract and
keep the evil spirit that is responsible for the death, when
it returns to the grave; for in case of its finding no fire
it is thought that it will probably go to the next camp
and do further mischief. This spirit is supposed to take the
form of a small brown lizard called Bilya Backan,’ but
sometimes another monster called the 'Waugul/ which
is supposed to reside in fresh-water lakes, is blamed.
One of the most important periods of a native’s life
is that when he is admitted to the manhood of the tribe.
Before admission he is required to pass through certain
initiation ceremonies. These, which take some time
to perform, vary considerably in different parts of the
State, but agree with one form or another of the initia
tion rites performed among the tribes of the Eastern
States. They have been so completely described in
various scientific memoirs that there is no necessity to
set them out at any length. The variations may
roughly be divided into three classes. From Kimberley
down to below the Be Grey River in the north we find
that both circumcision and sub-incision are essential
features of the ceremony, though the latter is not com-
pulsory in every tribe throughout that region. South-
ward from the De Grey there is a strip of coastal coun-
try about 40 miles wide running round to Cape Arid
where neither practice is in vogue, but is replaced by
piercing the septum of the nose. Over the remainder
of the State we find circumcision generally practised.
The circumcised tribes touch the coast at the De
Grey, and again at Eyre Sandpatch, but not at any
point between, though at Geraldton they are within
20 miles. Among the tribes near the head of the Green-
ough River, where both circumcision and sub-incision
are practised,
it is said that
when a youth
leaves the
camp for initi-
ation he bids
his sisters a
formal fare-
well, as on
his return he
must neither
speak to nor
look at them.
There is tra-
ditional evi-
dence that the
practice of cir
cumcision has
not long been
abandoned
along the
north-west coast south of the De Grey. At Roebourne it
has been superseded by tying a ligature tightly round the
arm at initiation, and it is stated that if this is retained
for any length of time the arm withers and becomes use-
less. While on this question it may be of some interest
to notice that there are many tribal customs in addition
to circumcision that are remarkably similar to those
mentioned in the Bible as observed by the Jews. Sir
George Grey repeatedly drew attention to this fact, and
Mrs. Bates mentions no less than fourteen customs which
seem to be common to both races.
The aboriginal practice of knocking out a tooth
upon initiation is also subject to variation over areas
almost coincident with those mentioned above. In the
north we find that two teeth are extracted, along the
coast the practice is not found at all, while in the
interior one only is knocked out.
GROUP OD NATIVES MOOLA BULLA GOV ABORINGNAL STATION.


The girls are not required to go through any initia-
tion ceremony similar to that prevailing in certain parts
of the coast, but on reaching the age of womanhood, or
upon being allotted to a husband, every woman carries
a thick stick or wanna as a badge, and which is also
incidentally used as a weapon of defence and an imple-
ment for digging roots.
As may readily be understood, polygamy is a usual
custom among the aborigines, and until the advent of
the white man infanticide was extremely common. In the
case of the mother’s death in giving birth to a child the
baby was almost invariably buried alive with its mother.
With regard to food customs, all native boys and
girls are forbidden certain foods until they reach man-
hood and womanhood, and all natives are forbidden to
eat the animal or plant representing their particular
totems on the occasion of a death in the family. If, for
example, a person’s totem was the kangaroo he would
refrain from eating the male animal in case of a death
on the male side of the house, and the female when any
of the womenfolk died. Scarring the body is also a com-
mon custom throughout the State, restricted to the breast
in some cases, in others involving the back and arms as
well. So far as can be ascertained the practice is merely
ornamental and has no ceremonial or symbolic meaning.
One of the chief ceremonial observances is the cor-
roboree, which is perhaps the most distinctive of Austra-
lian aboriginal customs, though to a certain degree it
resembles similar customs of the Polynesians. It is in
the main a war dance, but with various modifications is
used to celebrate other important events. A very usual
method of performing it is for one native to stand in the
centre of a half-circle of painted and decorated savages,
who dance in front of him with wild gesticulations and
cries, while he exhibits different pantomimic gestures ex-
pressive of certain events such as hunting kangaroos or
emus, and occasionally chants a descriptive song. As a
rule, the corroborees, which may extend over several
nights, are performed by the men, while the women sit
round the outside of the semicircle and form the
audience, often, however, joining in the chants. The
singing is usually a monotonous drone which cannot by
any stretch of the imagination be regarded as melodious.
In some parts, as at Roebourne, it is said that the
women sometimes have a corroboree of their own after
the men have concluded their ceremony. When poison
corroborees are held —that is, when the spears are
poisoned —the result is generally death for some parti-
cular member of the tribe, or the corroboree is the pre-
lude to a murderous attack upon tribal enemies.
VI.—ARTS AND MANUFACTURES.
When we take into consideration the low state of
intelligence of the Australian aboriginal in his natural
condition we can scarcely expect to find much evidence of
either art or manufacture. Some rudimentary know-
ledge of them may, however, be found in their attempts
at personal adornment, particularly on the occasion of
tribal ceremonies, in the preparation and ornamentation
of their weapons and in the rude rock-drawings and
paintings that are here and there to be found. Personal
adornment is usually crude and repulsive; the hair is
arranged with feathers from the emu or other
bird, and sometimes with shavings cut or scraped
from a billet of wood, while their bodies are
marked with daubs of red ochre and pipeclay,
without any pretence at design beyond follow-
ing the lines of the ribs and other parts of the body.
Some attempt at manufacture is shown in the plaited
grass rope which they use as loin-cloths. Their dwell-
ings give no idea of either design or permanency, being
merely shelters from the wind erected by placing boughs
against a support in the crudest possible manner. The
use of colour is also seen in the decoration of their
weapons. A certain amount of skill is shown in the
manufacture of these articles, which are made of stone
or wood and scored with lines or other simple devices
into which pigments of various colours are rubbed.
The most remarkable attempts at art are shown in
the rock-drawings and paintings which have been dis-
covered in various parts of the continent, and which
have been used as an argument in favour of a higher
stage of civilized development on the part of those natives
in whose territory they are found. In Western Aus-
tralia they are confined chiefly to the northern districts,
though examples have been seen at other places. The
first were those discovered by Ensign Dale in 1830 while
exploring the York district. On the wall of a sand-
stone cave he found a rudely-carved representation of the
sun, “a circular figure some 18 in. in diameter, emitting
rays from its left side.” Close by were impressions of
an arm and several hands. The most important dis-
coveries were those made by Sir George Grey in the
valley of the Glenelg, about 60 miles from the coast.
At the entrance to the first cave examined a “most
extraordinarily large figure” was seen peering down
upon him, and on the walls and roof of the interior
were paintings of a man and several women. The
rock face was painted black so as to throw the red and
white colour of the drawings into greater prominence.
Hands, heads, an ellipse, and other objects were sub-
sequently found, perhaps the most remarkable being
the profile of a human face and head cut in a sand-
stone rock, a carving which displayed undoubted signs
of antiquity. The colours used in the paintings were
red, yellow, blue, black, and white. Similar drawings
were found by Mr. F. S. Brockman when in charge of
an exploring expedition in the Kimberley district in
1901. These have been described by Dr. F. M. House,
who accompanied the expedition as naturalist:
“The most interesting thing connected with these
natives, or rather with a section of them, is the custom


they have of making drawings on suitable faces of rock.
The first specimen of these which we met with was near
Camp F.B. 25, and consisted of a row of figures. The
place was one which had been used evidently for a great
number of years for depositing the bones of the dead.
The figures are clothed and all in a similar style of
garment, with what appears like a necktie just below
the throat. Curiously this same style of figure,
similarly dressed, occurred wherever paintings of any
extent were found. In all there is an absence of the
mouth, and what appears to be a halo round the head.
These figures agree in these particulars with those found
by Grey on the Glenelg in 1837. The colours
used are red, yellow, black, and white, the black being
the snake. The origin of these figures affords an in-
teresting field for speculation and investigation. That
they date back before the advent of the first known
white men we know from the discoveries of Grey, but
evidently they must have seen men with clothes at an
earlier date, possibly shipwrecked mariners or Malays
who used to come across to the coast to get beche-de-mer.
it is probable that they copied their first drawings from
some done by white men, and the result being pleasing
to them the art was handed on; that they should adhere
so closely to one design shows either a great lack of
originality or that they attach great importance to that
particular figure. From the extent of the area over which
these drawings occur I should imagine they are not pecu-
charcoal and the other colours argillaceous earth, speci-
mens of which we found carefully wrapped up in paper-
bark parcels in most of the camps which had been
vacated hurriedly owing to our approach. The draw-
ings are finished with greater care and attention to detail
than one would expect to find in such a primitive race,
and they apparently value them considerably, choosing
places, as far as possible, where they will not be injured
by the weather. In all the more elaborate drawings
the colours appeared to have been mixed simply with
water, and could be smudged by rubbing with the finger ;
but in one or two places on the Glenelg I saw smaller
drawings and marks in red which were made with some
other pigment, and were not affected even by wet. In
the other drawings the snakes appear to be devouring
human beings, and in one drawing eggs are shown inside
liar to one tribe. We found none sojjth of the Charnley
River, and how far north they extend I do not know/'
Mr. Brockman points out that -these drawings are
to be found on almost every smooth surface of sand-
stone rock throughout the western portion of the Kim-
berleys lying south of Admiralty Gulf. The existence
of these artistic efforts has excited considerable interest
among ethnologists, and by many they are deemed to be
evidence that in some remote the northern portion
of this State was peopled by a race much higher in the
scale of civilization than that which now exists.
VII. MISSIONS AND OTHER METHODS
FOR IMPROVEMENT.
The Western Australian aborigines, like those of
the other divisions of the continent, are without doubt


rapidly decreasing in numbers, and their extinction is
only a matter of time. This result invariably follows
the encroachment of civilized peoples upon the territory
of the lower races of mankind, and this State shows no
indication of being an exception. From the settled
districts the natives have already almost entirely dis-
appeared, and while they still remain in some force in
the north-west, the growth of settlement is beginning to
make itself felt. Unfortunately the operation of
natural law is, as usual, being accelerated by the natives
themselves in the ease with which they accept drunken-
ness and other social vices of civilization, notwith-
standing the efforts of the Government to keep these evil
influences from them. But so long as they are still
among us we have certainly a duty to perform toward
them, and although it is popularly said that “gin and the
Bible are the greatest civilizing agencies of the British,
theie is no doubt that in the colonization of Australia
the protection and care of the aborigines has never been
lost sight of by the Home authorities, a policy that has
been adopted and extended by the colonies themselves.
Ever since the foundation of the State in 1829 there
have been continual endeavours on the part of both the
authorities and public and private benefactors to
improve the material as well as the moral and spiritual
welfare of the native population. That in the latter
direction only a very modified form of success has been
achieved is due to the low intellectual state of the natives
themselves, which provides but poor foundations upon
which to build.
Government action has necessarily been limited to
the material side of native life in the way of preventing
tribal and other disturbances, of prohibiting the sale or
gut of intoxicating liquors, of preventing miscegena-
tion and other social evils where possible, of affording
relief and comfort where required, and of securing
justice and fair treatment for the native in his dealings
with the whites. As far back as 1830 Protectors of
Aborigines were appointed whose special duty it was to
take care that the aborigines did not lack food and were
not subjected to injustice and indignity at the hands of
those who had seized their territory, a fact' that speaks
for the British sense of right, especially when we
remember that the little colony had so much to fear
from the hordes of savages that infested the neighbour
hoo 1 of the settlement. In 1839 Governor Hutt drew
the attention of the Home Government to the injustice
of punishing the. aborigines according to the canons of
civilized law, and recommended that legislation of a
special character be passed to control them.
In 1871 the Legislative Council reported that it was
desirable to appropriate grants of land to aboriginals. In
1875 an Act was passed giving powers to the principals of
native industrial institutions to act as trustees to orphan
native children, and in 1877 a reserve of 50,000 acres
was made in the Murchison Valiev for the benefit of the
aboriginals, as well as 100,000 acres on the Upper Gas
coyne. The latter, however, was subsequently (1897
withdrawn and 100,000 acres on the Forrest River,
Kimberley, substituted for it. In 1886 an Act was
passed authorizing the establishment ox a Board for tile
better protection of the aborigines and the manage-
ment of aboriginal affairs, and to amend the law relat-
ing to contracts with and other matters affecting
aboriginal servants.
In 1897 a Bill, which went still farther, was passed
by both Houses of the Legislature. By this enactment
the control of the aborigines was transferred from the
irresponsible Board to a sub-department of the State,
under the control of a responsible Minister of the Crown,
provision being made for the appropriation of a sum of
<£5,000 per annum for the use of the department. The
duties of the department were to apportion the moneys
above mentioned, so as to distribute blankets and other
relief, to provide for the custody of the children of
aboriginals, to furnish medical assistance and comforts
to sick and infirm natives, to manage the reserves, and
to exercise a general supervision and care over the native
population of the State.
This sum was increased to <£lo,ooo in 1906, and has
since been still further added to by annual votes, until
in 1910 the total amount expended by the Government
on behalf of the aborigines amounted to <£25,500. In
the same year three small stations near Hall Creek were
purchased by the State and set apart as the first native
settlement. The area of this settlement is about 860,000
acres, and it contains over 11,000 cattle and horses. It
is estimated that some 600 natives will come within its
influence, and it is hoped that its establishment will
diminish, if not stop, the crime of cattle-stealing.
One of the most difficult questions concerning the
natives, more especially those in the north, which the
authorities have to face is that of contagious diseases.
These diseases are so prevalent that the Government has
recently been compelled to give serious consideration to
the matter. In order to diminish the effects of, and
where possible cure those suffering from, such diseases
Lock hospitals have been erected on Bernier and Dorre
Islands, to which infected natives are taken for treat-
ment. The value of these institutions may be gauged from
the concluding paragraph of the Medical Superinten-
dent’s report for 1910:—“The work among the men has
been very encouraging, and when the new hospitals are
available the prospects of a fair percentage of good
results are assured. When it is realized that almost
every case sent home cured has been rescued from certain
death the State may be congratulated on this practical
method of recognizing its responsibility for the welfare
of these dispossessed heirs of the soil.”
In addition to the work carried on directly by the
department there are missions established by various
ecclesiastical bodies. All of these, which are noticed


below, are concerned mainly with the educational and
spiritual welfare of the natives, and they receive State
support in the shape of subsidies from the Government.
New Norcia Aborigines’ Station.
As early as 1846 a Benedictine Mission was com-
menced, at what is now called New Norcia, by a Spanish
Monk, the Rev. Father Dom Rosendo Salvado, 0.5.8.,
afterwards consecrated Bishop of Port Victoria, North
Australia; and, though labouring at first under what
then appeared almost insuperable difficulties, his efforts
have been long recognized as having ultimately culmin-
ated in an unqualified success. The Mission was estab-
lished as an Abbey Nullius and a Prefecture Apostolic
by His Holiness Pope Pius IX. on March 12, 1867.
Since the lamented death (in 1900) of Bishop Salvado,
after a life of self-sacrifice wholly devoted to the interest
and benefit of the aborigines, the Mission has been under
the charge, as
Superior, of
the Right
Rev. Fulgen-
tius Torres,
O.S . B . The
following in-
formation in
co n nection
with the Mis-
sion, kindly
furnished for
the Year-Book
by Father
Torres, is
given in his
own words:
“The object
of the Mis-
sion has ever
been to incul-
cate the precepts of Christianity and confer the advantages
of civilization on the aborigines of Western Australia.
Since its foundation on the Victoria Plains a consider-
able number of wild natives from various districts of the
State have been civilized, in the full sense of the word,
and have received instruction in the tenets of the
Roman Catholic religion. There are at present residing
at New Norcia and its out-stations, Marah and Wyening,
about 200 aborigines and half-caste natives, who are all
well lodged, clothed, educated, and supplied with every
necessary by this charitable institution, wnile a numbei
of the males are, in return for their manual labour,
receiving weekly or monthly wages from the manager of
the Mission.
“The Mission comprises cruciform church, dedicated
to the Holy Trinity, built of stone, 160 ft. long, a large
monastery, and over fifty other buildings of burnt bricks
and stone, including a steam flourmill and factories,
where all the clothing, boots, shoes, etc., used at the
Mission and its outlying stations are made by the
brothers and natives. There are also twenty-two cot-
tages for the use of the married aborigines and half-
castes, several large dwelling-houses, orphanages, and
two separate schools for native boys and girls, who, when
they are of age, are mutually engaged according to
their own freewill or choice, and embrace the Christian
marriage state just like other perhaps more highly-
civilized persons. After marriage they either settle in
the Mission village or voluntarily leave it at any time
to seek employment elsewhere among the settlers or
farmers throughout the State.”
In 1905 a Convent was erected for the full-blooded
and half-caste native girls, which is under the control
of the Sisters of St. Teresa. Over 1,500 acres of land have
been cleared about the Mission station, and nearly 1,000 of
them are un-
der yearly cul-
tivation. At
this Mission,
which is per-
haps the most
important of
the aboriginal
Missions in
the State, and
certainly one
of the most
s u ccessful,
there are
about 170 re-
ceiving in-
struction and
relief. An
offshoot from
New Norcia,
known as the
Drysdale River Mission,
was founded on the Drysdale River in 1908 by the
Right Rev. Bishop Torres. Being situated in a region
remote from any European settlement, and surrounded
by the treacherous and warlike tribes of the Kimberleys,
most of the time since its establishment has been
occupied in building strong and secure premises and
palisades. Tn 1910 the total strength of the Mission
consisted of three priests, one lay brother, six natives,
and eleven half-caste boys, but there is little doubt that
in the course of time it will be equally as successful as
the parent Mission. This venture does not receive any
direct subsidy from the Government.
Swan Native and Half-caste Mission.
In this Mission the Church of England makes provi-
sion for the education and training for employment of
BUSH NATIVES,FROG HOLLOW.


native and half-caste children. On June 30, 1910, the
number of inmates was thirty-seven, of whom eighteen
were boys and nineteen girls. "When the boys reach
seven years of age/’ says the manager, "they are usually
transferred to the Swan Orphanage, a neighbouring
I o' o o
institution of the Church, where the dark-skinned in-
mates have exactly the same status as their more lightly-
coloured companions. The control of the Mission is in
the hands of the Orphanage Committee, the local man
ager being the clergyman of the parish, while there are
a matron and a teacher resident at the Mission. The
girls do the work of the place, including the gardening
and dairying, and frequently gain excellent reports from
their mistresses when they go out to service. Old girls,
several of whom are married, are continually to be seen
at the Mission, which they consider they are privileged
to regard as their home. Quite recently the Mission
buildings were extensively repaired and enlarged; and
at present there is ample accommodation for further
inmates; but it is not always possible to induce native
women to consign their little ones to the care of others,
however much it may be to the advantage of them-
selves as well as of the children. The Church is making
an effort to induce settlers in the Nor’-West who have
the control of young half-caste children to commit them
to our care, and the zeal of one of our workers there
has already met with success, which it is hoped will
continue.”
BeagTe Bay Mission.
This mission for the benefit of the aborigines of the
Kimberley district was founded in 1890 by the
Right Rev. Dr. Gibney, the late Roman Catholic
Bishop of Perth. It was begun by the monks of La
Trappe, who did a large amount of arduous and useful
pioneering work. In 1900 they were recalled to Europe
and their place was taken by the Pallottines, who are
at present conducting the Mission. Under the Pallot-
tines the area of cultivation has been much extended,
and besides the ordinary vegetables, cocoanuts, dates,
pawpaws, bananas, and dhurra are grown with satis-
factory success. Rice, taro, and the pineapple are being
experimented with. The originally small herd of cattle
has increased considerably, and pigs have been intro-
duced. In addition, a new monastery and further
accommodation for the natives have been erected, and
two luggers, good sea boats, have been built of native
timbers.
The present staff consists of four Fathers, eight
Brothers of the Pious Society of Missions (Pallottine),
and six Sisters of the Order of St. John of God. The
most important work of the Mission is that of educat-
ing and training the children, of whom there are over a
hundred in number, while some sixty native men and
women are employed in various callings in and round the
establishment.
Sunday Island Mission.
In the early part of the year 1897, with the assist-
ance of a grant from the Aborigines’ Protection Board,
a Mission was commenced, under the auspices of the
Anglican Board of Missions, by four lay members of the
Anglican Church —Messrs. Hale, Ormerod, Lennox, and
Gatheroole. This Mission was devoted to the interests
of the natives of East Kimberley, and is situated at
Camera Pool, on the Forrest River, which flows into
Cambridge Gulf. Owing, however, to the extreme
hostility of the natives, who wounded and nearly
succeeded in killing the leader, the Mission had to be
temporarily abandoned. Another Mission has since
been started by Mr. Hadley, associated with Mr.
Ormerod, at Sunday Island. It is now under the entire
control of Mr. Hadley, who carried it on at his own
expense until June, 1903, when a grant of £lOO per
annum was made to him in recognition of his untiring
endeavours and considerable success. Since then the
amount has been still further supplemented with the
increasing usefulness of the work, and for 1910
amounted to over £4OO. At this Mission there are
from 112 to 115 permanent inmates, practically all of
whom are full-blooded natives.
Salvation Army Girls’ Home.
In addition to the splendid efforts of this religious
organization in other directions, a home for aboriginal
girls has been established at Kalgoorlie, which contains
some seventeen inmates. Other missions for the care of
native children are the Ellensbrook Home and the Aus-
tralian Aborigines’ Mission, the latter a non-sectarian
institution supported by public subscription, aided by
a small subsidy from the Government. The most recent
movement on behalf of the aborigines is the
Walcott Inlet Mission,
now being established at Walcott Inlet by the Presby-
terian Church. The work is to be under the charge of
Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Wilson, who have gained large
experience among the aborigines of Queensland.
A careful consideration and review of the money
spent upon the aborigines in this State, and of the results
achieved by the self-denying labours of those—more
particularly the missionaries—engaged upon the work,
must force upon us the fact that Western Australia, at
any rate, is fully alive to her obligations toward the
original possessors of the land. Many, no doubt, are
of opinion that money and labour are both wasted.’ To
them we would commend the words of Cicero in one of
his epistles to Atticus:—'‘Do not,” he says, "obtain
your slaves from Britain, because they are so stupid and
utterly incapable of being taught that they are not fit
to form a part of the household of Atticus.”


History of Western Australia.
CHAPTER I.
DISCOVERY OF AND EARLY VOYAGES TO AUSTRALIA.
Notwithstanding the amount of research
into the documentary annals of the world's
history that has taken place during the past
quarter of a century it is still impossible to
assign any definite date to the discovery of Australia.
From earliest times there have been traditions,
probably engendered more by the spirit of prophecy
than by fact, of the existence of a Great South Land.
Aristotle, Strabo, and others have expressed the opinion
that there existed south of the Equator areas of land at
least equal in extent to those above it. In the “Astro-
nomicon" of Manilius we find the lines —
. . Austrinus pars est hahitahilis oris ,
Sub pedibusque jacet nostris.”
These statements, however, were merely essays in the
region of probabilities, and had not any known basis
of fact. But to come down to a later period, it is possible
to show from early manuscript maps and other sources
that this belief in a southern continent was entertained
long before the discoveries of the Portuguese in the six-
teenth century. The Vicomte de Santarem, in his “Essai
sur I'histoire de la cosmographie et de la cartographic du
moyen age," gives a list of these maps, upon which are
to be found vague markings of an inhabited country
described as the “opposite earth," which could not be
reached owing to the torrid zone; and he points out that
“the cartographers of the Middle Ages have submitted
that as a reality which, even to the geographers of
antiquity, was merely a theory." Unfortunately, every
effort to discover manuscripts that would bear out the
assertions of these maps has so far been without success.
Marco Polo, in the thirteenth century, as the result of
his travels, certainly did advance the claims of the
Chinese to the discovery of a Great South Land, and
there is perhaps some justification for the statement, as
we know that for centuries prior to the European advent
that nation had established extensive trade relations
witn the islands of the East Indies. That the country
mentioned was Australia is, however, out of the ques-
tion. Marsden's explanation is probably the right one-
that it refers to a portion of Cambodia, the products
of which are gold, spices, and elephants.
“In the early engraved maps of the sixteenth
century, however/' says R. H. Major, 'we see the
effects of this description exhibited in a form calculated
to startle the inquirer respecting the early indications
of Australia. On these maps we find laid down an
extensive development of the great Terra Australis
Incognita trending northward to New Guinea, with
which on some of these maps it is made to be continuous,
while on others it is divided from it."
No doubt the conviction, resulting from these
rumours, strengthened by the success of Columbus and
fired by thoughts of the golden trophies of Cortes,
induced the hardy maritime adventurers of the age—
Portuguese, French, Dutch, English, and Spanish —to
scour the seas, hoping to prove the conviction true and
anxious to benefit by the boundless treasure that new
countries might possess."
In the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris there was
unearthed some years ago an old wooden globe on which
is inscribed the statement that the Terra Australis was
discovered in 1499. As the date ascribed to this globe
is 1535, it really fails as an instrument of proof, but
quite recently Mr. E. A. Petherick, the Commonwealth
Archivist, has announced that evidence is forthcoming
to prove that Amerigo Vespucci must have touched some
part of Australia during his return voyage to Cadiz
after the discovery of Brazil in 1499. So far the
complete case in favour of that contention has not been
presented, so that it is not possible to speak with any
decision, but it certainly would record a remarkable
achievement for those far-off days if, within sixteen
months in a small sailing vessel, Vespucci could have
sailed from Spain to Brazil, along the coast from Cape
St. Roque to the Amazon, then back again round Cape
Horn and across the Pacific Ocean to Australia, thence
proceeding by way of the Cape of Good Hope back to
Cadiz —a voyage of close upon 30,000 miles!
Early in the sixteenth century we begin to find
evidences of a more solid character. By this time the
Portuguese and other navigators had found a way by sea
round the Cape of Good Hope to the East Indies, and
extensive trade relations were being developed. This


meant the continual passage of ships to and fro, and it
is not unlikely that the prevailing winds bore many
ships toward the Australian coast when endeavouring
to make Java or other islands of the East.
The first actual claim to the discovery of Australia
was made by the French on behalf of Paulmier de Gon-
neville, who sailed from Honfleur in 1503 bound for the
South Seas. After passing the Cape he met with very
rough weather, and was carried in a north-easterly
direction by the storm to a great country to which he
gave the name of Southern India. Here he remained
some six months, during which he was hospitably
treated by the natives, and finally returned to France,
taking with him one of the native princes. Having been
plundered of everything during his voyage home by an
English corsair, his claim rests upon a declaration made
by him to the French Admiralty in 1505, which was
signed by the principal officers of the ship. The Presi-
dent de Presses in 1756, after examining the account
of De Gonneville, considered that the land reached was
somewhere south of the Moluccas, and was in fact the
first authentic discovery of the Terra Australis. An
impartial investigation of the matter does not bear out
this contention. De Gonneville refers to his friendly
intercourse with the natives —a fact in itself sufficient
in the eyes of anyone acquainted with Australia to
throw great suspicion on his discovery, as the natives of
our north-west coast, so far from being friendly, have a
thoroughly well-deserved reputation for cruelty and
treachery. We also know from De Gonneville's state-
ment that he was driven into calm latitudes, and was
so near the land that he was directed to it by the flight
of birds. Further, his men rebelled and refused to
proceed on their journey to the East. This latter
would scarcely have happened had they been so
near their destination as the north coast of Australia,
so that all things considered it is much more likely that
the country reached by him was really Madagascar.
Following upon De Gonneville comes Magalhaens,
or Magellan, who, after vainly endeavouring to secure
Portuguese support to a voyage round the world, finally
sailed away in 1520 with a small Spanish fleet. When
approaching the East Indies after doubling Cape Horn
he describes having sighted a large continent to the
south of Java to which the name Magellanica was given.
A close examination of Magellan's description of that
coast, however, leads one to feel sure that it refers to
the northern coast of New Guinea, with the known
features of which it has much in common. The claim
of the Portuguese to the discovery cannot therefore be
allowed to rest upon the statement of this navigator.
A more reasonable argument may be advanced by that
nation. Considering the evidence of six Portuguese maps
of the sixteenth century there is every reason to believe
that the mystery surrounding the discovery of Australia
was set at rest between 1512 and 1542. Upon these
maps there is shown a large coastline to the south and
south-east of Java, separated from the island by a
narrow strait, and to which the name Java la Grande
(Great Java) is applied. It is permissible to suppose
that the prevailing winds and the ease of sailing conse-
quent upon taking advantage of them had carried the
Portuguese mariners within sight of Australia. That
they did not at the time make use of that discovery is
not hard to understand. They were busily engaged in
trading to the East, and had little or no opportunity
of turning their knowledge to account. They were,
however, anxious that no other nation should derive any
benefit, and so far was this idea carried that Humboldt
informs us that the Portuguese were forbidden upon pain
of death to export marine charts showing the course to
the East Indies. According to Sir William Temple the
Dutch also, when trading largely with the East and too
busily employed to open up the continent, were guilty
of the same fault.
In the maps mentioned some islands are shown
lying off the west coast, and in one map the name
Abrolhos is appended to these. They are said to have
been discovered by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1527 and
to have been given their appellation, which in Portuguese
signifies "keep your eyes open," by that voyager. The
aptness of the designation no one acquainted with the
treacherous nature of the coastline will doubt. The
importance of the statement, however, lies in the fact
that we have here what is probably the first discovery
of Western Australia.
At any rate, that parts of Australia were known to
the Portuguese during the first half of the sixteenth
century is practically certain, and Major, after con-
sidering the documents available, makes the following
deliberate statement:
"Our surmises, therefore, lead us to regard it as
highly probable that Australia was discovered by the
Portuguese between the years 1511 and 1529, and almost
to a demonstrable certainty that it was discovered before
the year 1542."
Further evidence conclusively proving that it was
known prior to what we may term authenticated accounts
may be found in Cornelis Wyfliet’s "Descriptions Ptole-
maicse Augmentum" published in 1598. It is there
stated that
"The Australis Terra, is the most modern of all
lands, and is separated from New Guinea by a narrow
strait. Its shores are hitherto but little known, since
after one voyage and another that route has been
deserted, and seldom is the country visited except when
sailors are driven there by storms. The Australis Terra
begins at 2° or 3° from the Equator, and is maintained
by some to be of so great an extent that if it were
thoroughly explored it would be regarded as a fifth part
of the world."


But the sixteenth century was allowed to pass
without any definite step to increase the knowledge of
the new country being taken. That there were cour-
ageous spirits imbued with a thirst for discovery, who
sought greater fame than the mere accumulation of
wealth, is not to be doubted, but there is no record that
Australia ever claimed their attention. The great
majority of the adventurers, however, whether Portu-
guese, Spanish, Dutch, French, or English, found more
than sufficient occupation in exploiting the treasures
of the Indies, and preferred rather to gather in the
riches that were certain than undertake the search for
toward the end of the century of any exploratory voy-
ages made by the Spanish in the Southern Seas.
Political embarrassments and a depleted treasury had
caused the Emperor to renounce his pretensions to the
Moluccas in 1529 in favour of the Portuguese for a
certain consideration in money, although in accordance
with the decree of Pope Alexander VI. he retained con-
trol over the islands to the East. In 1542 an attempt
was made by Spain to establish a colony in
the Philippines. Although this was not success-
ful, a further essay made some twenty years later
resulted in the foundation of a settlement at Zebu. It
SECTION OF DAUPHIN CHART, PRESENTED BY SIR JOSEPH ANNK TO THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
those which were vague and problematical. Those who
were not content with the mild excitement of profitable
trade found ample employment for their buccaneering
tendencies in looting one another.
Still, the spirit of discovery was not dead, and the
seventeenth centurv had barely opened when the tale
was once more taken up —this time by the Spanish.
From the time (1527) when Alvaro de Saavedra, dis-
patched from New Spain to the Moluccas, had touched
upon the coast of New Guinea there is no record until
F
is not inconceivable that this settlement brought about
in those regions further voyages of discovery, of which
there are no records remaining. Of one, however, we
have certain particulars, and mention of it is important,
as it indirectly became the means of definite information
concerning the new continent being secured. Alvaro
de Mendana sailed from Callao on a voyage of explora-
tion in 1567, during the course of which he discovered
the Solomon Islands. Nearly thirty years later (1595)
he left Peru with the intention of founding a colony on


these islands, but failed to accomplish his object, as
he was unable to again locate them. Associated with
him on this voyage as chief pilot was Fernandez de
Quiros, to whom much of the honour of Australia
becoming definitely known is clue, though he himself
never set foot upon it. Failing to locate the Solomon
Group, Mendana attempted to form a settlement on the
island of Santa Cruz, but the venture met with no
success and resulted in his death.
The discovery of Santa Cruz led De Quiros to think
that the much-discussed southern continent was at last
found, and he addressed two memorials to the Viceroy
of Peru in which the question is set forth with much
geographical detail, and which may be said to have
brought about a definite solution of the problem, though
he was not destined to demonstrate it by actual dis-
covery. Two centuries later (when advocating the same
cause as De Quiros) Dalrymple, speaking of that
navigator, says: —“The discovery of the southern con-
tinent, whenever and by whomsoever it may be com-
pletely effected, is in justice due to this immortal name.”
The Viceroy of Peru, while sympathizing with De
Quiros and favourably inclined toward his projects, felt
that it was beyond his power to afford the assistance
asked for, and advised him to address himself to the
monarch in person, for which purpose he armed the
navigator with letters of support. The appeal to Philip
111. was successful, and De Quiros returned to Peru
with the necessary authority to carry out his plans.
Two large vessels and a corvette were equipped for the
expedition, which left Callao at the end of 1605. The
second ship of the three was under the command of
Luis Vaez de Torres, whose name remains in the nomen-
clature of Australian waters. The object of the voyage
was to make a second attempt to found a colony at
Santa Cruz and then to proceed in search of the southern
continent.
After the discovery of various small islands Quiros
reached a land which he called Australia del Espiritu
Santo (really the New Hebrides), and which he con-
sidered to be part of the continent.
At this place, through unknown causes, the ships
became separated. Torres finding that Espiritu Santo
was an island continued his way westward, passing
southward of what is now known as the Louisiade
Archipelago, and proceeding thence south of New
Guinea through the passage that was in future to bear
his name —Torres Straits. In his description of the diffi-
culties encountered in this passage he refers to large
islands to the southward. These were without doubt
the hills of Cape York Peninsula, so that to Torres,
though he was unaware of the fact, we owe the first
definite mention of the north-east coast of the island
continent. De Quiros, after leaving or being separated
from Torres, set his course for Mexico, where he arrived
in October, 1606, and from that time until his death
in 1614 unsuccessfully urged upon the Spanish King
the great desirability of prosecuting further searches in
these unknown regions.
From this time we may safely say that the existence
of a southern continent was definitely known, though
its coastline was still undefined and unexplored. What
for centuries had been merely rumour and suggestion
was at last established fact, and though nearly two more
centuries were to pass before its area was accurately
determined and its boundaries charted, yet from the
end of the sixteenth century Australia was practically
endowed with a habitation as well as with a name.
Having discussed thus far the question of the dis-
covery of Australia as a whole, we may, with regard
to voyages taking place after the seventeenth century
had opened, reasonably confine ourselves to those which
are of interest in dealing with that portion of the con-
tinent the history of which is the subject of this VvOrk—
Western Australia.
Western Australia was —and indeed from its
geographical position must have been —the first part of
the continent to become known, lying as it does just off
what was then the main trade route to the East. No
evidence can be found of this statement better than a
study of the map showing the prevailing winds. We
notice that south of the Tropic of Capricorn the general
direction of the wind is westward, while just above the
tropic we meet the south-east trades and monsoonal
disturbances. Mariners but doubtfully acquainted with
the seas in which they were sailing would have a
tendency, after rounding the Cape of Good Hope, to go
east as far as possible before bearing northward to Java
and Timor, thus hoping to get the benefit of the wind
in both directions, and avoid if they could the area of
disturbance. This would apply particularly to the
Dutch, whose information of the route was first gained
by the study of navigation and not by its actual prac-
tice; and it explains' in great measure the freauenev o*
Dutch names on the west coast of Australia. It is more
than probable that the first knowledge of a new con-
tinent many of them had was when they felt it under
their keels.
It is curious to note how great a part the struggle
for the control of the East Indian trade played in the
gradual determination of the coastline of this side of the
continent. Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, English, and
French in turn endeavoured to command the commerce
and resources of these regions of marvellous wealth, and
from the discovery of the Abrolhos by Mcneses in 1527
we have the same procession of nationalities in the
progress of Australian discovery.
Early in the seventeenth century we find important
changes taking place in the political conditions of
Europe. The great naval strength of Spain and the


mighty power consequent upon it had made her in the
sixteenth century a successful rival of Portugal in the
eastern trade. With the new era, however, the glory
of Spain was rapidly to wane, and the nation so long
trodden under the Spanish heel was not only to become
free but to challenge both her naval and commercial
supremacy.
The long-striven-for and hardly-won independence
of the Netherlands had roused all the strength and
energy of the people, and the dogged determination that
had ended Spanish oppression found continued oppor-
tunity in the desire to lift Holland to a proud position
among the nations. The northern provinces were free,
but Spain had for the time regained control of the
southern, and had made her implacable hatred felt
by repeated acts
of cruelty, from
which many of
the inhabitants
sought relief in
flight. Among
these were a
number of Ant-
werp merchants
who had for
many years been
indirectly con-
nected with the
trade to the In-
dies. The opposi-
tion of these men
was strengthened
by two of the
most potent of
human passions—
the bitter hatred
of exiles and the
fanatic attach-
ment to religious
faith. They saw
that Spain could
best be crippled
by curtailing her overseas trade or by depriving her of it
altogether, and that in the result the southern provinces
might be freed and the Protestant faith strengthened.
This, at first the idea of a few, gained general
support when the Spaniards forbade Dutch traffic with
Spain, which even during the wars had never altogether
ceased. Geography, hydrography, and navigation
became subjects of earnest study, and schools were
formed with the express purpose of endeavouring to find
a way to India and other Spanish possessions. The
outcome of this movement was the foundation in 1602
of the Dutch East India Company, under whose flag
many important voyages and discoveries were to be made.
f 2
Of the Dutch voyages prior to this time no certain
information is available. The English Ambassador at
the Hague in the time of Charles 11., Sir William
Temple, gave it as his opinion that “a southern con-
tinent has long since been found out,” which he said
was “as long as Java and is marked on the maps by
the name of New Holland, but to what extent the land
extends, either to the south, the east, or the west, we
do not know.” To the same authority we are indebted
for the declaration that the Dutch East India Company
“have long since forbidden, and under the greatest
penalties, any further attempts at discovering that con-
tinent, having already more trade than they can turn
to account, and fearing some more populous nation of
Europe might make great establishments of trade in
some of these un-
known regions,
which might ruin
or impair what
they have already
in the Indies.”
This statement
has been vigor-
ously denied by
the Dutch, but
the fact remains
that of the voy-
ages made by
the Company
little was known
until the pub-
lication of the in-
structions issued
by the Governor-
General of Bata-
via to Tasman on
his second voy-
age in 1644. This
curious docu-
ment was found
by Sir Joseph
Banks in 1770
when turning over the old archives at Batavia, and was
published by Sir Alexander Dalrymple in his “Collections
Concerning Papua.” From it we learn that in 1606 the
“Duyfhen” made the first authenticated discovery of
that great land which at the instance of the famous
navigator, Matthew Flinders, is now designated Aus-
tralia. The captain of this vessel, whose name is not
known, prepared a careful chart of the voyage, showing
that he sailed along the coast of New Guinea, then went
southward along the coast of Cape York Peninsula to
Cape Keer-Weer (“Turn again”), but was prevented
from landing even for water owing to the cruel and
treacherous nature of the savages, who murdered some
SECTION OF MAP FROM JOMARD'S ATLAS IN THE VRITISH MUSEUM, DATED 1546


of the crew. The results of Torres’ voyage not being
known at the time, the captain considered that the
whole coast traversed was a portion of New Guinea.
The second voyage, according to the “Book of
Despatches,” was that made in a yacht from Batavia
by order of the Fiscal d’Edel in 1617. Of this, however,
nothing certain is known, as the journals and remarks
could not be found.
No further attempts at discovery were made from
Batavia until 1623, but in the meantime outward-bound
ships touched at various portions of the coast in 1616.
1618, 1619, and 1622. Of these voyages but little
information is now available. The most important of
them all, from a romantic as well as from an historic
point of view, is that of Dirk ITartog in 1616, com-
manding the ship “Eendraght,” of some 360 tons burden.
To this navigator we owe the discovery of Dirk ITartog
Island, Doore Island (named after the chief pilot), and
the roads leading to Shark Bay, so named at a later
period by Dampier. The coast of the mainland adjacent
to these islands was also named Eendraght Land, after
the vessel. On the north end of the island bearing his
name ITartog left a tin-plate as witness to his
visit. This was nailed to a post and remained in
position for nearly a century before being again seen by
the eye of civilized man. It bore the following
inscription :
“On the 25th of October, 1616, arrived here the
ship ‘Eendraght,’ of Amsterdam: The first merchant,
Gilles Mibais van Luyck; captain, Dirk ITartog, of
Amsterdam; the 27th ditto set sail for Bantam; under
merchant, Jan Steyn ; upper steersman, Pieter Dockes,
from Bil; a.d. 1616.”
To continue the history of this plate it may be said
that when Van Vlaming, captain of the “Geelvinck” (of
whose voyage it will be necessary to speak later), visited
the island in 1697 —the first visit, so far as we know,
after the erection of the plate —he took the original
plate away to Batavia, replacing it by a now one, on
which the old inscription was copied and the following
new one added :
“On the 4th of February, 1697, arrived here the
ship ‘Geelvinck,’ of Amsterdam : Captain commandant,
Wilhelm van Vlaming, of Vlielandt; assistant, Jan van
Bremen, of Copenhagen; first pilot, Micheel Bloem van
Estight, of Bremen; the hooker ‘Myptangh’: Captain,
Gerrit Collaert, of Amsterdam; assistant, Theodorus
Heermans, of the same place; first pilot, Gerrit Gerritz,
of Bremen; then the galliot ‘Weseltje’: Commander,
Cornelius van Vlaming, of Vlielandt; pilot, Coert Ger-
ritz, of Bremen. Sailed from here with our fleet on
the 12th to explore the South Land and afterwards
bound for Batavia.”
Still another century later —in 1801 —during the
French voyage of discovery made by Baudin in the
“Geographe” and “Naturalist©,” Van Vlamings plate
was seen. The two vessels had become separated, and
Captain llamclin, of the “Naturaliste,” sent three men
on to Dirk ITartog Island for the purpose of signalling
the other ship. The boatswain on his return from the
island brought back the tin-plate, which he had found
on the north point half buried in sand and close to an
oaken post to which originally it seemed to have been
attached. Hamelin copied the inscription and then
replaced it in position on a new post. He also placed
on the north-east of the island a new plate giving the
name of his ship and the date of arrival. The old plate
remained for a while longer, but was not to be found
when King made a careful search for it in 1822. It
afterwards transpired that Freycinet had removed it in
1818 and had deposited it for safekeeping in the Museum
of the French Institute at Paris. This fact is recorded
in the Minutes of the Institute for 1821, but apparently
it was too safely deposited, as every effort since made to
discover it has been futile. The same fate was believed
to have befallen the original plate of Dirk Hartog,
which had been carried to Batavia. Fortunately, how-
ever, it was found in 1902 in the State Museum at
Amsterdam by Mr. J. F. L. de Balbian.
Reverting now to the historical narrative, it would
appear that in July, 1618, the outward-bound ship
“Mauritius” made some discoveries on the west coast,
more particularly of Willem’s River (probably the Ash-
burton) near the North-West Cape. As the journals
and remarks were lost no further particulars of this
voyage are available.
In the following year, 1619, a fleet of eleven vessels
under the command of Frederik Houtman, in the
“Dordrecht,” claims to have discovered a series of reefs
lying off the west coast, to which the name Frederik
Iloutman’s Abrolhos was given. These consist of a
cluster of rocky islets with surrounding reefs, and are
situated west and north-west of Champion Bay. The
term “abrolhos” is a contraction of the Portuguese ahri
vossos 0///0.9 (“keep your eyes open”) —a most necessary
precaution—and a term applied by them to outlying
coastal dangers. It is very doubtful whether this was
really the first discovery of these islands. It will be
remembered that on at least one Portuguese map of
the sixteenth century they are vaguely defined and the
term “Abrolhos” given them. That may have been
merely a generic term applied to some obstruction to
navigation about that latitude, but the Portuguese cer-
tainly claim, with some show of reason, that the honour
of their discovery belongs to Don Jorge de Meneses in
1527, and though we may not consider the arguments
in favour of that contention completely convincing,
there seems very little doubt that the Portuguese were
O
aware of the. existence of the islands before 1542. Mr.
Major is of opinion that there is no evidence that Hout


man ever visited the group at all, but that the islands
were named after him, in 1619, by Jacob d’Edel, to
whom their discovery was really due. This view, how-
ever, must give way before the researches of Professor
Heeres. In his work “The Part Borne by the Dutch in
the Discovery of Australia, 1606-1765,” lie prints two
letters from Houtman, both dated Jacatra, October 7,
1619, the one to Prince Maurice and the other to the
managers of the East India Company. In these he
describes his visit to the islands. “On the 29th” [July],
he writes, “deeming ourselves to be in an open sea, we
shaped our course north-by-east. At noon we were in
managers of the East India Company, bearing the same
date as lloutman’s, has perhaps a peculiar interest for
Western Australia, as it contains the suggestion, perhaps
the first, that the new land from its general appearance
might prove to be gold-bearing. For the publication of
this letter we are indebted to Professor Tleeres’
researches. In it, inter alia , d’Edel writes, after describ-
ing his meeting with Houtman at the Cape and their
journey together till they “came upon the south lands
situated behind Java”:
“We anchored in 14 fathom in 32i° latitude, the
bottom being level and hard; in full sight of the land
AN OLD CHART OF AUSTRALIA AND A MODERN ONE COMPARED, SHOWING THE DIVISION OF
POPE ALEXANDER VI,, 1530-6.
29° 32' southern latitude; at night, about three hours
before daybreak, we again unexpectedly came upon a
low-lying coast, a level broken country with reefs all
round it. We saw no highland or mainland, so that
this shoal is to be carefully avoided as very dangerous
to ships that wish to touch at this coast. It is fully 10
miles in length, lying in 28° 46'.”
The supercargo of the “Amsterdam,” one of Hout-
man's fleet, was Jacob d’Edel or Dedcl, after whom the
portion of the coast between Shark Bay and Champion
Bay, then discovered, was named Edel Land. The
letter forwarded by this supercargo from Jacatra to the
the sea was 100 fathom deep. We used our best
endeavours to make a landing, which, however, could
not conveniently be done owing to the steep coast.
We then made all sail, and the wind coming
round a little we stood out to sea, not deeming it
' O
advisable to continue longer inshore in this bad weather
with such large heavy ships and such costly cargoes as
we had entrusted to our care, and with great peril to
lose more precious time; but being contented with
having seen the land, which at a more favourable time
may be further explored with more fitting vessels and
smaller craft. We have seen no sign of inhabitants, nor


did we always keep near the coast, since it formed large
bays which would have taken up much time. Still, we
kept seeing the coast from time to time until in 27°
we came upon the land discovered by the ship
‘Eendraght,’ which land in the said latitude showed as
a red, muddy coast, which, according to the surmises of
some of us, might not unlikely prove to he gold-hearing,
a point which may he cleared up in time .”
These documents put Houtman’s visit to the
Abrolhos in 1619, as claimed by the Dutch, beyond the
possibility of doubt; but it is only fair to add that at
the time Mr. Major wrote their existence was not known.
The next voyage of interest was that of the
“Leeuwin” in 1622. This vessel rounded the Cape since
known as Cape Leeuwin at the south-west corner of
the continent, and continued along the coast as far east
as King George Sound. The title “Leeuwin’s Land”
was applied to the portion then examined, and on Ger-
ritz’ map it is said to consist of “dunes with trees and
underwood at the top” and “lowland seemingly sub-
merged” by the tide.
On J uly 5 of the same year there arrived at Batavia
a boat containing ten men, who formed part of the
crew of an English ship, the “Trial”; this was followed
some few days later by the pinnace of the same ship
with thirty-six men on board. The men stated that they
had lost and abandoned their ship with ninety-seven
men and the cargo on some rocks in 20° 10' southern
latitude and in the longitude of the western extremitv
of Java, that the ship ran on the rocks at night time
in fine weather, and that they had met with the accident
through following the course of Dutch ships. It is
probable that while right as to latitude the sailors were
considerably at fault in their longitude, as the rocks
have since been identified as the south-west part of
Monte Bello Reef, which runs north and south to the
north of Barrow Island. A Dutch yacht, the “Haze-
wind,” was instructed to search for the place, but for
some reason it never made a start. The instructions
given to the commander of the yacht are of a most
interesting nature, and had the voyage been carried
out in accordance with them the history of Australia-
or at least the western part of it—might have been
entirely different. The captain received orders to give
names fitting and worthy from a Dutch point of view
to the places he should visit, and to take possession
of them in the name of the United Provinces. That
of course, had it been done, would have meant annexa-
tion by the Dutch of practically the whole of Western
Australia, as the orders embraced the whole coastline
south if necessary to 50° southern latitude, and east-
ward as far as possible if the coast turned in that direc-
tion. From the standpoint of future British settlement
it is perhaps fortunate that the voyage never took place.
Apart from that phase of the question, however, the
voyage would have been productive of great results, and
a more or less definite knowledge of the possibilities of
the west would have been known to the world nearly
two centuries earlier. The thoroughness with which the
voyage was conceived and the advantages open to be
gained may be gathered from the following extract from
the instructions :
"The main object for which you are dispatched on
this occasion is that from 45° or 50°, or from the
farthest point to which the land shall be found to extend
southward within these latitudes, u]j to the northern-
most extremity of the South Land, you will have to
discover and survey all capes, forelands, bights, lands,
islands, rocks, reefs, sandbanks, dejDths, shallows, roads,
winds, currents, and all that appertains to the same, so
as to be able to map out and duly mark everything in
its true latitude, longitude, bearings, and conformation.
You will, moreover, go ashore in various and
diligently examine the coast in order to ascertain
whether or not it is inhabited, the nature of the land
and the people, their towns and inhabited villages, the
divisions of their kingdoms, their religion and jjolicv,
their wars, their rivers, the shape of their vessels, their
fisheries, commodities, and manufactures, but sjjecially
to inform yourselves what minerals such as gold, silver,
tin, iron, lead, and copper, what precious stones, pearls,
vegetables, animals, and fruits these lands yield and
produce.”
Farther on they were directed to inquire as care-
fully as possible into the question of whether the land
would yield gold, as had jjreviously been suggested, and
also to endeavour to procure and bring back to Batavia
samples of the natives.
The expedition failed to set out owing, it is said,
to unforeseen causes, but the existence of the instruc-
tions is particularly valuable, giving as they do a, com-
plete and comprehensive statement of the Dutch colonial
policy of the time. The principal end in view may have
been, as was stated, that of discovery, but there is ample
evidence that commercial interests were not lost sight
of, nor were possible political results altogether over-
looked.
1 he next mention we have of the new land was that
made by the captain of the “Wapen van Hoorn” in the
same year, 1622. This vessel had left Texel for the East
in the previous December, and on arrival at her destina-
tion reported having been "in extreme peril near
Eendraght Land.”
The knowledge of the west coast was extended
during 1623 by the “Leyden” and the “Tortelduyff,”
both of which reported having sighted the South Land.
In the same year Arnhem Land, including the present
Northern Territory of the Commonwealth, was dis-
covered by Jan Cartensz. During an attempt at ex-
ploration some members of the party were killed, and


the expedition returned with the information that “in
this discovery were found everywhere shallow water and
barren coasts; islands altogether thinly populated by
divers cruel, poor, and brutal natives, and ox very little
use to the Company.”
Nothing further is known until 1627, when the
“Guide Zeepaerd,” under the command of Franjois
Thyssen, sighted the south coast just beyond Cape
Lecuwin and made an exhaustive examination of the
coastline for about 1,000 miles eastward, giving to the
part explored the name of Nuyts Land, in honour of
the chief passenger, Pieter Nuyts, who was afterwards
Ambassador to Japan and subsequently Governor of
Formosa. In Nuyts Land was embraced all that terri-
tory lying at the head of the Great Australian Bight.
In the second half of the same year, on July 22,
1627, the Governor-General of the Dutch Indies sailed
Early in the following year Captain De Witt in
the “Vianen,” homeward bound, touched the shore on
the north-west coast in the neighbourhood of Kimberley,
and after making a cursory examination for some 50
miles gave it the name of De Witt Land.
The Same year, 1628, was also to witness the com-
mencement of one of the most important and exciting
voyages made to the new land. On the whole the
history of early Australian discovery is a calm and quiet-
story, without trace of adventure, recording nothing of
an eventful nature beyond the sighting and superficial
examination of stretches of isolated and uninteresting
coast. But there are some exceptions, and perhaps the
greatest of these is the tragic voyage of the "Batavia,”
whose passengers and crew formed the first white set-
tlers on Australian soil, albeit involuntarily and for
many of them with dire results.
DIRK HARTOG'S PLATE ,1616
from Table Bay with the ships “Galias,” “Utrecht/ and
“Texel.” All went well up to August 10, when the
rudder of the “Galias” broke, and the ship becoming
unmanageable, the other vessels passed out of sight.
Repairs being effected the next day she proceeded on her
course alone, and on September 5 came suddenly upon
the Land of Eendraght, which by the reckoning of the
chart should have been nearly 350 miles farther east.
The Governor’s experience on this voyage and his near-
ness to shipwreck led him to request the Company to
give particular attention to correcting the miscalcula-
tions in the chart—a work that seems to have been very
urgently required. Accuracy of observation and
charting was therefore enjoined upon succeeding cap-
tains, with a result beneficial alike to navigation and
geography.
VLAMING'S PLATE, 1697
The relation of this voyage, probably compiled from
Pelsart’s Journal, was first published in Dutch at
Amsterdam in 1647, and was repeatedly republished
during the succeeding few years. It was used by
Thevenot in 1663 to compile a French version for his
“Recueil de divers voyages curieux,” and all English
accounts were merely abridgments of this until 1897,
when Mr. W. Siebenhaar, of Perth, undertook a com-
plete translation of the Dutch account. It is from
this, with Mr. Siebenhaar’s kind permission, that our
description of the voyage is taken. Pelsart’s Journal
was recently published by Professor Heeres, but the
fact and particulars of the shipwreck were omitted as
being already sufficiently known.
In 1628 General Pieter Carpentier returned safely
from the East Indies with five richly-laden merchant


ships, and this, combined with the fact that the Govern-
ment had recently succeeded in releasing three ships
from an embargo laid upon them by the English a year
previously, led the authorities to determine to send
another fleet of eleven ships to the East, with which
General Jacob Specks was to sail. Two ships and a
yacht being soon ready to sail, the Senate sent them to
Texel so as to lose no time. These vessels were the
“Batavia" (under Frangois Pelsart), the "Dordrecht"
(under Isaac van Swaenswyck), and the "Assendelft"
(under Cornelis Vlack). They left Texel for their
destination on October 28, 1628. With the details of
the first part of the voyage we need not concern our-
selves. Nothing out of the ordinary happened except
that the ships became separated, which was so usuai
an occurrence as to cause little excitement. The
"Batavia" continued her course alone and on Whit-
Monday, June 4, 1629, reached southern latitude
28° 28V about nine miles from the mainland. Here they
got among the perilous banks of the Abrolhos and
shortly before sunrise struck the reefs. The usual trials
and tribulations attendant upon shipwrecks occurred,
intensified bv the drunkenness and lawlessness of the
soldiers and sailors, but eventually the whole company
was landed on two small islands situated about three
leagues from the ship. After considerable difficulty
provisions and merchandise, including treasure, were
landed, but it was impossible to secure sufficient water.
The forty people on the smaller island had only eighty
cans, and the 180 refugees on the larger had even less,
so that from the beginning the scarcity of water had
to be faced. On this account a great deal of dissatis-
faction arose, particularly as there was no water to be
found on the islands, and very little hope of securing
more until rain came, or unless the ship went to pieces
and some of the barrels were to float to the islands.
Some of the crew desired to take the boat and search
the other islands and the mainland, but Pelsart was not
at first favourable to this idea, feeling that he was
responsible for the safety of both the people and the
merchandise. Ultimately after much pressure he
yielded, and it was decided that they should try the
mainland for water, and if they found none continue
the voyage to Batavia to ask for help to rescue those left
on the islands.
Before carrying this resolution into effect the com-
modore (Pelsart) wished to sail across to the other island
to acquaint the people there with the decision arrived
at. The crew at first objected to this, but at length
were induced to start. When nearing the other shore,
however, they renewed their objections and definitely
refused to land, evidently afraid of some untoward
result. Pelsart was therefore compelled to return to the
first island. The next morning in company with some
others he set out early, after leaving a note of their
intentions, to search for water. For three days they
sought among the islands, but without success. Such
fresh water as there was in the rocky holes of the islands
round about had been spoilt by sea water during the
storm. Then on June 9 they steered for the mainland,
but were not able to land owing to the roughness of the
coast and the persistence of the storm. Many efforts
were made to effect a landing, but without avail, "for
the breakers were too strong and the coast too steep
and jagged, without any foreland or inlet, as is usually
found on other coasts, so that it seemed to them a bare
and cursed country, devoid of green or grass.” The
current bore them farther to the northward than they
desired, and on the 14th, on approaching the coast, they
observed a good deal of smoke, and endeavoured to run
in, hoping to find men and water. To land being
impracticable on account of the breakers, six men deter-
mined to swim for the shore, and all succeeded in
reaching it. A day's search left them exhausted but
unsuccessful. In the evening "they hapjDened upon four
people, who were creeping toward them on their hands
and feet." These fled upon the approach of the sailors,
who on their return to the boat described them as
“black savages, quite naked, leaving themselves un-
covered like animals." The next day they were for-
tunately able to land, and managed to collect about 20
gallons of water. They next resolved to go farther
inland in the hope of securing more in the mountains,
but the search was vain, as there was no appearance of
water, “for behind the mountain chain the country was
flat again, bearing neither trees nor vegetation nor
grass, and being everywhere covered with high ant-hills
built of earth, which in the distance were not unlike
Indian huts. There were also such multitudes of flies
that one could not keep them out of one's eyes." They
next saw eight black people, each carrying a stick in
his hand. These approached them to a musket shot’s
distance, but "when they saw our people coming toward
them they took to their heels and would neither speak
nor stop."
Oppressed by a sense of his own danger and fearing
for the safety of those left on the islands, Pelsart fol-
lowed the coastline in the hope of reaching the river of
Jacob Kemmessensz, which according to his charts was
close at hand. North-easterly winds prevented him
from reaching it, and finally he determined to try to
make Batavia for assistance. This difficult task he
accomplished, and after sighting Java on June 27
reached Batavia on July 5. The next day he made his
appearance before the Court, and having informed the
Governor-General and Council of his misfortunes,
requested speedy help to save the shipwrecked people,
and to secure as much as possible of the merchandise.
In a few days the frigate "Sardam" was assigned to


him, and after manning and victualling her he left on
his return to the Abrolhos on the 15th of the month.
In the meantime, however, there was great trouble
among those left behind on the islands. After the ship-
wreck the supercargo, Jerome Cornelisz (a chemist of
Haarlem), with several accomplices, had formed the
intention of refloating the ship and sailing her for
piratical purposes, a trade which in those days was far
from being unremunerative. To this end they remained
on the vessel for some ten days, until, in fact, she fell
to pieces, and they had considerable difficulty in gaining
piracy was out of the question, lie therefore resolved,
with the aid of his accomplices, to murder all the people
except forty men, and then with the scoundrels that
remained seize the yacht which he expected Pelsart to
bring from Batavia and go pirating with her. Select-
ing those upon whom he could depend, a contract was
made out to which all agreed. The wording of this
bond, really an agreement to commit wholesale murder,
is so curious that it may be interesting to print it in
full:
“We, the undersigned, in order to take away all
TASMAN'S MAP, FROM THEVENOT'S COLLECTION, 1663.
the shore. Cornelisz then as supercargo took command
of the company, which at that time was distributed
among three islands, the largest number and most of
the miscreants being with him. The distribution on
three islands arose from the fact that a few days
previously some of the men, in charge of a soldier,
Webbye Hays, had gone off to a third in search of water.
The supercargo having been on the island for about
a month after the wreck, and seeing that the ship was
rapidly breaking up, realized that his first intention of
distrust that exists or might arise amongst us, bind
ourselves herewith, on the salvation of our souls , and
on the solemn oath that God shall truly help us to he
true to each other in everythiny and to love each other
as brothers; also promising not to do each other any
injury whatsoever in person or possession without first
verbally declaring to each other the breach of the peace,
in knowledge whereof we have signed this contract on
the 12th July, 1629, on the island Batavise’s Hcrkhof.”
The signatures followed. (The language was probably


Cornelisz’; the italics are our own.) They then pro-
ceeded to murder all those on the island with the excep-
tion of thirty men and four boys, so that the name of
the island as set down in the contract —Batavia’s grave-
yard — was both sinister and significant.
Meanwhile Webbye Hays and party, who were away
looking for water, were after twenty days successful in
finding it, and made three fires as a signal. As this
happened to be on the day of the general murder Cor-
nclisz and his friends were probably too busy to notice
it. Some who escaped the carnage managed to get
across to Hays on rafts and take him the dreadful news.
Having with these reinforcements some forty-five men
under him, he resolved to place himself in a position
oi defence from attack. Those on the remaining island,
either not being aware of what had transpired or being
too weak to defend themselves, were attacked by a
party of Cornelisz ruffians, and ail but seven boys and
six women were murdered. The chests of merchandise
weie then opened and the worthy band attired them-
selves gaudily in scarlet cloth, with gold and silver
embroidery.
The ringleader, however, recognized that there
could be no safety for him until Webbye Hays and
party were put out of the way. Consequently, having
assumed the title and authority of ‘‘Captain-General/’
lie sent an expedition of twenty-two armed men against
them. These were successfully repulsed by the practically
defenceless band. Cornelisz tnen had recourse to
strategy, and by letter secretly oliered some of the men
large rewards in return for treachery. These letters
were shown to Hays, and a trap was accordingly laid.
Cornelisz was induced to come to the island to settle the
terms, and on arrival he himself was taken prisoner
and some of his men killed.
At this stage, September 13, the “Sardam” with
Belsart arrived at the Abrolhos. the commodore being
pleased to find from the presence of smoke that some
at least of his people were still alive. Before he could
land, Webbye Hays and tiiree others came on board
and gave him an account of the whole tragedy, further
informing him that the ruffians were already on their
way to surprise and seize the ship. These when they
arrived were captured, a fate that also quickly befell
the remainder of the band. An examination into the
whole circumstances was then and there made, and as
carrying the miscreants back to Batavia would have
meant crowding the frigate too much, Cornelisz and
those closely associated with him were put to death on
Seal Island after being subjected to the refinements of
what one almost feels compelled to admit was well-
merited torture. Among them they had murdered no
fewer than 125 innocent people. The frigate then
returned to Batavia, stopping on her course to maroon
two of the conspirators on the coast near Champion Bay.
These two villains were the first white inhabitants of the
continent so far as is known. It is curious that the
first white settlement in Australia also consisted of
persons largely of the same class.
During the years following, particularly in 1629,
1632, and 1635, various places on the west coast were
either touched at or sighted by Dutch ships, but these
did not contribute anything new in the way of informa-
tion. The next important voyage was that of Abel
Janssen Tasman (who had discovered Van Diemen
Land in 1642) and Franz Visscher with the }achts
“Limmen,” “Zeemeeuw,” and “De Brak.” It was for
this voyage, which took place in 1644, that the Dutch
“Book of Despatches’" previously referred to, and from
which much of our knowledge of the voyages of the
Dutch East India Company is derived, was compiled.
The object of the exjiedition was to explore the north-
west and north coasts of the new continent, and to
proceed eastward, despite adverse winds, to determine
whether New Guinea was a separate island or part of
the mainland. Tasman’s Journals have unfortunately
been lost, so that such information as we possess about
the voyage is rather meagre, and is taken from a work
published in 1705 by Burgomaster Witsen, who quotes
Tasman as the authority for his statements. These refer
chiefly to the natives, who are described as “possessing
rude canoes made of the bark of trees, but no houses;
to live poorly, go naked, and eat yams and other roots.”
From the map published by Thevenot in 1663,
which it is said was originally taken from that done in
inlaid work on the pavement of the new Stadt Haus in
Amsterdam, we may get a fair idea of his route, lie
certainly did not ascertain whether New Guinea was
separated from the mainland, but he examined the
northern coastline from Arnhem Land to Exmouth Gulf,
taking in De Witt Land and part of Eendraght Land,
and embracing the districts now known as the Kim-
berleys and the North-West. He also appears to have
landed in what we call Carnot and Roebuck Bays. To
him we owe the name “New Holland,” which was
applied by the Dutch only to that portion of the con-
tinent lying west of a meridian line drawn north and
south through Arnhem Land and the islands of
St. Francis and St. Peter. The part east of that line
was still denominated the Terra Australis . New Hol-
land, which included the whole of the present State of
Western Australia, was according to the Dutch “The
Great Known South Land,” as distinguished from the
rest of Australia, which remained “The Unknown Land.”
From this time to the end of the century the
interest of the Dutch in coastal exploration seems to
have flagged. The sterile nature of the country promised
but little in the way of wealth, and though the territory
was still included in the lands of the Dutch East India
Company it was left undisturbed to the occupation of


the savages. An exploratory voyage was made by the
“Leeuwerik” in 1648, and in 1649 the “Vergulde
Draeck/’ laden with rich merchandise and money, was
wrecked in latitude 30° 40' and 118 lives lost. Seven
of the survivors managed to reach Batavia, leaving
sixty-eight behind them to protect the cargo and
treasure, and implored assistance. To this end several
ships were dispatched in 1657 and 1658, but many of
these met with disaster of one kind or another, and all
returned from the search unsuccessful. The first of
these vessels, the “Witte Valck” and “Goede Hoop,”
sailed down the coast for some distance, but reappeared
after losing a boat and eleven men. The “Vinck,” from
the Cape to Batavia, was instructed to search, but also
failed. The “Waeckende Boey” and the “Emeloort”
visited the mainland in 1658 on the same mission, but
with abortive results. The first of these vessels foolishly
abandoned a boat and fourteen men during bad weather,
and only four of them got back to Batavia, the
remainder succumbing to incredible suffering and
privation. In the same year the “Elburg” joined in the
search with the same negative result. Many of these
ships observed wreckage of various kinds floating about,
which evidently came from the “Vergulde Draeck,” but
nothing was ever heard of the unfortunate castaways.
There was, however, some result from the attempts in
improved charts of the coastline.
Some twenty years later the “Vliegende Swaan”
coasted the north-west of the continent on her voyage
from Ternate to Batavia.
CHAPTER II.
DISCOVERY AND EARLY VOYAGES — (Continued).
U p to the end of the seventeenth century
English maritime enterprise in the Pacific Ocean
and Southern Seas had been almost a negligible
quantity, confined chiefly to occasional voyages of
aci venture of more or less piratical intent, and
any English interest or even knowledge of the new
Southern Land could scarcely be said to exist. Curiously
enough that English interest was in the first place
stimulated by one who at that period of his life was in
every respect a buccaneer —William Dampier. But
pirate though he practically was, he had some of the
qualities of a hero, and he posssessed that faculty of
accurate observation that made his remarks and opinions
on places visited of special value to his country.
Born in 1652 of a respectable family in Somerset,
Dampier as a young man gained some experience of
the sea both in the merchant service and in the navy.
In 1674 he went to Jamaica to assist in the management
of Colonel Helyar's plantation, but the life was so
devoid of adventure that in the following year he went
back to sea. In 1679 he joined the buccaneers and
made various expeditions in the Pacific with the avowed
object of plundering the Spanish settlement. Some four
years later he took service with one Cook on a cruise
round the world. Finding that the vessel was too small
for the purpose they ran along the coast of Africa in
the hope of meeting a more suitable craft. At Sierra
Leone they fell in with a Dutch ship carrying thirty-six
guns, and without any qualms of conscience forcibly
took possession of her and ran out to sea. Dampier’s
narrative says nothing of this, but would lead us to
believe that the voyage was one of discovery only,
instead of being, as it really was, a purely piratical
venture. Cook died in 1684, and Davis, who took his
place, joined forces with a Captain Swan of the
“Cygnet,” and for twelve months they scoured the
South American Coast in company. They then parted,
as Swan wished to try the Mexican Coast and then go
across the Pacific toward the East Indies. With him
went Dampier, filled (according to his narrative) with
a desire for discovery. Reaching the Philippine Islands
in June, 1686, they remained there until early in the
following year, when dissatisfaction became rife among
the crew owing to the prolonged inactivity. This was
ended by Dampier and party sailing away with the ship,
leaving Swan and about thirty-six men stranded on
Mindanao. After a course of piracy in the China Seas
Dampier seems to have tired of the life and set sail
for home, taking a lonely route to the south in the hope
of avoiding English and Dutch ships, of which he stood
in some dread. Contrary winds carried his ship out of
her course, and in January, 1688, he decided to land
on the shores of New Holland “to see what the country
would afford us.”
The landing took place in the north-west corner of
King Sound, at the spot now known as Cygnet Bay.
Here the ship was beached for cleaning and repairs, and
it is curious that apparently by accident Dampier found
the one place on the whole north-west coast suitable
for that purpose. During the stay here, lasting until
March 12, the leader appears to have found the society
of his fellow-buccaneers uncongenial, and to occupy his


time made a careful exploration of the surrounding
country.
“New Holland,” he tells us, ‘‘is a very large tract
of land. It is not yet determined whether it is an island
or a main continent; but I am certain that it joins
neither to Asia, Africa, nor America. The part of it
that we saw is all low, even land, with sandy banks
against the sea; only the points are rocky, and so are
some of the islands in this bay.”
Dampier’s observations on the country and the
natives are singularly correct, and have a particular
valuß as giving the first definite and accurate informa-
tion known concerning any portion of this vast continent.
The soil he describes as dry and sandy, “destitute
of water, except you make wells; yet producing divers
sorts of trees. But the woods are not thick nor the
trees very big. Most of the trees we saw are dragon-
trees, as we supposed, and these, too, are the largest
trees of any there. They are about the bigness of our
large apple-trees . . . and the rind is blackish and
somewhat rough. . . . The other sorts of trees were
not known by any of us. There was pretty long grass
growing under the trees, but it was very thin. We saw
no trees that bore fruit or berries.”
Of the natives, whom he must have observed with
very great care, he writes :
The inhabitants of this country are the miserablest
people in the world. The Hodmadods of Monomatapa,
though a nasty people, yet for wealth are gentlemen to
these, who have no houses and skin garments, sheep,
poultry, and fruits of the earth, ostrich eggs, etc., as
the Hodmadods have; and setting aside their human
shape, they differ little from brutes. They are tall,
straight-bodied, and thin, with small long limbs. Thev
have great heads, round foreheads, and great brows.
Their eyelids are always half-closed to keep the flies out
of their eyes, they being so troublesome here that no fan-
ning will keep them off. They will creep into one’s
nostrils, and mouth, too, if the lips are not shut very
close. So that from their infancy, being thus annoyed
with these insects, they do never open their eyes as
other people, and therefore they cannot see far, unless
they hold up their heads, as if they were looking at
somewhat over them.
“They have great bottle noses, pretty full lips, and
wide mouths. The two foreteeth of their upper jaw
are wanting in all of them, men and women, old and
young. They are long-visaged. . . . Their hair is
black, short, and curled.
“They have no sort of clothes, but a piece of the
rind of a tree tied like a girdle about their waists, and a
handful of long grass, or three or four small green
boughs full of leaves, thrust under their girdle to cover
their nakedness.
“They have no houses, but lie in the open air with-
out any covering, the earth being their bed and the
heaven their canopy. . . . They do live in com-
panies, twenty or thirty men, women, and children
together. Their only food is a small sort of fish which
they get by making weirs of stones across liHle coves
or branches of the sea, every tide bringing in the small
fish, and there leave them a prey to these people, who
constantly attend there to search for them at low water.
This small-fry I take to be the top of their fishery.
They have no instruments to catch great fish should they
come ; and such seldom stay to be left behind at low
water. ... In other places at low water they seek
for cockles, mussels, and periwinkles. Of these shell
fish there are fewer still, so that their chiefest
dependence is what the sea leaves in their weirs, which,
be it much or little, they gather up and march to the
places of their abode. There the old people that are not
able to stir abroad, by reason of their age, and the
tender infants wait their return; and what Providence
has bestowed on them they presently broil on the coals
and eat it in common. Sometimes they get as many fish
as makes them a plentiful banquet and at other times
they scarce get everyone a taste; but be it little or much
that they get, everyone has his part, as well the young
azid tender, the old and feeble, who are not able to go
abroad as the strong and lusty. When they have eaten
they lie down till the next low water, and then all that
are able march out, be it night or day, rain or shine,
tis all one ! They must attend the weirs or else they
must fast, for the earth affords them no food at all.
There is neither herb, root, pulse, nor any sort of grain
for them to eat that we saw, nor any sort of bird or
beast that they can catch, having no instruments where-
withal to do so.
“I did not perceive that they did worship anything.
These poor creatures have a sort of weapon to defend
their ware or fight with their enemies, if they have
any that will interfere with their poor fisheries.
Some of them had wooden swords; others had a sort of
lance. The sword is a piece of wood shaped somewhat
like a cutlass. The lance is a long straight pole, sharp
at one end and hardened afterwards by heat. I saw no
iron nor any other sort of metal.”
After leaving Cygnet Bay Dampier desired to pro-
ceed on the voyage to England, but this did not meet
with the approval of his companions. A quarrel
occurred, and in the result the navigator with two
others was put ashore on the Nicobar Islands. Here
they suffered many trials and privations, but ultimately
succeeded in getting away, and in 1691 Dampier arrived
back in England alter an absence of nearly nine years.
Some years passed without incident until the Dutch
became anxious about the fate of a missing ship, the
“Riddcrschap van Holland,” and in order to make cer-
tain Willem van Vlaming in 1696 was instructed by the


Company to proceed with the “Geelvinck” and two other
vessels to carefully examine the west coast of New Hol-
land for some trace of her. On Christmas Day, 1696,
they sighted land, and on December 29 anchored off the
shore of a large island, upon which they landed on the
following day. On exploring it they were struck with
the large number of rats' (wallabies) nests found, and
from that fact gave it the name of Rottnest Island.
Some pieces of wreckage were discovered, but there was
nothing by which they could identify the vessel they
were endeavouring to trace. From the higher parts they
could see the mainland distinctly, and from the smoke
rising here and there from among the trees they gathered
that natives were present. On January 5, 1697,
Vlaming with eighty-six well-armed men landed on the
shore somewhere in the neighbourhood of Cottlesloe
Beach, and marching eastward came upon what they
described as “a large basin of brackish water.” On the
banks of this they met with traces of natives in the shape
of footprints, a fire still burning, and a hut that would
BLACK SWAN RIVER ON NEW HOLLAND OPPOSITE
ROTTNEST ISLAND FROM VANKEULEN.
have disgraced a Hottentot, but the aborigines them-
selves were not to be seen. They camped near the fire,
and on the following day separated into three parties
for exploratory purposes and went off in different direc-
tions, to meet again at night having made no discovery
of any importance beyond proving that the “basin cf
brackish water” was really a river. Some of the men
foolishly partaking of nuts “having the taste of our
large Dutch beans” which they found growing on a
certain tree paid severely for their indiscretion —so
much so that one wonders whether they really were
Dutch beans. On the 9th they brought the ships in and
anchored just off the mouth of the river, which Vlaming
and a party explored on the following days for a distance
of some 14 or 16 leagues. They were rewarded by the
discovery of numbers of that hitherto unknown prodigy
of Nature —the fabulous black swan described by
Juvenal. Several specimens were secured and three
were taken alive to Batavia. From the presence of these
birds Vlaming named his discovery the “Swan River.”
However, having, according to the narrative, “found
neither good country nor seen anything worthy of note”
Vlaming continued his voyage northward, examining
the shore carefully for traces of the lost ship, and
occasionally landing to make some exploration of the
coast. On February 4 they reached Shark Bay and on
Dirk Hartog found the tin-plate previously referred to.
This they took away, leaving another in its place.
Resuming the voyage they reached the North-West Cape,
and on the 21st of the month set the course direct for
Batavia, after firing guns “as a signal of farewell to the
miserable South Land.” To Vlaming thus belongs the
discovery of the Swan River, the most important so far
of all the discoveries on the mainland, and he also had
the honour of being the first to anchor in the harbour
at Fremantle.
Meanwhile Dampier had not been idle. For some
years after his arrival in England he was engaged pre-
paring a record of his voyage and adventures from 1683
to 1691. This was published in 1698 as “A New Voyage
Round the World.” From it the English gained their
o o
first accurate knowledge of these new South Lands. So
impressed were they with the potentialities of the places
described and so desirous of learning more about them
that William 111. was induced to send Dampier in the
“Roebuck,” under commission from the Admiralty, to
make further exploration of the north-west coast and to
solve, if possible, the question whether the new dis-
coveries were a series of islands or part of a great con-
tinent.
Dampier sailed from England on January 14, 1699,
taking the usual route round the Cape and thence east-
ward. On August 1 land was sighted, and on the sth
he anchored in Dirk Hartog Bay, to which, owing to
the prevalence of sharks, he gave its present name of
Shark Bay. Some eight days were spent in making trips
to the mainland in search of water, but without result.
During this time he surveyed a portion of the Bay and
collected a good deal of valuable information about the
coastal country, as well as interesting data concerning
the fauna and flora. Tie tells us that the land was
gently undulating, with stretches of sand along the sea-
board, changing to a reddish soil of sandy nature farther
inland. Upon this grew 4 plants, grass, and shrubs, but
no tree above 10 ft. in height. Of the tree blossoms
blue was the predominating colour, and small and
beautiful flowers of various hues, different from any-
thing he had previously seen, abounded everywhere. The
onlv large birds were some eagles, cormorants, pelicans,
gulls, and ducks. The land animals were few in number,
consisting in the main of kangaroos, iguanas, and lizards.
The kangaroos were new to natural history, and Dam-
pier's description of them is the first known. “The land
animals,” he writes, “were only a sort of racoons, dif-
ferent from those of the West Indies, chiefly as to their


legs; for those have very short forelegs, but go jumping
upcn them as the others do, and, like them, are very
good meat.” The iguanas (or guanos, as he terms them)
he found good to eat, but the sensitive stomach of a
buccaneer rebelled at the idea of the harmless Australian
lizard.
Water not being available, he decided on the 14th
to continue his voyage north, keeping as close to the
shore as he could in the hope of finding more fertile
country and an abundant supply of water. From time
to time he sent the boats ashore for supplies, but only
once did he obtain sufficient to replenish the casks. On
the 21st he reached some islands, afterwards called the
Dampier Archipelago, situated off the present town of
Cossack, and on the 31st again landed, some 150 miles
south of his former anchorage, in Cygnet Bay. Here he
had a small brush with some natives, in the course
of which a sailor was speared and a native shot.
Being still
greatly con-
cerned about
the shortage
of water,
and disgust-
ed with the
sterile nature
of the land,
Dampier felt-
compelled to
abandon any
further ex-
ploration of
the coast.
In accord-
ance with
this resolu-
tion he set
sail early in
September for Timor and New Guinea. On his voyage
home the “Roebuck” was wrecked on the island of
Ascension, but the navigator succeeded in reaching
England, and in 1703 published an account of his
voyage.
His observations with regard to the coast and the
information he brought back concerning the country
and its inhabitants have been proved to be remarkably
reliable, and may be regarded as some compensation for
his failure to achieve the actual objects of his mission.
Whether the new land was a succession of islands or a
continent was a question yet to be solved, and the pas-
sage between New Guinea and Australia was still
unknown.
His unfavourable reports about the land and his
opinion of its wretched inhabitants, whom he described
as “the miserablest people in the world,” did not give
any encouragement to the Government to pursue its
investigations. Consequently we hear of no further
voyages under the English flag until 1770, when Captain
Cook discovered and took possession of the more fertile
country on the east coast.
A remark made by Dampier when seeking a passage
among the islands of the archipelago that bears his name,
that “among so many islands we might have found some
sort of rich mineral or ambergreece,” has given rise to
a curious inaccuracy in many publications concerning
the gold discoveries of Western Australia. It is stated
that Dampier, a Dutch buccaneer, discovered gold on
the north-west coast in 1688, and that on account of
this discovery the Dutch charts of that region were
marked “Provincia aurifera.” Though the region is so
marked on some of the sixteenth century Dutch charts ;
it is really the result of a geographical blunder, due to
a misreading of part of Marco Polo's “De regionibus
orientalibus. ”
This actually
refers to
Lower Siam,
but was ignor-
an 11 y trans-
ferred by
early geo-
graphers to
an imaginary
great south-
ern continent.
Dampier was
not Dutch.
Neither does
he make any
mention in
his narrative
of a discovery
of gold. Had
he done so it is scarcely probable that English in-
terest in the new country would have ceased after his
report.
The unpromising reports concerning the value of
the new land which were brought back by Dutch
navigators had the effect of causing the interest of that
nation also to wane. Only one more expedition with
definite instructions to explore any part of the coastline
was sent out. This was in 1705, when a small fleet of
three vessels made some examination of the north-west
and improved the charts which Tasman had compiled.
In 1718 one Hans Furry, of Neufchatel, published
a work in which he proposed the establishment of a
Dutch colonial settlement in the south-west corner near
Cape Leeuwin. This idea was submitted to the
authorities of the East India Company at Batavia and
Amsterdam, and being declined by them was unsuc-
MAP OF THE EAST INDIES FROM DAMPIER'S JOURNAL, 1700


cessfully urged upon the West India Company. The
inducements offered were not commensurate with the
expense, and the frugal Dutch mind was not prepared
to spend money on something that offered little or no
prospect of return.
Dutch interest may from this time be said to have
ceased, though as the century progressed Dutch vessels
either sighted or touched at isolated portions of the
coast, and some had the misfortune to be wrecked there.
In 1711 the “Zuytdorp” was supposed to have struck
somewhere on the Abrolhos, that area of extreme danger
to early navigators, and in 1727 the “Zeewyck” came
to grief on a reef in the same group. Of this vessel
numerous relics have from time to time been found by
various ex-
plor e r s and
others, and
they now form
an interesting
exhibit in the
Western Aus-
tralian Museum.
In 1755 and
1765 casual
Dutch visits
were recorded,
but they were
without in-
cident.
Almost coin-
cidently with
the cessation of
Dutch enter-
prise France
became active
in the Southern
Seas. Thence-
forward, up to
the time of the
actual annexa-
tion and settle-
merit of Western Australia by Great Britain, the com-
peting nations in these waters, as in so many parts of
the world, were the English and the French.
The first French ship to touch at any portion of
the Australian coast was “Le Gros Ventre,” under the
command of Captain de St. Alouarn, in whose honour
the St. Alouarn Islands were named at a later date by
D’Entrecasteaux.
For some years after this there is no record that
any navigator visited the western shores. The dis-
coveries of Cook in 1770 and his favourable reports on
the fertile nature of the country had turned attention
to the eastern side of the continent, and whatever efforts
NEW HILLAND, FROM MAP OD THE WORLD IN EMANUEL BOWEN'S
ATLAS, LONDON, 1747.
were made in the way of exploration were directed
toward that part. In 1791, however, nearly a century
after the visit of Darnpier, the English Government sent
out Captain George Vancouver (who had previously
served as a midshipman under Cook) and Captain
Broughton in H.M.Ss. '‘Discovery” and “Chatham” on
a voyage to the north-west coast of America by way of
the Cape and Australia.
On August 20, 1791, they had their first view of
Australia —that of a conspicuous promontory with
high cliffs dropping almost perpendicularly into the sea.
This they named Cape Chatham, after the earl of that
name, who at that time presided over the Admiralty.
Though describing the promontory as a cape, Vancouver
was in some
doubt whether
it was not really
an island, a
doubt after-
wards proved to
be well founded.
Passing this
and following:
a n eastward
course, while
keeping: as near
the shore as
possible in the
hope of dis-
covering: a safe
anchorage, they
entered a fine
natural harbour
on the 28th and
bestowed upon
it the name of
King George
111. Sound.
Landing: on the
29th they no-
ticed that there
was a further inner harbour and a second extension
toward the north-east. The day being the birthday of
the Princess Royal they named the inner portion Princess
Royal Harbour. Vancouver then, in the name of the
King, took formal possession of all the country “from
the land we saw north-westward of Cape Chatham so far
as we might explore its coasts.” On the same day the
narrow entrance to the north-eastern extension was dis-
covered and the harbour named Oyster Harbour, on
account of the number of oysters found there.
The ships remained at anchor for about a fortnight,
during which a close examination of the harbours was
made, and the coast for some distance inland was


explored. The land in places seemed barren or covered
with a “deadly green herbage, with here and there a
few grovelling shrubs or dwarf trees scattered at a great
distance from each other.'' This, Vancouver admits,
might not have originated from sterility of the soil, but
as the result of a bushfire which it was evident had
recently passed over it, especially as the surrounding
country presented a far more fertile and pleasing aspect.
Fresh water was abundant and kangaroos, ducks, and
fish not scarce. The climate was temperate and agree-
able. Of shrubs and plants a great variety was found,
which “afforded Mr. Menzies [the naturalist of the
expedition] much entertainment and enjoyment.”
Natives they did not actually meet, but one or two
deserted villages were seen, as well as single habitations,
giving them the impression that the aborigines were a
wandering people, trusting greatly to the natural
products of the soil for food, and not expert either at
hunting or fishing. Our illustration of the deserted vil-
lage is taken from the published account of “Vancouver s
Voyage,” and is interesting if only to show the ideal
impression that the mind of an artist can receive from
even the squalid shelter of an Australian black.
Before leaving the Sound Vancouver deposited on
Point Possession a sealed bottle containing a parch-
ment record of his visit, and a second bottle containing
a similar record on Seal Island, where he thought the
natives would be less likely to get it. This second bottle
was probably found by Chr. Dixon, of the “Elligood,”
who left a plate recording his calling at Oyster Harbour
in August, 1800.
In 1883 a wooden tablet was erected by the Gover-
nor, Sir William Robinson, over an old well on the
island by the channel connecting Middleton Bay and
Oyster Harbour. This it is believed marks the spot
where “George Vancouver, an illustrious navigator,
watered H.M.S. 'Discovery' in October, 1791.”
Leaving King George HI. Sound Vancouver and
Broughton continued their voyage eastward along the
coast as far as Termination Island, so named from the
fact that from there they set their course for America
and lost sight of the Australian coast.
In addition to the places mentioned Point Posses-
sion, Cape Howe, Mount Gardner, the Eclipse, Break-
sea, Seal, and Michaelmas Island and nearly every
prominent headland or island from Cape Leeuwin to
122° east longitude owe their names to this voyage,
which from the standpoint of accuracy of observation
and attention to detail was one of the most important
made to the shores of Western Australia.
About this time the French Government began to
be anxious about the fate of the expedition under La
Perouse, which had not been heard of since leaving
Botany Bay in 1788. The general impression was that
the expedition had met with disaster, but in order to
have the matter cleared up two ships, the “Recherche
and the “Esperance,” were fitted out for a search and
placed under the command of Admiral D'Entrecasteaux.
Leaving France in September, 1791, D’Entrecasteaux
proceeded by way of the Cape of Good Hope and reached
the coast of Tasmania, anchoring in Storm Bay on April
21, 1792. From there they went to the Solomon
Islands, the Moluccas, and the East Indian Archipelago,
and then turned southward down the coast of Western
Australia. They did not, however, sight the Australian
coast until December, 1792, when they came within hail
of a point which they named D’Entrecasteaux Point,
lying north-west of Chatham Island. Continuing their
course to the eastward they skirted the coast as far as
Termination Island, where they sheltered from a storm
and then turned off to Tasmania again. The account
of this voyage was written by Labillardiere, the cele-
brated botanist, who seems to have possessed especial
talent for noticing unimportant things so far as Aus-
tralia is concerned. Several places on the south coast
were charted and named on this voyage, to which the
discovery of the Recherche Archipelago is due.
This expedition, so far as finding any trace of La
Perouse and his party was concerned, was doomed to
failure. The fate of that navigator remained a mystery
until 1825, when Captain Dillon, of H.M.S. “Research,”
discovered remnants of the “Astrolabe” and “Boussole”
on Vanikoro, the most southerly island of the Santa
Cruz Group.
English maritime activity in the Southern Seas was
now in full swing and English association with the new
South Land definitely established. Perhaps no one did
more to bring about an accurate knowledge of, at any
rate, the coastal districts of the continent than Matthew
Flinders, to whom we owe its present name. Though
we are concerned onlv with his connection with the west,
%/
he was responsible for the discovery of practically the
whole of the south coast. In many respects Flinders
was not unlike Dampier —if we except the latter's buc-
caneering proclivities. Bold and intrepid as an explorer,
he was at the same time a careful observer, shrewd and
painstaking, as well as accurate in detail, so that the
information he procured proved of the greatest value
in extending the vague knowledge then existing con-
cerning this still practically unknown country.
Flinders left Spithead on July 18, 1801, in the
“Investigator," the old “Xenophon,” a sloop of 344 tons.
On November 6 he reached what he termed Cape
Leeuwin, as being the south-western and most projecting
part of Leeuwin Land, and from there to King George
HI. S ound, where he arrived on December 9, care-
fully surveyed the intermediate coast, naming various
points. He remained at the Sound for some days, which
were spent in charting Princess Royal and Oyster Har-
bours, and in establishing friendly relations with the


aborigines. A short vocabulary of the native language
was prepared and information collected as to their habits.
Their manners he describes as “quick and vehement and
their conversation vociferous, like that of most uncivilized
people. They seemed to have no idea of any superiority
we possessed over them. On the contrary, they left us,
after the first interview, with some appearance of con-
tempt for our pusillanimity, which was probably
inferred from the desire we showed to be friendly with
them.”
Before leaving the spot a search was made for the
record bottles left by Vancouver in 1791. This was
unsuccessful; but in a garden on the east side of Oyster
Harbour a piece of sheet-copper was found inscribed—
“ August 27, 1800, Chr. Dixon; ship ‘Elligood/ ” from
which it was surmised that the bottles had been
previously dis-
covered and
removed.
On January
5 Flinders
again got
under way
and directed
his course to
the east and
north, passing
the Recherche
Archipelago
and after-
wards discov-
ing much of
the hitherto
unknown
south coast.
On board
the ‘ ‘lnvesti-
gator” with
him were
Robert Brown, well known as a botanist, and William
Westall, the famous painter; while one of his officers
was (Sir) John Franklin, afterwards Governor of Tas-
mania and a famous explorer, who ended his career
amid Arctic snows.
For one thing Flinders will always be remembered-
that he gave to Australia her present name. Various
appellations had been bestowed upon her —Magellanica,
Jave la Grande, Terra Australis, and Great South Land.
After Tasman’s voyage in 1644 the western portion was
called New Holland, the eastern still retaining the name
Terra Australis. Subsequent to Cook’s discoveries the
eastern part received the name of New South Wales,
the remainder being still New Holland. The meridian
dividing the two, according to the patent to the first
G
Governor of New South Wales, was 135° eastern
longitude, almost identical with the old line of separa-
tion laid down after Tasman’s voyage. Flinders
readopted the name Terra Australis for the whole con-
tinent, including New South Wales, New Holland, and
Van Diemen Land, as he had proved the east and
west to be parts of one continent. At a later date, in
1814, he suggested —and his suggestion was adopted —
the name Australia, “as being more agreeable to the
ear, and an assimilation to the names of the other great
portions of the earth.”
The fate of La Perouse being still unknown, a
further French expedition was dispatched in 1801.
This consisted of three vessels —the “Geographe,”
under Commodore Nicolas Baudin ; the “Natural-
iste,” of which Captain Hamelin was the com-
mander; and
a small 30-
ton ship, the
“C a suarina/’
under Lieut.
Louis de Frey-
cinet. After a
brief prelim-
inary visit to
the western
coast they
went on to
Timor, after-
wards return-
ing southward
for closer ex-
amination of
the Western
Australian
shore. I n
June, 1801,
they anchored
off the mouth
of the Swan River and devoted some days to its
exploration, with the intention of tracing its source.
They seem to have reached the junction of the Helena
with the Swan when the leader, M. Heirisson, felt com-
pelled to return, as the provisions were running short.
The narAe of a member of the party being Moreau, the
title Moreau Inlet was bestowed upon the Canning River,
while the islands upon which the present Perth Cause-
way stands were called the Heirisson Islands. The view
from the top of Mount Eliza was described as par-
ticularly striking and beautiful and the fertile nature of
the soil about Guildford commented upon. At the
point where they abandoned their journey up the river,
about 60 miles from the mouth, the river was narrow,
only about 8 ft. deep, and the water salt. Having made
DESERTED INDIAN VILLAGE, KING GEORGE III SOUND (FROM VANCOUVER'S VOYAGEL


a specially minute survey of the coast in the vicinity of
the Swan River and at Rottnest Island, where they
found a species of wallaby, they proceeded to make an
examination of the whole Western Australian Coast.
From Cape North-West Cape names were
awarded to the prominent natural features. A new
entrance to Shark Bay, to which Baudin gave the name
of Geographe Channel, was discovered, and Captain
Hamelin found the plate left by Vlaming on Dirk
Hartog Island more than a century previously. Evidence
of the visit of this expedition to the south-west coast
may be found in Leschenault Estuary and Cape
Leschenault and Point Peron, named after the botanist
and the zoologist attached to the enterprise.
Some English authorities are of opinion that,
considering the completeness of the scientific equipment
carried by these vessels, the results achieved were sur-
prisingly small. This is set down to the fact that Baudin
hurried over his work, being satisfied to take credit for
discoveries already made by Flinders and others. To
some extent it may apply to the south coast, over which
a certain amount of friction arose between Baudin and
Flinders, who were coincidently in that neighbourhood;
but there is no reason to express any dissatisfaction with
the work done on the western side of the continent, over
which great pains appear to have been taken.
No further record exists of any voyage to Western
Australia until the year 1818, when the French Govern-
ment dispatched Captain Freycinet in the corvette
“Uranie” on a voyage of discovery and scientific
investigation. In the course of this cruise Freycinet
anchored in Shark Bay, of which M. Duperron made a
minute survey, and upon which the French name “le
Baie des Chiens Marins” was bestowed. He then pro-
ceeded along the north-west coast on his way to the
islands in the South Seas, calling at Sydney on his
return. Judging from the letters of M. Arago, one of
the members of the expedition, the Western Australian
coast failed to meet with their approval. “The coast,”
he says, “from the moment we saw it exhibited nothing
but a picture of desolation ; no rivulet consoled the eye,
no tree attracted it; no mountain gave variety to the
landscape, no dwelling enlivened it. Everywhere
reigned sterility and death. . . . Threatening reefs,
sometimes rising to the height of 40 or 50 ft., seem
desirous of opposing the audacity of the mariner and
forbidding his approach to this land, abandoned by
Nature. Its outline is uniform, without breaks,
almost without difference, and always very low. At
the first view you take in an immense distance; but
beware of looking for any enjoyment. The search would
be merely wasting your strength, without finding the
least relief.” And in another letter: —“The sun sets:
everything is dead. The myriads of flies that devoured
us have disappeared ; no insect wings through the air ;
no voice disturbs the silence of this melancholy solitude ;
a sharp cold benumbs the limbs. The sun reappears:
the air is again peopled; a consuming heat oppresses
us; we seek repose and find nothing but fatigue. What
a frightful abode!” All of which simply goes to prove
M. Arago’s inability to probe beneath the surface appear-
ances.
The number of French expeditions that touched at
one part or another of the western coast of Australia
began to arouse something like suspicion in the English
mind, and consequently the British Government started
to take a livelier interest in that part of the continent.
In 1817 the Admiralty decided to send an expedition
to complete the survey of the whole coastline, and from
that date until 1822 Lieutenant Philip Parker King
was busily engaged carrying out that work. In pur-
suance of his instructions King left Sydney in Decem-
ber, 1817, in the cutter “Mermaid,” of only 84 tons,
having with him Mr. Allan Cunningham as botanist and
as officers Lieutenants Bedwell and John Septimus Roe,
the latter of whom afterwards became the first Surveyor-
General of the colony. The first call was made at King
George 111. Sound, which was reached on the 20tli of
the following month. Here King remained ten days,
which were spent in procuring wood and water and
making various excursions into the surrounding coun-
try, giving Mr. Roe his first experience of what was
afterwards to be his life’s work —the survey of Western
Australia. The usual directions laid down by the
Admiralty about the planting of seeds were carried out,
but without permanent effect, as three years later not
a trace of the garden was to be found. Leaving the
Sound, King was prevented by sickness among the crew
from making any further examination until he reached
the north-west coast. This was then accurately charted
and various points named. At the same time excur-
sions to the mainland were made at various places and
friendly intercourse, wherever possible, established with
the natives. On March 4 he anchored in Nickol Bay
for the purpose of making researches and then went
along the north coast and on to Timor, after leaving
which he made all speed back to Sydney to replenish
the stores. Two important questions had been set at
rest by this voyage —the openings behind Rosemary
Island and the nature of Van Diemen Gulf. Owing
to the loss of the anchors King found it impossible to
make a detailed examination of Exmouth Gulf or land
upon Depuch Island, so favourably noticed by Peron.
Many rivers, bays, and ports had been discovered, and
the exploration of the interior had revealed good pas-
toral country. “Its thickly-wooded shores,” says King,
“bore a striking contrast to the sandy, desert-looking
tract we had previously seen, and inspired us with


the hope of finding at some future time a still
greater improvement of country between the two ex-
tremes.”
I lie Mermaid’ left Sydney on the second voyage
in May, 1819, and in the following September reached
Cambridge Gulf, so named after the Duke of Cambridge.
Here King thought he had made a great discovery,
believing that it must terminate in a river of some
kind. Instead of that he found it barren and useless,
the surrounding country being devoid of vegetation, the
soil sandy and salt, the water undrinkable, and the
gulf itself tailing off on all sides into a series of mud
flats. Within the gulf he discovered an island, named
by him Adolphus Island, of which he was able to give
a much more favourable account, as grass was growing
luxuriantly over it and the water was fresh and abund-
ant. Leaving
there he sail-
ed westward
along the
north coast,
examining
and naming
as he passed
Sir Graham
Moore Is-
lands, Eclipse
Islands (from
an eclipse of
the moon tak-
in g place
while there),
V ansittart
Bay, Admir-
alty Gulf, and
Port Warren-
der. At this
point King
decided to
leave the coast for the time, the scarcity of water
and the absence of provisions having caused sick-
ness among the crew. He therefore set sail for Timor,
and thence returned to Sydney, having examined on his
trip a further 540 miles of the northern coastline. In
the following year a third voyage was undertaken for
the purpose of extending the survey to Warrender, and
in the course of this York Sound (after the Duke of
York), Careening Bay (where the ship was repaired),
Prince Regent River, and many other places were
named and examined. A serious leak in the cutter
compelled King to abandon the work, and he again
returned to Sydney, arriving there at the end of the
year, having narrowly escaped shipwreck at the entrance
to the Heads. Unfortunately, owing to the unsea-
worthiness of the cutter, the amount of work done on
g 2
this survey was but small. King's desire to complete
his labour was, however, unabated, and in 1821 he
again left Sydney for the north-west coast, this time
in the brig “Bathurst,” purchased for the purpose by
the Government. With a larger vessel and an in-
creased crew the expedition was mucf better equipped,
and the commander was able to spend a longer time
at the scene of his operations. The coast, as far
down as Cape Latouche Treville, was examined and sur-
veyed, after which King sailed across to the Mauritius to
refit, returning at the end of 1821 to King George
Sound. From there he sailed along the west coast,
checking many points of previous surveys until he
arrived at the Swan River, where he anchored for
a while. Resuming his voyage he examined, with a
good deal of accuracy, the intervening shore until
he reached
the Abrolhos
and finally
Dirk Hartog
Island. Here
he landed
and searched
without suc-
cess forVlam-
ing’s plate,
and then pro-
ceeded north-
ward to Cape
Leveque, thus
practically
completing
the survey of
the whole
Western Aus-
tralian coast
fr o m King
George Sound
to Wvndham,
with the exception of that part lying between
Depuch Island and Cape Villaret. What Cook, Bass,
and Flinders had done for the eastern and southern
coasts King, following upon the earlier Dutch, French,
and English navigators, had done for the western and
northern, so that the Admiralty was in possession of
fairly comprehensive charts of the whole Australian
coastline.
With Lieutenant King the long line of discoverers
may be said to have ended. Practically everything
in the way of interior exploration had yet to he
undertaken, but the few voyages that afterwards took
place to these shores were in the nature of looking for
satisfactory places of settlement rather than of discover-
ing new territory, or else were for the purpose of check-
ing and correcting existing surveys.
ABORIGINAL HUTS, WEST COAST (FROM FREYCINET'S VOYAGE.


Although the existence of the western side of the
continent had been known for certainly two, and very
probably three, centuries it was not until the third
decade of the nineteenth centurj^ —some forty years after
the foundation of the colony of New South Wales —that
the British Government decided to take steps to found
a settlement there. That the matter had not previously
engaged the attention of the Llome authorities was in all
likelihood due to the unsatisfactory reports of the new
territory brought back by navigators, who, confining
themselves to the uninviting coastline, seemed to have
neither the time nor the inclination to make any exami-
nation of the interior, and so missed the fertile inland
districts. Neither was there at that period that con-
gestion of population in the Old Country which made
colonies necessary as outlets for her surplus people. The
only inducement in those days to leave the comforts of
civilization was the almost certain knowledge that for-
tune, rapid and large, was to be secured by a few years’
exile. When, however, a strong suspicion began to
gain ground that other nations were casting their eyes
toward the southern seas the English people, with that
profound belief that the Beatitude “Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth” was part of their
country’s constitution, began to realize that a few settle-
ments on the eastern coasts were scarcely sufficient, in
the opinion of others, to establish a claim to the whole
of this vast continent as British territory. There is very
little doubt that the settlements at King George Sound
and the Swan River were in the first place due to the
activity being displayed by the French in Australian
waters.
It was rumoured that Admiral Baudin had contem-
plated a settlement at Western Port in Victoria in 1802,
and an exhaustive examination of the north-west coast
had, it will be remembered, been made by Freycinet in
1818. In 1825 we find that another expedition con-
sisting of the “Thetis” and “Esperance,” commanded
respectively by De Bougainville and Du Camper, was
cruising about the southern coast. These voyages gave
rise to the strong suspicion that France, recognizing that
maritime power depended greatly on the possession of
suitable colonies, was looking for the opportunity to
establish a settlement in Australia. The suspicion may
have been further strengthened by a belief that in the
minds of Frenchmen the Napoleonic dream of an Indian
conquest had not, perhaps, altogether vanished. In that
case a colony on the west coast of Australia would, in
conjunction with the Mauritius, have formed a strategic
base of some value. Such a colony would also have
THE CYCLOPEDIA OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER III.
ANNEXATION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
been the means of introducing a formidable competitor
into the trade relations then being fostered between India
and the newly-established penal colony in New South
Wales. Whatever the reasons may have been, there is no
doubt that they were sufficient to move the English
authorities to take action. The movements of the
French were closely watched, and at the same time
settlement both in Australia and New Zealand was
pushed on, so as to deprive France of the chance of
gaining any foothold on Australasian soil.
The fear of French annexation of the western and
southern coasts caused General Darling, then Governor
of New South Wales, to draw the attention of the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies to the possibility, and ask
that steps be taken to avert it. “It will not be easy/
he wrote, “to satisfy the French, if they are desirous of
establishing themselves here, that there is any valid
objection to their doing so on the west coast, and I there-
fore beg to suggest that the difficulty would be removed
by a commission,” proclaiming “the whole territory as
within the Government.” On March 1, 1826, Lord
Bathurst addressed two despatches to Darling, informing
him that two French vessels were reported to have
sailed on a voyage of discovery, and suggesting that for
fear the Frenchmen should attempt to take possession
of or establish a claim to any part of the western coast
of the continent, it would be advisable for the
Governor to send an exploring party to Shark Bay. In
one of these despatches —a private one —the Secretary
of State was particularly careful to draw General
Darling’s attention to the fact that he had avoided any
expressions which might, at some future time, be con-
strued into an admission of there not having been a
preoccupancy by Great Britain, and the Governor was
pointedly warned to regulate his language accordingly.
This probably explains the absence of any public procla-
mation as to the intention of the Government to found a
settlement. On March 11 Lord Bathurst again addressed
Governor Darling upon the subject (and it is more than
likely that the three despatches came from England by
the same ship), instructing him to have an examination
made of King George Sound in preference to Shark Bay.
The reasons given were that the soil at the Sound was
reputed to be richer, and that, situated as it was on
the track of vessels passing between Sydney and London,
communication could more easily be kept up with a
settlement in that locality. In October, 1826, Governor
Darling replied to these despatches. Lie stated that in
his opinion King George Sound was unsuited “even for
a penal settlement,” but promised to make early arrange-
84


incuts for having it examined and taken possession of.
The country round Shark Bay he considered even worse;
in fact, he had been given to understand that the
adjacent coastlands were frequently under water. “The
French,” he added, “would therefore find it difficult to
maintain themselves at either of those places.”
However, without loss of time directions were given
to fit out expeditions for the purpose of carrying into
effect the instructions of the Home Government. Three
sites for occupancy were
determined upon at
Raffles Bay, Western
Port, and King George
Sound —and on Novem-
ber 9 H.M.S. “Fly”
accompanied by the brigs
* 4 Amity” and “Dragon,”
sailed from Sydney to
establish the settlements
at Western Port and
King George Sound.
The contingent for the
Sound was on the
“Amity,” and was under
the command of Major
Lockyer, of the 59th
Regiment, who had with
him Captain Wakefield
and a detachment of the
39th Regiment, as well
as twenty-four convicts.
In the instructions given
to Lockyer he was told
“to avoid any expression
of doubt as to the whole
of New Holland being
within this Government,
any division of it which
may be supposed to
exist under the de-
signation of New South
Wales being merely
ideal, and intended only
with a view of dis-
tinguishing the more
settled part of the
country. Should this explanation not prove satisfactory
it will be proper in that case to refer them to this
Government for any further information they may
require.” If it should so happen that a landing had
already been effected by the French “you will, notwith-
standing, land the troops agreeably to your instructions,
and signify that their continuance with any view to
establishing themselves, or colonization, would be con-
sidered an unjustifiable intrusion on His Britannic
Majesty’s possession.” The departure of this expedi-
tion was notified to Lord Bathurst on November 24.
The party arrived at King George Sound on Christmas
Day, 1826, and on the morning of the 26th they landed
and Lockyer proceeded to select a position for the settle-
ment. Various situations were examined and discussed,
but it was not until the 29th that a site was fixed, which
is now occupied by the town of Albany. The exact
spot where the British flag was hoisted, from which the
whole of Western Aus-
tralia was claimed as
belonging to the Crown,
is unfortunately not
precisely known. It was
somewhere at the base
of either Mount Clarence
or Mount Melville, near
both of which there still
exist some indications
of the early settlement.
Very meagre informa-
tion concerning the little
colony is available be-
yond the diary kept by
Major Lockyer during
the first four months of
its existence. From this
we learn that the Sound
was used largely by
American and other
sealers and whalers who
plied their vocation
among the islands along
the south coast and as
far up the western coast
as Rottnest Island. With
these Lockyer from time
to time had a good deal
of trouble owing to their
ill-treatment of the na-
tives. From the condition
of the settlement in 1831,
when the convicts were
withdrawn and the estab-
lishment placed under
the Swan River Govern-
ment, we may ascertain that very little progress was
made during the four years of its existence. This was
probably due to the fact that it was far removed from
civilization and was wholly dependent for supplies and
information upon occasional visits of ships from Sydney.
The soil does not appear to have lent itself to such
desultory attempts at cultivation as were carried on.
The poor results from tillage may be gauged from the
fact that on more than one occasion the colonists were
H.M.S. “SUCCESS.”


reduced to privation owing to the delayed arrival of
vessels with food supplies. Lockyer returned to Sydney
in April, 1827, leaving Captain Wakefield in command.
This officer was succeeded in turn by Captain Barker,
who retained control until the convicts were withdrawn
and the idea of a penal settlement abandoned. This
took place by proclamation dated March 7, 1831. The
withdrawal of the troops and convicts was due to various
causes. One of the conditions laid down by the
Government in 1828 regarding the then proposed settle-
ment at Swan River was that no convicts were to be
sent there. Those who entered upon the scheme did
not consequently relish the presence of a convict
establishment within the borders of the territory. Tuen
the commission issued to Captain Stirling as Governor,
and which was dated March 5, 1831, described the colony
as that portion of Australia lying west oi tlie 129th meri-
dian of eastern longitude, and therefore a settlement
under other control could scarcely continue to exist.
Further, Governor Stirling wished to settle colonists in
the southern portions of the State (as may be seen from
part of a despatch to the Secretary of State dated
January 30, : —“ln obedience
to instructions directed to me under date of December
30 I am desirous of attracting settlers to occupy the
country in the southern districts of this territory, and
I intend shortly to submit for public selection and
occupation lands situated in the direction of King
George Sound. At present a military post is main-
tained there, and which is under the command of
General Darling. 1 therefore take the liberty to
suggest that the present Commandant and his party
should be removed, and the duties of that station be
committed to an officer and a small party of soldiers
from the detachment serving under the Officer Command-
ing the troops in this settlement.” This course was
approved by the Home authorities, and Stirling was
informed in a despatch dated July 20, 1830, that General
Darling had been so instructed. These instructions
were carried out early in the following March, and on
the 7th of that month, as stated above, the settlement
at the Sound was brought under the control of the
Western Australian Government. Meanwhile the
French scare had become more pronounced in New South
Wales by the arrival at Sydney in December, 1826, of
the corvette “L ? Astrolabe,” which had spent almost the
whole of the month of October at King George Sound.
Just about that time, too, information arrived from
London that the French Government had asked Lord
John Russell what portion of Australia England con-
sidered to be included within the boundaries of her
territory —a question to which Lord John gave the
historic reply, “The whole.” In Governor Darling’s
opinion these facts made the necessity for some definite
British settlement on the west coast more insistent.
Fortunately the means of carrying his conviction into
operation were available.
Reports had been received by the Secretary of State
in England to the effect that the settlement founded at
Melville Island on the northern coast in 1824 was
unlikely to realize expectations. In consequence Lord
Bathurst directed the Governor of New South Wales to
send a man-of-war to the spot, with orders to the cap-
tain to remove the settlement, if necessary, to a more
suitable site, preferably one further eastward. The
man-of-war at Sydney when the despatch arrived was
H.M.S. “Success,” commanded by Captain (afterwards
Sir James) Stirling. Governor Darling, so far as the
records show, appears to have communicated Lord
Bathurst's wishes to Captain Stirling in an informal,
unofficial way, for the first intimation we have of their
receipt is in the form of two letters from Stirling to the
Governor, in the first of which —dated December 8, 1826
—it was pointed out that the north-west monsoonal rains
would interfere with the removal of the Melville Island
settlement until after April; in the other —dated
December 14 —Stirling suggested that he should employ
the ship during the interval in making an examination of
The Swan River, which had been surveyed by the French
in 1803-4. On December 18 the Governor informed
Lord Bathurst that he had “acquiesced” in Stirling’s pro-
posal, “as it is of great importance that so advantageous
a position should not be taken possession of by the
French.”
On January 17, therefore, the “Success,” under com-
mand of Captain Stirling, and having on board Mr.
Charles Fraser, the Colonial Botanist, left Sydney with
a view of making up the French survey deficiences and
of examining thoroughly the country in the vicinity of
Swan River. During the early part of the voyage she
was accompanied by a cutter, whose sailing qualities,
however, turned out to be inferior; consequently the
vessels parted company, the smaller craft being instructed
to make for King George Sound, for the settlement at
which she was carrying provisions. On March 4 Stirling
sighted land and rounded Cape Leeuwin. “The first
appearance of the coast we were now to explore,” he
says, “presented nothing attractive; the monotony of its
outline and the dusky hue of the meagre vegetation it
supported at once accounted for the sterile and hopeless
character attributed by early navigators to this region.”
On the following day Rottnest Island was reached and
explored, and on March 6, 1827, the “Success” anchored
off the South Head of Swan River. Early on the morn-
ing of the Bth Stirling started to carry out the real
objects of the expedition, which were “to proceed, if
possible, to the source of the river—to examine the banks
and the depth of water, to fix on an eligible spot for
a settlement, to ascertain the productions of the country,


the nature of the soil, and the practicability of forming
a harbour for shipping.”
For the purpose of fulfilling these instructions the
ship’s gig and cutter were provisioned for a fortnight
and well armed, after which, under the command of
Captain Stirling, they proceeded up the river. Mr.
Fraser formed one of the party. No difficulties were
met with until they reached the flats above Heirisson
Islands (the site of the present Perth Causeway), where
the water was too shallow to float the boats, which had
to be unloaded and drawn across. After that the way
was tolerably easy, and on the 13th they arrived at
what they deemed to be the source of the river.
•‘At daylight on the 13th,” says Captain Stirling, “we
were as usual in motion, and observed little variation in the
appearance of the land as we ascended, except that the hills
on the banks were higher and more frequent, and the soil
upon them of a coarser
description. They are
here composed of a
red sandstone, red
clay, and an ochry
loam, varying in
colour between red,
brown, blue, and yel-
low. The soil on the
lov iands continued as
good as ever. About
an hour after starting
we had the misfortune
to stave the cutter on
a sunken tree; lead
and fearnought, how-
ever, speedily effected
a cure, and we con-
tinued to pursue our
course amid increasing
difficulties from simi-
lar obstructions and
from the decreasing
width of the stream.
The hills round us
were high, and we as-
cended them with
ease; but it was in
vain that we sought a view of the country; we were
the more disappointed because its character was evi-
dently changing. At length, after several halts, we
reached, about 11 o’clock, a spot where the river takes an
eastern direction, just above a considerable creek on the
left hand. We there found insurmountable obstructions to
our further progress—in fact, we had reached the termina-
tion. Far beyond this there was the bed of a torrent, but
no longer a river, nor even a continuation of water except
in a succession of distant parts. Here, then, on a high
bank we pitched our tent. The richness of the soil, the
bright foliage of the shrubs, the majesty of the surrounding
trees, the abrupt and red-coloured banks of the river occa-
sionally seen, and the view of the blue summits of the
mountains from which we were not far distant made the
scenery round this spot as beautiful as anything of the
kind I had ever witnessed.”
During the course of the trip two gardens were
planted about 15 miles up the river, and after some
trouble friendly intercourse was established with the
natives. The soil along the banks was examined and
an abundance of fresh water found. An ascent of the
hills, to which the name General Darling Range was
given, was made by Mr. Fraser. The cutter then
returned to the ship, leaving the gig, with Lieutenant
Belches in charge, to make a hurried examination of a
tributary river (the Canning), to which the French had
given the name of Moreau Inlet. After her return
the crew of the frigate was employed surveying the
islands of Rottnest, Berthollet (now Carnac), and
Buache, as well as the adjacent rocks. On Buache
a garden was planted (from which probably the
present name Garden Island was derived) and some cattle
and sheep left there. The “Success” sailed for
Geographe Bay on March 21. Here Stirling remained
until the 25th, when he set his course for King George
Sound, which was
reached on April 2.
He remained at the
settlement, which
did not come up
to his expectations,
until two days
later, when he left
for Sydney, arriv-
ing in Port Jackson
on the 15th of the
same month, having
been absent about
three months.
So far as their
reports go, both
Captain Stirling and
Mr. Fraser seem to
have been greatly
impressed with the
possibilities of the
newly-examined
country. The latter, who had certainly greater experi-
ence in judging, was if possible the more pronounced
in his good opinion, and there is no doubt that his
opinion was largely relied upon when the question of
colonization was under discussion. In concluding his
report upon the natural history, soil, etc., of the Swan
River district he says : -
In delivering my opinion on the whole of the lands seen
on the banks of the Swan, I hesitate not in pronouncing
it superior to any I have seen in New South Wales east-
ward of the Jilue Mountains, not only in its local situation,
but in the many existing advantages which it holds out to
settlers, viz. :—
Ist. The evident superiority of the soil.
2nd. The facility with which settlers can bring their
farms into a state of culture from tiie open state
of the country, the trees not averaging more than
ten to the acre.
THE SWAN RIVER (FRON A PAINTING BY J. W. HIGGINS, 1827.


3rd. The great advantage of fresh-water springs of the
best quality, and consequent permanent humidity
of the soil—two advantages not existing eastward
of the Blue Mountains.
4th. The advantage of water carriage to their own
doors and the non-existence of impediments to
land carriage.
These favourable reports so impressed General
Darling that he forwarded, on April 21, 1827, a
despatch in which he strongly advised the Home
Government to establish a settlement at Swan River as
quickly as possible. In this despatch he points out:
Assuming that the calculations of the periods necessary
to make the respective voyages to and from India and other
parts are correctly stated, Swan River would appear to
hold out advantages highly deserving attention. A con-
valescent station might be established there, as proposed by
Captain Stirling, for the sick and invalids from India,
instead of sending them at once to England. A passage of
thirty days, the period stated in the report as necessary for
vessels to go from India to Swan River, is inconsiderable
in comparison with the length of time required to make the
voyage to Europe, and at Swan River the advantages to an
invalid in point of climate would, I have no doubt, be
greater than in England. The establishment, however, if
to any extent, must be effected directly from England or
India, totally independent of this colony, Swan River being
too remote and the voyage too uncertain to admit of its
depending on this place for its supplies. It will be seen
by the report that Captain Stirling considers that Swan
River possesses all the advantages with references to the
trade with the Eastern Islands, which attach to Melville
Island, or any part of the north-west coast of this territory.
Among the natural advantages of the Swan River, it will
be observed that good water is abundant. The country is,
besides, favourable for cultivation, the soil in general being
excellent, some specimens of which, and of the natural
productions of the country, 1 do myself the honour to for-
ward to Your Lordship by this opportunity. And the
scenery is represented as at once grand and picturesque. .
It is much to be regretted that the water at the
entrance of Swan River is not of a greater depth, there
being only about 6 ft. for a mile above its mouth. More
particularly as Melville Water, through which it flows,
appears to be a commodious and magnificent basin. Nautical
men can, however, best determine whether the advantages
of the externa] anchorages of Gage Roads and Cockburn
Sound are likely to compensate for the inconvenient nature
of the river. As Captain Stirling's visit to Swan River
may attract attention and the report find its way into the
French papers it appears desirable, should His Majesty's
Government entertain any intention of forming a settle-
ment at that place, that no time should be lost in taking
the necessary steps.
This recommendation appears to have been con-
veyed to England by Captain Stirling in person. After
consideration the Government decided to give effect to
it, and to Stirling was entrusted the charge of organiz-
ing the expedition.
In the meantime, while preparations were being
made in England for the establishment of the colony,
instructions were sent to Commodore Schomberg, of the
Indian Squadron, to take possession of the territory. In
pursuance of these orders Captain Charles Fremantle,
of H.M.S. “Challenger,” was detailed for the purpose,
and on May 2, 1829, he anchored off the mouth of the
Swan, and hoisting the British flag on the South Head
took formal possession, in the name of H.M. George IV.,
of ‘all that part of New Holland which is not included
within the territory of New South Wales.”
Thus the principal reason for the establishment of
Western Australia was the fear entertained both in
England and New South Wales that France had formed
the intention of occupying a portion of the continent.
A few years later it was admitted that such fears were
groun Hess. The French expeditions had all one of two
objects in view—the advancement of science or the dis-
covery of the fate of La Perouse. The Earl of Ripon in
1833, writing in reference to the matter, said:—“The
present settlement at Swan River owes its origin, you
may perhaps be aware, to certain false rumours which
had reached the Government of the intentions of a foreign
power to establish a colony on the west coast of Aus-
tralia. The design was for a time given up entirely
on the ground of public economy, and would not have
been resumed but for the offer of a party of gentlemen
to embark in an undertaking of this nature, at their own
risk, upon receiving extensive grants of land, and on
a certain degree of protection and assistance for a limited
period being secured to them by this Government.”
CHAPTER IV.
COLONIZATION AND EARLY SETTLEMENT.
The English Government having decided, as we
have seen in the preceding chapter, to proceed with the
settlement at Swan River it became necessary to draw
up the conditions under which the new colony was to
enter upon its existence. It is more than probable—
in fact, according to Lord Derby’s statement it is certain
-that the framing of these conditions was both in-
fluenced and expedited by a proposal made by a syndi-
cate consisting of Mr. Thomas Peel (a relative of Sir
Robert Peel, the then Home Secretary), Sir Francis
Vincent, Mr. E. W. H. Schenley, and Colonel T. Potter
Macqueen. These gentlemen appear to have been led
to formulate their scheme through the favourable re-
ports of the country given by Captain Stirling. By a


memorial dated November 4, 1828, they offered to send
out and settle in the neighbourhood of the Swan River
10,000 persons chosen from England, Scotland, and Ire-
land, and to find them in provisions and other neces-
saries usually allowed to emigrants; also to bring to the
settlement 1,000 head of horned stock, and to arrange
for three small vessels to run subsequently between
Sydney and Swan River as occasion might require, the
undertaking to be completed within four years. In pay-
ment of their expenses, which they estimated at <£3o
per head of the people taken out, they expressed them-
selves willing to take grants of land at a valuation of
Is. 6d. per acre, and they further promised to provide
proper surveyors for the purpose of allocating to every
male not less than 200 acres of land from the quantity
they were to receive. The objects of the proposed
scheme were stated in the memorial in the following
terms:
“It is well known that the soil of Swan River, from
its moist state,
is better adapted
to the cultiva-
tion of tobacco
and cotton than
any other part of
Australia. Both
of these articles
are intended to
be cultivated
upon a large
scale; as also
sugar and flax,
with various im-
portant articles
of drugs that
the climate is
peculiarly adapted to the growth of.
“The undersigned [the members of the syndicate]
are satisfied that should they succeed in sending home
to the Mother Country that produce which at this
moment the Government are indebted to powers which
it would be their policy to suppress, were they in a con-
dition so to do, they will have forwarded not alone the
views of His Majesty’s Government, but effected a
national good which neither time nor circumstances can
erase from the annals of British history.
“Their grazing operations will go very extensively
into the rearing of horses for the East India trade, with
the most important establishment of large herds of
cattle and swine, for the purpose of supplying His
Majesty's or other shipping with salt provisions , as the
proximity of salt mines, of the best description, holds
out a great inducement towards its success.”
The English Government looked favourably upon
the proposals, but was not inclined to accede to the
whole of the requests made by the syndicate. After
some delay through further correspondence the follow-
ing reply to the memorial was sent by the Colonial
Office to Mr. Peel on December 6, 1828:
“I am directed by Secretary Sir George Murray
to acquaint you, in answer to your memorial dated the
14th of last month, that the terms upon which the free
grants of land will be made in the proposed settlement
of Western Australia are those contained in the paper,
a copy of which I enclose. His Majesty’s Government,
however, are desirous that the experiment should not
be made, in the first instance, upon a very large scale,
on account of the extensive distress which would be
occasioned by a failure in any of the objects expected
from the undertaking; and they therefore consider it
their duty to limit the grant which you request to a
maximum of 1,000,000 acres. Half a million of these
will be allotted to you as soon as possible after the
arrival of the
first vessel taken
out by you,
which may con-
tain not less
than 400 persons
of both sexes, in
the proportions
of not less than
five female to six
male settlers;
and if you shall
have covered
this grant by
investments, in
accordance with
the enclosed
terms, before
the expiration of the year 1840 the remaining 500,000
will be allotted to you by degrees, as fresh importations
of settlers and capital shall be made, in accordance with
the terms already mentioned. But in order that you
may suffer no ultimate loss by any reasonable retarda-
tion of your investments, His Majesty’s Government
intend that the allowance of 40 acres for every £3 in-
vested shall not be reduced on your second 500,000
acres, although your claim to such second 500,000 may
not arise before the expiration of next year, which is
the period limited 'to other settlers applying for free
grants. But they will reserve your claim at the original
rate of Is. 6d. per acre until the expiration of the year
1840, after which time no part- of your grant will be
held binding upon which the whole required sum of
Is. 6d. per every acre shall not have been actually in-
vested. A convenient allotment of land will be reserved
for the town and harbour, for public buildings, and
THE SETTLEMENT, KING GEORGE SOUND, 1828


for the accommodation of future settlers; and a priority
of choice to the extent of 100,000 acres will be allowed
to Captain Stirling, whose surveys and reports of the
coast have led to the formation of the settlement. The
remaining land will be chosen by the settlers in the
order of their arrival, those who arrive together drawing
lots for the priority of choice."
The enclosure referred to was a circular dated De-
cember 5, setting forth the terms upon which the
Government was prepared to assist colonists. This cir-
cular was worded as follows:
“Although it is the intention of His Majesty’s
Government to form a settlement on the western coast
of Australia the Government do not intend to incur any
expense in conveying settlers or in supplying them with
necessaries after their arrival.
“Such persons, however, as may be prepared to pro-
ceed to that country, at their own cost, before the end
of the year 1829, in parties comprehending a proportion
of not less than five female to six male settlers, will
receive grants of land in fee simple (free of quit rent)
proportioned to the capital which they may invest upon
public or private objects in the colony to the satisfaction
of His Majesty's Government at home, certified by the
Superintendent or officer administering the Colonial
Government, at the rate of 40 acres for every sum of
£3 so invested, provided they give previous security;
first, that all supplies sent to the colony, whether of pro-
visions, stores, or other articles which may be purchased
by the capitalists there, or which shall have been sent
out for the use of them or their parties on the requisition
of the Secretary of State, if not paid for on delivery in
the colony, shall be paid for at home, each capitalist
being held liable in his proportion, and, secondly,
that in the event of the establishment being broken up
by the Governor or Superintendent, all persons desirous
of returning to the British Islands shall be conveyed to
their own home at the expense of the capitalists by
whom they may have been taken out. The passages of
labouring persons, whether paid for by themselves or
others, and whether they be male or female, provided
the proportion of the sexes before mentioned be pre-
served, will be considered as an investment of capital,
entitling the party by whom any such payment may
have been made to an allowance of land at the rate of
£15 —that is, of 200 acres of land for the passage of
every such labouring person over and above any other
investment of capital.
“Any land thus granted which shall not have been
brought into cultivation or otherwise improved or re-
claimed from its wild state, to the satisfaction of Govern-
ment, within twenty-one years from the date of the
grant shall, at the end of the twenty-one years, revert
absolutely to the Crown.
“All these conditions with respect to free grants oi
land, and all contracts of labouring persons and others
who shall have bound themselves for a stipulated term
of service, will be strictly maintained.
“It is not intended that any convicts or other
description of prisoners be sent to this new settlement.
“The government will be administered by Captain
Stirling, of the Royal Navy, as Civil Superintendent of
the settlement; and a Bill, in the nature of a civil
charter, will be submitted to Parliament in the com-
mencement of its next session.*' (Dated, December 5,
1828.)
The letter of December 6 and the enclosed condi-
tions, which were those offered to the public at large,
failed to meet with the approval of the members of the
syndicate. Their original request, it will be noted, of
4.000. acres was cut down to a maximum of
1.000. and even that was subject to conditions. The
priority of choice of land over all other settlers, Captain
Stirling alone excepted, was not approved. The situa-
tion therefore differed from that which held good at the
time they agreed to undertake the scheme, and
ultimately all the members drew out with the sole ex-
ception of Mr. Peel, whose faith in the matter was so
great that on January 28 he informed the Government
that he was desirous of carrying on and completing the
project by himself, on the terms approved by the
Colonial Office for the syndicate. To this the Secretary
of State consented.
In the meantime new regulations, not quite so
favourable, had been issued on January 13, 1829, allow-
ing only ten years, instead of twenty-one as originally
set forth, for bringing the land under cultivation. By
a special concession, however, this part of the regula-
tions was held not to apply to Mr. Peel.
Under these new regulations invested capital was
to comprise stock of every description, all implements
of husbandry and other articles applicable to the pur-
poses of the productive industry or necessary for the
establishment of the settler on the land where he was
to be located, and the amount of any half-pay or pen-
sion received from the Government. Under the word
“person" no child under ten years of age was to be
included, but 40 acres were allowed for every child under
three years of age, 80 for every child under six, and
120 for every child exceeding that but under ten. The
fee simple of the land was not to be granted in any
case until Is. 6d. per acre had been expended in cul-
tivation or permanent improvement. At least one-
fourth of the land was to be reclaimed from its wild
state within three years or a fine of 6d. per acre in-
curred ; and if nothing had been done at the end of ten
years in all the whole was to revert to the Crown. These
conditions were to hold only until the end of 1830.


The Government agreed to bear the cost of the
civil and military officers necessary, but allowed them
to take land in lieu of pay.
These conditions seem to be liberal enough to have
ensured success to any capably-managed expedition. Yet
that was not the result of Mr. Peeks project. Although
anticipating somewhat, it may be advisable to complete
the story. The first shipment of immigrants and stock,
under the charge of Mr. Peel, arrived in the colony to-
ward the end of 1829. Owing to lack of management
on the part of the promoter, and to his failure to pro-
vide those whom he had brought with food and clothing
according to his contract with them, most of them de-
serted and struck out for themselves. In fact, almost
from the date of their landing it was evident that the
project was doomed to failure. Beyond merely bringing
the people out Peel
failed to fulfil any of
the conditions of his
agreement with the
Government, and in
consequence endless
litigation ensued.
Finally, on Septem-
ber 25, 1834, he made
formal application to
the Governor for a
grant of 250,000 acres
of land on conditions
of general improve-
ment.
In compliance with
this request he was
granted on November
25 following the fee
simple of the land now
known as Cockburn
Sound Location 16,
“in consideration of certain location duties performed to
the satisfaction of Governor Stirling/' Here he settled
down in solitary grandeur, an embittered and disap-
pointed man, doing little or nothing to improve his vast
estate, and died at Mandurah some thirty years later
in comparatively indigent circumstances.
Apparently a second proposal to establish a settle-
ment in Western Australia was made about the same
time, with abortive results, by Mr. Nathaniel Ogle. In
his work '‘The Colony of Western Australia,” published
in 1839, he says: —“The writer in 1828-9 was desirous,
from private information he had received, to emigrate,
with nearly 1,000 well-selected companions, to Lesche-
nault and La Vasse. A frigate of nearly 1,700 tons,
built at Archangel for the Greeks, was selected.
The capital ready was ample. It was deemed
necessary to require the use of the ship on the
HOUSE OF COLONIAL CHAPLAIN, REV. J. B. WITTENOOM, PERTH, 1832.
(FROM ORIGINAL SKETCH BY HIMSELF.)
coast for three years to supply the colony with labourers,
cattle, and provision. The Government, after much
correspondence, refused them permission to use their
ship for that period because she was foreign huilt; which
caused the expedition to be abandoned —-to his great and
lasting regret.”
Concurrently with the negotiations with private
parties the Government pushed on the official arrange-
ments for the inception of the new colony. Owing to the
personal knowledge of the country which he possessed
and the enthusiasm he showed in advocating its claims
it was felt that the administration could not be entrusted
to any other than Captain Stirling. A Scotchman by
birth and a naval officer of many years’ standing, he
had gained a good deal of colonial experience in the
colony of New South Wales, and had been instrumental
in forming the settle-
ments in the north
and south of that
territory. He was
therefore peculiarly
fitted to undertake
the duties attendant
upon the control of
the new venture. At
first it was a mat-
ter of consideration
whether he should be
merely a Civil Super-
intendent or should
have the larger powers
of a Lieutenant-Gov-
ernor. By the time
the conditions of
settlement were laid
down the latter title
was decided upon as
being the more suit-
able, and it was also decided to award him a
priority of choice of 100,000 acres as some recompense
for the services he had already rendered. This con-
sisted of the whole of Garden Island, with the exception
of such portions as might be required for Crown pur-
poses, together with sufficient land in the neighbourhood
of Cape Naturaliste necessary to make up the full
grant.
At the time he received no definite commission as
Lieutenant-Governor. In place of that he received a
letter of appointment and instruction which was dated
December 30, 1828, and which held good for something
over two ye # ars, until, in fact, March 5, 1831, when the
first commission was issued appointing him Governor
and Commander-in-Chief of Western Australia. The
reason for the adoption of this course was explained in
a despatch forwarded to Stirling by the Secretary of


State for the Colonies at the same time as the letter of
appointment. This document clearly laid down the
course to be followed in establishing the new settlement,
and has such an important bearing upon the genesis of
the State that we reprint the full text of it:-
It having been determined by His Majesty’s Govern-
ment to occupy the post on the western coast of New Hol-
land, at the mouth of the river called “Swan River,” with
the adjacent territory, for the purpose of forming a settle-
ment there, His Majesty has been pleased to approve the
selection of yourself to have the command of the expedition
appointed for that service, and the superintendence of the
proposed settlement.
You will accordingly repair, with all practicable dispatch,
to the place of your destination, on board the vessel which
has been provided for that purpose.
As Swan River and the adjacent territory are not
within the limits of any existing colony, difficulties may
easily be anticipated in the course of your proceedings,
from the absence of all civil institutions, legislative,
judicial, or financial.
Until provision can be made in due form of law for the
Government of the projected colony the difficulties to which
I refer must be combated, and will, I trust, be overcome
by your own firmness and discretion.
You will assume the title of Lieutenant-Governor,
and in that character will correspond with this department
respecting your proceedings and the wants and prospects
of the settlement you are to form.
Amongst your earliest duties will be that of deter-
mining the most convenient site for a town to be erected
as the future seat of government.
will be called upon to weigh maturely the advant-
ages which may arise from placing it on so secure a situa-
tion as may be afforded on various points of the Swan
River, against those which may follow from establishing
it on so fine a port for the reception of shipping as Cock-
burn Sound is represented to be; and more effectually to
guard against the evils to be apprehended from an improvi-
dent disposal of the land in the immediate vicinity of the
town, you will take care that a square of three miles for
one thousand nine hundred and twenty acres) is reserved
for its future extensions; and that the land within this
space is not granted away (as in ordinary cases), but shall
be held upon leases from the Crown, for a term not
exceeding twenty-one years. You will, from the commence-
ment of the undertaking, be observant of the necessity of
making out and reserving, for public purposes, all those
peculiar positions within or in the vicinity of the projected
town which, from natural advantages or otherwise, will
probably be essential to the future welfare of the settle-
ment. In laying the foundations of any such town care
must be taken to proceed upon a regular plan, leaving all
vacant places which will in future times be required for
thoroughfares and as the sites of churches, cemeteries, and
other public works of utility and general convenience.
You will cause it to be understood that His Majesty
has granted to you the power of making all necessary
locations of land. For your guidance in this respect ample
instructions will, at a future period, be prepared. In the
meantime I enclose a copy of the instructions of the
Governor of New South Wales on this subject, to which you
will adhere as closely as circumstances will admit.
You will bear in mind that in all locations of territory
a due proportion must be reserved for the Crown, as well
as for the maintenance of the clergy, support of estab-
lishments for the purposes of religion, and the education of
youth; concerning which objects more particulars will be
transmitted to you hereafter.
I think it necessary also to caution you thus early (as
land on the sea or river side will naturally be the first to
be located) that you must be careful not to grant more than
a due proportion of sea or river frontage to any settler.
The great advantages to be derived from an easy water
communication will, of course, not escape your consideration,
and this advantage should be divided amongst as many
settlers as can conveniently benefit by their position in the
vicinity.
in regard to the surveys and explorations of the coun-
try, which you may think it right to set on foot, it is per-
haps premature to give you any instructions upon a point
when so much must be left to your own discretion and
intelligence as to the nature of the soil and of the
country which you may obtain on the spot; looking, how-
ever, to the future prospects of the settlement and the
advantages of its local position 1 should be inclined to think
that it will be expedient to make the country south of
tSwan liiver the scene of your labours, rather than the tract
of country north of that stream, and that you will do well
to invite the settlers to locate themselves according to this
suggestion.
You will endeavour to settle, with the consent of the
parties concerned, a court of arbitration for the decision of
such questions of civil rights as may arise between the
early settlers, and until a more regular form of administer-
ing justice can be organized.
You will recommend, by your counsels and example, the
habitual observance of Sunday as a day of rest and public
worship, as far as may be compatible with the circum-
stances in which you may be placed.
With these few and general instructions for your
guidance, assisted by the oral and written communications
which have taken place between yourself and this depart-
ment, you will, 1 trust, be able to surmount the difficulties
to which you may be exposed at the outset, enhanced as
they will be by the want of any regular commission for
administering the Government.
An instrument of that nature, accompanied with all
the requisite instructions, will be transmitted to you as
soon as the indispensable form of proceeding in such cases
will allow.
Upon receipt of these instructions Captain Stirling
at once set about the preparations for inaugurating the
settlement. Stores and other requirements of value in
the undertaking were rapidly got together and the civil
officers necessary for the control and government were
chosen and appointed. These on the whole were admir-
ably suited for the task of colonization. The Colonial
Secretary, Mr. Peter Brown, was a man who already
possessed administrative experience; the duties of
harbourmaster were entrusted to Commander M. J.
Currie, a naval officer of long standing; Dr. Charles
Simmons was the medical officer, Mr. James Drummond
the botanist and naturalist, and Mr. James Morgan
the storekeeper, a position of no little moment in the
new settlement. The most important office after that
of Lieutenant-Governor was unquestionably that of
Surveyor-General. This was conferred upon Lieutenant
(afterwards Captain) John Septimus Roe, who had
previously gained an intimate knowledge of the Western
Australian coastline during the expeditions of


Names.
Designations .
Ages of
Children.
Capt. Stirling, R.N
Lieut.-Governor
-
Mrs. Ellen Stirling
_
—
Andrew Stirling
3 years
Win, Stirling
His nephew
—
Geo. Mangles
—
—
Geo. Eliot
11 years
Thos. Blakey
—
Sarah Blakey
- . —
—
John Kelly
—
Elizabeth Kelly
—
—
James Morgan
—
11‘years
Mr. P. Brown
Col. Secretary
—
Mrs. Caroline Brown
—
—
MacBride Brown
—
2 years
Ann Brown
6 months
Richard Evans
—
•
Margaret McLeod
—
—
Mary Ann Smith
—
—
Mr. James Morgan
Storekeeper
—
Mrs. Rebecca Morgan
—
—
Rebecca Morgan
—
12 years
Ann Shipsey
—
—
Patrick Murphy
—
—
Commander M. J, Currie
R.N
Harbour master
—
Mrs. Jane Currie .
—
—
Frederick Lnd 1 ow
—
—
Mildred Kitts Ludlow
—
—
Jane Fruin
—
Mr. Jno. S. Rowe
Surveyor
Mrs. Matilda Rowe
—
—
Chas. D. Wright
—
—
Mr. Hy. C. Sutherland
Assistant Surveyor
—
Mrs. Ann Sutherland
—
—
Mr. W. Shilton
Clerk to Col. Sec.
Mr. Jas. Drummond
Agriculturist
Mrs. Sarah Drummond
—
Thomas Drummond
—
18 years
Jane Drummond
—
16 years
James Drummond
—
15 years
John Drummond
—
13 years
Johnson Drummond
—
9 years
Euphemia Drummond
—
3 years
Elizabeth Gamble
—
—
Mr. Chas. Simmons
Surgeon
—
Mr. Tally Daly
Assistant Surgeon
—
Names.
Designations.
Ages of
Children.
Mrs. Jane Daly
Jessie Jane Daly
—
8 years
Joseph T. Daly
—
6 years
Hy. Jno. Daly
—
4 years
Edwd. N. Daly
—
2 years
Eliza Rose Daly
—
2 months
Jas. Elliott
-
Alex. Fandam
Cooper
—
Mary Fandam
.—
Wm. Hoking
Artificer
.—
Mary Hoking
—
—
Jno. Hoking
—
14 years
Wm. Hoking
—
12 years
Mary Hoking
—.
10 years
Thos. Hoking
—.
8 years
David Hoking
—
6 years
Chas. Hoking
—
2 years
Thos. Davis
Smith
—
Catherine Davis
—
Jno. Davis
3 years
Charlotte Davis
2 years
John Davis
His nephew
13 years
James C. Smith
Roatbuilder
—
Sarah Smith
—
—
Lieutenant King in 1818-22. The officers and artificers
were engaged at rates of salary and wages approved by
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Sir George
Murray. In the matter of securing artificers some diffi-
culty was encountered, and only three were obtained in
time to leave by the first ship.
The “Parmelia,” a vessel of 449 tons register,
Captain J. IT. Luscombe, was chartered to convey the
officials and their families, with the necessary supplies,
to the Swan River, and H.M.S. “Sulphur” was commis-
sioned for the purpose of transporting thither a
detachment of the 63rd Regiment, which, under the
command of Captain F. C. Irwin, had been detailed
for the security and protection of the new settlement.
The necessary preparations being completed, the
“Parmelia” sailed from Spithead on February 6 with
the following list of passengers the first band of
colonists to make a home in the new settlement of
Western Australia:
On the 9th she was joined by H.M.S. “Sulphur”
from Plymouth with the detachment of soldiers on
board, and the two vessels sailed in company for their
destination, with hope strong in the hearts of all that
the mission would result in a further successful expan-
sion of the Empire of Great Britain.
Shortly after the departure of the expedition a Bill
was presented to the English Parliament “relative to
the government of His Majesty’s settlements in Western
Australia on the western coast of New Holland.” This
was passed on May 14 by 10 Geo. IV., c. 22, and
provided that the King, with the advice of the Privy
Council, might make, or might authorize any person or
persons resident in the colony to make, such laws and
ordinances as might be necessary for the peace, order,
and good government of His Majesty’s subjects within
the settlement; that such laws, orders, etc., be laid
before both Houses of Parliament as soon as practicable
thereafter; that no part of the colonies of New South
Wales and Van Diemen Land was to be included in
the new colony or settlements; and that the Act was to
continue in force until the end of 1834. This period
of continuance was extended by various Acts from time
to time until it was formally repealed by the passage of
13-14 Viet., c. 59 (to which reference will be made
in due course), which dealt with the government of the
whole of the Australian colonies.
Meanwhile the two vessels were proceeding on their
way. Nothing of any moment occurred until they
reached Cape Town. There, through an unfortunate
accident, Dr. Daly (the Assistant-Surgeon for the
colony) and his eldest daughter were drowned while
returning to the ship from the shore. After remaining
in Table Bay for about a fortnight, during which some


necessary repairs to the “Sulphur” were effected, the
expedition left that port on April 30 for the Swan
River. The warship, possessing poorer sailing qualities,
was unable to keep up with the “Parmelia,” which
proceeded on her course as rapidly as circumstances
allowed in order to reach her destination before the wet
season was too far advanced. During this latter part of
the voyage the Lieutenant-Governor made all necessary
arrangements for the administration and control of the
settlement, so that as little time as possible might be
lost after arrival in the organization of the Government.
Instructions were issued to the Civil officers, giving in
detail the necessary directions for the management of
their departments. On May 16 a document was issued
constituting, without salary, a ‘Board of Counsel and
Audit in the management of the property of the
Crown, and of public property within the settlement.”
The members of the Board were Commander Currie,
Lieutenant Roe, and Mr. William Stirling. Among
the other duties assigned to this Board was that of
valuing the stock and other property brought by
colonists, so that the proper amount of land might be
allotted to them. On the same date Mr. James Drum-
mond wa-s appointed as Superintendent (honorary) of
Government farms and gardens, Mr. G. W. Mangles as
Superintendent of Government Stock, Mr. H. W.
Reveley as Civil Engineer, Mr. William Stirling as
Registrar, and Mr. H. C. Sutherland as Assistant Sur-
veyor. In most cases no salary was attached to the
appointment; a lack that was afterwards remedied. On
the first of June land was sighted, and on the following
day the '‘Parmelia” moved toward an anchorage in
Cockburn Sound. In doing so she grounded on a bank
between Carnac Island and the mainland, and was
extricated only after considerable difficulty and no little
damage by the exertions of the crew of 11.M.5.
“Challenger,” which had remained at Swan River to
protect the flag until the settlers arrived. The winter
season having commenced, and the weather being
boisterous and stormy, Captain Stirling decided to land
on Garden Island and there erect necessary buildings to
protect the stores. On June 8 H.M.S. “Sulphur” put in
an appearance, but it wa-s not until the 17th that the
detachment could disembark on the mainland and
relieve the crew of the “Challenger.” This ship then
determined to sail for India, but was prevented from
doing so through the services of her artificers being
required for the purpose of repairing the “Parmelia,”
which had been rendered unseaworthy through
grounding on Parmelia Bank. It was not until August
28 that 11.M.5. “Challenger” finally departed, leaving
H.M.S. “Sulphur” as protection for the settlement.
On June 18 Captain Stirling and party landed on
the mainland at Rous Head and issued the following
proclamation, thus effecting the actual settlement of
Western Australia:
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency James Stirling, Esquire, Captain
in the Royal Navy and Lieutenant-Governor of His
Majesty’s Settlement in Western Australia:
Whereas His Majesty having been pleased to Com-
mand that a Settlement should forthwith be formed within
the Territory of “Western Australia,” and whereas with a
view of effecting that Object an Expedition having been
prepared and sent forth, and in Accordance with His
Majesty's Pleasure the Direction of the Expedition and
the Government of the proposed Settlement having been
confided to me, and whereas in Pursuance of the Premises
Possession of the Territory having been taken, and the
Settlement therein being now actually effected, I do hereby
make the same known to all Persons whom it may concern,
willing, and requesting them duly to regulate their con-
duct with reference to His Majesty’s Authority, repre-
sented in me, as good and loyal subjects ought to do, and
to obey all such Legal Commands and Regulations, as 1
may from time to time see fit to enact, as they shall answer
the contrary to their Peril.
And whereas by the Establishment of His Majesty’s
Authority in the Territory aforesaid, the Laws of the
United Kingdom as far as they are applicable to the Cir-
cumstances of the Case, do therein immediately prevail
and become security for the Rights, Privileges, and Immuni-
ties of all His Majesty’s Subjects found or residing in such
Territory, I do hereby caution all to abstain from the
commission of Offences against the King’s Peace or the
Laws of the Realm upon pain of being arrested, prosecuted,
convicted, and punished in the same manner and to all
Intents and Purposes as is usual in similar offences com-
mitted in any other Part or Parts of His Majesty’s
Dominions subject to British Law.
And whereas for the aids of Justice and the preserva-
tion of Peace F may hereafter see Occasion to nominate
and appoint a properly qualified Person to execute the
Office of Sheriff of the Territory, having under his direc-
tion responsible individuals filling the Offices of High Con-
stable, Constables, Bailiffs, and Surveyors of High Ways.
And whereas 1 may hereafter see occasion to issue a Com-
mission to .certain discreet Persons to proceed to the
Cognizance of Offences against the Laws; to hear and
determine Complaints of Injury; to commit Offenders for
further trial to the Custody of the Sheriff; and to con-
duct themselves in the execution of their Office according to
such mode of proceeding as Justices of the Peace may law-
fully adopt; I here command and require that due
obedience and respect" be shewn to all such Persons in their
several Places and Jurisdictions.
And whereas the Protection of Law doth of Right
belong to all people whatsoever who may come or be found
within the Territory aforesaid, 1 do hereby give Notice
that if any Person or Persons shall be convicted of behav-
ing in a fraudulent, cruel, or felonious Manner towards
the Aborigines of the Country, such Person or Persons
will be liable to be prosecuted and tried for the Offence, as
if the same had been committed against any other of His
Majesty’s subjects.
And whereas the safety of the territory from invasion
and from the attack of hostile native tribes may require the
establishment of a Militia Force which on emergency may
be depended on to assist His Majesty’s regular troops in
the defence of the laws and property of the inhabitants of
the Territory, and moreover the Efficiency of such an armed
body, depending wholly on its Organization, Discipline, and
Preparation for service, all male persons whatsoever, be-
tween the ages of 15 and 50, are hereby required to enrol
themselves in the Muster roll of the Militia of the Country
in which they may reside, and to observe that the days for
Muster and Exercise, and the Names of the Officers whom


I may see fit to appoint to command them will be duly
notified, and that on proof of their Disobedience to such
officers or of negligent performance of the Duties required
of them, they will be subject, in the Absence of Martial
Law, to a pecuniary fine and to Imprisonment until the
same shall be liquidated.
And whereas His Majesty having been graciously pleased
to confide to me the Power to make all necessary Loca-
tions, and to grant unoccupied Lands within the aforesaid
Territory under such Restrictions as are or may be con-
tained in the several Instructions issued or to be issued to
me by Authority of His Majesty’s Government, I do hereby
give Notice that the Conditions and existing Regulations
under which Crown Lands will be granted will be exhibited
to Public Inspection at the Offices of the Secretary to
Government, and of the Surveyor of the Territory, subject
to such alterations and amendments as may from time to
time be ordered, and all Persons desirous of obtaining
Lands or of becoming settlers for any other purposes in this
Territory, are, as soon as may be practicable after their
arrival in this Settlement, to appear at the Office of the
Secretary to Government, and there to make application
for Permission to reside in the Settlement, and all Persons
found at large without having obtained such Permission will
render themselves liable to be committed to Custody, and
all Persons in like Manner who may intend to quit the
Colony are to give a week’s Notice of their Intentions to
depart, upon pain of being liable to be apprehended and
detained and of rendering the Master of the Ship in which
they may be about to depart subject to a Fine as set forth
by the Port Regulations.
God save the King!
Given under my hand and seal at Perth this 18th day
of June, 1829. S'
( L.S. ) James Stirling,
V_ y Lieutenant-Governor.
By His Excellency's Command,
Peter Brown,
Secretary to Government.
The proclamation was published both on the main-
land (by Captain Irwin) and on Garden Island, and on
the same day orders were issued confirming the appoint-
ments (all of them without salary) which had been made
in the course of the voyage.
The strong winds and rough seas consequent upon
the season of the year made regular and continual com-
munication with the mainland both difficult and
dangerous. It was therefore deemed wise to postpone the
work of erecting the permanent settlement, and in the
interval temporary buildings to house the colonists and
stores were erected on Garden Island, some of which
continued in occupation even after the removal of the
settlement, as it was thought safer to house the bulk of
the stores on the island, bringing them across from time
to time as necessity required. A portion of the scrub
was also cleared, and the seeds brought from England
and the Cape were planted, so that, though late, they
might have the advantage of the portion of the season
still remaining.
During the month of July two exploring parties
were sent out in order to secure all the information
possible concerning the districts within easy reach of
the Swan River. The first of these, under the control
of Lieutenant Henry, of the “Challenger,” proceeded to
discover the source of the Canning River and to
examine the country lying between the mountains and
the sea. The party followed the river for a distance of
100 miles and found that, with trifling exceptions, the
soil was well adapted to agriculture. The second
expedition, under Commander Currie, explored the
country south and south-east of the Swan for a distance
of about ten miles, finding a river and several fresh
water lakes, and further extending the area of possible
cultivation.
Meanwhile Captain Stirling and his officers, having
decided to found two towns, one at the mouth of the
river to serve the purposes of a seaport and one farther
inland as the seat of government, landed on the main-
land to select suitable sites. That for the port was
quickly chosen on the south bank of the Swan at its
mouth, and was named Fremantle in honour of the
captain of the “Challenger.” The other selection proved
more difficult, but after closely following the course of
the Swan for some miles they finally fixed upon a spot
just above the junction of the Swan and the Canning,
as the best position for the seat of government, to
which they gave the name of Perth, possibly out of
compliment to the Secretary of State for the Colonies
and to the Lieutenant-Governor, both of whom were
sons of Caledonia, and possibly because the contour of
the country just at that point was not unlike that of
the ancient capital of Scotland.
That the site chosen was admirable in every way
must be admitted, even though for the time being it
was difficult of access from Fremantle, which was on the
south side of the river. Overshadowed by Mount Eliza,
with a broad expanse of water before it, and the river
flats where Stirling had experienced difficulties in 1827
stretching out beyond it, it made an ideal spot for what
was to become the capital city of a great State. No
doubt the existence of these flats, which seemed to
promise well for agricultural development, in part at
any rate, led to the selection of that particular place.
The site having been settled, notice was given that the
first stone of the new town of Perth would be laid on
August 12, the date of King George IV.’s birthday. The
ceremony was performed by cutting down a tree on the
allotment set apart for the military barracks.
During this month (August) the other vessels —the
“Calista,” “St. Leonard,” and “Marquis of Anglesey”—
arrived with settlers and stock. These as well as the
first arrivals were all anxious to receive locations of
land as quickly as possible, for though there was little
or no opportunity of doing anything in the way of
cultivation at the time they were desirous of making
preparation for the following season. The Surveyor-
General and his assistants were kept busy making
rough but fairly accurate surveys of locations applied
for. All these applications made the issue of land
regulations imperative, and on August 28 the first Land


Regulations for the colony were proclaimed. These
provided that the territory should be divided into
counties, hundreds, townships, and sections; each
section to be 640 acres in extent, each township 25
sections, each hundred 4 townships, and each county 16
hundreds. In each county 600 sections were reserved
by the Government for public expenses, educational
support and endowment, cost of public works, and the
administration of justice. Land was not to be open to
location until surveyed, and was then to be granted
only in complete sections. No allotment was to have
river frontage of more than one-fourth its exterior
boundary. No second location was to be granted to
any person who had not fulfilled the conditions of
improvement with regard to the first, and no grant was
to be made to indentured servants or to persons coming
to the colony at the expense of others. Three square
miles w’ere reserved as the site of the town of Perth :
these were to be split up into allotments of nine to ten
acres each, to be held, according to instructions from the
Colonial Office, on a twenty-one years’ lease, with the
right of the Government to resume if necessary for
public purposes upon paying compensation, these leases
to become freehold if not resumed within the period
stated, and to carry at all times the right of sale or
assignment. They were also to be subject to such rates
as the Government might deem necessary to impose.
The same conditions were to prevail with regard to
Fremantle. Persons possessing land in the settlement
at large were to have the right to a free grant in the
vicinity of a township in the ratio of one acre for every
1,000 acres held by them. The general conditions as
to the assessment of property upon which land would
be granted and the quantity to be so granted, as laid
down in the Colonial Office circular of January, 1829,
were incorporated, and the following mode of pro-
cedure for taking up grants was laid down :
“All persons who may be desirous to receive allot-
ments of land are to make application to the Lieutenant-
Governor according to a form which will be furnished
to them at the office of the Colonial Secretary. If the
application be admissible, it will be referred to the
Board of Commissioners for the management of Crown
property, who will report to the Lieutenant-Governor
the extent of land to which the applicant may appear
to be entitled, upon a strict examination into the value
and description of property imported by him.
“The kinds of property on which claims may be
founded are only such as are applicable to the improve-
ment and cultivation of land, or necessary in placing
the settler on his location; and the value thereof will be
estimated by the Commissioners according to such fair
standard of reference as they may see fit to adopt.
“On receiving the report of the Board the
Lieutenant-Governor will accord permission to the
applicant to proceed to select such land, to the extent
recommended, as may suit his particular views, and
having selected, the applicant is to make his selection
known to the Surveyor-General by filling up the form
which may be attached to the permission to select. This
report of selection will be examined by the Surveyoi-
General and transmitted by him to the Lieutenant-
Governor, with such remarks as may be necessary to en-
able the Lieutenant-Governor to decide on the pro-
priety of the allotment being made, and if no prior
claim to the land in question or other objection exist
the applicant will receive a grant thereof, in the usual
form of a primary conveyance.
“Land thus granted will belong in perpetuity to the
grantee, his heirs, and assigns, to be held in free and
common sociage, subject, however, to such reservations
and conditions as may be stated in the conveyance.’
Then follows the description of the liabilities in the
way of rates and taxes to which the land is to be
subject, and the provision that no settler could, without
special permission, sell his land until he had improved
it to the extent of Is. 6d. per acre.
With regard to the kinds of property on which land
could be granted it may be mentioned that one settler
claimed an allotment on the ground that he possessed
a half-share in a pair of rabbits!
The surveys of the town sites of Perth and
Fremantle were quickly completed and on September 5
the first allotments were taken up. In Perth the pur-
chasers, either on leasehold or in fee simple, were F. C.
Irwin (the officer commanding the troops), Rev. J. B.
Wittenoom (the Colonial Chaplain), May Hodges,
George Leake, and P. P. Smith; in Fremantle the first
allotments fell to William Lamb, John Hobbs, Lionel
Samson, and Thomas Bannister. There was only one
other lot sold in Fremantle in 1829, the purchaser being
John Bateman, but in Perth there was more demand.
There we find that during 'the remaining months ofthe
year land was either leased or sold to John Septimus
Roe (the Surveyor-General), Dr. Simmons, Wm. Shaw,
John Morrell, John Tichbon, Thomas Davis, William
Hoking, Thomas Bannister, James Henty, James
McDermott, Samuel Cox, Richard Jones, Hugh
Macdonald, David Paterson, George Embleton, William
Leeder, Henry Trigg, William Nairne, Robert M. Lyon,
and C. Browne.
In addition to making the necessary surveys in
Perth and Fremantle Lieutenant Roe was able, during
the first three months after his arrival, to make surveys
of the surrounding country sufficiently accurate for the
purpose of making grants in accordance with the regu-
lations. The first of these, as shown by the records, were
made on September 29 to the following grantees:
R. H. Bland, 8,000 acres; Peter Brown (Colonial
Secretary), 5,000 acres; Charles Boyd, 640 acres; W.


T. Dance (captain of the “Sulphur”), 5,000 acres;
William Dixon, 2,268 acres; Sir James Hume, 2,666
acres; George Leake, 14,887 acres; Colonel Peter A.
Lautour, 10,000 acres; Dr. John Whattley, 1,500 acres;
John Septimus Roe, 3,100 acres; Lieutenant-Governor
Stirling, 4,000 acres; William Shaw, 1,000 acres;
Lionel Samson, 4,696 acres; and Charles Ridley, 1,750
acres. All these grants were close to the Swan River,
many of them with river frontage. The reasons for this
were that the soil seemed more promising and the river
afforded an easy method of transit. Other assignments
on account of capital invested that were made
during 1829 were C. H. Fremantle (captain of the
“Challenger”), 5,000 acres in the interior; Thomas Ban-
nister, 2,000 on Canning River; Plenry Camfield, 1,000
on Swan River; M. C. Carew, 100 on the Helena; John
A. Dutton, 3,600 on the Canning; P. PI. Dod, 2,000
on the Swan; John O. Davis, 7,026 on the Canning; R.
Dawson, 1,280 on the
Canning; James
Drummond (the bot-
anist), 1,000 on the
Swan and 100 on the
Helena; Joshua Greg-
ory, 1,000 on the
Swan; John Hobbs,
4,000 on the Can-
ning; William Lamb,
8,119 on the Swan;
Colonel Lautour, 100
on the Helena; R.
Warded, 1,000 on
the Swan; HanigJ
Scott, 4,000 on the
Swan; William K.
Shenton, 100 acres
on the Helena; W.
H. Mackie and F.
and F. C. Irwin, 200 on the Swan; and P. Pogers,
4,000 acres on Canning River. According to the
official statistics 525,000 acres were granted by the end
of the year, including the original grant of 100,000
acres to Captain Stirling and the 250,000 conditionally
granted to Mr. Peel, who arrived with his immigrants
about the middle of December.
But all these vast areas of land were at that time
virgin forest, and though the possessors were potentially
rich, they were actually suffering all the privations and
discomforts incident to settlement in a new countrv.
J
They were even without homes, with the exception of
such rude shelters as they could make for themselves,
and they had practically no means of subsistence beyond
the supplies they had brought, and such further pro-
visions as ships expected to arrive from time to time
might bring. Their condition was certainly not one to
H
be envied. Though many of them were of first-class
family and descended from the best English stock they
were in great measure unprepared for the trials they
had to face, and were not inured to the privations that
must necessarily befall those who hope to wrest a liveli-
hood from the wilds of Nature. Their difficulties were
greatly increased by the fact that they arrived at the
height of the winter season, and were prevented by
the cold and rain from making much headway for some
considerable time. But all their trials were borne with
stout hearts, and they struggled manfully forward,
strong in their determination to succeed. The state of
the settlement during the first few weeks of its
existence may be fairly well estimated from the
despatch forwarded by the Lieutenant-Governor to the
Secretary of State on September 9, 1829. “Exposure
to the winds and rain of a boisterous winter,” he
says, “has been the most serious evil we have en-
countered, but that
and other privations
incident to such an
undertaking have
been borne with
cheerfulness and over-
come with proper
spirit by all the indi-
viduals forming the
civil and military es-
tablishment. Among
the settlers since
arrived some disap-
pointment has arisen
in consequence of
their being in gen-
eral but little accus-
tomed to encounter
hardships, and in
all cases too sanguine
in the expectations they have entertained respecting
the country. But as the weather has improved
they have been enabled to extend their explorations
and attain more comfort, and I believe there is now
existing among them a cheerful confidence in the
qualities of the country and a general belief in its
future prosperity. . . . Up to the present period
no event of a nature wholly unexpected or very
important has occurred in the prosecution of the service,
except that the western coast of New Holland was taken
possession of in IT is Majesty's name by Captain
Fremantle, and that the settlement has subsequently
been commenced and proceeded in. The progress made
in the erection of storehouses and temporary buildings
for the civil establishment, in landing the stores and
provisions, and in exploring the country has been very
considerable when viewed with reference to the season
FREMANTLE, 1832 (FROM ORIGINAL SKETCH BY R. MORRELL


of the year and to the means at the disposal of the local
government. The weather at the period of my arrival
being extremely boisterous, 1 was forced to disembark
the people and stores on Garden Island, the commun-
ication between the ships and the mainland being too
unsafe and uncertain during the winter season to admit
of their being placed at any other point. Since then
as the weather has improved I have removed such
persons and stores as have been necessary to the sites
of the towns of Perth and Fremantle, but I intend to
keep the principal depot of provisions and stores still
at Garden Island, carrying over as they are wanted the
articles therein deposited. The arrival of two other
ships with settlers making it necessary to have locations
prepared for them I have been under the necessity of
interrupting the general survey of the surrounding
coast and country for the purpose of laying out the
town of Fremantle at the entrance of Melville Water
as a landing port, and also the town of Perth near the
island on the Swan River, with a view to its being in
the neighbourhood of those who may wish to cultivate
the rich lands immediately above it on the river. . . .
The settlers have already made selection of town lots
in each place and are proceeding with alacrity in the
preparation of buildings.”
During September the civil establishment was
removed to Perth and the settlement began to acquire
something of a permanent appearance. A cottage for
the Lieutenant-Governor was erected not far from the
present site of Government House, and the various depart-
mental offices were built in close proximity to it, so that
the work of administration could be carried on more
easily. Houses of more or less permanent character
began to arise and the first place of worship for the
Church of England was erected through the earnest
solicitation, as well as by the actual assistance, of the
Colonial Chaplain, the Rev. John B. Wittenoom.
Between then and the end of the year several ships
arrived with settlers, stock, and provisions. Among
these was the “Gilmore,” with Thomas Peel and his
party of immigrants and servants on board. As this
vessel did not arrive at Swan River within the time
stipulated in the agreement the land originally
reserved for Mr. Peel had been granted to other
applicants, but he secured a location to the south of
Fremantle, as before mentioned, extending from the
sea to the present south-western railway line, and con-
taining an area of 250,000 acres.
In order to increase the knowledge of the country
lying outside the area of settlement, and so as to have
land ready for the requirements of the new settlers
continually arriving, further expeditions were sent out
in the latter months of the year. Lieutenant Preston
(of H.M.S. “Sulphur”) and Dr. Collie examined during
November the coastline and adjacent country between
Cockburn Sound and Geographe Bay, paying particular
attention to the rivers and to the suitability of the soil
for cultivation. In December Ensign Dale, of the 63rd
Regiment, who had previously endeavoured to trace the
source of the Helena River, made a further attempt.
He followed the stream until it became a mere chain
of ponds, and then returned bringing back the
information that the country toward the coast did not
give much promise in the way of agriculture, though it
offered fairly good pasture for sheep. In the same
month Dr. Wilson, R.N., left the settlement at King
George Sound with a small party, intending to proceed
toward the Swan River. Though he did not go far in
the direction aimed at, he passed through some of the
best country from a scenic point of view in Western
Australia, and in the course of his wanderings dis-
covered the Denmark River. Dr. Wilson’s report of
the trip spoke highly of the character of the soil in
general, though some of it he admitted was “as miserable
and useless as any to be found in New South Wales.”
For extended accounts of these and succeeding exploring
expeditions we would refer the reader to the section
of this publication dealing with the “Explorations in
Western Australia.”
It is worth recording as an event of importance
that on Christmas Day, 1829, the first white child —
daughter of the Surveyor-General was born in
Western Australia. CXJcJcs
The total population of the colony at the end of the
year was 1,290, of whom 850 were permanent residents,
the greater part of the remainder forming the comple-
ment of the ships then at anchor, one of these being
H.M.S. “Success,” which grounded on entering
Challenger Passage and received injuries that took
twelve months to repair. To carry out these repairs she
was beached at that portion of the Sound since known
as Careening Bay. The value of the property brought
by the settlers up to this time was about £45,000,
the proportion of which that was applicable to the
improvement of land, and upon which land was granted
according to the regulations, being £42,000.
On January 20, 1830, Captain Stirling addressed
a despatch to the Colonial Office embracing a report of
the various matters we have already referred to and
giving some important information as to the class of
people arriving in the colony. Those who came as
settlers, having a certain amount of capital, were on
the whole highly respectable and independent persons,
but the same could not be said of their workmen and
servants. In many cases these seemed to have been
recruited from parish outcasts, or engaged without any
reference to character, and had consequently caused
great inconvenience by their drunken and disorderly
habits. So troublesome had these people become, the
Governor reported, that he had found it necessary to


appoint a magistracy, whose chairman (Mr. W. 11.
Mackie) was “a gentleman bred to the law,” and to
engage a number of constables, for the purpose of
preserving order in the settlement. We also gather
from the document that even at this early stage depres-
sion had made itself felt in the affairs of the young
colony. “Among so many settlers there could not be a
great number with minds and bodies suited to encounter
the struggles and distresses of a new settlement. Many,
if not all, have accordingly been more or less disap-
pointed on arrival either with the state of things here
or their own want of power to surmount the difficulties
pressing around them. . . . From this depression,
however, the active and stouthearted have now re-
covered, and ten or twelve of the leading men of the
settlement having occupied their grounds, and having
declared themselves fully satisfied with the quality of
the soil and the condition of their cattle, I consider the
undertaking is now safe
from the effects of a
general despondency,
which at one time
threatened to defeat the
views of His Majesty’s
Government in this
quarter.”
The despatch then
goes on to discuss the
climate and the general
prospects of the settle-
ment. The climate, of
which the Lieutenant-
Governor had had prac-
tically a year’s experi-
ence, he found "favour-
able to health in an
uncommon degree,”
though owing to the
heat of December and January 'The workmen have not
been able to work in the sun from 10 to 3 o’clock” ! In
regard to the general prospects the opinion was expressed
that the land suitable for tillage was somewhat limited
in area, but that there ought to be a good future both
for pastoral pursuits and fruit culture, more particularly
of temperate and sub-tropical fruits. The position of
the settlement, he considered, was an excellent one for
developing an Eastern trade in British manufactures.
But though on the whole the prospect was a favourable
one, Captain Stirling was careful to point out that
practically everything depended on the right class of
immigrant being secured. "The greater part,” he says,
"incapable of succeeding in England are not likely to
prosper here to the extent of their groundless and incon-
siderate expectations. Many of the settlers who have
come should never have left a safe and tranquil state of
h 2 I
life; and if it be possible to discourage one set
of people and to encourage another I would
earnestly request that for a few years the helpless and
inefficient may be kept from the settlement, while to the
active, industrious, and intelligent there may be assured
with confidence a fair reward for their labours. This
country may at no distant period absorb, with advantage
to Great Britain and herself, an immense migration of
persons, any great portions of which if sent forward
too soon will ruin her prospects and their own.”
In a semi-private letter to Mr. Twiss, the Under-
secretary of State for the Colonies, which was forwarded
by the same vessel as the preceding despatch, the
Lieutenant-Governor ventured the opinion that the rush
of settlers had been due to the exceedingly liberal land
laws, and also to the fact that no convicts were to be
sent to the colony. As to the class of people arriving,
he is still more emphatic than in his official utterance
upon the point that there
are "many who will be
ruined by their own
groundless expectations
and helpless inefficiency.”
Discussing in this letter
the future prospects of
the colony, Captain Stir-
ling urged that his ex-
perience during the first
six months of his admin-
istration had convinced
him that the English
Government must either
decide to give up the
settlement altogether or
else must establish it defi-
nitely as a Crown Colony ,
with a regular commission
to the Governor, proper
machinery for enacting ordinances, and a system of finance
with provision for raising revenue and expending money,
subject, of course, to revision by the Home authorities.
The arguments used in this communication appear to
have had considerable weight, as on July 20, 1830, the
Secretary of State informed Captain Stirling that a
commission was in course of preparation which would
contain the authority in matters of administration that
had been sought.
The history of the colony up to the end of 1830 is
practically confined to a record of the early struggles
of the pioneers, of the alienation of land under the
system of grants, and of exploration of the country.
Even though, at the beginning of the year, the reports
of the inefficient section of the community were begin-
ning to reach England there was no diminution in the
stream of immigration. In fact, so great was the influx
PERTH, 1832 (PROVI ORIGINAL DRAWING BY REV J. B. WITTENOOM).


that the local government found it necessary to import
provisions and stock from the Cape, the East Indies,
and the other Australian colonies in order to prevent
the possibility of famine occurring before the colonial
lands and stock commenced to make some return. The
results of this importation were not, however, altogether
satisfactory. In the absence of proper storehouses much
of the grain was spoilt by exposure to the weather or
ruined by white ants and other vermin, while a fair
number of the cattle wandered away into the bush and
either died or became wild.
While those who arrived later missed many of the
hardships which the first arrivals had to undergo they
had the same strenuous battle to fight when their grants
were apportioned. Among them, however, were prac-
tical farmers from the agricultural counties of England,
all possessed of at least moderate capital, and these soon
began to show actual results for their labour. In fact,
a more hopeful air began to pervade the whole com-
munity. Many were engaged in clearing their grants
and sowing crops, employing their spare time in at-
tempts at brickmaking, so as to improve their general
condition by the erection of more comfortable houses.
Their want of knowledge of the climate, however, caused
a good deal of suffering during the wet season. The
winter rains of 1830 were particularly heavy, so much
so that the river overflowed its banks and brought con-
siderable loss and damage to those who were temporarily
residing on the flats waiting for their grants, or who
had elected to build permanent homes on the lower
levels. The shipping at Fremantle also suffered in no
small degree. Four vessels broke loose from their moor-
ings and were driven ashore, one of them, the "Rock-
ingham,” becoming a total wreck on that part of the
coast which has since borne the name.
Much trouble was also experienced with the cattle
and sheep during the year. Many of the cattle got
away into the bush, and the scab disease, introduced by
some flocks brought from Tasmania, greatly lessened the
small number of sheep in the colony.
Meanwhile the alienation of land was proceeding
apace, and among those recorded as having received
grants during the year we find many —J. and J. W.
Hardey, J. S. Roe, Stephen and James Plenty, W. L.
Brockman, E. Barrett Lennard, J. H. Monger, A. PI.
Stone, J. S. Clarkson, Robert Dale, W. K. Shenton, and
others —whose names have been graven deep in the annals
of their adopted country. There being very little avail-
able land remaining on the banks of the Swan or within
reasonable reach of Perth or Fremantle it became neces-
sary, in order to accommodate many of these applicants,
to extend the boundaries of the settlement. With that
end in view a further examination of the country south-
ward along the coast was made by the Lieutenant-
Governor. This resulted in the establishment of a mili-
tary station at Port Leschenault, where the present town
of Bunbury stands. A new county was thus added to
the colony, and by Government notice every endeavour
was made to induce those applying for land to select
it in that district. Unfortunately for its progress
enormous areas were taken up by Colonel Lautour, the
Henty Brothers, and others, but no immediate use made
of the land, so that for many years the district made
no headway at all. The settlement became little more
than a name; even Captain Stirling seems to have been
disheartened, as the military detachment stationed
there was withdrawn before the end of the year. It is
worthy of note that the grant—lo3,ooo acres—made to
Colonel Lautour formed the location upon which an
attempt was made at a later period to establish the town
of Australind.
About the same time (March, 1830) the country
near King George Sound was thrown open under the
name of Plantagenet County. Here grants were made
to Dr. Collie, Captain Bannister, Lieutenant Preston,
and J. L. Morley, but, as in the case of Port Les-
chenault, no attempt at immediate cultivation was made.
Partly in order to do something in the way of
assisting discharged servants, who had completed their
terms of service, to become good settlers, the town of
Guildford was opened in the following month, and blocks
of four and five acres each were granted to these people,
with the intention that they should assist one another
and eventually form a co-operative settlement.
From the fact that Captain Stirling desired 90,000
acres of his original grant to be at Cape Naturaliste it is
more than probable he was convinced that the neigh-
bourhood offered great promise. The pressure of his
administrative duties had prevented him from paying
any attention to the matter up to that time, but in May,
1830, accompanied by a band of settlers, he set out to
examine the locality with a view of establishing a new
township. The party landed at the mouth of the Black-
wood in Flinders Bay, and marked off the site for a
township to be named Augusta. The settlers, under
the leadership of Captain Molloy and Messrs. Bussell
and Turner, selected grants and set about the cultiva-
tion of them. Though the soil was good, the labour of
clearing was very great, and consequently but little pro-
gress was made. The heavy forest baffled all their at-
tempts to pasture stock, and to add to their difficulties
supplies ran short time after time owing to their isolated
position. For four years they struggled along with
indifferent success, finally removing in 1834 to the less
heavily-timbered plains of the Vasse, which seemed to
offer greater opportunities. One result of the settlement
at Augusta that was of permanent value was the open-
ing up in 1831, by Mr. Bussell, of an overland route
from Perth to Cape Leeuwin.
While these attempts, not on the whole successful,


were being made to establish settled communities along
the south-west coast attention was also being paid to the
portions of the interior eastward of Perth. Ensign Dale,
who had previously penetrated some distance in that
direction, pursued his investigations farther inland and
brought back such glowing accounts of the new country
that Lieutenant Erskine was dispatched to obtain still
more definite information. So completely did his
opinion agree with that formed by Dale that the
Lieutenant-Governor decided to make a personal tour
of inspection. So impressed was he with what he saw
that arrangements were at once made to throw the land
open for selection, and before the end of the year many
large tracts were taken up. Sites for the towns of York,
Northam, and Beverley were also marked out at this
time, but no allotments were apportioned in any of
them, the first town lots —at York —being sold in 1835.
Thus by the end of 1830 the colony had extended
its boundaries to
include (apart
from the mili-
tary station at
King George
Sound, which
still remained
under the
eminent of New
South Wales)
settlements at
Swan River,
Port Lesche-
nault, Guildford,
and Augusta, in
addition to
which areas of
land had been
assigned in
Plantage n e t
County and in the York-Beverley district. In most
of these places little work had been done, but
marked progress had been made in Perth and on the
holdings along the Swan, Helena, and Canning Rivers,
though as yet the returns were insufficient to provide
for the sustenance of the community without importing
provisions. Fremantle had made but little advance.
At the end of the year it was still practically a camp, and
though there were many good citizens who were strain-
ing every nerve to develop their properties and improve
the condition of things generally, a great part of the
inhabitants were of the class that is always afraid of
work, and particularly loud in expressing disappoint-
ment and dissatisfaction. A number of these, most of
whom were utterly incompetent as settlers, and some of
whom held grants of land, left the colony during the
latter half of the year, either abandoning their holdings
or arranging for incoming settlers to take them up. As
may readily be understood, they did not fail on their
arrival in England or the other colonies to express in
unmeasured terms their disapproval of Western Aus-
tralia, and there is no doubt that for many years the
colony suffered from the effect of these reports.
The relations between the natives and the white set-
tlers seem to have been of a distinctly friendly nature
at the beginning, but by the middle of the year several
incidents occurred that gave cause for alarm. The kind-
ness of the white settlers in the way of distributing food
and clothing, though greatly appreciated, seems to have
turned the aborigines into persistent beggars and, when
it became impossible to continue the gifts, into equally
persistent thieves. Their acts of depredation culminated
in an attack in open daylight on the house of a settler
named Paton, situated at the west end of the town-
ship not far from the present Leederville Railway
Station. At the
time of the
occurrence Cap-
tain Stirling
was absent at
Port Lesche-
nault, and the
duty of coping
with it rested
upon the Com-
mandant, Cap-
tain F. C. Ir-
win. His report
upon the sub-
ject, given be-
low, is particu-
larly valuable
not only as an
interesting ac-
count of the
first brush with the natives, but as an outline of the
methods observed by the Government and white settlers
in dealing with the aboriginal inhabitants of the
territory. “On the 3rd instant” (May), he says, “at 3
p.m. a message was brought to the Cantonment soliciting
aid against the natives on the part of the inhabitants in
the west end of the town. In my absence Ensign Dale
proceeded to that quarter with a few of the Guard; 1
followed with more men soon after on hearing the re-
port. On arrival at the quarter I learned from Mr.
Reveley and other credible testimony that the natives
were decidedly the aggressors; they had been very
troublesome in the forenoon —in one place throwing
spears at poultry, at another stealing pieces of board
from workshops; and at last they broke into and plun-
dered the house of a man named Paton, which brought
on the encounter.
TOWN HALL, PERTH, 1870.


“ Three or four neighbours endeavoured to drive the
natives from the house, which they had collected round;
they, however, threw their spears at them and drove
them back to the next house, following till they re-
covered their spears. More people coming up with two
or three musquets, they advanced to dislodge the natives
from Patou s; several were drawn up with spears poised
in their throwing sticks, and a tall savage, who appeared
the chief, showed unequivocal gestures of defiance and
contempt on the musquets being presented. The people
now tired, and this man was seen to fall wounded, fall-
ing a second time after rising; the natives now made a
rapid retreat, leading him off,
“This daring and hostile conduct of the natives
induced me to seize the opportunity to make them
sensible of our superiority by showing how severely we
could retaliate their aggression, but that we had no
wish to injure them. With this view I continued the
pursuit, directing that a shot should not be fired but in
self-defence. After proceeding one and a half miles in
a N.-W, direction we overtook Mr. Dale near a lagoon,
with a few soldiers and settlers. 1 was concerned to find
that he had received two wounds from the thrust of a
spear by a native while endeavouring to secure him in
a swamp; the savage succeeded in escaping, though
severely wounded by a shot in the face, his jaw being
seen to hang; he had previously slightly wounded Ser-
geant Smallman in an ineffectual attempt to secure him
after knocking him down with his fusee. I now divided
the party, taking half with me round the lagoon and
directing Mr. Dale with the remainder to go the opposite
way to get the. natives between us, should they be in
the lagoon. We discovered them by their talking at the
upper end, where the breadth was from 40 to 50 yards,
but none could be seen, so thick was the cover of the
tea-trees and reeds 7 or 8 ft. long.
“While observing the natives here several shots
were fired towards us from the opposite bank by Mr.
Dale's party. On calling out for an explanation and
ordering the firing to cease I learned that a volley of
spears had been thrown at them while penetrating the
swamp to where the natives were; three spears had
pierced the arm of the Acting Sergeant-Major, and the
party fired in return.
‘‘One of the natives now called out from a tree
he had ascended and gave us to understand that their
women and children were with them, and seemed
earnest in his entreaties that we would leave them.
“I now told the party to leave the swamp, and for
about twenty minutes we held a parley, the natives
pressing us to leave them, and we in vain trying to
encourage them to come out to us. At this period,
hearing a trampling in the lagoon, I proceeded alone
down the bank and distinctly heard the groans of the
wounded, whom they were carrying past, but the height
of the reeds concealed them all but the tops of their
spears. Considering the object I had in view as now
fully accomplished of impressing a salutary dread of our
superiority and arms, while we showed them that we
did not wish to injure them, after getting them and
their families completely in our power, we left them at
sunset on apparently friendly terms as usual, i was
now anxious to re-establish a good feeling from a dread
that they might think of revenging themselves on set-
tlers in the interior before they could have intelligence
of this affair.
“During the night nothing was heard of them, but
next morning they were seen to cross the river at the
islands with their families in considerable numbers. A
patrol I sent out for the purpose brought in three
natives they had surprised. These men had been often
in the Cantonment, and willingly accompanied the sol-
diers. They intimated by signs that some of their
people were dead or wounded in the lagoon after yes-
terday's fire. When this was told me 1 took them off
to the lagoon, but they could show none, and 1 con-
cluded they meant to signify that some of their peojile
had fallen there. On our return we observed a body
of about forty, including women and children, moving
westerly. Some came towards us on being called, and
with these and our guides to the swamp we parted on
very good terms. At the Cantonment I learned that
several natives had come in, being anxious about the
fate of those who had been surprised in the morning.
Some days after several natives came into the Canton-
ment and pointed out their women and children play-
ing about the outskirts, evidently to make a show of
their confidence in us. I desired that they should be
received in the usual friendly way, but ordered a ser-
geant with a file of the Guard with their musquets to
watch their motions. At seeing the arms they looked
alarmed and made signs to put them away. The good
effect of this precaution was afterwards apparent, for
on their moving to the western extremity the sergeant
kept* out of their view till he saw a considerable number
collected round Paton's house (which they had before
rifled), trying to push open the door and windows.
On this he made his appearance, when the natives all
ran off to the rear. Since that time they have not visited
the Cantonment, and I am happy to learn that they
have committed no act of aggression against the settlers
in any part of the country."
Unfortunately Captain Irwin’s fear of reprisals
by the natives were only too well grounded. Not
long after the disturbance at Perth news came from
the Murray River that a settler named McKenzie
had been murdered as an act of retaliation.
This was the beginning of long years of trouble with
the aborigines and of no little danger to the colonists.
Before the end of the year a second murder was com


mitted, also by way of retaliation. The settlers on the
Swan had been put to much inconvenience through
petty thefts, and finally a native detected stealing
potatoes from Mr. Butler’s garden was shot dead.
Within a little time a party of natives surrounded the
house and brutally murdered a servant named
Entwistle, in the presence of his two young sons, both
of whom, however, succeeded in escaping. The ring'
leaders of the horde were two well-built natives, Yagan
and Midgegooroo, who managed to elude capture at the
time. These two seem to have been the chief actors in
every native disturbance until 1833, when both were killed.
Up to the close of 1830, and indeed for some little
time after, the government of the colony was vested solely
in the hands of Captain Stirling, who had nothing to
guide him in his duty save the meagre letter of instruc-
tions; forwarded with his appointment and occasional
despatches conveying further instructions from the
Colonial Office. That he succeeded so admirably is a
tribute both to his enthusiasm for the task and to his
judgment in the execution of it. Certain alterations had
been determined upon by the Home authorities before
the end of the year, but notification of these did not
reach Western Australia until toward the middle of 1831.
CHAPTER V.
1831-1838.
ADMINISTRATION OF SIR JAMES STIRLING.
With the year 1831 Western Australia may be
considered to have emerged from the experimental stage
and to have entered upon a permanent existence. For
many years afterwards its history was necessarily little
more than a record of constructive development such
as is common to all new communities, interspersed with
periods of depression and frequent attacks and depreda-
tions on the part of the natives, but all along the line
there was distinct growth, gradual indeed for some
time, but in the main healthy and progressive.
One of the chief events of importance was an
alteration in the land regulations. Early in 1830 it
had become evident to the Home authorities that in
the interests of the colony generally, and in order to
stem the influx of settlers, many of whom were totally
unsuitable, it was necessary to make some restriction
on the further alienation of land by means of grants.
New regulations were therefore drawn up under which
the quantity of land obtainable was reduced by one-
half —20 acres instead of 40 for every £3 invested, and
100 acres instead of 200 as formerly on the passage of
every servant. These came into operation at the begin-
ning of 1831 and continued in force throughout the
year, during which the English Government further
considered the whole question of land grants in the
Australian colonies and ultimately decided to adopt
the American principle of sale. The chief reason for
adopting this course was that it had been found that
the system of granting land had had the effect, in New
South Wales and Van Diemen Land, of encouraging
the dispersion of settlers over too wide an extent of
country, which, apart from other inconveniences, greatly
increased the expenses of administration in every branch
of the Public Service. This decision was arrived at and
published in England in March, 1831, but owing to the
length of time then occupied in conveying the infor-
mation to the colonies it did not operate until well
into 1832. By it the principle of granting laud accord-
ing to the property brought by the settler was entirely
discontinued, and in its place it was provided that ‘‘all
the lands in the colony not hitherto granted and not
appropriated for public purposes will be put up for
sale. The price will, of course, depend upon the quality
of the land and its local situation, but no land will be
sold below the value of ss. per acre.” The method
adopted in carrying this system into effect was that an
intending purchaser was allowed to select within defined
limits the land he desired to acquire. The area was
then advertised for three months, at the end of which
it was sold to the highest bidder above the minimum
of ss. The transaction had to be completed within one
month thereafter. The minimum area was 640 acres,
but the Governor could, if he deemed it advisable, allow
a smaller quantity; the maximum, however, which was
2,560 acres, must not be exceeded. Land which could
not bo sold might be let on grazing lease from year to
year, it being understood that if at any time its pur-
chase was applied for it must be put up for sale in the
ordinary way. It will be remembered that under the
regulations previously in force persons sending out
labourers were allowed to reckon the passage money of
such labourers as part of the capital on which they
could secure grants. As the colony had not the
advantage of convict labour it was felt that nothing


should be done that might affect the supply of free
labourers, and therefore £2O was allowed in the pur-
chase of land for every married labourer and his family
landed in the colony. The bounty was restricted to
married labourers to prevent, as far as possible, that
excess of males over females which had been found so
injurious in the two penal colonies.
In the same year (1831) the change in the method
of administration, forecasted in the Secretary of State's
despatch of July 20, 1830, bringing the settlement
definitely into line as a Crown colony was effected. The
Act 10 Geo. IV. c. 22, enabled the King, with the advice
of the Privy Council, to make, and to authorize any
three or more persons to make, all necessary laws and
to constitute all necessary courts for the peace, order,
and good government of the settlement. No steps were
taken under this Act until November 1, 1830, when an
Order-in-Council was issued constituting the Gover-
nor, the Senior Military Officer next in command, the
Colonial Secretary, the Surveyor-General, and the
Advocate-General to be a Legislative Council to dis-
charge the functions entrusted to them by the Act,
subject to a provision for disallowance by the Secretary
of State, and further that any law or ordinance made
by the Council must have been first proposed by the
Governor or officer administering the Government.
This Order-in-Council was forwarded to Western Aus-
tralia by despatch dated April 28, 1831, with which
were enclosed the formal commission to Captain Stirling
as Governor and Commander-in-Chief, and also a
lengthy document under the King's Sign Manual con-
taining instructions as to procedure. In the second
clause of these instructions the same officers who had
been appointed a Legislative Council were also appointed
as an Executive Council for the assistance and advice
of the Governor. The reasons that the two Councils
were appointed by different methods lay in the fact that
while the King could by virtue of the j)rerogative estab-
lish an Executive Council, the Royal authority was not
competent, without the aid of Parliament, to create a
Legislature except by popular representation, or to
establish Courts on lines that differed from those of
Westminster. In the despatch of April 28 the diverse
methods of appointment were pointed out and the
Governor's attention drawn to the fact that, although
composed of the same individuals, the two bodies were
separate and distinct, and that separate accounts must
be kept of their proceedings. It may be noted that
there were three subjects upon which power to legislate
was specifically withheld —the naturalization of aliens,
the granting of land titles to unnaturalized aliens, and
all questions of divorce. It was late in 1831 when the
information concerning these alterations in the adminis-
tration reached the colony, and consequently the first
meeting of the Legislative Council did not take place
until January, 1832.
The year 1831 cannot be considered to have been
one of any great progress, nor did it afford much in the
way of incident. Owing to the adverse reports
concerning the condition of things in the settlement,
assiduously spread abroad by those who had been
unable to grapple with the difficulties, the influx of
people showed a distinct tendency to abate, and many
of those who did come were of little value as colonists,
serving only to augment the already considerable
number of the dissatisfied and disappointed. Those,
however, who recognized the wisdom of doing their best
in the new surroundings were beginning to see signs of
reward. Though fearful of a recurrence of the dis-
heartening conditions of the previous winter they per-
severed in their endeavours to clear and cultivate their
land, and by the end of the year had 200 acres under
cultivation, of which 160 were producing wheat. Con-
sidering that over a million acres had been alienated,
this amount seems pitifully small, and certainly adds
to the overwhelming evidence that exists as to the
incapacity of most of those to whom land had been
granted. So anxious does the English Government seem
to have been to avoid expense and even responsibility
in establishing the colony that land was granted to all
and sundry without any guarantee that they either
could or would do anything in the way of improvement.
No attempt was made to preserve anything like a just
proportion between the land alienated, the capital in-
vested, and the labour available. In fact, The Literary
Gazette , the organ of the Literary Society formed by
the officials and better class settlers, asserted that ‘“to
the want of labour, and to that alone, may be traced
all the evils that have afflicted this infant settlement."
Taking into consideration the numerous servants who
had been introduced this scarcely seems feasible at first
sight; but if we combine the ineptitude of the major
portion of the&e servants with the lack of ready money
and the absence of the true colonizing spirit on the part
of the settlers, who were, most of them, completely at
a loss where to begin, we reach in all probability some-
thing like the true reasons for the approximation to
failure that occurred in these early years.
The amount of wheat produced was, of course, far
from being sufficient to supply the demands for a
population which then numbered about 1,500, hence
the colonists had still to depend on the ships
arriving from time to time for provisions. Any delay
in the appearance of these vessels was a matter of no
small moment, causing as it did a very appreciable in-
crease in the cost of living. During the latter part
of 1831 very few ships arrived, and as a result some-
thing akin to famine drew ominously close. That in


face of troubles such as these the colonists refused to
acknowledge defeat is a tribute to their indomitable
perseverance. One method adopted for overcoming their
initial difficulties was the establishment during the year
of an Agricultural Society, which was the parent of
the present Royal Agricultural Society of Western Aus-
tralia. By means of this institution they were enabled
to meet regularly for discussion and encouragement,
and there is no doubt that it was of inestimable value
in stimulating and developing the agricultural and pas-
toral industries. That in the latter of these industries
there were great possibilities was recognized by all, but
unfortunately there were but few head of stock in the
colony and not a large number of sheep. So serious
did these various questions—want of capital, of labour,
and of stock—become that during the year it was de-
cided to petition the English Government, asking that
the Colonial Treasury be authorized to make advances
for the purchase
of stock, and
asserting that
with some little
assistance in
that way the
settlement
would quickly
become a pros-
perous com-
munity. Al-
though the
Governor was
in sympathy
with the re-
quest, and on
more than one
*
occasion urged
it in his despat-
ches, the Home
authorities, true to the policy of incurring no expense,
paid no heed to his representations.
In the way of exploratory work the year was not
productive of great results. The principal expedition
was that of Captain Bannister and party in December
and January. Confronted by great difficulties and a
certain degree of danger they made their way overland
from Perth to King George Sound, the longest overland
journey that had so far been undertaken. At one stage
of the trip Captain Bannister was forced to kill his
horse owing to inability to procure food for it.
About 100 miles farther on the provisions for the party
ran out, and they were compelled to retrace their steps
and eat the dead animal. However, after many trials
they arrived safely at King George Sound, having
gained considerable information of value concerning the
country passed through, and having blazed a tiack
between the two settlements which proved very useful
after the transfer of the King George Sound settlement
to the Government of Western Australia in the follow-
ing March. About the same time a party under Mr.
W. K. Shenton proceeded by sea to Port Leschenault
and thence up the Collie River, looking for satisfactory
places of settlement. The report brought back was not,
however, sufficiently favourable to encourage any
attempt at cultivation. Various other trips were made
during 1831, chiefly in the south-west portion of the
colony and round about King George Sound. Though
none of these were productive of further expansion
at the time, they were of distinct value in that they
increased the existing knowledge of the country
generally and enabled the authorities to form a better
estimate of its capabilities. In the spring of the year
the settlement of York district, postponed from 1830,
was undertaken, and a party, among whom were Messrs.
Hardey, Clark-
son, Bla n d,
and Moore, was
led over the
ranges by Lieu-
tonant Dale,
and left to form
the beginning of
what has since
become one of
the finest agri-
cultural centres
in the Common-
wealth.
Only three
additional towns
were proclaimed
during the year
—those of Kelm-
scott, Kingston,
and Albany. Kingston, which was on Rottnest
Island, never got beyond that stage. Several allotments
were taken up, but no attempt at building a township was
ever made. With the single exception of Perth, very
little progress was made in any of the townships.
Fremantle as the port displayed a certain amount of
activity, but not in the direction of erecting permanent
buildings. Being the distributing centre for supplies
it boasted some fairly large stores, the principal of
which were those of Messrs. Leake, Shenton, and Sam-
son, through whose energies a monthly service of boats
was inaugurated between the port and Guildford. This
for many years was the cheapest and safest mode of
transport for goods, though there existed from early in
1831 a fairly good road between Perth and Fremantle.
Other evidences of civilization also began to make their
appearance. That great want of British communities
HAY STREET, PERTH, FROM MILLIGAN STREET, 1869


a newspaper —was met by the issue (in manuscript) of
The Western Australian Chronicle and Perth Gazette.
This was published by Mr. W. K. Shenton, and the
price was 3s. 6d. per copy. Needless to say, it did not
survive many issues. Later in the year a hand-
printing press arrived from Tasmania, and a newspaper
printed on letter paper was issued in Fremantle by
Messrs. Macfaull and Shenton. The press was erected
in the shed in which the first bushel of wheat grown in
the colony was ground. Thus from the one build-
ing there issued food both for mind and body. Want
of news caused the publishers to fall back on contribu-
tions, some of which might be described as early nine-
teenth-century yellow-Press efforts, and which resulted
in a dissolution of partnership. The paper was carried
on by Mr. Macfaull, who was compelled, in order to
secure freedom from molestation, to remove the press
to Hamilton Hill, some three miles out in the bush.
This was the spot where the first vines reared in the
colony were planted. The newspaper lasted only about
twelve months, the returns not being sufficient to pay
the rent of the press. The owner of the machine then
started another paper called The Inquisitor , and secured
as contributors Captain Graham (formerly Governor of
Sierra Leone), Mr. Yule, a Scotch lawyer named Clark,
and a merchant named Johnstone. So much talent
proved too heavy for the journal; serious disagree-
ments arose between members of the staff, ending in a
duel between Clark and Johnstone, which was fought
on the beach at North Fremantle —the only duel fought
in Western Australia. Johnstone was fatally wounded,
dying within twelve hours. The result was equally
fatal to the newspaper, and ended the first chapter of
the history of journalism in the colony.
As evidence of the fact that the difficulties of their
position were not weighing too heavily upon the set-
tlers it may be mentioned that in the first
Governor’s ball was held. From the accounts preserved
this seems to have been quite a gorgeous affair, and the
supper, which one record describes as “an elegant and
suj:>erb one,” rather appeared to discountenance the
statement that the colonists were approaching the verge
of starvation.
In December Captain James Stirling's commission
as Governor and Commander-in-Chief, as well as one
appointing him Vice-Admiral of the colony, arrived
from England. These interesting documents relating to
the early history of Western Australia are now pre-
served in the Public Library at Perth. As soon as
possible after the arrival of his commission and instruc-
tions the Governor called his advisers together, and the
first sitting of the Legislative Council constituted under
the Order-in-Council of November 1, 1830, was held
in January, 1832. The principal business was the estab-
lishment of a Civil Court having the powers of the
Courts of King’s Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer.
Mr. George Fletcher Moore was appointed Civil Com-
missioner, and the Court was opened in March, 1832,
the first jury case being tried in the following June.
The other matters which mainly occupied the atten-
tion of the Legislative Council during the year were
the shortness of provisions, the need of more live stock,
and the menacing attitude of the natives. The pos-
sibility of famine, which had begun to cause uneasiness
in 1831, became more accentuated, and the want of
food supplies culminated in a serious, if not dangerous,
situation early in the following year. Vessels which
had for months been expected to arrive with provisions
failed bo put in an appearance, the small stock of wheat
that had been raised locally was almost exhausted, and
many of the settlers were faced with starvation. Some
idea of the scarcity that existed may be gleaned from
the following list of prices:—Salt pork, from £lO to
£l4 a cask; wheat, 355. to 40s. per bushel; fresh meat,
Is. lOd. per lb.; eggs, ss. per dozen; flour, 10d. per lb.;
and butter (when procurable at all), 7s. per lb. The
colonial Government, realizing the seriousness of the
position, made arrangements to assist those possessing
little ready money by supplying provisions on credit out
of the Government stores. To encourage cultivation it
was notified that payment for these stores could be made
by locally-grown wheat on a basis of 15s. per bushel.
All classes of the community were compelled to avail
themselves of the offer, as practically the whole of the
food supply remaining was in the Government stores.
The arrival of two small schooners in March and April
relieved the position slightly, and from the middle of
the year a succession of provision-laden ships altogether
averted the danger of famine.
Hand in hand with the want of provisions went
the absence of money and the lack of sufficient live
stock. Most of the money brought by the settlers had
been spent in making useless experiments or in paying
for the necessaries of life at famine prices, so that
nothing was left to secure necessary farming implements
or to purchase stock. One method suggested as a way of
coping with the financial difficulty was the establish-
ment of a bank. In May a prospectus was submitted
to the Governor asking for an advance of £5,000 from
the Treasury on the security of twenty-five responsible
persons. It was pointed out that if money could be
advanced by the Government on the discount of Bills
at 5 per cent, the colony would benefit very consider-
ably, as settlers were then borrowing at so much as 25
per cent. The Governor was unable, in face of his
instructions, bo meet the request, and suggested that
the colonists should raise the money by subscription.


An attempt to do this was unsuccessful; the members
of the community at that time were all borrowers. Very
little actual cash was available; all transactions were
by means of promissory-notes of from 2s. 6d. upwards
in value. Some temporary relief was afforded by an
inventive genius named Woods. There was at the time
a coin current in India called an “Indian dump,”
roughly pentagonal in shape, made presumably of silver,
and in common use prior to the introduction of the
rupee. Woods bought up all the German silver teapots,
spoons, etc., that were available, and minted them into
dumps, at the face value of the Indian coin. For some
six months they were found to be very useful and in
part displaced the promissory-notes. At the end of that
period, however, the attention of the authorities was
drawn to the number of these coins and the scheme
was exposed,
with the re-
sult that for
affording un-
doubted fin-
ancial assist-
ance Woods
received a sen-
tence of seven
years’ trans-
portation to
Van Diemen
Land.
Apart from
the ordinary
necessaries of
life money
was badly
needed for
the purchase
of stock, both
cattle and
sheep, for the
pastures. The settlers themselves had not the capital
to lay out in chartering a vessel and importing
animals, but they were convinced that if the Imperial
Government would only come to their assistance in
that direction the cost might be met out of suc-
ceeding harvests. They pointed out that the acreage
under grain had increased to 435, from which a
yield of 15 bushels per acre was expected, and that
the suitability of the soil for agricultural purposes was
assured, so that there was not likely to be any great
difficulty in meeting the advances asked for. To this
request, as bo the former one, the Governor was com-
pelled bo give a negative reply.
A further question that became acute during the
year 1832 was that of protection from the natives. The
aggressive attitude adopted by the aborigines in 1830
became more pronounced in 1831, when two servants of
settlers were murdered and a considerable number of
the stock stolen. During the early part of 1832 there
were no open attempts at violence, but in May a party
headed by the stalwart Yagan, who seems to have been
the leader in all the trouble, attacked two settlers
on the Canning River and killed one of them. From
that time the depredations became more frequent
and more daring, and so serious was the state of
affairs that in June a meeting of settlers at Guild-
ford decided that the colony must be abandoned
unless ample steps were taken by the Government
to protect life and property. In order to afford
all possible assistance and so meet the wishes of the
community the Governor immediately established a police
force, and in retaliation the natives speared his pigs.
When these
various ques-
tions the
scarcity of
provisions,
the want of
money, the
need of more
live stock,
and the fear
of native ag-
gression are
taken into
c o nsideration
it becomes
evident th a t
the settle-
ment in 1832
was in rather
a parlous
state. So con-
vinced were
the settlers
that the only hope of improvement and assistance
lay in a personal appeal at headquarters that they
presented a memorial to the Governor asking him
to proceed to England and present their case as
strongly as possible to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies. It will be remembered that in 1831, when
these matters first called for consideration, the Governor
had been requested to draw attention to them in his
despatches. The fact that no reply had been received
from Home to those requests, added to the growing in-
sistence of their needs, caused the colonists to take the
extreme step of requesting the Governor to personally
present their requirements to the English authorities.
On the advice of the Executive Council the Governor
agreed to do as requested, and on August 12 left Fre-
mantle for London in H.M.S. “Sulphur.” From a
PERTH NATIVES CAMP AT CRAWLEY IN THE EARLY DAYS


despatch to the Colonial Office which he found oppor-
tunity of forwarding during the course of the voyage
we are able to get a very clear view of the condition
of affairs and the reasons which actuated him in acced-
ing to the memorial of the settlers. After referring to
a previous despatch in which he had drawn attention
to the matters under review he goes on to say :
In the course of a few weeks subsequent to the date of
that communication referred to the evils which had been
anticipated began to be felt. The scarcity of money in
private hands and the reduction in the Government ex-
penditure which took place in the early part of the year
had the material effect of discouraging importation from
the neighbouring colonies, and the consequent high price of
all the necessaries of life hastened that exhaustion which
had been apprehended. In addition to these annoyances it
was found that the unfavourable accounts which had been
spread regarding the settlement had deterred persons from
coming to it; the natives also began to be troublesome;
and the imposition of a duty on spirits which 1 deemed it
advisable in May last to pass into a law aggravated the
depression of spirits which had so far affected the com-
munity as to prevent exertion and useful speculation.
Persuaded that many of the evils complained of were
attributable to the circumstances that attend every new
settlement, i felt disposed to trust to the operation of
time and that improvement which might be expected from
continuous efforrs. Put in a small community there is
usually some one prevailing sentiment, and as in this in-
stance it happened to be of a desponding character, there
was reason to apprehend that it would lead to a total
remission of labour, in which case the support of the
colonists would fall upon the public stores, or to the aban-
donment of the enterprise by those persons whose means
and abilities were requisite for its success.
Explanatory of the feelings above mentioned, 1 beg
leave to call Your Lordship’s attention to the accompanying
documents [the memorials previously referred to]. In
these and in the Minutes of my Executive Council
it will be perceived that some decisive measures had become
necessary to the successful continuation of the enterprise.
In a conversation which 1 had with some of the leading
settlers in the latter part of June 1 was respectfully solicited
to adopt certain changes in the conduct of government
regarding the increase of public expenditure, the granting
of loans, and the repeal of the duty on spirits; but as in
taking such steps 1 should have departed from the substance
of Your Lordship’s instructions without the justification of
circumstances, 1 was under the necessity of declining any
serious departure from the line of policy which had been
adopted, but 1 stated my readiness to convey to Your Lord-
ship such representations regarding the real state of the
settlement as would enable Your Lordship to judge of the
course to be pursued. The length of time before an answer
could be expected and the difficulty in making arrangements
of this kind by correspondence being suggested I was asked
whether 1 would undertake to represent in person to His
Majesty’s Government the state of the colony and advocate
its cause. 1 replied that it would not be proper for me to
quit the colony unless it were recommended by the con-
current wishes of the settlers at large, and that it would
be useless on my part to go to England unless 1 had some
trustworthy assurance from the leading persons in the
colony that they would not remit any exertion in the mean-
time for the advancement of the undertaking and the
maintenance of a proper feeling, if, however, I should be
satisfied on these points I should not decline the mission
proposed to me. The gentlemen present stated it to be the
general opinion that some such measure was requisite for
the public welfare, and that they believed it would tend
very much to restore confidence, but that they would con-
sult, with my permission, public opinion upon the subject.
Having brought the question referred to before my
Executive Council on the 29th June ... it was the
unanimous opinion of the members that the measure pro-
posed would afford satisfaction to the community, tend to
the good of His Majesty’s Service, and go far to restore
and maintain those exertions on the behalf of individuals
which were necessary to the success of the colony. In con-
sequence of this recommendation ... 1 determined
upon its adoption and issued a public declaration to that
ettect.
The above extract from the despatch has been
quoted at length in order to prove the falsity of the
contention so often put forward that the object of the
Governor’s mission to England was to endeavour to
secure the transportation of convicts to the colony in
order to expedite the construction of roads, bridges,
and other public works. In his work “The State and
Position of Western Australia,” published in 1835,
Captain Irwin (who commanded the troops in the colony
from 1829 till 1833, and who acted as Lieutenant-
Governor after Captain Stirling’s departure) points out
that no such wish was expressed in the memorial of the
colonists. ‘ The colonists,” he says, "‘having had before
their eyes in the neighbouring penal settlements the
serious evils inflicted on society by the employment of
convicts . . . have firmly resisted the temptation
to seek such a remedy for their wants.” Considering
that one of the principles laid down on the establish-
ment of the colony was that no convicts should be sent
there, a principle which no doubt influenced many in
deciding to emigrate, it is not likely that, even if such
a request had been put forward, the English Govern-
ment would have given it any consideration at that
early stage of the colony’s history.
One of the first difficulties that Captain Irwin had
to contend with after the departure of the Governor
was renewed activity on the part of the natives. He
had, however, the temporary satisfaction of securing the
notorious Yagan, who was imprisoned on Carnac Island
in charge of Mr. R. M. Lyon, a gentleman with pro-
nounced philanthropic views. Every attempt was made
to civilize the native, but just as Mr. Lyon was begin-
ning to feel that his methods were successful
escaped and regained his tribe. The spearing of a sol-
dier’s wife shortly afterwards went a long way toward
alienating the little remaining sympathy of the whites
for the aborigines. Even the advocates of kindly treat-
ment felt that drastic steps ought to be taken. As a
result the history of 1833 and part of 1834 is prac-
tically the tale of native aggression and repulsion.
Thefts were incessant, murders increasingly frequent,
and the settlers lived in continual fear of an outbreak,
a fear that was enhanced by their knowledge of the
treacherous and cunning nature of the aborigines. The


colonists were also at a disadvantage in that the natives
made no open attack, but confined themselves to covert
acts of theft, and to acts of violence and even murder
upon individual settlers or their servants. The Govern-
ment forbade anything in the nature of an organized
expedition against the blacks ; any action taken must be
against individuals by way of punishment for specific
crimes. This appearance of weakness on the part of the
settlers, combined with the fact that the initial fear
of the white man’s weapons had worn off, caused the
natives to become more daring, and by the middle of
1833 the situation was one of no little danger to the
colony. Toward the end of April, 1833, there occurred
the wanton murder of an unoffending native by one of
Major Nairn’s servants, who had formerly been in Tas-
mania, simply to show how the aborigines were dealt
with there. Immediately afterwards another native
was killed during an attempt to rob a store at Fre-
mantle. These two deaths seem to have had a disastrous
effect and to
have raised a.
spirit of revenge
among the sur-
rounding tribes.
Under the
leadership of
Yagan, Midge-
gooroo, and
Munday three
r e d oubtable
chiefs —a party
of natives set out
from Preston
Point early on
April 30 with the
deliberate inten-
tion of commit-
ting murder as an act of retaliation. Strange to say, they
fell in with the same cart from which the Tasmanian
had shot the innocent black at almost precisely the same
spot on the Canning Road. In it were two brothers
named Velvick, servants of Mr. Phillips. These were
speared and the bodies mutilated beyond recognition,
the murderers afterwards escaping into the bush. Such
an act could not be allowed to pass without the utmost
endeavours to mete out punishment to the offenders.
Accordingly the Lieutenant-Governor issued a pro-
clamation outlawing the three leaders and offering re-
wards for their apprehension, dead or alive. From that
time it is evident that the desire for revenge, irrespec-
tive of any question of justice, actuated the settlers as
well as the natives. Parties were formed and the sur-
rounding country scoured in every direction for Yagan
and his companions. Eventually, on May 16, Captain
Ellis managed to secure Midgegooroo, who, after a
patient investigation, was condemned to death and pub-
licly shot in front of Perth Gaol within a week of his
capture, in the presence of the Lieutenant-Governor and
Council, the event being almost one of general rejoicing.
The search for the other ringleaders was then continued
with vigour, and it is to be feared that the feeling of
hatred and distrust which then existed was the cause of
more than one innocent native being shot down. To
place the matter on a saner footing it became necessary
for the Government to issue a proclamation pointing
out that offences against the aborigines would be visited
with the same punishment as if committed against any
other of His Majesty’s subjects. This and the fact that
advocates were not wanting who pointed out that the
natives were merely obeying a natural or tribal law
stopped the continuance of outrages, but did not cause
the settlers to relax their efforts to capture Yagan and
Munday. The death of the formidable leader was finally
encompassed by
what was an un-
doubted act of
treachery. Two
lads named
Keats observed
Yagan and some
companions mak-
ing their way to
the house o f
Lieutenant Bull
for flour; they
fraternized with
them, and then
as soon as a
favourable op-
portunity oc-
curred the elder
shot Yagan in cold blood. In retaliation the
natives attacked the lads and succeeded in killing the
murderer, though not until a second black had been
dispatched. The two aborigines chiefly responsible for
the conflicts that had occurred being thus accounted
for, the Government, as a token of reconciliation, re-
moved the ban of outlawry from the remaining leader
Munday. Other steps were also taken to bring about
a friendlier state of affairs; these met with some degree
of success, and for a few months the settlers had free-
dom from molestation.
Notwithstanding the unrest created by these
troubles, the area of land under crop was increased
during 1833 to something like 600 acres, and it was
felt that there was every prospect of reaping sufficient
grain to meet the wants of the community. In fact, a
ship from Tasmania with a cargo of 2,000 bushels of
VIEW OF FREMANTLE, 1832, FROM THE CANNING ROAD.


wheat, sent by Governor Arthur during June, returned
to Hobart with the information that the grain was not
required. Material progress was evidenced by the im-
provements in methods of communication; roads were
being made between the settlements, channels through
the flats at the present Causeway were begun, and im-
provements to the jetty at Fremantle were under con-
sideration. A weekly newspaper, The Perth Gazette
and Western Australian Journal —which still lives as
The West Australian —was established at the begin-
ning of the year, and exerted considerable influence in
the progress of the settlement. One of its first actions
was to revive the agitation for the establishment of a
bank. The question was also taken up by the Agricul-
tural Society, but the same obstacles which had pre-
viously stood in the way of its solution still prevailed.
The Society therefore sought to form an institution
which might be able to supply some of the benefits of a
bank, though not in the way of monetary loans. The
result was the establishment of the Swan River Barter
Society, each member of which agreed to accept the
notes of any other member in lieu of cash, provided
they were presented according to a stipulated form.
Two forms were provided, one for the use of agricul-
turists and the other for merchants. The person who
tendered the note for payment to any agriculturist had
the right to choose the kind of produce he would take
for it, and the agriculturist was not compelled to take
from the merchant any article not in general con-
sumption. The institution was to be under the wing
of the Agricultural Society, which was to settle an} T
dispute about prices or values. Each member was
allowed fifty notes, each note having a face value of
£l. Any defaulter was to be immediately excluded
from the privileges of the Society. Although never
fully carried out, the project met with a certain amount
of success, and to it is due that system of exchange and
barter which in the absence of sufficient ready money
became so general in succeeding years throughout Wes-
tern Australia.
Another system initiated during 1833 was that
of parcelling out allotments of from 20 acres
upwards to servants and labourers. Two objects were
sought to be achieved by this departure —to keep a
sufficient amount of labour round the settlement and
to give the working class an opportunity of building
up a competence. Unfortunately the scheme met with
very little success, probably due to want of good
feeling between servants and masters. Many of the
settlers were unsuitable for their positions as masters,
and a great number of the servants were utterly incom-
petent as agriculturists. Its failure is a matter for
regret, as efficient labour was urgently needed, and the
stream of immigration had been very adversely affected
by the misrepresentations spread abroad, and by the
superior inducements which the other colonies were
believed to afford.
An attempt was made during the year to open up
relations with India, and a company was formed at
Calcutta with that object in view. It was proposed to
establish an Anglo-Indian settlement near King
George Sound, and the barque “Mercury” left Calcutta
in October with the first load of passengers and stock.
Unfortunately she was never again heard of. Such a
sad event naturally put an end to the operations of the
Company, and Western Australia lost what would have
almost certainly proved to be a very valuable acqui-
sition to her resources.
Exploratory work during 1832-3 was practically
confined to elaborating the information concerning dis-
tricts already recognized as being within the settlement.
The area of country of which the administration
possessed, at any rate, some general knowledge was
large enough to meet any demands for land that were
likely to be made. It was felt that greater benefit would
result to the colony if more were known of that area
than if time were spent in securing a vague idea of
portions lying beyond it. In addition, the roving
spirit and the desire to seek for some new place were
wearing off. The settlers whose opinions would have
been of any value were actively employed clearing and
planting their own grants. The officials were busily en-
gaged in their official duties and had little spare time for
outside work. Nevertheless, from time to time trips were
undertaken and results of value achieved. Ensign Dale
and Dr. Collie greatly enriched the store of information
concerning the district round King George Sound, and
J. G. Bussell made a careful examination of the Vasse
district which resulted in the profitable settlement of
that portion of the colony.
Captain Irwin, who had occupied the position of
Lieutenant-Governor from the date of Captain Stirling’s
departure, left for England in September, 1833, and
Captain Richard A. Daniell became Lieutenant-
Governor for the remaining period of Stirling’s absence.
The year 1834 witnessed the revival of the original
hopeful spirit on the part of the settlers. This seems
to have been due in part to information which reached
the colony toward the end of 1833 to the effect that
the Governor had met with a large measure of success
in his representations to the Home authorities.
The principal reason, however, was that the colonists
had learned the lesson of colonization—that satis-
factory results could not be looked for all at
once, but could be achieved only by years of toil. Their
experiences of the previous years had given them a
knowledge of the soil and its possibilities; they knew
what to do, and were no longer experimenting in the


dark. They recognized that the country possessed all
the potentialities necessary for the realization of their
original expectations, but that its rewards were only
for those who were prepared to labour and to wait. The
factors that had operated in retarding the expansion
of the colony were three —the misrepresentation of those
who had left the settlement, the inefficiency and lack
of interest on the part of the British Government, and
the ignorance of what they would have to encounter
on the part of the colonists themselves. These factors
were in a measure ceasing to have any effect. The
misrepresentations were being appraised at their true
value ; the Home authorities showed some slight indica-
tion of being prepared to listen to reason; and the
settlers themselves understood better what was
demanded of those who undertook to found a new
colony.
The revival of hope and confidence resulted in a
steady progress being manifest. This was more evident,
perhaps, in the settled and orderly condition of the
towns and selections than in any abnormal increase in
the productions of the soil, though the report of the
Agricultural Society for 1834 considered the results
achieved in the way of agricultural and pastoral
development were very encouraging. Statistics collected
for the purposes of the report showed that there were
809 acres under grain of various kinds, 109 yielding
potatoes and other vegetables and fruits, and 118 lying
fallow, which would have been utilized but for the
absence of seed wheat. The available stock consisted
of 84 horses, 78 mares, 307 cows, 96 working cattle,
97 bulls and steers, 3,545 sheep, 492 goats, and 374
pigs. The wool clip for the year amounted to 7,585 lb.
Nearly every kind of European fruit-tree and shrub
had been planted, and some of them, particularly the
vine, olive, fig, and peach, appeared to thrive well.
Both this and the preceding report mention the
occurrence of a disease among the live stock which had
been the cause of considerable loss, and which even the
most experienced among stock failed to diagnose. Many
of the flocks and herds were moved from the coast to
the Avon district in the hope that a change of herbage
would stamp out the evil. Unfortunately the change
served to make the mortality only greater. As a
matter of fact, this was the Western Australian farmer’s
first experience of the poisonous plants growing in vari-
ous districts, and which have been the cause of so much
trouble and expense ever since. This report of the
Agricultural Society is of particular value, sounding as
it does the first distinct note of confidence in the future
of the colony.
In the condition of the towns may be found,
perhaps, the best index of the progress of the settlement
during the first five years of its existence. Fremantle
had become a compact little seaport town with a few
made roads and the predominance of hotels and stores
usual to such places. Ferries across the river had been
established at Fremantle, Preston Point, Mount Eliza,
and Guildford, and roads as well as river communication
existed between the port and the capital. Perth had
grown into a large straggling village, with one main
street, St. George’s Terrace, which ran parallel with the
river and was about a mile in length. On either side
of it were the Governor’s House, Government Offices,
Commissariat Stores, Court-house, Gaol, and Barracks.
Those lastnamed occupied the site on the north side of
the present Treasury Buildings, and to their presence
Barrack Street owes its name. Clustered round the offices
were the dwellings of many of those engaged therein,
and from the surrounding bush there peeped forth the
modest dwellings of the settlers. To the westward was
a flour-mill erected at considerable cost by the Civil
Engineer, Mr. IT. W. Reveley, a personal friend of
Byron and Shelley. Across the river at Point Belches
(Mill Point) was another mill, the property of Mr. W.
K. Shenton, the walls of which are still standing. Along
the course of the river from Perth to Guildford were
many farms and selections, some of which, notably those
of Messrs. Hardey and Clarkson at the Peninsula,
showed the work of experienced hands. Guildford itself
was an industrial village, composed chiefly of servants
and others to whom small grants had been made.
Beyond the town, at the jhmetion of the Helena and
the Swan, were many of the principal selections. The
soil was good and the situation admirable. Here were
the properties of Captains Stirling and Meares, Messrs.
Walcott and Wells, and many others. Higher up the
river were the grants of Dr. Harris, Messrs. Yule,
Leake, Lennard, Brockman, Mackie, Irwin, and others,
all of whom had laboured to make their holdings suc-
cessful, and to whom much of the renewed spirit of
confidence was due. In the Canning district, which was
connected with Perth by two roads —one through South
Perth and the other through Guildford—were the
properties of Major Nairn, Messrs. Bull, Phillips, Wal-
lace Bickley, Hester, and Captain Bannister, all of
which were being cleared and improved. Kelmscott
which had been proclaimed some two years previously,
existed only in name, no development having taken
place probably owing to distance from the market. York
was reached by a bush road from Guildford. The prin-
cipal settlers there were Messrs. Bland, Trimmer, and
Heale, the first of whom devoted his attention to
pastoral pursuits with considerable success. On the
Murray were the establishments of Messrs. Peel and
Hall and Captain Byrne. Other grants had been made
in the district, but fear of the natives kept the owners
from living upon them. At Augusta good progress had


been made largely through the efforts of Captain Molloy
and Messrs. Turner and Bussell. The population num-
bered about 100 and formed on the whole a fairly
prosperous little community. The settlement at Albany
made little advance, notwithstanding the efforts of Sir
Richard Spencer, the Government Resident, to push it
forward. The few people who were there seem to have
developed a Micawber-like habit of waiting for some-
thing to turn up. Port Leschenault, like Kelmscott,
remained a settlement merely in name. No part of
the colony, as may be seen, could be said to have
advanced with any degree of rapidity, but there is
ample evidence that, despite their despondency, the
settlers as a whole were doing everything that limited
facilities would allow to lay the foundations of future
prosperity and permanence. They were still harassed
by the want of ready money or specie and the scarcity
of provisions. The first difficulty was in some degree
met by the issue from the Commissariat Office of <£l
notes, signed by the Deputy Assistant Commissary
General and countersigned by two members of the
Executive Council, and made payable on demand either
in specie or by Treasury bill. The second was not so
easily remedied. A recurrence of the conditions of
1832, combined with the fact that the stock of locally-
grown wheat had been almost exhausted, brought the
settlers once more dangerously close to starvation. For
some unexplained reason the authorities did not at
first seem to realize the position, and it was not until
matters reached a critical stage that the Government
schooner was dispatched to the Mauritius for supplies.
By the beginning of September it was found necessary
to exercise the strictest economy in the use of the
remaining foodstuffs, and until the arrival of several
ships later in the month the settlers were practically
reduced to a famine diet. Though the danger was thus
averted, high prices continued to rule until the end of
1835, when a plentiful harvest brought the cost of living
down to normal, and dispelled the fear of further
scarcity of the necessaries of life in the immediate
future.
In the year 1834 the suggestion to establish a penal
settlement was first raised. The residents of Albany,
disheartened by the trials and difficulties of pioneering
work, and probably influenced by the remembrance that
the first settlers at King George Sound were convicts,
decided to petition the Imperial Government to allow
convicts to be sent to Western Australia. They
recognized that the colony was established upon the
principles of free labour and that the presence of con-
victs offered serious objections, but urged that forced
labour was necessary to open up proper lines of com-
munication between the various settlements, and to
undertake the various other works by which alone the
advancement and prosperity of the colony could be
secured. They were persuaded that the country was not
deficient in natural possibilities, but felt that in the
absence of a market the settler had no inducement to
labour. The only remedy was the introduction of con-
victs. Failing that, they felt the settlement could
advance only at the sacrifice of the first settlers and
their entire capital. The petition did not meet with
any support from settlers in other parts of the colony,
and though forwarded by the Governor to the Secretary
of State, it was accompanied by the information that
he did not feel disposed to recommend it. Under the
circumstances the petition was refused, but the wisdom
of the majority of the settlers and of the Home
authorities may be questioned in the light of events of
less than fifteen years afterwards, when at the request
of these same colonists convicts were introduced to carry
out the same policy of construction and development
that was urged at this time, and which would have
been of such inestimable value to the settlers of those
early days.
The respite from native attacks and depredations
that followed the death of Yagan was ended early in
1834 by the same band of natives —the Murray River
tribe —which had caused most of the previous trouble.
The members of this tribe, which was the only one
with which the colonists had so far any difficulty, were
of a savage and warlike disposition, capable of any
degree of treachery, and most inveterate thieves. From
the beginning of the year they had been very trouble-
some throughout the Swan River district, and in April
became so fearless as to make an attack in open daylight
upon Mr. Shenton’s mill at Point Belches. After
threatening to kill the occupants if they attempted to
raise an alarm they looted the place and carried off
about half a ton of flour. For this offence four natives
were captured, three of whom were publicly flogged.
About the same time an attack was made upon Mr.
Burges’ farm and a quantity of wheat was stolen. One of
the natives concerned in this raid was captured and
confined in the soldiers’ barracks. In attempting to
escape he was shot by a soldier named Larkin. This
set the tribal law of retaliation in motion and Larkin
soon suffered the penalty, being speared in the barracks’
enclosure. This open defiance threw the settlers into
a state bordering upon panic. The Government, loath
to take drastic action, confined itself to ordering Captain
Ellis, the Superintendent of Police, to search for the
murderer and patrol the settlement as a means of pro-
tection. The relief afforded by these measures, however,
was only temporary. The natives moved outside the
area of patrol, and soon there came news of murders
out on the York Road and away in the Murray district.
So strong was the opposition shown by the natives


along the Murray toward the whites that few were
brave enough to attempt (o cultivate their grants. The
district possessed some of the best land known to exist,
and many grants had been taken up, but the fear
inspired by the aborigines almost caused their abandon-
ment. Matters reached a climax in Julv, when two
%/ j
settlers were murdered and two others severely wounded.
These crimes put any further thought of mild treatment
out of the question. The authorities were compelled to
mete out drastic punishment to the ferocious blacks,
who robbed with impunity and did not hesitate to
threaten the settlers with death. The Swan River
natives being quiet and peaceful, Captain Ellis was
instructed to proceed with a body of police to the
Murray district. At the same time the Governor paid
a business visit to Mr. Peel, whose grant was within
the area of dis-
turbance. On ar-
rival an expedi-
ti o n was or-
ganized, which
proceeded toward
the site of the
proposed town,
Pinjarra. Here
it fell in with
the main body of
natives, and the
encounter since
known as the
Battle of Pin-
jarra took place.
The engagement
was short but
sharp, and in the
result more than
half the male
members of the
tribe were killed
and several of the women and children captured. The
attacking force did not emerge scathless, and unfor-
tunately Captain Ellis was so severely wounded that he
died within a fortnight. The prisoners were released
and instructed to return to their friends with the
information that any recurrence of the troubles or any
attempt to avenge the punishment just inflicted would
be met by the destruction of the whole tribe. This
salutary lesson, which ought to have been given two
years earlier, ended all trouble as far as the Murray
River tribe was concerned. On the return of the expe-
dition proposals for an experiment in civilizing the
natives were set on foot, and a reserve at the foot of
Mount Eliza was used for the purpose. One of the
settlers, Mr. F. F. Armstrong, who had become familiar
I
with native ways, was placed in charge, and for many
years carried on the work with fair success. This move-
ment undoubtedly helped toward bringing about a
better understanding, and at the same time served to
show that the colonists did not look upon the aborigines
merely as vermin and therefore to be exterminated.
In June the Governor, who had been away from the
colony since August, 1832, landed at King George
Sound, but did not reach Perth until a couple of months
later. During his absence, which had been wholly in
the interests of the settlement, the honour of Knight-
hood had been conferred upon him. His return was
made the subject of general rejoicing, more particularly
as it was thought that the rumours of his success in
his mission were in the main true. The alterations in
the system of government were, shortly, that the Legis-
1 ati v e Council
was to be in-
creased by the
addition of four
unofficial mem-
bers to be
nominated by the
Governor, and its
sessions were to
be open to the
public. The civil
and military
j
establish m ents
were to be in-
creased and the
expenditure i n
regard to them
placed upon a
different footing.
Revenue was to
be derived from
a duty on spirits
and sales of
Crown lands, supplemented by a colonial grant or grant-
in-aid from the Imperial Treasury sufficient to meet the
necessary expenditure. The expenditure was to be allo-
cated and controlled locally, subject, of course, to dis-
allowance. The land laws were to be liberalized so as to
enable occupants to dispose of their holdings, even though
the conditions of improvement had not been carried out.
The colonial stores were to be closed, but sufficient
foodstuffs to prevent famine were to be kept in the
Commissariat Stores, such supplies to be obtained from
local sources where possible. The gist of these alter-
ations, without any mention of the method of
increasing the membership of the Legislative Coun-
cil, had been communicated by Stirling to the
colony in the previous year. In concluding that
ST GEORGE’S TERRACE, PERTH, 1870,


letter he says:—“ln making these several concessions
the Government considers it will have accomplished all
that the settlers ought to expect. In the advancement
of their particular pursuits, in the cultivation of the
soil, and in the conversion of its natural resources into
a productive state the colonists could not desire any
solid or permanent benefit from the assistance of the
Government, and in all such matters they must there-
fore rely upon their own means and industry. They
will be protected by a local government; they will enjoy
the benefit of English laws; their interests will be
superintended by a Legislature composed in part of
persons taken from their own body, and with these
advantages, if private capital and enterprise cannot
accomplish all that remains to be done to render the
settlement prosperous, it will not owe its failure to
any want of attention to its interests on the part of
Government.”
The satisfaction that had been expressed when the
tenor of the alterations became known in 1833 was
considerably modified when the exact terms were made
public, and it was seen that the proposals scarcely met
the difficulties referred to in the memorial of 1832. It
was decided, however, to take no further action until the
new system was brought fully into operation. This the
Governor proceeded to do with all possible dispatch.
On August 26, 1834, a Government Notice was issued
detailing the increased civil establishment and the regu-
lations for the management of public business. This
was followed in September by the rules and regulations
for the assignment of town allotments, providing that
a right of occupation might be secured at a minimum
price of from £2 to £5 according to the town, which
right would merge into a title in fee simple as soon as
certain stipulated improvements had been effected and
a fee paid for registration. In October the conditions
of sale of Crown lands at a minimum of ss. per acre
(as previously determined) were published and in
January, 1835, the Governor laid before the Legislative
Council the estimates of revenue and expenditure for
the year. This was the first document of its kind,
and as it contained the plans for revising and extending
the revenue and expenditure which had been decided
upon during the Governor’s visit to England it created
considerable public interest. In bringing it forward
Stirling was careful to call the attention of the Council
to a despatch of March 4, 1832, by which the procedure
was authorized, and in which it was laid down that
control over the Estimates extended only to the revenue
raised by local taxation, and did not refer to “funds
arising from the property or droits of the Crown.” That
the proposals would not meet with the approval of the
people even the Governor himself seems to have been
aware, as he proposed that the Council should form
itself into a Committee to consider them in his absence
and to suggest others if it failed to approve of them.
This course was adopted and in the result fresh pro-
posals were suggested by the Committee. The principal
point of difference was the expense necessary to main-
tain a police corps. The objection raised was that this
meant increased taxation, and that if such taxation
had to be imposed the money derived might be better
spent on more urgent requirements such as roads and
bridges. It is a curious fact that on more than one occa-
sion the roads and bridges vote has determined the fate of
colonial Governments. Feeling that he was not justified
in hanging up the whole budget until the opinion of
the Home authorities was known, the Governor
accepted the amended proposals and the Estimates were
then approved.
The firm stand taken b} r the Council in this
matter was due mainly to a large public meeting
of settlers called by requisition to the Sheriff and
held in February, 1835, at which dissatisfaction with
the results of the Governor’s mission was expressed in
no uncertain voice. The real source of the trouble was
unquestionably the amendment in the constitution of
the Legislative Council. The colonists expected that
the unofficial members, whom it was proposed to add,
would be elective and not nominated. When it was found
that such was not to be the case the cry that it was
against the spirit of the British Constitution to be
taxed without representation was raised, and the sug-
gested financial proposals strenuously opposed. So
strong was the feeling that the Governor was requested
not to carry the provision for nominated members into
effect. As a matter of fact, no additions to the Council
were made by this means during the administration of
Governor Stirling, though the delay was due not to
any deference to the wishes of the colonists, but to
a despatch from the Colonial Office instructing the
Governor to defer any augmentation until further
advised. Other matters beside the questions of the
augmentation of the Legislative Council and the reduc-
tion of the police corps that were dealt with at the
meeting referred to were the inability of the colonists
to bear further taxation, the publication of Government
accounts, the inadvisability of further taxation until
elective representation in the Council was conceded,
condemnation of the departure from the original con-
ditions of the land regulations of 1829, a request that
the extent of the land grants made to civil, naval,
and military officers be made public, and a resolution
in favour of the establishment of a bank. The settlers
further expressed dissatisfaction with the tenor of the
despatches received from the Home authorities, which
they considered unexplainable, except on the hypothesis
that trustworthy information concerning the condition


of the colony was not forwarded by the local Govern-
ment. All these points were subsequently embodied in
a memorial and transmitted to the Secretary of State.
That the Governor did not approve of the turn that
affairs had taken is clear from two despatches, one
unofficial forwarded just after the date of the public
meeting, and the other official, detailing the various
alterations in the administration and also explaining
his reasons for agreeing to the amended financial pro-
posals. In the first of these documents he says, in
referring to the copies of newspapers enclosed: —"I
believe the only point in them to which it is worth
while to draw your attention is the report of a public
meeting of the settlers held at Perth on the 16th ultimo.
As the Governor and his measures appear to have been
tolerably well abused on that occasion perhaps I am
not an impartial judge of their proceedings in other
respects; but I cannot help feeling alarmed at the
injury which may
be done to the
settlement by the
self-conceit and
absurdity of a
few individuals.
The resolutions
which were
adopted at the
meeting have not
led as yet to any
application to the
local Govern-
ment, but in my
opinion the im-
mediate destruc-
tion of the colony
would be the con-
sequence of
granting them the objects of their desir e. With the excep-
tion of this tendency to be dissatisfied with that which has
been done for them as colonists, and the wish on the part
of some useless people to make themselves important by
exciting discontent, the colony is in a progressive and
satisfactory state/' Tn the second despatch, dated May
4, 1835, after describing the changes in administration
made in acordance with the decisions of the Home
authorities, with which he was fully in accord, he points
out that it would give him the greatest pleasure if he
could state with truth that the colonists generally were
of the same opinion. The requests put forward by the
settlers seem to have been both reasonable and just,
and it is hard to understand why the Governor so
bitterly opposed them. To characterize practically the
whole unofficial portion of the settlement as "useless
persons" even in an unofficial document was scarcely
i 2
wise. The difficulties in the way of giving effect to
their wishes may have been, and perhaps were, insur-
mountable at the time, but even so the attitude of the
Governor was not one to be commended. Facts like
these help to sustain the opinion that the administration
of Sir James Stirling was not entirely successful. Owing
no doubt to the representations made by the Governor
little or no attention was paid to the settlers' requests
for some considerable time.
The year 1835 was devoid of anything in the way
of important happenings beyond the burning question
of government. Some progress was made in the way of
agriculture and the number of stock was materially
increased. At the end of the year the Agricultural
Society estimated that 1,579 acres were under crop and
that the settlers possessed 7,158 head of stock, of which
number 5,138 were sheep. During the six years of the
colony's existence 163 ships had arrived, bringing
2,281 passengers
and imports to
the value of
£394,095. In
comparison with
1834 very little
trouble was ex-
perienced with
the natives dur-
ing the year.
The oppor-
tunity for the de-
velopment of pas-
tor a 1 pursuits,
which had begun
to attract atten-
tion in 1834, be-
came more evi-
dent during the
period 1836 to 1838, and to these years may be ascribed the
beginning of that industry upon which the success of Wes-
tern Australia practically depended until the time of the
gold discoveries of the early nineties. To keep sheep was
easier and in a way less expensive than to till the soil,
besides which the profits from wool were surer and
larger than those from wheat. Consequently while
agriculture was not neglected, the rearing of sheep was
looked to as the principal industry. Strenuous efforts
were made in 1836 and 1837 to import sheep, but
without much success. In 1838, however, owing to the
arrival of new settlers with capital and to the deter-
mination of the old ones to test their convictions, large
purchases were made. By that time the area of land
available for pasturage had been greatly extended. The
Avon, Plantagenet, Williams, Vasse, and Murray dis-
tricts had been opened up and fairly well stocked. A
BARRACK STREET, PERTH, 1870.


comparative return of the sheep in the colony in 1834,
when the industry was first suggested, and in 1838
shows the progress made. As against 3,545 head in
1834 there were 15,590 in 1838, and the value of wool
exported had risen from £760 to £1,935. The total
trade of the colony in the latter year was represented
by exports to the value of £6,840 and imports £46,766.
The revenue was £4,551 and the receipts in aid £7,361,
while the expenditure was £12,277. The total acreage
under crop in 1838 was 2,447, and the wheat yield
amounted to 22,104 bushels. A statistical return
prepared by the Governor for the Colonial Office showed
that the population of the settlement in 1837 was
2,032, and the value of property about £260,000,
producing an annual accumulation of capital of some
£72,000. These figures are of importance both in the
way of refuting the prophecies of failure and of showing
that the colony was in a fairly healthy condition. The
great drawback to more rapid advancement seems to
have been the scarcity of efficient labour. Many of
the more capable workmen had become settlers with
land of their own to cultivate, and few others had
arrived to take their places; as a consequence agricul-
tural development was considerably retarded. The fall
in the tide of immigration was due in the opinion of
the Agricultural Society to the alteration in the land-
grant system which took pace in 1832 and might be
corrected by reducing the minimum of ss. per acre or
by adopting a graduated scale rising in proportion to
the progress and resources of the colony. Whatever
the reasons, the need was so great that the Legislative
Council in 1838 voted £I,OOO to cover the expenses of
importing efficient labourers. If the money could have
been applied forthwith it would probably have materially
advanced the prosperity of the colony, but it was
necessary first to obtain the approval of the Secretary
of State, and through the delay the opportunity was
almost lost. The subject of the land regulations con-
tinued to form one of the most fruitful sources of
discontent among the colonists. Practically every set-
back that the colony suffered was ascribed to the
iniquity of the regulations and there is no doubt that
in some instances they were unjustly made to bear the
shortcomings of the settlers themselves. From time to
time they formed the subject of public discussion, and
early in 1837 a petition was presented to the Governor
asking him to recommend certain changes. This docu-
ment averred that the alteration from the system of
grants to that of sale had checked immigration and
retarded progress just at the time when the settlers had
overcome their critical difficulties and looked forward
to some recompense for their labour. A return for
three years to the system of grants was asked for and
a suggestion made that each bona fide new settler
should receive 2,560 acres free and be permitted to
purchase more if lie wished at 3s. per acre. The
petition was forwarded in due course by the Governor,
but apparently, like several previous requests, it was
not deemed worthy the consideration of the Home
authorities.
The relations between the Governor and his Legis-
lative Council did not improve during the remaining
years of Sir James Stirling’s term. Early in 1836 the
Governor informed the Council that it was necessary to
consider the Estimates in advance for the year 1837-8,
as no action could be taken upon them until the appro-
val of the Secretary of State had been obtained, and
allowance must be made for the time occupied in secur-
ing that approval. This practically reduced the Council
to a mere cipher. Though the Governor was in no way
responsible for the procedure that had to be adopted,
but was merely carrying out his instructions, the fact
that such a course had to be pursued was unfortunate.
After the disapproval of the Estimates of 1835 relations
between Sir James Stirling and his Legislative Council
had been somewhat strained, and this new phase of
affairs only served to make the position worse. The
result was that when the Estimates for 1837, 1838, and
1839 were laid before the Council further disagreements
occurred, several items being opposed and others sub-
stituted. The Governor in these instances not being
prepared to accept the advice tendered to him referred
the matters for settlement to the Colonial Office. So
deeply interested were the Home authorities in the
colony and so pronounced in their desire to promote its
welfare that up to the end of 1838, when Stirling’s
term as Governor ended, no reply had been vouchsafed,
though nearly three years had passed since the first
request had reached London. As this policy of delay
and even forgetfulness seems to have characterized the
Colonial Office in all its dealings with Western Aus-
tralia it is not to be wondered at that the early colonists
found much to complain of in the treatment meted out
to them.
It will be remembered that during the periods of
scarcity between 1831 and 1833 most of the settlers had
been compelled to obtain supplies from the Government
on credit. By a despatch of 1833 these debts were
transferred by the Imperial authorities to the colony as
a Colonial Fund, which it was hoped would promote the
interests of the settlement and lay the foundation of a
system that would the Mother Country in a
short time from all charge on account of the civil estab-
lishment of the colony. ” No steps were taken at the
time to carry out this instruction, but in 1836 a Board
was appointed to arrange for the payment of these
debts. In some cases the settlers were no better able
to pay than when they contracted the liabilities, and in


the others any overwhelming desire to liquidate was
largely absent, so that several years elapsed before the
whole amount was received.
Another liability rested upon the settlers who had
received land under the original conditions of grant. In
those conditions the Crown reserved the right to impose
a fine of 6d. per acre upon all lands not improved to a
certain extent at the end of three years from date of
assignment. In February, 1838, it was deemed expedient
to impose this fine, and notice was issued to that effect.
At the same time it was stated that all lands not im-
proved by the end of ten years would, according to the
old terms, be resumed by the Crown. Payment of the
fine was to be made by the end of 1838, failing which it
would be levied on the land. This was one of the wisest
moves made by
the Colonial
Office during the
infant years of
the settlement, as
it tended to in-
crease the re-
venue at the ex-
pense of other
than the hona
fide settlers, and
throw open to
them good land
which was not
being used. This
was the view
taken by the
public when the
notice was issued,
but when the
time for its en-
forcement arriv-
ed opinion had
changed, and the
settlers found in
the intention a further reason for their dissatisfaction.
By the end of 1836 immigration had practically
ceased. This was due to the fact that prophecies of cer-
tain failure still continued to be spread about, and
probably also to some inkling of the want of encourage-
ment on the part of the Home authorities becoming
known. As the need of immigration was so great it was
felt that some steps should be taken to start the stream
flowing again. The colonists were firmly convinced that
many of the causes that led to the cessation would be
removed if only full information concerning the settle-
ment could be made public in England. This was to some
extent achieved by the labours of Captain (afterwards
Lieutenant-Colonel) Irwin, who had commanded the
military forces at Swan River from 1829 to 1833, and who
returned to that position in 1837. Through his influence
a Committee, which afterwards became the Western Aus-
tralian Association, was formed in London for the pur-
pose of disseminating particulars as to the actual state
of the colony. To assist this body a further Committee
was appointed locally in 1836, and for some years
regular communication was kept up between the two
bodies, resulting in a better understanding in England
both of the hardships of pioneering and of the pros-
pects of ultimate prosperity that the colony afforded, so
that from the beginning of 1837 the opportunities that
Western Australia seemed to offer in the way of profit-
able investment began to attract attention.
In spite of the dissensions in official circles, the
colony began in these years to make some appreciable
headway. Even
at Albany, which
usually lagged
behind the other
districts, indica-
tions of improve-
ment were mani-
fest, due to the
immigration of a
few Indian set-
tlers with native
servants, and to
the harbour be-
ing greatly used
by American
sealing and whal-
ing ships. To-
ward the end of
18 3 6 H.M . S .
'Beagle, ” under
the command of
Captain Fitzroy,
put in at King
George Sound on
her homeward
voyage after a scientific expedition. On board as natu-
ralist was the celebrated Charles Darwin. The vessel
remained there for eight days, which Darwin described
as the dullest spent since leaving England, and
Fitzroy regretted that duty compelled him to call at
such a bleak and uninviting place. Y r ork had become
a thriving pastoral district, controlled by level-headed
and experienced agriculturists; Augusta remained
stationary, but its offshoot at the Vasse, as well as
settlements at Port Leschenault, Pinjarra, and the
south-west generally were beginning to move forward.
Perth and Fremantle had reached the dignity of settled
towns, with property valued in the aggregate at nearly
£lOO,OOO, and looked upon themselves as constituting
the “metropolitan area."
HAY STREET, PERTH (LOOKING EAST), 1870.


The principal evidence of progress may perhaps be
found in the establishment of banking facilities. This
question had agitated the public mind for years with-
out any result. Various suggestions had been put for-
ward, but English capitalists declined to take any in-
terest in them, and the colonists were not financially
strong enough to carry them out. The desirability of a
bank was, however, never lost sight of, and in 1836 the
matter became the most important topic of discussion
to the exclusion almost of every other question. In
January, 1837, the time was felt to be ripe. The colony
had become self-supporting so far as necessaries were
concerned, and only required to import implements,
clothing, and luxuries, the cost of which was more than
met by the exports of wool and other produce. In that
month, therefore, the prospectus of the Bank of Wes-
tern Australia was issued, with a nominal capital of
£IO,OOO, of which only £2,500 was required forthwith.
Operations commenced in June, 1837, with such success
that for some time no further capital was called up.
At the very inception £4,000 was placed on deposit,
and after a year’s working a dividend of 14J per cent,
was paid. The good effects of the institution were soon
apparent; a distinct impetus was given to development,
and not only were existing industries extended, but
new ones were seriously considered. One of these was
the formation of whaling companies. The success of
American and French whalers on the coast of Western
Australia had been known for years, but the colonists
had never been able to finance arrangements for sharing
in that success. Such, however, was the confidence given
by the free circulation of a little money that in 1837-38
two companies —Perth and Fremantle —were actively
engaged in whaling operations. To the efforts of the
Fremantle company is due the tunnel under Arthur’s
Head at that port, made so as to secure convenient
access to the town. In 1837 oil and whalebone to the
value of £3,000 was exported, but by the end of 1838
incapacity and mismanagement had brought about the
downfall of the Perth company and seriously hampered
the Fremantle venture.
The aborigines, who had been quiet and orderly
since the effective punishment received at Pinjarra,
again became troublesome in 1836 in the district round
York. Cases of theft were fairly common, and finally
two natives were shot while attempting to rob the house
of a settler near the township. This incensed the tribe,
and every opportunity for retaliation was seized. Sheep
and even horses were wantonly killed, and at last a
settler was murdered and his body mutilated. The
Governor recognized the seriousness of the position and
immediately strengthened the military force, thus pre-
venting the abandonment of the district. More drastic
measures would probably have been taken against the
whole tribe if the Governor had not been hampered by
instructions from the Imperial authorities to the effect
that the natives were to be treated in all respects as
Europeans, and given the same opportunities. One
would have thought that the people on the spot would
be the best judges in a matter of this kind. To make
regulations for the protection of aborigines was wise in
itself, but to expect the settlers in a remote colony to
think of regulations when harassed by a warlike and
treacherous tribe showed very little grasp of the position.
The result was that in 1837 the natives became openly
defiant, robbing and wounding with impunity. Matters
culminated in the brutal murder of two settlers named
Jones and Chidlow and the attempted murder of Mr.
Waylen. The incensed whites then instituted what was
to all intent a man hunt, in the course of which several
blacks were killed and most of the others driven away.
These stern measures checked the outrages to a great
extent, and such offences as occurred during 1838 were
easily dealt with by the law. This necessitated a native
prison, and Rottnest Island was selected for that pur-
pose and used almost continuously until a year or two
ago.
Several excursions into the unexplored portions of
the territory were made about this time. With many
of them, more particularly those in the south-western
corner of the colony, Sir James Stirling was associated,
thus gaining at first hand a knowledge of the territory.
In 1836 the Moore River was discovered by Mr. George
Fletcher Moore, after whom it was named, and in the
course of the search excellent pastoral country was
opened up. The notable expeditions of this period, how-
ever, were those instituted by the Imperial Government
for the purpose of examining the coastline and exploring
the interior of the north-west. 11.M.5. “Beagle” was
commissioned to carry out the coastal survey, and the
inland expedition was entrusted to one who afterwards
rose to the highest pinnacle of fame in colonial affairs,
Lieutenant (later Sir) George Grey, the great proconsul.
The objects of this exploration were “to gain informa-
tion as to the real state of north-western Australia, its
resources, and the course and direction of its rivers and
mountains; to familiarize the natives with the British
name and character; to search for and record all in-
formation regarding the natural productions of the
country, and all details that might bear upon its
capabilities for colonization or the reverse ; and to collect
specimens of natural history.” These various objects
were carried out with that thoroughness which dis-
tinguished all Grey’s colonial work.
Of miscellaneous events of interest the years 1836-8
afforded but few. Once more in 1837—scarcity of pro-
visions faced the young settlement and possible danger
of famine was not wholly averted until the harvest of


1838. A second newspaper —The Guardian —conducted
by Nairn Clark, of duelling fame, made its appearance
in 1836, but lived only a year, being killed, according
to the untruthful statement of the proprietor, by the
personal opposition of the Governor. Elementary
education began to receive attention, and schools at
Perth and Fremantle were projected early in 1838. On
June 1, 1836, the first commemoration of the establish-
ment of the colony in 1829 took place —an event which
has been regularly observed ever since.
With the year 1838 Sir James Stirling’s adminis-
tration ended. He resigned the reins of government
with the unanimous regret of the colonists. Though
they had not always been able to see eye to eye with
him in administrative affairs they recognized his
enthusiasm and whole-heartedness in the service of the
colony, and felt that the errors of Stirling the Governoi
faded away before the merits of Stirling the man.
Whether an impartial survey of Stirling’s adminis-
tration can hold it to have been altogether successful
is an open question. Without doubt he was hampered
by want of interest on the part of the Home authorities
generally and by inefficiency to deal with matters of
colonization on the part of the Colonial Office. But
even taking those facts into consideration, he lacked
some of the statesmanlike qualities so necessary to the
government of a new settlement. Over-sanguine and
not always farsighted, he led the first colonists to expect
a better state of things than really existed, and ap-
parently not even practical acquaintance with the terri-
tory gave him that knowledge of those requirements so
essential in establishing agricultural communities. But
to attach to him all the blame for the depression that
ensued is unjust. The settlers themselves deserve a
share of it, for many of them in the hope of growing
rich quickly had embarked on a venture for which they
were unfitted in every possible way.
Accustomed from his naval training to obey and be
obeyed without question he adhered too closely to the
letter of his instructions, and leaned too little upon the
advice of his Councils. Yet taking all these shortcom-
ings into consideration, that he did so well in face of
difficulties which at times nearly overwhelmed him, and
under responsibilities which might easily have crushed
any man, stands to his lasting credit. Though in mat-
ters of judgment he sometimes failed, anxiety to take
the wisest course was always present, and all his actions
w r ere marked by a whole-souled desire to uphold the best
and dearest traditions of the British race.
CHAPTER VI.
1839-1842.
GOVERNOR HUTT’S ADMINISTRATION—LAND REGULATIONS—PROJECTED SETTLEMENT
AT AUSTRALIND ABORIGINES—EXPLORATIONS.
Mr. John Hutt, who succeeded Sir James Stirling
in the position of Governor of the colony, arrived at
the beginning of 1839, some two or three days before
his predecessor’s departure. Mr. Hutt had previously
held the office of Governor of North Arcott, in the
Madras Presidency, and had been strongly recommended
as Governor of the newly-established colony of South
Australia, in the arrangements for the inception of
which he had, in conjunction with his brother, Mr.
(afterwards Sir) William Hutt, M.P., taken a very
prominent part. The system upon which South Aus-
tralia was colonized was so different from the method
adopted in Western Australia that the early settlers
were somewhat doubtful as to the wisdom of the appoint-
ment. That he had a wide theoretical knowledge of
colonization was generally admitted, but it was feared
that the absence of a practical acquaintance with its
trials and difficulties scarcely fitted him to follow in the
footsteps of a man like Sir James Stirling. Added to
that he was believed to disagree with the policy hitherto
adopted, and that seems to have been counted against
him, though there is no doubt that the colonists them-
selves were not in accord with it. At any rate, the
newspaper files of the period show clearly enough that
he had to fight down a certain measure of unpopularity
at the commencement of his term.
One of his first official acts was to take advantage
of the authority to increase the membership of the
Legislative Council by the addition of four unofficial
nominees, notwithstanding the opposition of the
colonists to any increase in that body except by means
of an election. On January 5, 1839, he nominated
Messrs. William Locke Brockman, George Leake,
Thomas Peel, and William Tanner, and these gentlemen


Look their seats in the following March. The term of
office was the duration of their residence in the colony.
His next was in connection with the land regula-
tions. Sir James Stirling had been inclined to adminis-
ter these from the point of view of the settler, and had
deferred as long as ho could putting into operation any
of what may be termed the penal clauses of these regula-
tions. It will be remembered, however, that in 1838
Stirling had felt compelled to give notice that the fine
of 6d. per acre provided for in the original regulations
of 1829 on all properties unimproved at the end of three
years must be paid by December 31 or it would be
levied out of the properties, and, further, that all land
remaining unimproved at the end of ten years would
be resumed. This notice, which was certainly in the
interests of the bona fide settler, had met with approval
when first issued, but before the time of payment arrived
it had, like many other acts of the Government, fallen
under the ban of the colonists’ displeasure. When the
time for enforcement arrived Sir James Stirling had re-
signed the Governorship, and it fell to the lot of Mr.
Hutt to carry the notice into effect. In order to give
every possible opportunity he extended the time of pay-
ment for a further three months, but notified that in
case of non-payment the remission of Is. 6d. per acre
allowed on the surrender of land would be reduced to
Is. A further notice was also issued requiring the con-
ditions of the land regulations of 1830 to be fulfilled
within three months, viz., that a quit rent of Is. per
acre should be paid upon properties not improved within
two years from date of assignment, and that at the
end of a further two years the property if still unim-
proved should revert to the Crown, or be subject to an
additional quit rent. The time for fulfilment of these
obligations had, he pointed out, already expired, and
therefore the first must be fulfilled within the time
stipulated, and the second by the end of 1839, failing
which the land would be resumed by the Crown.
The issue of these notices met with the most
strenuous opposition on the part of the colonists. The
opinion was freely expressed that the Home Government
desired to regain possession of as much of the land as
they could secure in order to carry out newfangled
schemes of colonization, to which, it was delicately
hinted, the Governor was not altogether indifferent. A
meeting of the Agricultural Society—the usual method
of voicing dissatisfaction—was promptly held, and it
was decided “That a memorial to the Home Government
be drawn up soliciting a remission of fines due under
the land regulations, and a grant of fee simple to set-
tlers under certain circumstances, viz., those having ex-
pended large sums on small parcels of land, considering
the same as portions of their several grants from the
Crown. It was also decided to petition the Governor
to suspend the operation of the objectionable clauses
until a reply was received. This, however, the Governor
was not prepared to do, the only concession made being
i-iiat various methods oi payment were allowed.
The stand taken by Mr. llutt in these matters, and
the fear that he would attempt to carry a land tax,
made the meeting of the Legislative Council which was
held in March particularly interesting to the colonists.
Their fears at the time proved unfounded, though in
discussing the Estimates the possibility of such a tax
was foreshadowed. This he was strongly urged not to
bring forward, as it would press so heavily upon the
owners of land as to restrict development. For the
time he adopted the advice tendered, but in October,
1839, he summoned a meeting of the Council to consider
a Bill for the augmentation of the revenue by an assess-
ment on land in order to provide for the establishment
of a police force as a protection to the settlers against
the aborigines. The strong opposition shown to this
proposal and the unanimous opinion of the colonists
that it would bring about serious depression in the
affairs of the colony led him to abandon the idea, and
substitute in its place a tax ujjon sales by auction.
In accordance with the notices issued a few grants
of land were resumed in 1839 and a further 100,000
acres scheduled for resumption in 1840. In order, how-
ever, to prevent this policy bearing harshly upon
genuine settlers the Governor viewed the conditions of
alienation with the greatest liberality, and wherever
possible allowed advantage to be taken of any extenuat-
ing circumstances that could be brought forward. As
regards other portions of his land policy Mr. Hutt stood
firm. When the Agricultural Society objected to immi-
grants being restricted to certain areas in selecting land
and to the reservation and resumption of springs and
watering-places, on the ground that these matters were
at variance with the Home regulations, the Governor
declined to alter his measures. On the first point he
held that some concentration round existing settlements
was necessary as a means of protection from natives,
and on the second that springs should be reserved for
the general use of all settlers.
Discontent over the various systems of land aliena-
tion adopted by the Imperial Government, and with
their administration by the Governor, had grown to be
something more permanent than a “hardy annual.” For
the first decade of the colony’s existence the regulations
were never absent from the minds of the colonists, and
were always urged as the reason for the slow progress
_ # X o
of the colony s affairs. Time after time memorials were
forwarded asking that radical alterations be made.
Changes were made in various ways, as we have seen,
but there was scarcely an instance in which the altera-
tion did not afford as fruitful a source of agitation as
the original had done. While the hardship engendered
by the regulations must in many cases be admitted it


is only fair to the Colonial Office to jmint out that in
the beginning the settlers readily accepted the condi-
tions upon which land was offered to them, and, further,
that in no single instance did the Home authorities ask
for more than the fulfilment of their contracts. If the
time spent in agitation had been occupied in endeavours
to improve their holdings much of the dissatisfaction
would never have arisen. The crux of the trouble was
not so much the injustice of the regulations as the ignor-
ance of the settlers as to the difficulties of transforming
virgin forest land into productive areas. So anxious
were they to obtain large tracts of land that in many
cases they secured areas that could never be made pro-
ductive except by experienced farmers —which they
were not—possessing the most modern scientific know-
ledge, which had not then been discovered. To assist
such Sir Janies Stirling obtained from the Home Govern-
ment permission to surrender their holdings on a valua-
tion of Is. 6d. per acre, the surrender value to be
apjilied as part of the cost when purchasing more suit-
able locations.
The expressed intention of the Governor to enforce
the fines and resumptions of which he had given notice
formed the subject of a further memorial to the Secre-
tary of State in July, 1839. No reply was received until
April, 1841, when a despatch from Lord John Russell
arrived stating that the questions had been referred to
the Land and Emigration Commissioners, and in accord-
ance with their recommendations it had been decided
to grant the fee simple on all lands improved; to grant,
in the case of unimproved land, the fee simple of one-
fourth, provided the remainder was surrendered to the
Crown; and in cases where improvements to a greater
extent than necessary had been made on one holding,
to grant the fee simple of one-fourth of the unimproved
remainder, provided that the balance was surrendered
to the Crown. In the same despatch Lord John advised
the introduction of a land tax of 4d. per acre. This
latter advice the colonists declined to accept, though a
Bill to impose the tax was put forward by the Governor
in 1841.
The Land and Emigration Commissioners men-
tioned above were appointed by the Secretary of State
in 1840 to control emigration and advise on colonial
affairs generally, but more particularly those relating
to the Australian colonies. The members were T. F.
Elliot, Colonel Torrens, and the Hon. E. E. Villiers.
Beyond doing a certain amount of work in the cause
of emigration this Board does not seem to have had
much bearing on Western Australian affairs.
Early in 1839 Governor Tlutt received instructions
to further amend the land regulations by increasing the
upset price of Crown lands from ss. to 12s. per acre.
Feeling that to do so would be a false step, as private
sales were being effected at less than half that price, he
treated the instruction as advisory rather than man-
datory. In 1840 he was informed that it must be noti-
fied to the public without delay as the minimum jmee
of land in the Australian colonies. Except as regarded
land in new settlements little objection was taken to the
order either then or at a later period, when the price
was further increased to 20s. per acre. The objects of
the alteration were to curtail the size of estates and to
produce an increased revenue. The effect was to give
the colonists a better chance of selling their surplus land
at a more satisfactory figure, and consequently the sale
of Crown lands languished.
Much of the agitation concerning the land regula-
tions was due to the fear that the various alterations
would restrict immigration and that therefore the
dearth of labour would become much more pronounced.
The colonists recognized that with more labour avail-
able greater development of the various industries
would result and the general prosperity of the colony
be stimulated. The necessity for immigration was by
this time beginning to impress itself upon the Imperial
authorities and others interested in Western Australia,
as well as upon the local Government. In 1840 the
Legislative Council, at the instance of the Governor,
set aside the receipts from fines and land sales, amount-
ing to £1,500, for the purpose of obtaining labour from
England. The British Government tried with some suc-
cess the practice of sending out youths from Parkhurst
Prison as juvenile emigrants, and private bodies of per-
sons interested in the colony evolved schemes for in-
creasing the supply of labour upon terms that would be
profitable to themselves.
One Committee made proposals to the Secretary
of State with the double object of supplying the demand
for labour and of attracting the enterprise of capitalists.
It suggested that Crown lands should be open to
purchase after survey at a minimum of 10s. per acre,
that the proceeds of these sales should be employed in
defraying the cost of emigration to the colony, and that
Commissioners should be appointed to act under the
Colonial Office to carry the scheme into effect. Pro-
vision was also to be made by which land might be sold
in England and the proceeds applied to defraying the
cost of sending labourers to the colony. The Commis-
sioners were to have the power to raise loans on the
security of future sales, such loans to be applied to
emigration purposes. This Committee acted on behalf
of a Company formed for the purpose of acquiring land
in Western Australia, which had first approached the
Government in 1838 prior to the departure of Mr. John
TTutt.
The proposals failed to meet with the approval of
Lord Glenelg, the Secretary of State for the Colonies.


While he was anxious to facilitate emigration to Wes-
tern Australia he was opposed to the sale of colonial
lands to a Company in England on the ground that it
might lay the Government open to a charge of partiality
and also cause the abandonment of the Government’s
policy of disposing of colonial lands by public sale in
the colony. He was prepared, however, to allow the
Company to pay into the hands of the emigration agent
money to be expended in sending out emigrants, for
which they would receive a certificate entitling them
to a remission of equal amount in the price paid for
any land they might purchase in the colony.
Another body active in the interests of Western
Australia was the Western Australian Association,
which grew out of the Committee of Correspondence
formed in London in 1835, and was generally known
as the "‘Association in Bedford Street.” Its objects
were to advance the interests of Western Australia by
inducing the Government to offer bounties for the intro-
duction of labour, to secure an amendment of the land
regulations so that land could be taken up prior to
survey, to encourage the formation of companies to in-
vest capital in the colony, and generally to disseminate
correct and useful information concerning the state of
the colony’s affairs. Sir James Stirling, after his return
to London, became a prominent member of this body,
in the work of which he was actively assisted by Messrs.
Wm. Hutt and T. Bland. At a public meeting held
in Perth in April, 1840, these three gentlemen were
appointed agents bo look after matters affecting Western
Australia.
One effect of the work of these committees was the
issue in October, 1839, of a Colonial Office regulation
designed to encourage emigration. The terms of it were
practically those embodied in the reply of Lord Glenelg
dated January 5, 1839, to the first of the committees
mentioned above. The regulation, which was largely in
the nature of an experiment, was limited in operation
to two years. The results from it were inappreciable.
Out of these various movements arose what pro-
mised to be a very important development in Western
Australian affairs —the settlement at Australind. Not-
withstanding the unfavourable reports concerning the
sterility of the country and the destitution of the set-
tlers that had been industriously spread about there
were numbers of people who still retained their belief in
the possibilities of the colony, and from the time of
Mr. PeeTs project attempts were continually made to
form land companies for the purpose of undertaking
extensive settlements therein. Most of these schemes,
affected by the want of success of Mr. Peel, failed
to mature, but the Western Australian Company,
formed in 1839 to effect a settlement at Australind,
carried its proposals into operation, and in all prob-
ability would have ultimately achieved complete success
but for misrepresentation and false reports.
In 1835 a suggestion had been made to purchase
Colonel Labour's grant of 103,000 acres situated on
Leschcnault Estuary, or to procure a portion of Thomas
Peel's grant. Nothing came of it until 1838, when the
first of the committees mentioned above made an unsuc-
cessful application to Lord Glenelg for certain privi-
leges. One of the objects the Committee had in view
was to apply the principles of colonization advocated by
Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Mr. Wakefield’s idea,
upon which the colony of South Australia was prac-
tically founded, was to colonize by means of companies,
which should acquire land and send out settlers and
labourers of proved competency for its cultivation.
Areas were to be cut up into small sections and sold to
approved settlers and a proper balance between capital,
labour, and land continually observed.
The unsympathetic attitude of Lord Glenelg
brought about the abandonment of the scheme, but
shortly afterwards, through the exertions of Mr. Win.
Hutt, M.P., and Mr. M. Waller Clifton, F.R.S., a
Company was formed called the Western Australian
Company, under which the settlement at Australind
was established according to Mr. Wakefield’s ideas.
The site suggested was again Colonel Lautour s
grant, and negotiations for its purchase were entered
upon. Some doubt arose as to whether this grant came
under the land regulations of 1829 or of 1830. In the
first case it was not liable to resumption for twenty-one
years, but in the second it would be liable at the end
of 1840. This question was decided by the Colonial
Office declaring that it was held under the 1829 regula-
tions, and that Governor Hutt had been advised accord-
ingly. Everything being thus clear, the Company was
formally constituted in May, 1840, with a capital of
£50,000. The directors were Wm. Hutt, M.P., John
Chapman, T. H. Brooking, Captain Sweny, R.N.,
Edward Gibbon Wakefield, Henry Buckle, C. En derby,
Jacob Montefiore, Jas. Irving, and G. R, Smith, M.P.;
T. J. Buckton was Secretary and Marshall Waller Clif-
ton, F.R.S., Chief Commissioner in Western Australia,
with his son, R. W. Clifton, as his Secretary. Colonel
Lautour’s land was purchased mainly on the recom-
mendation of Sir James Stirling, who described it as
well suited for the purpose in view. A prospectus was
issued offering part of the property for sale in allot-
ments, and a plan was drawn showing a complete and
bcautifully-laid-out city, bo which the name Australind
was given to signify the connection with India that the
town was expected to possess. Land containing 51,000
acres was thrown open for selection in sections of 100
acres each at a price of £1 per acre, the purchaser of a
section to be also entitled to four quarter-acre town


allotments, the price of which to those not taking
agricultural grants was set down at £lO. Half the
money received from sales of sections was to be spent
on conveying passengers and emigrants to the settle-
ment, and half the sum received from sale of town
allotments to be spent on improvements. So rapidly
were sales effected that by the end of September 400
sections and 3,100 town allotments had been disposed
of, the remainder —100 sections and 900 allotments —
being reserved for subsequent sale to settlers only. Suc-
cess having so far attended the project, tlie remainder
of the staff —a medical officer and nine surveyors —were
then appointed and a small vessel, the “Island Queen,”
chartered to convey them to the scene of operations.
Soon afterwards the “Parkfield,” a barque of 600 tons,
was secured, and preparations made for the embarkation
of Mr. Clifton
and the first
portion of set-
tlers and emi-
grants. A second
ship, with the
remainder o f
the settlers, un-
der the charge
of the chaplain,
Rev. J. R. Wol-
laston, himself a
purchaser o f
land, was to fol-
low. Then came
the hitch in the
a r r angements.
The ‘ Parkfield”
was to leave
London on Oc-
tober 20, but
on the 12th
Captain Grey
arrived with information that Governor Hutt in-
tended to resume Colonel Lautour’s grant for non-
fulfilment of conditions, and a rumour was also spread
that in Grey's opinion the grant was practically
valueless from an agricultural point of view. Expecta-
tion quickly gave way to consternation; the public
feared the loss of the money it had invested, and the
directors were faced with binding contracts involving
large expenditure, apart from having received £60,000
for land already possibly resumed by the colonial
Government, and perhaps disposed of to other settlers.
It does not appear to have struck them that there was
no need for anxiety on that account, as Lord Glenelg’s
decision su|3erseded any subsequent act of the colonial
Government. In the hope of extricating themselves
from their troubles they lent willing ears to a suggestion
from Grey that the country surrounding Port Grey, be-
tween Gantheaume Bay and the Arrowsmith, in the
j *
neighbourhood of the present town of Geraldton, was
not only available, but much more suitable, being one
of the finest districts in Australia. Ready to take
advantage of any outlet from their difficulties the direc-
tors secured the approval of Lord Glenelg to the change
of locality, and then apparently congratulated them-
selves and the landholders upon their “happy deliverance
from evil.” Clifton seems to have been the only one
who kept his head, lie tried, though without avail, to
persuade the directors to rely upon the reports of
Sir James Stirling and others who had returned
from the colony rather than upon those of Grey,
who in all probability had never seen the locality.
Having de-
cided upon the
change the
directors lost no
time in making
their determina-
tion public. In-
vestors were
given the op-
tion of consent-
in g to the
change of lo-
cality or of re-
ceiving back,
with interest,
the money they
had paid for al-
lotments in the
Leschenault dis-
trict. Harassed
by doubts
of the new
territory and
afraid of the difficulties of pioneering work many of the
investors withdrew, and quickly something in the nature
of a panic set in. To allay the trouble Captain Grey
was asked to meet a body of the landholders and give
whatever information he could concerning the country
round Port Grey. This was deemed so satisfactory that
several who were wavering decided to remain in the
venture, which might even then have succeeded but for
the action of a party of investors at Halifax, who had
taken up land to the value of £12,000. These with-
drew their money, and in a little while such was the
effect that nearly £40,000 paid for land was reclaimed.
The drift was at last stayed by the action of the Right
Honourable J. W. Croker, F.R.S., who refused to with-
draw his investments.
WILLIAM STREET, PERTH, 1 870.


In spite of all these difficulties, which were in-
creased by the failure of the Company’s bankers, the
directors proceeded with the new scheme. The “Park-
field" was engaged to proceed to Port Leschenault as
before, but on arrival she was to pick up the survey
party, sail up to Perth so that Mr. Clifton might inter
view Governor Hutt, and then make for Port Grey.
Meanwhile the instructions of Lord Glenelg had
reached the colony, and the notice of resumption of
Colonel Lautour’s land was immediately withdrawn,
At the same time pleasure was expressed at the fore-
shadowed introduction of further capital and labour.
The townsite of Bunbury was forthwith surveyed and
proclaimed, and a Government Resident appointed.
For the protection of the incoming settlers a picket of
soldiers was stationed there, and considerable activity
was shown in the settlement of the surrounding country.
The advance party of surveyors landed in Koombana
Bay late in 1840, and at once set about their work. In
1841 (March) the “Parkfield” with Mr. Clifton and the
first portion of settlers arrived, and some consternation
was created by the news that the whole party was to
proceed northwards to Port Grey. This idea, however,
was not carried out after all, as the Governor declined
to permit a settlement at that port, owing to its distance
northward precluding both means of communication and
possibility of adequate protection. On the advice of
Mr. Hutt therefore Mr. Clifton decided to remain at
Leschenault and take possession of Colonel Lautour’s
grant, so coming back to the Company’s original arrange-
ment. The upset and turmoil in London had thus been
quite unnecessary; that it ever occurred is unfortunate,
as with the bright prospects in view at the inception
of the scheme it is more than probable that the venture
would have been a success had nothing of the kind ever
taken place. As things were the chances of success were
small from the very outset. The early trials and priva-
tions of the “first fleet” by the “Parmelia” were largely
reproduced, and as a result many of the immigrants
drifted away to the Swan River and other more settled
parts. Notwithstanding the efforts of Mr. Clifton and
his sons, the failure of the scheme became more and
more apparent as time went on. The misrepresentations
in London, and the doubts in the minds of the settlers
themselves, many of whom were unsuitable, hindered
every attempt at development. The whole place sank
into a condition of chronic despondency, for which there
seemed to be no possible cure. The reasons for failure
have been accurately pointed out by Professor Jenks:-
“A reference to the Company’s prospectus shows that it
mainly aimed at inducing the emigration of small
capitalists, who had already bought and paid for land
at the Company’s offices in London, according to the
vicious system, so much beloved of statesmen and com-
pany promoters, but so fatal to their clients, by which
the intending settler is shown a plan of land situated
some thousands of miles away, and induced to commit
himself irrevocably to the purchase of a spot which he
has never seen, and of which the map can only give him
the very vaguest idea. There is no need to attribute
any conscious injustice to the organizers of such schemes.
The natural desire to retain as much control as possible
at headquarters, and to secure the investor beyond re-
demption, is sufficient to recommend the plan.”
The arrival toward the end of 1842 and the begin-
ning of 1843 of ships with about 400 fresh immigrants
induced a little activitv for a while, but matters soon
settled down again into their former condition. Every-
one seemed to lose heart and failure was written large
over the whole venture. In addition Mr. Clifton was
hampered by the inability of the directors in London
to appreciate the position. About the middle of 1843
the final distribution of rural lands took place, and
shortly afterwards instructions were received to stop all
sales and discharge the surveyors. Before the end of
the year Mr. Clifton was himself released from duty,
and his son appointed agent to dispose of the remainder
of the property at 2s. per acre. So ended, within a
space of three years, the second large colonization
scheme attempted in Western Australia. That of Mr.
Peel in 1829 was impossible from the beginning, but a
better knowledge of local conditions on the part of the
directors of the Western Australian Company might
have made that of Australind successful. The
application of Mr. Wakefield’s principles of colonization
ceased with this experiment, though some attempt was
made in 1849 to establish a new company on the ruins
of the old one. From the point of view of the colony
generally there was some little gain by the Australind
venture, as it brought about the introduction of at any
rate a few badly-needed labourers, the population having
increased from 2,760 in 1841 to 3,476 in 1842.
Another important phase of the affairs of the
colony to which, in addition to the land question,
Governor Hutt gave the closest attention was the treat-
ment of the aborigines. Having come to Western
Australia with certain preconceived ideas upon this
question he devoted considerable time to an endeavour
to carry them into effect. Those in England who did
not understand the circumstances had made a good deal
of capital out of the affrays that had taken place
between the settlers and the natives in various parts
of Australia. Influenced by the opinions thus promul-
gated the British Government decided to inaugurate a
new policy which should have the effect of preserving
and civilizing the natives, and at the same time prevent
oppression on the part of the settlers. As this
policy was in accord with the Governor s own views


he entered into its operation with zest. In 1839
instructors to the natives were sent to all the colonies,
Messrs. G. Barrow and C. Symmons being those
appointed to Western Australia. Native schools were
established —the first being those under the Wesleyan
Church —and land bounties offered to those settlers who
were prepared to give instruction to the aborigines and
make some attempt to civilize them. The effect of these
admittedly wise measures was not, however, at first
apparent. Trouble with the aborigines still continued,
and had to be met in the way that the colonists had
previously found effective. Throughout 1839 robberies
were frequent and on more than one occasion stock was
killed. Such events as these the colonists were becoming
used to, but the hideous murder of a white woman and
her eight months old child by the York natives called
for signal
p u n i s h m ent.
After some
trouble two of
those concerned
in the affair were
caught and
hanged on the
scene of the
offence. Later in
the year a second
murder was com-
mitted in • the
Canning district,
and in 1840 a
third by some
natives near
L e s c h e n ault.
In 1841 there
occurred an in-
cident which, if
true, can only
be described as
an act of atrocious cruelty and savagery on the part
of some of the settlers in the south-west. Early
in the year a settler at Wonnerup, George Layman,
offered some indignity to a native, in return for which
he was on the first convenient opportunity speared
through the heart. An avenging party under Captain
Molloy set out and, it is said, ultimately succeeded in
surrounding the whole body of natives on an open sand-
patch, whereupon they proceeded to shoot the unfortu-
nate aborigines in cold blood, not stopping till the adult
males had all been accounted for. Colour is lent to
the story by the fact that there is a sand-patch near
Minninup where skulls and bones are still to be seen,
and near which even present-day natives will not go.
No records of the encounter exist, and it is more than
likely that it has been built up to account for the
collection of bones, which in all probability represent
an aboriginal burial-place, which would be winytch or
sacred to the hoolyas or spirits of the departed, and
therefore to be avoided by all natives. All that is
definitely known is that the murderer of Layman was
shot by a soldier later in the year.
By the end of 1841 the effects of Mr. Hutt's policy
began to be seen in the cessation of thefts and the
establishment of more harmonious relations between the
colonists and the aborigines. In fact, the end of the
native trouble in the south-west portion of the colony
was in sight. Isolated instances of robbery and violence
continued to happen, and even happen yet, but nothing
further occurred in the way of organized attack,
demanding measures of repression beyond the power
of the police to
deal with.
While the
period under re-
view was an im-
portant one
from the stand-
point of land
r e g u 1 a t i ons,
colonizat ion
schemes, and at-
tempts to grapple
with the native
difficulty it was
equally impor-
tant from the
standpoint o f
exploration. The
districts north of
Perth, and even
the extreme
north-west, till
then a country
known by name only, were examined by Captain Grey, the
coastline of the same part was accurately surveyed by
Captains Wickham and Stokes in H.M.S. "Beagle,”
and the eastern stretches between Adelaide and King
George Sound were traversed by the intrepid explorer
Eyre.
Grey, who after his north-west expedition in 1837-8
had sailed for Mauritius, returned to Perth toward
the end of the latter year, and early in 1839 was
engaged in a search for a settler named Eliot, who had
lost his way in the Williams district and had been
missing for three weeks. In the course of this search,
which was successful, he explored most of the country
between Leschenault and the Williams. Returning to
Perth, he organized an expedition for the exploration
of the country lying between Shark Bay and Perth, and
MOUNT ELIZA, FROM PERTH, 1870.


spent two months, under circumstances of great
difficulty and often of danger, in making a thorough
examination of this district, discovering the Gascoyne,
Irwin, and other rivers, the Victoria Range, and
several peaks and hills. Much of the country passed
through was excellent for pastoral purposes, and it
was this fact that led him to urge the Western Aus-
tralian Company to found the settlement of Australind
in that district. Soon after Grey's reports had been
placed in the hands of the Governor, Mr. George
Fletcher Moore was sent to examine the coastal dis-
tricts in the neighbourhood of the Moresby Range. His
opinion was favourable, confirming that of Grey. Moore
discovered a satisfactory harbour and named it Port
Grey in honour of the explorer. This was the harbour
that figured so largely in the discussion about the site
of Australind. Grey then returned to England but on
the death of Sir Richard Spencer came back to the
colony as Government Resident at Albany, a position
he occupied until late in 1840, when he succeeded
Colonel Gawler as Governor of South Australia.
Meanwhile Captains Wickham and Stokes in H.M.S.
“Beagle" began and completed a series of coastal surveys
on the north-west coast, in the course of which the
Fitzroy and Adelaide Rivers were discovered. In 1840
they examined the Abrolhos Islands, discovered a good
anchorage at Champion Bay, and surveyed Dampler
Archipelago. In 1841, during the illness of Wickham,
Stokes sailed from Koepang to complete the survey of
the coast south of Roebuck Bay, which had been left
unfinished by King in 1821. Having done so, he con-
tinued his voyage to Swan River, and later in the year
made a trip to determine the exact position of Port
Grey, which he found to be almost identical with
Champion Bay.
It was during this latter year (1841) that Mr. E.
J. Eyre, who was afterwards Governor of Jamaica,
accomplished an overland journey which ranks as one
of the greatest feats in exploration ever performed in
Australia. In an attempt begun in the previous year,
to cross overland from Adelaide to Western Australia,
Eyre had failed through want of water. Having sent
back the majority of his party, he started from Fowler
Bay with a companion, Baxter, and a blackboy named
Wylie to reach King George Sound or perish in the
attempt. A short distance south-west of Eyre Sand-
patch two natives who were accompanying them mur-
dered Baxter during the night and got away with
most of the provisions. Eyre and his blackboy were left
to accomplish a journey of some hundreds of miles
through unknown country with 40 lb. of flour and four
gallons of water. This they succeeded in doing after
undergoing the severest hardships; in fact, they would
in all probability never have got through but for their
fortunate meeting with and kind treatment by Captain
Rossiter, of the whaler “Mississippi,” who rendered them
every possible help when reduced to the last extremity
of hunger, thirst, and fatigue. Eyre's journey, which
was the first successful attempt to cross the continent,
was of the greatest geographical importance, as it
settled the question of rivers emptying into the Bight,
and proved that there was nothing in the nature of a
great inland sea.
Other short exploratory tours were made about the
same time, principally for the purpose of further
opening up the south-western districts, which were
regarded as the most promising portion for development,
and of which accurate and complete information was
desirable.
With regard to strictly local affairs, the reports of
the Agricultural Society for 1839-42 show that very
definite expansion was taking place, though still limited
by the want of labour. The chief development was to
be found in the pastoral industry. By the end of the
latter year the number of sheep had increased to over
60,000 and wool to the value of £6,348 was exported.
Other live stock showed a corresponding increase in
numbers, but the same indications of progress were not
apparent in the amount of land actually brought under
cultivation. The area of land under crop, which in 1839
stood at 2,725 acres, had increased to only 3,047 in
1842, due partly to the difficulty of securing labour
and partly to the fact that better results, at the cost of
less exertion, could be secured by sheep-farming.
Owing to the increased prosperity the deficit in the
colony's finances which had been rapidly increasing for
years past was nearly adjusted by 1842, notwithstanding
the active public works policy that was rendered neces-
sary by the expansion. Extensive surveys were made
in various districts and roads opened up between the
various settlements. So buoyant was the state of affairs
that plans were even drawn for a mole harbour and
dock at Fremantle, estimated to cost over £70,000.
Needless to say, the belief in their future prosperity
was not strong enough to commit the colonists to the
construction of these works. Under the supervision of
the Town Trust —the forerunner of the City Council —a
public jetty was, however, constructed at Perth, and
in 1840 the first pile of the Perth Causeway was driven.
Another evidence of progress was the establishment,
on Rowland Hill's system of uniform rates, of regular
J ? o
postal communication between the various settlements
in the colony, daily between Perth and Fremantle,
and less frequently to the outlying districts.
The general improvement in affairs had also
attracted the attention of outside banking institutions,
as we find that in 1841 the Bank of Western Australia
was amalgamated with the Bank of Australasia, which
was desirous of opening business in the colony. Some
of the shareholders were opposed to the change, and


took steps to establish another local bank, the result
being that later in the year the Western Australian
Bank, which has exercised so great an influence in the
history of Western Australia, opened its doors. The
original directors were J. S. Roe, W. Tanner, W. J.
Lawrence, E. Hamersley, R. Hinds, J. Stringer, and
G. F. Stone. The capital was £20,000. The first
dividend—ll per cent —was declared in July, 1842.
The same activity was displayed in religious and
educational matters. In answer to a requisition the
Governor introduced a Bill into the Legislative Council
in 1840 for the purpose of promoting the erection of
churches and chapels and of providing for the main-
tenance of ministers of religion. By the end of 1842
there were four Anglican clergymen, in addition to
the Colonial Chaplain, stationed at various towns, and
one Wesleyan clergyman resident in Perth. The
members of the Church of England began to look for-
ward to the establishment of a bishopric, and with that
end in view set aside 10,000 acres as an endowment.
The same Church had established a grammar school
in the capital, and with Government aid primary schools
were at work in different parts of the colony.
In 1839 a mineral believed to be encrinite was
discovered in the Toodyay district. This was regarded
as important, being in the opinion of the colonists
an indication of the existence of a coalfield. About
the same time it was reported that coal had actually
been found on the Murray River, at a place where
researches were being prosecuted by a Mr. Preiss, a
German naturalist. In order to stimulate search the
Government offered a free grant of 2,560 acres to the
first discoverer of a coalbed, but nothing definite
resulted from the offer.
CHAPTER VII.
1843-1849.
DEPRESSION—LABOUR PROBLEMS—FINANCIAL CONDITION —QUESTION OF CONVICT
LABOUR—ESTABLISHMENT OF PENAL SETTLEMENT.
With the year 1843 there came one of those waves
of depression which so frequently rolled over Western
Australia during the early years of its existence. Follow-
ing as it did upon a period of moderate prosperity which
had apjDeared to possess some elements of permanency,
the colonists were greatly discouraged and the seri-
ousness of the position was consequently considerably
increased. The first signs of the trouble were an
unaccountable fall in the price of stock, and a constant
flow of specie out of the colony to pay for the imports
which far outvalued the exports. The causes assigned
for the depression were various. Naturally among
them the “iniquitous” land regulations held a prominent
place. Other reasons urged were the want of protective
duties, the high rates of interest on borrowed money,
the excess of imports over exports, and, above all, the
scarcity of labour. Many were the means suggested and
tried for coping with the trouble, the ultimate one
being that which has had so wide and far-reaching an
effect upon the history of Western Australia the
introduction of convict labour and the establishment of
a penal settlement.
Up to 1842 the colonists may be regarded as having
been engaged in combating local difficulties, in forming
their homes, and in striving to wrest the necessaries
of life from the virgin forest. Their aim was to supply
the local market, and so long as that* market could
absorb their products high prices necessarily ruled and
a general condition of solvency existed. They were also
getting fair prices for such wool as they were able to
export. One of the causes of the depression seems to
have been the belief that they could go on importing
stock without bringing about either a fall in values or
a surplusage on the market. The result of this belief
was that nearly £50,000 in specie was sent out of the
colony to pay for importations of all classes of stock.
This, occurring when supply and demand were fast
approaching a level, caused a reaction and a consequent
drop in prices, which produced a sudden cessation of
speculation, a general retrenchment, and a serious fall
in the values of property of all kinds. In commenting
upon the condition of affairs at the opening of the
Legislative Council in June, 1843, the Governor urged
that the colonists should look for other avenues of
industry and profit, so as to provide exchangeable com-
modities to balance the great excess of imports over
exports. Without such commodities the enormous
balance of trade against the colony had to be met by
Treasury bills or by sending specie out of the country.
Both ways were bad; they not only restricted develop-
ment, but were destructive of those beneficial results
which ought to accrue from trading.


Recognizing that depression existed, the colonists
eagerly sought for some means of overcoming it, and
it was soon evident that public opinion considered that
the solution lay in the introduction of further labour.
•j
In coming to this conclusion they were guided by the
knowledge of the relief afforded by the Australind
settlers of 1841 and 1842, and by the immigrants landed
from the ‘‘Success” in April, 1843. The question of
immigration began to engage the attention of the
Legislative Council in August and a Committee was
appointed to consider the best method of obtaining a
supply of labour. The report of this Committee, which
was presented to the Council in the following October,
estimated that 400 servants were urgently required,
300 of whom might be advantageously employed in
farming pursuits and the remainder as domestic
servants. Being of opinion that it was not possible to
raise sufficient money for the purpose by sales of land,
the Committee advised that a loan be obtained from
the Imperial authorities the interest upon which should
be provided for on the annual estimates by earmarking
the moneys derived from land sales, transfer fees, and
other land sources. Failing Colonial Office approval of
this idea, they advocated a system of bounties. The
Legislative Council adopted the report, and it was for-
warded by Governor Hutt for the consideration of the
Home Government, which declined to accede to either
recommendation.
While convinced that in the introduction of labour
lay the solution of their difficulties, the colonists also
gave consideration to the suggestions of the Governor
to look for other industrial outlets for their energies.
One marketable commodity ready to hand was timber,
and efforts were made to work up an export trade in
the jarrah and other woods with which the colony
abounded. Attention was directed to a letter which
Sir James Stirling had received from the Admiralty
some years previously in which an offer to purchase
200 loads of timber was made. A fair market was also
believed to exist in the Mauritius. With these possi-
bilities in view an attempt was made by Mr. C. D.
Ridley to form a Company, but without success. Later
in the year, however, various samples were forwarded
to London and a certain degree of interest taken in
them, resulting in the inception of a small export
trade. Better success followed a shipment of sheep to
the Mauritius, which realized 28s. per head, and
potatoes to the value of <£3oo were also exported. These
small items with £6,000 worth of wool and oil to the
value of £3OO, practically comprised all the exports,
leaving over £60,000 imports to be paid for by specie.
The result was that by the end of the year there was
practically no money in the market. The Government,
as well as the settlers, was compelled to exercise the
most rigid economy. The accounts for 1842-3 showed a
deficit of some £7OO, with a prospect the reverse of
reassuring. To stem the tide an Act was passed to
increase the duties on spirits, and various license fees
were imposed. About the same time the new Land Act
(6 Viet., c. 36), regulating the sale of waste lands of the
Crown in the Australian colonies, came into operation,
raising the price to 20s. per acre. This does not seem
to have exercised any appreciable influence, one way
or another, upon the colony’s affairs at the time. What
had undoubtedly exercised an influence for good was
the consistent policy of Governor Hutt in regard to
the various land regulations. So successfully had he
carried out these regulations that in 1843 out of a
million and a half acres alienated, there were not
100,000 for which the fee simple had not been issued.
The one bright spot in the year’s transactions was
the harvest. About 800 additional acres were under
cultivation and good returns obtained from the whole.
Grapes, olives, and other fruits were produced, and
some attention paid to wine-making, while the number
of sheep had increased by one quarter. Yet notwith-
standing this apparently satisfactory condition the
colonists’ fears of depression were abundantly fulfilled
in 1844. As compared with 1839, prices of commodities
fell nearly 50 per cent, and rents and wages were
correspondingly lower. These things, combined with
the scarcity of money and the pessimistic view of the
situation taken by the colonists, served to accentuate
the depression. To prevent, so far as possible, the
specie remaining from being sent out of the colony the
Government called tenders for a loan. At first there
was no response, but by the middle of the year Treasury
bills to the value of £4,200 had been taken up. As
wheat grown in the colony was also accepted for these
bills the loan served a further object by providing a
market for surplus grain. Yet, though times were so
bad, and the banks to assist their customers were com-
pelled to reduce the rates of discount we find that the
Western Australian Bank was able to declare substantial
dividends in January and July, showing that in spite
of the depression there must have been a firm belief
in the recuperative power of the colony.
The revenue returns for the year 1843 4 showed a
decrease on those of the previous year and were
insufficient to meet the expenditure. The value of
imports was £58,600, while the exports totalled only
£13,609, the principal being wool and oil, which
together amounted to £12,540. This shrinkage in
revenue and great disparity between imports and
exports caused considerable uneasiness. So much so that
when the Estimates for 1845-6 were brought before the
Legislative Council in May the Governor remitted them
to a Committee for consideration. His estimate of


expenditure was £8,886 12s. 6d., but the Committee,
convinced that it could not be met by revenue, reduced
it to £7,283 12s. 6d. by cutting down the items relating
to the administration of justice, public works, police
and surveys and exploration. At the same time the
revenue estimates were revised and £2,000 less set down
as piobable returns from spirit duties. To balance this
further ad valorem duties on imports, estimated to
yield £1,300, were proposed. Such drastic alterations
to the Governor’s proposals could not fail to produce
acrimonious discussion, more particularly as the
amended Estimates received the support of the Council
generally. The Governor made strenuous objections,
but the Committee’s report was carried against him.
Feeling that to exercise the power of veto which he
possessed would only make matters worse, and that to
reserve both sets of Estimates for the consideration of
the Home authorities would also be inimical to the best
interests of the colony, Governor Hutt gave his assent
to the Committee’s proposals. So convinced was he,
however, of the want of wisdom shown in taxing food-
stuffs that he congratulated himself on not being a
settler, and assured the Council that the “doom of the
colony was sealed.” The action of Mr. Hutt in this
matter only served to increase his unpopularity. Not
only were the members of his Council opposed to him,
but public opinion generally declared itself adverse, and
he achieved the unfortunate distinction of being freely
criticized and derided in the public Press. That his
view of the situation was wrong the end of the year
clearly showed, the revenue not even reaching the
revised estimate by some £4OO. While admitting his
ability in matters of administration generally, and more
particularly in regard to the land regulations and the
treatment of the natives, it is open to question whether
his grasp of the financial affairs of the colony was
equally successful.
The Estimates being disposed of the Committee took
into consideration the general financial condition of the
colony and presented a further report to the Legislative
Council in July. As the result of exhaustive inquiries
the Committee was convinced that the depression
existing was due to
The alteration in the land regulations, fixing the mini-
mum price of Crown lands at 20s. per acre, which has
had a powerful and baneful influence upon the condition
of the colony, and consequently on the revenue, by put-
ting a stop to the sale of Crown lands—no money sales,
with the exception of a few town allotments, having
been made since December 1, 1842—and to the intro-
duction of capital.
The great and sudden fall in the price of stock, owing
to the large increase and comparative and stationary
position of the population, by the entire stop the land
regulations alluded to have put to immigration.
The consequent difficulties of the farmers, and inability
to meet their engagements, contracted at a time when
J
the price of stock was high and all the other neces-
saries of life proportionately high.
The balance of trade, being so much against the colony,
occasioning an annual abstraction of specie and other
capital of not much less than £20,000.
To these may be added the injury our farmers have
sustained by the large amount of colonial produce
poured into Western Australia from the adjacent
colonies—in a great degree occasioned by a similar state
of things, brought on in a great measure by the same
causes.
The report was not received by the Council with
any degree of enthusiasm. While it professed to consist
of the opinions of the colonists, and did in a
measure disclose the causes of the depression and
the condition into which the colony had fallen, it con-
tained no suggestions for alleviating the distress or for
bringing back prosperity. This defect the Chairman
of the Committee, the Honourable Peter Brown, Colonial
Secretary, sought to remedy by making certain pro-
posals when discussing the report. His speech was
rather remarkable as showing the state into which the
colony had lapsed. Supporting his remarks by elaborate
tables giving the development of the previous seven
years he pointed out that the balance of trade against
the colony since its inception was large, but up to that
time had been greatly minimized by a substantial
annual expenditure on the part of the Government. A
gradual increase of population, including some
capitalists, had also helped to render progression
possible, but the alteration in the price of Crown lands
had stopped this immigration and so put an end to
progress. The continual drain of specie to pay for
imports had then made itself felt, with the result that
the whole colony had been brought to the verge of ruin.
Although/’ he said, “we have plenty of real property
and stock of every description, we have not a shilling
which as a colony we can call our own. We have no
balance in our Treasury; the balance in the Commis-
sariat chest is the property of the Queen. As
individuals we have loose silver in our pockets—
but only as individuals—for as colonists it is the
property of the foreign creditor.” The remedies sug-
gested by Mr. Brown were to make the colony an
exporting one —this, it will be remembered, had already
been urged by the Governor; to induce the British
Government to consent to the flotation of a loan of
£IOO,OOO, to be used to pay off the mortgages and
introduce labour; and to secure a reduction in the price
of Crown lands. These suggestions were then put in
the form of definite propositions and resulted in a long
and rather acrimonious debate. The Governor said he
was not disappointed with the discussion, because he
never expected anything from it. It was not possible
to find any distinct or specific remedy. He had no
panacea to offer ; all he could do as head of the Govern-
ment was to call attention at all times to three points


of conduct —economy, a cessation of paper credit, and
an increase of exports. The true remedy was in these,
and until it was applied the colony would never do
much good. Finally, four out of the five propositions
were either withdrawn or rejected, the one carried
declaring “that it is the opinion of this Council that a
measure well calculated to advance the interests of this
settlement would be the reduction in the price of Crown
lands from 20s. to ss. per acre, as it would have the
probable effect of encouraging capitalists to settle in the
colony and be the means of providing a fund for the
introduction of useful artisans, handicraft and agricul-
tural labourers, in proportion to the capital which would
be invested in land.” Though barren of results in other
directions the discussion had the effect of encouraging
production in various ways with the object of estab-
lishing a larger export trade. Shipments of horses and
cattle were sent to the Mauritius, where they realized
satisfactory prices. A stock market was established at
Guildford, the rearing of horses for Indian remounts
advocated, and the growth of sheep to increase the
export of wool encouraged. The development of a
timber trade was looked upon as one of the principal
assets of the colony, and great activity was displayed
throughout the south-west district in preparing sawn
timber for export. By the end of the year over 250
tons were lying at Bunbury awaiting shipment. Even
taken as a whole, these various movements were not
sufficient to establish any considerable volume of trade,
but the record of them shows that the small colony,
which consisted of only 4,300 persons, over 1,200 of
whom were resident in Perth, was straining every nerve
in an endeavour to rise above its difficulties.
Notwithstanding the activity displayed in these
ventures and the practice of the most rigid economy
on the part of the people the condition of affairs went
from bad to worse. The financial aspect in 1845 was
even less encouraging than in the previous year. When
the session of the Legislative Council opened in May
the Governor had the unwelcome task of announcing
that even the estimate of revenue as amended by the
Committee had not been realized, and that compared
with 1843-4 there was a falling off in revenue of
£2,627. On the year’s transactions the expenditure
exceeded the receipts by £450 an amount small in
itself, but appreciable in a country whose total income
was less than £7,200. Seeing no prospect of improve-
ment the Governor in preparing the Estimates was
compelled to use the pruning knife even more vigorously
than the Committee of 1844 had done. The revenue
he estimated at £6,920 and the expenditure at
£6,647 12s. 6d. This time the Estimates were passed
practically as presented. To further reduce them with-
out seriously affecting the efficiency of the Government
was impossible, and to have attempted to increase the
expenditure in face of the growing depression would
have been suicidal.
It is evident that the apparently hopeless condition
of affairs now affected the people generally. In April
they presented a memorial to the Governor and Council
pointing out that though the colony was surrounded by
the elements of wealth, possessed abundance of rich
land, an industrious and intelligent population, a genial
climate, and a geographical position with extraordinary
commercial advantages, it was in a most critical position.
The circulation was drained; immigration had ceased,
emigration had commenced; the revenue was falling;
property was almost valueless; trade was almost anni-
hilated; and public confidence at an end. The causes
of all the evils, it was asserted, were the drainage of
specie and, of course, the land regulations, The G-overnor
was asked to make searching investigation as to the
truth of the allegations and then devise some remedy.
What that remedy was to be or how- it was to be applied
there was not even an attempt to conjecture. The
memorial was presented to the Legislative Council by
Mr. George Leake, but that body refused to entertain
it on the ground that its desponding tone and erroneous
assertions were at variance with the facts, and tended
to injure the country in the minds of intending immi-
grants. At the same time Mr. Leake endeavoured to
secure the appointment of a Committee to inquire into
the condition of the currency with a view of preventing
the little specie that remained from leaving the colony
before the end of the year. The Council, however,
felt that that was a matter over which it had little or
no control. The Governor maintained that the abstrac-
tion of specie was due to the system of trade adopted
in the colony, that there were no real merchants, but
only traders, who did business on the principle of
Whittington and his cat. A motion to establish a Corn
Law in the hope of effecting an improvement in prices
also received an “unqualified and uncompromising
rejection.” An impartial consideration of the memorial
and of Mr. Leake’s motions fails to reveal any reason
why they should have been treated so summarily. It
was suggested at the time that the constitution of the
Legislative Council itself supplied that reason, as the
Council consisted principally of paid officials, upon
whom the depression had no other effect than to enable
them to secure necessaries at lower prices than formerly.
While one must acquit the members of being interested
from that standpoint, it is nevertheless apparent that
they showed a readiness to reject the various proposals
for improvement without substituting any others of
value to the community. That an injustice was done
to the memorialists there is no manner of doubt. The
tone adopted by them may have been desponding, but
their statements were unfortunately far from erroneous.


the colony tvas being drained of specie, and the Govern-
ment must have been aware of the fact, as the colonial
schooner was at the time under orders to proceed to
the Mauritius for silver. Further, emigration did
exceed immigration, as the official statistics showed, the
number of departures for the year 1844-5 being 124 as
against 72 arrivals. That the population increased from
4,001 to 4,369 in the twelve months was owing to an
increase of 120 in the number of births over deaths.
Trade was not annihilated, nor was property valueless,
but the depression was so acute that the branch of the
Bank of Australasia, which had been operating since
1839, was withdrawn from the colony. The Western
Australian Bank even found that its dividend-paying
capacity was shrinking. These things show that the
statements, far from being erroneous, were in great
measure true. They certainly were injudicious, but
the answer of the Council was scarcely such as to lead
the petitioners to see the
error of their ways.
The land regula-
tions continued, of
course, to form a
fruitful theme for
discussion and com-
plaint both in the
Legislative Council
and among the set-
tlers generally.
Since the promulga-
tion of the regula-
tions fixing the
minimum price at
20s. per acre immi-
gration had almost
ceased, and the revenue
received from the sales of
Crown lands had practically
dwindled to vanishing point. The returns show that the
amounts received during the five years were: —In 1841,
£129; 1842, £2 ; 1843 and 1844, nil; 1845, £2s—a total
of £156. The whole population pleaded for the repeal of
the regulations. Petitions were forwarded, strongly sup-
ported by the Legislative Council and by those in
England who had knowledge of the colony, but all
without effect. The Secretary of State, Lord Stanley,
positively declined to make any alteration. Notwith-
standing repeated rebuffs the Legislative Council
made a further attempt in July, 1845. A series of
propositions was tabled by Mr. Singleton, declaring
that the experience of nearly three years had confirmed
the opinions expressed in the protest of 1842; that the
system was noxious in its effects, having stopped immi-
gration and reduced the value of property; that the
j 2
want of attention shown by the Imperial Government
to the remonstrances of the colonists was to be regretted;
that the effect of the regulations, which applied only
to Australia, had been to divert the tide of emigration
to the African and American colonies; that any legis-
lation deterring immigration was unjust, especially
when capital and labour were abundant in Great
Britain : that it was unjust to charge the colony with
the expense of importing labour; and that the system
of occupation of Crown lands was opposed to the
opinions and wishes of the colonists. These propositions
were all carried in spite of the strong opposition of the
Governor and the Advocate-General. Later in the
month this latter officer brought forward a further
series of motions dealing with the same subject, but
couched in different language. Some of them were passed
and the remainder withdrawn. A memorial embody-
ing the whole of the resolutions was then drawn up and
transmitted to the Secre-
tary of State, but, like
many other protests
on the part of the
colonists, it appears
to have gone to
swell the contents of
the Colonial Office
wastepaper basket.
Another sugges-
tion ♦ for affording
relief was the in-
auguration of a
spirited public
works policy. At
the instance of the
settlers a Bill was
passed through the Coun-
cil authorizing a loan of
£2,000 at 7 per cent, for the
purpose of building a gaol and carrying out other neces-
sary works such as road-making. At the same time it was
resolved to apply to the Imperial authorities for a loan of
£IO,OOO for public works. The request was accordingly
made, but refused with the same promptness as every
other application for money in those days. An assess-
ment on land for road purposes was also suggested, but
did not meet with the approval of the Council, though
the imposition of tolls to be used in repairs was then
authorized.
During the year (1845) further efforts were made
to increase the exports in wool and oil and establish a
permanent trade in other commodities. An experi-
mental shipment of four tons of sandalwood realized
£4O and Mr. Bland contracted to supply 400 tons of
jarrah to the Admiralty for use in the Dockyards. The
CRUSE’S M ILL, 1 846.


Vineyard Society, formed in 1844 to promote the culture
of the vine and olive, reported the satisfactory produc-
tion of wine, and published a “Manual for the Cultiva-
tion and Manufacture of the Vine and Olive in Western
Australia.'' The total exports for the year came to
£13,353, of which £7,257 was represented by wool and
£3,415 by oil.
In the midst of the colony's troubles, when an
experienced Governor with extensive local knowledge
was particularly desirable, Governor Hutt announced
his intention to retire. He had for some time past been
in indifferent health and felt that it would be wise to
take advantage of the expiry of his term and return
to England. He left the colony in H.M.S. “Fly" on
February 19, 1846.
Upon the whole Mr. Hutt cannot be considered to
have been a popular Governor. He was universally
respected for his uprightness of character and for
the strict and steady impartiality that marked his
administration, but he received none of that enthus-
iastic admiration which was accorded to Sir James
Stirling. Following that officer, whose inclinations and
opinions were almost invariably on the side of the settler
and opposed to the Home authorities, and possessing as
he did rigid principles and a deep sense of the
importance of his position, he was bound to come into
conflict with the people whom he was called upon to
govern, more especially as he allowed neither personal
friendships nor local influences to interfere with the
performance of his duty. His unpopularity was mainly
due to his strict enforcement of the land regulations
and his refusal to admit that every regulation of the
Colonial Office which did not meet with the approval
of the settlers was wrong. He was undeservedly blamed
for advising the British Government to raise the selling
price of Crown lands and equally undeservedly accused
of being the cause of the depression that existed. The
apparent failure of his financial administration was
more than anything due to the fact that he assumed
the reins of government just at the time when a strong
reaction was manifesting itself throughout Great
Britain against the extreme emigration policy of the
previous decade. All the colonies suffered from that
reaction, but none so severely as Western Australia,
which had in addition to fight against continued mis-
representation and falsehood. In these circumstances
it was almost impossible to estimate with any degree of
assurance either the revenue or the expenditure for
any period in advance. By the exercise of extreme
caution and circumspection Mr. Hutt probably saved
Western Australia from the overwhelming disasters
that the other colonies suffered, though it is possible
that that same caution retarded the colony's advance
when matters generally throughout Australia began to
right themselves.
His policy toward the aborigines also aroused the
opposition of the colonists when it was first made known.
They regarded it as the outcome of mawkish sentiment-
ality toward the natives on the part of people in England,
who really knew nothing of the practical side of the
question, and they considered that its only effect would
be to increase the lawlessness and violence of the
savages. By the end of Mr. Hutt's term, however, the
settlers were convinced, in the words of the Legislative
Council, that the friendly intercourse between the
whites and the natives and the absence of strife were
due to the humane measures he had adopted.
Consideration of these various matters leaves little
doubt that his administration was on sounder lines than
that of his predecessor. In fact, many of the difficulties
that he had to face were the result of a certain degree
of partiality on the part of Sir James Stirling, and the
opposition he met with both from the Legislative Coun-
cil and the colonists generally would have fallen to the
lot of any man who endeavoured to carry out strictly
the duties imposed by his commission. As a kind friend
his departure was regretted by all, though in the minds
of many that regret was tempered by the knowledge
that his departure put a stop to his administration.
But judged apart from the influences of the immediate
circumstances, that administration, though unpalatable,
was wise and necessary in the interests of Western Aus-
tralia, and that fact would probably have been recog-
nized at the time had it not been that long before his
arrival he had been prejudged as a man of strong per-
sonality with distinct leanings toward the policy of the
Colonial Office.
When information reached England that Mr. Hun
intended to retire attempts were made without success
to secure the appointment for Mr. Marshall Waller
Clifton, the ex-Chief Commissioner of the Western
Australian Company. In August, 1845, Lieutenant-
Colonel Andrew Clarke, K.H., was appointed to succeed
Governor Hutt, and arrived in the colony in February,
1846. An Irishman by birth, Lieutenant-Colonel Clarke
had had previous administrative experience as Governor
of St. Lucia. The common belief that when things are
particularly bad a change of government will often
bring relief seemed in a measure to be justified by the
new Governor’s arrival. Certainly the colony had
touched bottom, and there was a slow but appreciable
improvement in affairs. The real reason was probably
that Mr. TTutt’s policy was beginning to show some re-
sult. When the financial year closed in March it was
found that the revenue, estimated at £6,920, had
yielded £7,866, and showed a surplus of £335 over the
expenditure.
In January, 1846, a despatch was received from
the Secretary of State for the Colonies informing the
O
Governor that the Act of 1844 imposing certain duties


on imports had been disallowed, such disallowance to
take effect three months after receipt of the notification.
The ground of objection was the same as Governor iiutt
had urged so strongly when the matter was under con-
sideration, viz., that the proposals were bad in principle.
Other proposals to take the place of those annulled were
suggested in the despatch, and to consider these
Governor Clarke called the Legislative Council together
early in April. In accordance with the suggestions—
practically directions —of the Secretary of State the Act
of 1844 was repealed and a further one substituted for
imposing duties by way of revenue only, and not by
way of protection. This Customs Ordinance (9 Viet.,
No. 7) is rather of importance, as it was distinctly pre-
ferential in character y all imports from foreign countries
being charged with a duty twice as great as that on
imports from any part of the British Empire. The
basis of value for computing the duty was the invoice
price with 20 per cent, added.
Another ordinance of importance passed at this
time was one repealing the pilotage dues and making
the ports of Western Australia free to the world. It
was thought that the high dues exacted from the masters
of incoming vessels had done much to keep ships away
from the colony, and had consequently hindered the
development of an export trade. As an experiment it
was worth trying, as the colony had little to lose by
it, and so far as one can judge it had some
effect in inducing vessels to make Fremantle one of their
ports of call.
Owing to the illness of the Governor little else was
done by the Legislative Council beyond passing the
Estimates (revenue, <£7,670; expenditure, £7,610) for
1846-7 and agreeing to the perennial resolutions oppos-
ing the price of Crown lands and objecting to the system
generally. Similar resolutions had been carried in 1845,
and to these a reply was received in October from the
Rhdit Honourable W. E. Gladstone, who had succeeded
to the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies. The
despatch stated that the requests had been referred to
the Land Commissioners, who decided that ‘ the system
of land sales must remain untouched,’ 7 and that their
decision had been approved by the Government. Among
the requests refused was one asking permission to allow
Crown lands to be occupied temporarily for squatting
purposes, with a right of pre-emption. By the same
mail advice was received to the effect that the applica-
tion for a loan of £IO,OOO asked for in 1845 had been
refused on the ground of public policy, and the Act
for raising a loan of £2,000 to build a gaol at Perth
and for other purposes disallowed on the ground that
in a small colony with a barely sufficient income it was
unwise to anticipate revenue.
In the English Parliament the only matter of
interest to the colony was a Bill to continue the opera
tion of the Act of George IV. with regard to the
government of Western Australia. The discussion that
took place in the House of Lords is interesting because
it foreshadowed the granting of responsible government
to the Australian colonies. Earl Grey expressed the
opinion that the ancient system of colonization, by
which the colonists were allowed to manage their own
affairs without any interference on the part of the
Mother Country, was infinitely safer, wiser, and better
than that which had of late years been adopted. The
whole system of the government of Australia required
revision, and to be placed on an improved and per-
manent footing. Then, according to The Times’ report,
the Duke of Richmond gave notice that if there ivere
no remedy for the frightful evils existing in this colony
from the state of the convicts transported he would
move for a committee of inquiry, for in no country
calling itself Christian was there a worse state of de-
pravity. Lord Lyttelton, the Under-Secretary of State
for the Colonies, replied that he had paid attention to
the subject and had strong hopes of being able to pro-
duce a measure during the session to redress those evils.
When this report reached Western Australia there was
great public indignation, as up to that time the settlers
had always proudly emphasized the fact that the colony
was free from taint. The statements were put down as
being one more indication of the woeful ignorance exist-
ing even in high places. A reference to Hansard of
May 7, 1846, shows, however, that both the Duke of
Richmond and Lord Lyttelton were referring to the
convict system in Australia as it then existed, and not
to Western Australia, so that considerable public energy
seems to have been unnecessarily expended over the
matter.
Though the depression was by no means at an end,
it seemed to be lessened in tension after Governor
Clarke’s arrival in 1846. The reason is probably to be
found in the fact that Mr. Hutt’s advice to develop the
various potentialities and encourage an export trade
was being acted upon. In January, 1846, the “Unicorn”
left Fremantle with the largest cargo of Western Aus-
tralian produce that had so far been exported, consist-
ing mainly of wool, oil, and timber. The timber trade
particularly began to arouse a great deal of interest.
For years previously boats had been built of local wood,
but in 1846 something better was attempted, and three
small ships, the largest capable of carrying 300 tons,
were constructed at Fremantle. Various vessels were
also repaired in the colony, and in the case of one of
them, the “Halifax Packet,” Lloyd’s surveyors expressed
great satisfaction with the class of wood used. The
colonists were advised that a ready market existed in
England for colonial hardwoods, and prepared a good
deal for dispatch, but unfortunately the want of ship-
ping facilities greatly hindered the development of the


trade. In order to extend operations the Western Aus-
tralian Bank offered liberal assistance to those cutting
timber. It agreed to advance £2 for every load stacked
on the beach and a further 10s. when the load was
shipped. During the year trade with the Mauritius was
also encouraged and the foundations laid for the export
of sandalwood to Ceylon and China. At the end of
1846 it was estimated that 200 tons of this wood were
ready for dispatch, the total value of timber actually
exported during the twelve months being £575.
An encouraging revival of whaling also took place,
and attempts were made to arouse interest in fishing
matters generally. A proposal was made to establish
a joint-stock fishery on the Abrolhos Islands, but
through inability to secure a long lease of the islands
the project lapsed. It was revived in 1847 by the estab-
lishment of the Pelsart Fishing Company.
A further interesting development in 1846 was in
the direction of minerals. Rumours of mineral dis-
coveries had repeatedly been made in previous years, but
nothing had come of them, though both explorers and
geologists expressed the opinion that the country was
not devoid of mineral wealth. Some incentive to search
was given by the discovery of copper in 1845 in the
neighbouring colony of South Australia, through which
it was said some fortunes had been made.
About the middle of July a settler on the Murray
named Beacham, while engaged cutting a ditch, came
upon pieces of substance which on being shown to Mr.
Birch, a chemist of some experience, were pronounced by
that gentleman to be coal, but of inferior quality, such
as is usually found near the surface. The mere fact of
it being coal was sufficient to raise hope, and the
Government Resident of the district (Mr. F. C. Single-
ton), with Messrs. O’Grady Lefroy, G. Nash, and S.
Moore, immediately proceeded to make an investigation.
Mr. Singleton reported very favourably to the Governor,
and Mr. Moore supplied sufficient information to the
Press to excite great public interest. Rumours of
mineral finds became general, and quite a mining fever
raged during the month of August. The anxiety to dis-
cover something precious in almost every piece of stone
bordered on the ludicrous, and The Inquirer humorously
summed up the position thus: —“We cannot peep out
of our door but we are assailed by ‘Have you seen it?'
‘What do you think of this specimen V The invasion of
the Huns was a trifle to the hosts of specimens of black-
boy, gum, charcoal, clay, and other swindling pretenders
who march in hourly calling themselves coal , and if we
fly from them we are met by gangs of iron pyrites, mica,
and such vagabonds, tramping along, with trumpets
blowing, under the ensign of copper. We never did hope
to see Perth so much awake. We dread that the excite-
ment may be too much for the good town, which may
suffer a relapse of another eighteen years' duration.
Every unfortunate corpse of an old burnt gum-tree is
dragged from its resting-place, divided into morsels,
wrapped in shrouds of whitey-brown paper, and
triumphantly carried about St. George's Terrace in the
waistcoat pocket of some excited citizen, clerk, or mem-
ber of the Council, who with a pompous strut or a con-
fidential wink lugs out the unhappy little blackened
scrap and applies it to the nose of everyone he meets
with, ‘Does it not smell like coal V —till at length he
reaches our office, and, bespeaking a special supplement
for his discovery, deposits it, with solemn injunctions
for its safety, on our table. What is the subsequent
fate of the little wretch is a secret which in the present
state of public feeling we dare not avow."
The want of a geologist who could give definite
information as to the value of the various “finds" was
greatly deplored, and the Government was asked to send
to England for a competent man, to whom it was sug-
gested that as much as £2OO a year should be paid !
Toward the end of August a meeting was held at
Perth with a view to the formation of a Company for
the purpose of investigating the mineral resources of
the colony. Messrs. G. F. and S. Moore, R. Habgood,
J. W. Gregory, James Stokes, L. Birch, R. W. Nash,
J. W. Davey, and J. Tate were elected a Committee to
carry out arrangements, and Mr. S. Moore placed a
boring apparatus at their disposal. The first locality
to be tested was the supposed coalbed on the River Mur-
ray. As a result of the efforts of this Committee there
was issued in September the prospectus of the Western
Australian Mining Company. The capital was fixed at
£20,000, in 10,000 shares of £2 each, 4s. to be paid on
allotment and 4s. a quarter thereafter. The directors were
Messrs. J. S. Roe (chairman), S. Moore, W. Knight,
B. V. Vigors, H. C. Sutherland, and R. Habgood.
A few days later came the announcement of a fur-
ther discovery of coal on the Irwin River by Mr. A. C.
Gregory, the Assistant Surveyor-General, and his
brothers. These officers returned from an expedition
to the north of Perth with a large block of coal said to
have been taken from a seam 6 ft. thick. On the
strength of the discovery the actual finder, Mr. H. C.
Gregory, applied for the free grant of 2,500 acres pro-
mised in 1839 to the discoverer of coal. A party under
Lieutenant Helpman was sent to report on these dis-
coveries early in the following year, and returned with
the information that the coal seam had been traced for
several miles. The Government Gazette announced that
the party had proved “the existence of a large and open
bed of coal" at the locality indicated by the Messrs.
Gregory.
Meanwhile the Mining Company had started opera-
tions, and a bore was sunk in the Murray district. At
a depth of 40 ft. coal of a better quality was reached,
but farther down the indications were not so good.


Then trouble arose, as the shareholders were “sordid
persons” and looked for dividends. Being pacified, the
work was continued and an expert, Dr. F. von Sommer,
commissioned to report. The report was that of a true
“mining expert,” vague and unsubstantial, and asked
for further time for investigation. In March, 1847,
shafts were sunk near Kelmscott, in the Canning dis-
trict, in the hope of securing lead. This hope proved
unfounded, but an analysis of 100 ft), of ore taken out
showed 66 lb. 11 oz. of pure zinc, 13 lb. 5 oz. of sul-
phur, and 10 lb. of iron, the remaining 10 lb. being
earthy matter. Zinc, however, had little value on the
market at the time, and as a reaction after the mining
fever had set in very little more in the direction of
obtaining minerals was done for some years.
Two serious misfortunes befell the Government at
the end of 1846 and the beginning of 1847. The first
of these was the death in November of the Colonial
Secretary, Hon-
ourable Peter
Brown (or
Broun), who had
occupied the
position since
the foundation
of the colony
and had been
closely identi-
fied with its de-
velopment. The
whole popula-
tion joined in
deep expressions
of regret and ac-
knowledged the
zeal and whole-
hearted n e s s
shown by the
deceased gentleman in the public service. The second
misfortune occurred in the following February, when
the Governor, Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew Clarke, who
had been in feeble health ever since his arrival in Wes-
tern Australia, died after a protracted illness. He had
resided only twelve months in the colony, and for the
greater part of the time had been a confirmed invalid,
so that it was scarcely possible for him to leave his
mark on the administration. Owing to his death the
office of Governor devolved upon Lieutenant-Colonel
Irwin, the Commandant of the Forces, and the
Colonial Secretaryship was temporarily filled by the
Advocate-General, Mr. G. F. Moore, whose legal duties
were during the time discharged by Mr. R. W. Nash.
These alterations in the personnel of the Government,
though compulsory, did not altogether meet with public
approval. The Inquirer regretted that the reins had
fallen into the hands of persons whose aptitude for
government was not such as to inspire confidence in the
wisdom of their measures.
The Legislative Council met in June, 1847, and
from the Governor’s speech it is apparent that an im-
provement was taking place in local affairs. Rapid pro-
gress had been made in the acquirement of internal
wealth and in the development of the colony’s resources.
The revenue for 1846-7 amounted to £8,453, while the
expenditure was only £7,966, leaving (with the previous
year’s surplus) a credit balance of £B2l. Owing to the
improvement in the finances the Governor announced
that he had been able to arrange for the colonial
schooner “Champion” to proceed to Singapore for the
purpose of securing a supply of Chinese, who would be
under engagement to remain in the colony for three
years. By this means he hoped that considerable relief
would be afforded to the settlers by supplying the de-
ficiency existing
in the labour
market. Ano-
ther matter of
importance men-
tioned in the
speech was an
increase of
£6,869 in the
value of exports
1846-7 over
those of 1845-6,
which brought
the exports to
within £5,000
of the imports.
In pursuance
of the intention
mentioned in
the speech the
“Champion” was later in the year dispatched to
Singapore, and returned with a few Chinese servants.
Colonies of German immigrants were at that time being
imported into South Australia with more than little
success, and, bearing that in mind, the Legislative Coun-
cil appointed a Committee to consider how best to secure
part of that stream for Western Australia. Nothing
resulted, however, except a report of a valueless nature.
The session of 1847 was marked by extreme activity
in matters of legislation. The list of measures proposed
almost looks as if Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin was anxious
to get his personal ideas passed into law quickly, and
before a successor to the late Governor could arrive from
England. The chief proposal was one to place an export
tax on sandalwood, the proceeds to be devoted to the
maintenance of roads. This aroused very strong opposi-
tion, in deference to which it was replaced by a system
VIEW OF CITY FROM MOUNT ELIZA RIFLE RANGE LOOKING EAST,1871.


of licence fees for permission to cut sandalwood. No
great objection was offered to the idea, and it was passed
into law, but by May, 1848, the effects of it had become
so marked and the ordinance itself so unpopular that it
was suspended for six months and nor renewed during
the year. Another measure of importance was the aboli-
tion of the General Roads Trust and the substitution
of a Central Board of Works, charged with the con-
struction and maintenance of the roads throughout the
colony. The official members of this Board were W.
Knight (chairman), G. F. Stone, C. Symmons, and
F. D. Wittenoom, and the unofficial members were G.
Leake, T. Helms, R. Habgood, and J. Hardey.
In 1847 an addition was made to the official mem-
bers of both the Legislative and Executive Councils by
the appointment of the Collector of Customs, Mr. H. C.
Sutherland. The unofficial portion also underwent some
change through the resignation of Mr. Singleton, who
was succeeded first by Mr. Andrews and afterwards by
Mr. S. Moore.
That the depression was giving way before the de-
termined energies of the people is apparent from the
exports for the year. Ever since the foundation of the
colony the value of the imports had largely exceeded
that of the exports, but in 1847 it was found that
against imports to the value of £25,463 the colonists
were able to place £24,535 in exports. One remarkable
feature was the growth of the sandalwood trade. In
1846 it was valued at £320; in 1847 it had reached
£4,440. The revenue, too, was distinctly buoyant; the
estimate of £8,070 was exceeded by nearly £4OO, and
that without any appreciable increase in the expendi-
ture. The Estimates for 1847-8 were framed on more
hopeful lines, and the revenue was set down at £9,221.
In January, 1848, news of the appointment of Cap-
tain Charles Fitzgerald as Governor was received with
every manifestation of delight. Though the colonists
respected Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin as a man they had
a decided objection to him as Governor. His methods
of raising money were particularly obnoxious, and every
administrative act was viewed with suspicion. It is
doubtful whether any reason for the opposition could
have been given. Long years of depression and struggle
had made the colonists pessimistic, and, like discon-
tented British subjects in every quarter of the globe,
they threw the blame upon the Government of the day.
The Inquirer newspaper, a journal possessing a much
wider circulation than The Perth Gazette , was probably
the instigator of most of the feeling displayed. Its
editor (Dr. W. H. Shell) had been disappointed through
not being appointed to the office of Colonial Surgeon
on the death of Dr. Crichton in 1846, and seems to have
blamed Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin and the Acting
Colonial Secretary (Mr. G. F. Moore) for it. Con-
sequently on every possible occasion he displayed the
most bitter animosity toward these gentlemen, and used
the columns of the newspaper against them.
As the new Governor did not arrive until some
months after the announcement it fell to the lot of
Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin to preside over the session of
the Legislative Council, which opened in March, 1848,
and in which the newly-arrived Colonial Secretary (Dr.
Richard Robert Madden) took his seat for the first time.
The outlook, as disclosed by the Governor's speech, was
beginning to brighten considerably; the revenue had ex-
ceeded the expenditure; exports were increasing in
value and approximating even more nearly to the im-
ports than in the previous year; and in every direction
there was evidence that the severe period of depression
was coming to an end. Beyond passing the Estimates
for 1848-9 little business was done, as Lieutenant-
Colonel Irwin did not wish in any way to hamper the
movements or anticipate the ideas of the new Governor,
who was believed to be on his way to the colony. It be-
came necessary, however, to summon a second session
in July to consider a despatch from the Secretary of
State for the Colonies. For the sake of convenience the
Council had adopted the practice of passing in March
the Estimates for the succeeding year commencing in
April, instead of those for the year later, as the finan-
cial regulations required them to do. The despatch drew
attention to this regulation and required that the
Estimates of the Council should be prepared in advance,
so that the Home authorities might have the oppor-
tunity of pronouncing upon them before they actually
came into operation. In pursuance therefore of this
direction the Governor presented to the Council the
Estimates for 1849-50, which showed a decrease of £SOO
on the figures for 1848-9. As soon as the Estimates were
out of the way two other very important matters were
brought up for consideration. One was the necessity
for further exploration, not so much for the purpose of
accurate geological survey as with the object of finding,
if possible, further suitable land for pastoral pursuits.
The land available for sheep was all in use and the want
of new depasturing districts was severely felt. It was
agreed that the Surveyor-General should lead an expedi-
tion through the south-east in the following September.
The other matter considered was the constitution of the
Legislative Council. Out of ten members seven held
their seats by virtue of their official positions as Govern-
ment officers, and only three were what might be termed
unofficial, though even those were appointed solely by
the Governor. There being apparently no chance of
securing any alteration in the direction of elective
representation Mr. Leake endeavoured without success
in 1845 to secure the appointment of additional un-
official members. Mr. R. W. Nash returned to the
charge in the session of 1848 and secured the appoint-
ment of a Committee consisting of Messrs. W, IT,


Mackie, G. Leake, and himself to prepare a statement
upon the constitution of the Council for presentation to
the Secretary of State. The statement showed that
originally the power of legislation, including taxation,
was vested in the Executive alone; that four unsalaried
members were afterwards added to form a mixed Legis-
lature of five salaried officers and four unofficial
colonists; that the principles of constitution of that
body reserved to the Crown the nomination, suspension,
and removal of members, and vested the initiation of
Bills, the option of putting questions to the vote, and
the power of veto in the Governor; that on a vacancy
occurring in the unofficial membership a salaried officer,
the Colonial Judge, had been appointed; and that a
further salaried officer, the Collector of Revenue, had
since been added, making the proportion of salaried
officers to unofficial members that of seven to three.
Various suggestions for the equalization of representa-
tives were made, but left to the Home Government to
settle. One thing was definitely requested: that the
unanimous vote of the unofficial members against a
proposition should have the effect of vetoing it.
The report of the Committee did not meet with
approval. In place of it an amendment was passed ask-
ing that three or.four unofficial members be added to
the personnel of the Council. The request was duly
forwarded with the favourable recommendation of the
Governor, but no action was taken by the Secretary
of State at the time, as the whole question of the govern-
ment of the Australian colonies was then under con-
sideration.
With these matters the administration of
Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin closed, the new Governor
(Captain Charles Fitzgerald) arriving at Fremantle on
August 10. As previously noted, Irwin’s methods of
government were not popular, and the termination of
his authority was viewed with some degree of satisfac-
tion, not perhaps unshared by the Commandant himself,
who had grown weary of the determined opposition
shown toward every proposal made by him and the con-
tinual misrepresentation to which he was subjected.
Captain Fitzgerald, who was not without administrative
experience, having been Governor of the Gambia for
nearly four years, was hailed with delight almost as the
saviour of the colony, and addresses of welcome showered
upon him from all quarters.
No matters of any political importance arose dur-
ing the remainder of 1848. As a result of agitation on
the part of colonists in England the Colonial Office
sanctioned the raising of a loan for immigration pur-
poses upon the security of the Land Fund. As there
did not happen to be a solvent Land Fund in Western
Australia no benefit was derived from the concession.
Evidences of returning prosperity may be found in
the exports for the year, which amounted in value to
£29,598. Of this total sandalwood, which three years
previously had not been considered as an asset of any
value, accounted for £13,353, more than the export
value of wool and oil together. There is no doubt that
an equally large trade in the local hardwoods —the jar-
rah and karri—would also have been developed at this
period if the colonists had only had at their command
facilities for cutting and preparing large quantities. A
demand for these hardwoods had certainly arisen, but
the colonists were quite unable to meet it. Contractors
for railway construction in India were ready to use the
timber, but unfortunately could not get it as rapidly as
they required it. To overcome the difficulties an attempt
was made in Madras to form a Western Australian
Timber Company, but without success. Later in the
year a small Company was formed at Perth with a
capital of £I,OOO, a sum so small that the concern was
necessarily doomed to failure.
The Mining Company continued its operations dur-
ing the year, and shafts were sunk in various places
in the hope of discovering payable minerals. The ex-
pectation that good coal existed on the Murray had
not been borne out, and the expert, Dr. von Sommer,
was sent to examine the coal find of the Messrs. Gregory.
The only valuable result from these wanderings that
seems to have accrued to the colony was a geological
map of the south-western division. Besides coal, con-
tinual rumours were circulated that copper was also to
be found. Some ore sent from Kelmscott to South Aus-
tralia was declared to contain that metal, and further
discoveries of it were reported from Mr. Hardey’s pro-
perty, near York, but it was not until the end of the
year that, by the discovery of the Geraldine Lead Mine,
any serious attempt at mining was made.
The rumours of minerals and the necessity of fur-
ther country for the extension of the pastoral industry
led to a revival in exploration during the period 1843-50.
Early in 1843 Messrs. Landor and Lefroy made a short
trip to the south-east of York and Beverley in search
of a large inland sea mentioned by the natives. Beyond
the headwaters of the Hotham and the Williams they
did discover some lakes, but they were for the most
part salt and were not surrounded by country at all
favourable for pasturage. In the following year
Lieutenant Helpman in the schooner “Champion” was
dispatched to Gantheaume Bay, at the mouth of the
Murchison River, and brought back reports confirmatory
of Captain Stokes’ observations on the general character
of the country. An excursion down the Blackwood
River was made by Assistant Surveyor, A. C. Gregory,
in 1845, and in 1846 the same officer, accompanied by
his brothers, F. T. and C. Gregory, visited the salt lake
region of the interior. It was in the course of this
expedition, while examining the rivers reported by Grey
in 1839, that the discovery of a coal seam was made


near the source of the Irwin. The same party made
a further examination of the Murchison and Gascoyne
districts late in 1848, and discovered a galena lode in
the bed of the Murchison River. So much interest was
shown in this discovery that in December the district
was visited by the Governor and the Geraldine Mine
established. It was during this journey that Governor
Fitzgerald was speared by the blacks. In the same year
the Surveyor-General started on the longest of those
expeditions, which earned for him the title of “the
father of Australian explorers.” Starting from York
and making toward the south-east he reached the Pal-
linup in October, and from there turned easterly until
the Bremer Range was reached. No better country
than dense scrub and salt lakes could be seen farther
on, so Roe retreated toward the coast, stopping only at
the Russell Range after being deprived of water for
three days and nights. On the return journey several
extensive beds of brown coal were found at the Fitz-
gerald River. The party reached Perth on February
2, 1849, after having explored 1,800 miles of country,
some of which was heavily timbered with woods of com-
mercial value.
The subject of the land laws, both as regarded sale
and leasing, was still considered of profound importance
by the colonists, and the agitation which had been car-
ried on practically from the inception of the colony still
continued. The request of the Council for some reduc-
tion of the minimum price of £1 per acre was refused
by a despatch from Earl Grey dated August 11, 1848.
In it he informed the colonists that “the very same
arguments which are now brought forward against the
establishment of the minimum price of £1 per acre in
1841 were urged with no less confidence against the
establishment of a minimum price of ss. per acre as a
substitute for free grants in 1831, and the subsequent
advance of that price to 12s. an acre in 1839. Each of
these changes has been regarded with equal apprehen-
sion, yet, as I have observed, it is with the adoption
of that policy, which has equally dictated each succes-
sive advance in the price of land, that the great progress
of the colony may be said to have commenced.” This
reply, which was applied to the Australian colonies as
a whole, scarcely answered the arguments advanced, and
certainly the latter part of it, as far as Western Aus-
tralia was concerned, was not borne out by the facts.
The amount received from the sale of Crown lands under
the regulation was pitifully small, and did not in any
way contribute toward great progress. For years after
the regulation came into force adversity rather than
prosperity ruled in the colony, and the improved state of
affairs in 1847 and 1848 was due more to the develop-
ment of an export trade than to any beneficial effect of
the land regulations.
In addition to the question of sale there was also
that of leaseholds, an important matter in a country
which looked to squatting as one of its mainstays. Dur-
ing Governor Hutt's term an ordinance had been passed
allowing purchasers of sections of 320 acres the right of
pasturage over adjacent Crown lands. This was con-
sidered a step in the right direction, and the people
were much disappointed when the Act was disallowed
by the Crown. In 1848 a circular despatch was sent to
all the Australian colonies by Earl Grey, suggesting a
new set of land regulations, to deal chiefly with the
question of leasing the waste lands of the Crown. To
carry this suggestion into effect as far as Western Aus-
tralia was concerned the Legislative Council appointed
a Committee to draw up regulations for consideration.
This Committee, all of whose members were large land-
owners, advised that the Crown lands of the colony
should be divided into two classes, A and B. That
within class A should be included all lands within three
miles of a town site or of land already granted in fee
simple; all land within two miles of the sea coast; all
within two miles of either bank of the named rivers or
permanent streams; and all within ten miles of the
summit of Wizard's Peak, of the junction of the Fitz-
gerald and Elwes Rivers, of the summit of East Mount
Barren, and of such other lands as the Governor might
proclaim. Class B was to comprise all other lands open
for location. In class A only yearly leases for pastoral
purposes could be granted; in B leases could be given
for any term not exceeding eight years. Allotments of
not more than 320 acres of A land could also be secured
on lease for a term up to eight years for cultivation and
tillage, and holders of leases ot B land could cultivate
any portion of it. These proposals, it may be seen, vir-
tually prohibited squatting within reasonable distance
of good water or permanent settlement. It was felt
that they were framed entirely from the point of view
of the large landowner, a feeling that was strengthened
by the fact that the Committee among them held nearly
one-half of the alienated land of the colony. Possessing
no representation in the Council, the only means the
settlers had of voicing their objections were by public
meetings and memorials. A public meeting was there-
fore held on July 18, 1849, at which a reso-
lution was unanimously passed “That in the
opinion of the meeting the regulations framed
by the Committee for the occupation of waste Crown
lands are unsound in policy, unjust in principle, in-
applicable to the wants of the colony, in opposition to
the wishes of the colonists, and if adopted will tend to
frustrate the introduction of immigrants, the increase
of revenue, the production of wool, and cause a gradual
depopulation of the settlement." The meeting then ap-
proved an amended set of regulations, and concluded


by agreeing that a memorial should bo forwarded to the
Secretary of State informing him that the colonists had
no confidence in certain members of the Executive Coun-
cil, and, further, that the Governor be asked to allow
the colonists, in case of a vacancy in the Legislative
Council, to select a member from the list approved by
the Home authorities. As, however, the Council de-
cided to withdraw the most objectionable clauses of the
Committee’s proposed regulations no further action was
taken. It may be mentioned that Lieutenant-Colonel
Irwin was the chairman of the Committee, which doubt-
less in great measure prompted these last resolutions.
In fact, throughout the whole discussion this point was
emphasized, and there is just the possibility that it in-
fluenced the meeting more than any definite objection
to the proposed regulations.
Notwithstanding the political troubles and the
straitness of finances the period 1843-9 was in general
one of progress and development. A census taken in
October, 1848, showed that the population of the colony
was 4,622 —made up of 2,818 males and 1,804 females,
while of the total number 2,900 were adults. The stock
numbered 141,123 sheep, 2,095 horses, 10,919 cattle,
1,431 goats, and 2,287 swine. The cultivated area com-
prised 3,317 acres under wheat, 672 under barley, 134
oats, 100 rye, 39 maize, and 120 potatoes. Vineyards
and fruit orchards were represented by 114 acres, kit-
chen gardens by 244, and green crops by 2,321. Mail
communication had been improved, and by the end of
1848 a monthly service between Fremantle and London
via Singapore had been inaugurated. Bridges had been
built, main roads cut, and overland traffic established
between Perth and Albany. Educational facilities, cer-
tainly only of a very primary character, had been
afforded to most of the settled townships and places of
worship for the principal sects erected in Perth. The
greatest event in religious circles was perhaps the estab-
lishment of the Roman Catholic Church. The authori-
ties in Sydney had been requested as far back as 1841
to send someone to minister to the needs of members
of that communion, but it was not until 1843 that three
priests were detailed for the work. Almost from the
first they were infected with the desire to carry on
extensive mission work among the natives, and by solici-
tation induced the Congregation of the Propaganda to
send Dr. Brady as Bishop, with a large staff of priests
and helpers. This party arrived early in 1846. The
Bishop remained in Perth, and the others were sent out
into the wilderness to form missions to the north, south,
and east of the capital. The first two, for various reasons
over which the devoted band had no control, proved
entirely unsuccessful, and those priests who survived the
attempts made their way to India and the Mauritius.
Of all who had come out with Bishop Brady only two
remained—two whose names are cut deeply in the his-
tory of the Roman Catholic Church in this State:
Guiseppe Serra and Rosendo Salvado. After a brave
struggle they established a mission for the aborigines at
New Norcia, in the Victoria district, and laid the
foundations of perhaps the most successful native mis-
sion in Western Australia.
There remains one phase of the history of this
period which has still to be dealt with —the agitation for
the introduction of convict labour. It will be remem-
bered that at the establishment of the colony one of the
conditions of its foundation was that it was not to suffer
from the taint of the convict system. This was no doubt
an important factor in inducing many of the early set-
tlers to make the Swan River colony their home, and
to their credit it must be said that they struggled with
their difficulties and privations long years after they
might have been forgiven for abandoning their prin-
ciples in favour of the relief that the introduction of
forced labour would undoubtedly have afforded. From
time to time suggestions of the benefits to be derived
from the presence of convicts were thrown out and
sternly repulsed. It was only when, by the cessation of
immigration, the supply of adequate labour came prac-
tically to an end that transportation was considered as
a way out of their difficulties. Without labour —free
or forced —development was almost impossible. The
colonists had proved that in the preceding years.
Development was the keynote of prosperity and increased
population necessary to provide a market- for their agri-
cultural produce. With all its drawbacks transportation
had provided the means for that development and that
market for produce in the Eastern States of Australia,
and therefore when all other means were exhausted the
colonists of Western Australia were compelled to take
the question into consideration. That they did not do
so at all readily there is ample evidence. The daring
spirits who, at King George Sound in the early thirties,
memorialized the Home Government to send out
convicts were regarded by the rest of the community
almost as pariahs. The same strong feeling of aversion
toward the very idea remained until the acuteness of
depression in 1843 and 1844 forced the colonists to re-
consider their position.
At a general meeting of the York Agricultural So-
ciety held in April, 1844, Mr. S. E. Burges moved—
“ That it is the opinion of this meeting that, inasmuch
as the present land regulations have entirely destroyed
our labour fund, we conceive that the Home Govern-
ment are bound in justice to supply us with some kind
of labour, and after mature deliberation wc have come
to the determination of petitioning the Secretary of
State for the Colonies for a gang of forty convicts —to
be exclusively employed in public works.” The motion
was not put. In its place a resolution was passed ap-
pointing a Committee to inquire into the matter. This


Committee a few days later interviewed Governor ITutt
upon the question, but received no encouragement, lie
informed them that he had already addressed the Secre-
tary of State upon the subject of labour, and as the
point was occupying the attention of the Home Govern-
ment he had no doubt that some scheme would be
evolved in which Western Australia would participate.
In spite of this rebuff a petition was prepared for signa-
ture, but it lapsed from want of support. The York
agriculturists had, however, achieved something. They
had directed the attention of the settlers toward the
importation of convicts as a way out of their difficulties,
and from that time, though strenuous opposition con-
tinued to be manifested, the advocates of convict labour
steadily gained ground. The newspapers, reflecting in
this case general public opinion, argued against con-
victs on the grounds of expense and undesirability,
and showed that the experiences of the other
colonies ought to banish any suggestion in favour of
the idea from the minds of Western Australian colonists.
Opposition to the intro-
duction of convicts was fur-
ther strengthened by a no-
tice that appeared in The
Hobart Gazette in January,
1845, stating that Her
Majesty had been pleased to
extend pardons to convicts
in Van Diemen Land, con-
ditional upon the recipients
remaining in one or other
of the Australian colonies.
The fear that some of these
people might decide upon
Western Australia as their
homes resulted in a public
meeting being held at Perth in April, when it was de-
cided to forward a memorial to the Secretary of State
asking that none of these pardoned convicts be allowed
to come to the colony. When the colony was founded,
the memorial declared, “a solemn and distinct pledge
was given by Her Majesty’s Government that it should
not be made a receptacle for convicts; a pledge which
(should this colony be left open to the semi-pardoned
convicts of Van Diemen Land) would be entirely for-
feited, while the colonists themselves would be reduced
to a much worse position than those in settlements
avowedly penal, where at least some protection is
afforded to the well-disposed by the restraints put upon
the convicts by the laws, by the presence of a large
military force, and by the active exertions of a numer-
ous police.” Why the colonists feared that convicts
would be attracted to a country which had failed to
attract free labour was not explained. The memorial
was forwarded in due course and rejected, the Home
Government asserting that if certain convicts had since
conviction led blameless lives there was no just reason
for refusing to allow them to seek the means of main-
taining themselves in other colonics besides Van Die-
men Land.
Meanwhile the advocates for convicts were
endeavouring to gain public support. Two memorials,
both abortive, had been submitted to the people, and
a third was in course of circulation for signatures. In
July a long letter on the subject was published in The
Inquirer , observing that owing to the absence of labour
sixteen years of endeavour had brought but little pros-
perity to the colony, and that there was little hope of
any great improvement under present conditions. The
question of introducing convicts, it was argued, was not
a matter of principle but of policy, and the supporters
of the system favoured it, not through any admiration,
but simply as a matter of expediency. There is no
doubt that public opinion, slowly but surely, was begin-
ning to move along these lines, and the official mind
was seriously perturbed. On July 24 the matter was
HIGH STREET. FREMANTLE (LOOKING EAST), 1872.
raised in the Legislative Council by Mr. F. C. Singleton,
and by a unanimous vote it was declared ' That the
necessity for such an application [i.e,, for the introduc-
tion of convicts] is not apparent. No dearth of labour
can be so extreme as to call for, or to warrant our hav-
ing recourse to, such a hazardous experiment for a
supply.” The moral aspects of the question were also
strongly animadverted upon, and altogether it is evident
that at that date there was no intention whatever on the
part of the local Government to advocate such a step.
Beyond occasional references no further attention
was given to the matter publicly during 1845 or 1846,
though the memorial which had been prepared was
slowly making its way among the colonists and attract-
ing the signatures of many who as a matter of principle
were scarcely in favour of it, but as a matter of ex-
pediency saw no better way out of their difficulties. The
terms of the memorial, drawn up in the names of the
"landowners, merchants, and inhabitants of Western
Australia/' set forth that capitalists were originally


attracted to the colony on certain conditions which
seemed to be advantageous ; that through “mismanage-
ment, inexperience, and ignorance of the seasons great
numbers of the early settlers lost or expended the greater
part of their capital” before they derived any result
from it, but that after struggling for many years with
almost incredible difficulties they began to hope for a
general rise in values owing to a steadily-increasing
stream of immigrants. This hope, however, vanished
when in 1841 Her Majesty’s Government saw fit to raise
the minimum price of Crown lands to £1 per acre, thus
causing a stoppage of sales and a consequent diminution
in the fund derived therefrom, which had been used
for the purpose of encouraging the introduction of
labour. Immigration consequently ceased and labour
became unprocurable. A depression occurred, bringing
with it the emigration of many to the other Australian
colonies. Land and other property lost its marketable
value, and there was no probability, under existing cir-
cumstances, of labour or capital being attracted in the
SOUTH BAY AND JETTY, FREMANTLE, FROM LIGHTHOUSE, 1872.
future. In view of this condition of affairs (which was,
it may be remarked, considerably exaggerated) the
memorialists asked that “the importance of this colony
to the British Empire” should be considered, as from
its geographical position and great natural resources it
ought to become a powerful and prosperous settlement.
“Unless,” said the petition, “Her Majesty’s Government
will reduce the price of land to its original standard and
resume the principle on which this colony was founded,
and act upon that principle judiciously and not lavishly
as was the case formerly, or will devise some other ex-
pedient as shall cause the reintroduction of capital and
labour, your memorialists conceive that this colony must
become absolutely useless to the British Crown, an en-
cumbrance on the Empire, and ruinous to those indivi-
duals who have been led to embark in it the whole of
their fortunes.” If it was not possible to accede to any
of these suggestions then the hope was expressed that
the Home authorities would “convert the colony into a
penal settlement on an extensive scale.” Asa reason for
convicts it was pointed out that good roads through
the settled districts were necessary but expensive, only
perhaps “to be accomplished by convict labour” ; that
bridges, wharves, lighthouses, and other public works
could be constructed only by such means; and that the
increased population under the scheme would provide
the market so necessary for agricultural products.
By the beginning of 1847 the progress of this
memorial had changed the idea of transportation from
a merely abstract theory to a very practical means of
relief. The benefits to be derived from forced labour
seemed to be many; that it would relieve the existing
depression and bring a return to prosperity was in the
opinion of many of the settlers a certainty. It is to be
feared that these facts were felt to be more important
than that lowering of the moral tone of the community
which would necessarily result from the establishment
of a penal settlement. Even the newspapers, which up
to that time had urged the moral disadvantages, changed
their tone and advocated the benefits that would accrue
from cheap labour and a
progressive public works
policy, though they salved
their consciences by suggest-
ing that the convicts should
be confined in hulks, not al-
lowed to mix with the free
people, and returned to
England when their services
were no longer required.
The change of opinion may
have been due in part to the
growing belief that the
Home Government would
accede to the prayer of the
memorial not so much out of
consideration for the colony, as because, other penal
settlements being closed, Great Britain required some
fresh outlet for her convicts.
Notwithstanding this change of front on the part
of the colonists the Governor, Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin,
remained steadfast in his condemnation of the idea. At
the opening of the Legislative Council in June, 1847, he
vehemently opposed the agitation, and regretted that
“the dearth of labour or the desire to accumulate wealth
on the part of a portion of the community” had caused
the suggestion to be entertained. In support of his
attitude he referred to a report of a Committee of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, dated 1846,
which unequivocally asserted that a discontinuance of
transportation would be in the interests of Australia
and the Australians. He concluded by saying: —“With
the experience of other colonies before us, which we now
witness struggling to free themselves from this system
as from a pestilence, I would strongly urge all who are
favourable to the measure to consider whether the injury


likely to be entailed on the community, and particularly
on their own families, may not convince them, when too
late, that they have obtained their object at a dreadful
sacrifice.”
After this the question appears to have again lan-
guished until the latter half of 1848. Governor Fitz-
gerald, in pursuance of suggestions made to him by the
Secretary of State before leaving England, made in-
quiries as to whether the colonists would be prepared
to receive convicts from Pentonville —a prison for per-
sons convicted of trivial offences —who should be accom-
panied by their wives and families. The cost of sending
them out might be recovered from their wages and used
as a fund to introduce free labourers. The convicts
would, of course, be pardoned on their arrival and so
enter the colony as free men. The Secretary of State
also put the idea before several persons in London who
were interested in Western Australia. These were agreed
as to the advisability, and one of them, Mr. Louis Sam-
son, wrote to the colony asking for an expression of
opinion. The replies to Governor Fitzgerald’s inquiries
were not particularly encouraging, but he felt himself
justified in asking for 100 ticket-of-leave men, whom he
thought would be of more value and bring less risk to
the community than the lads from the Parkhurst Re-
formatory, of whom 131 had been sent out between 1843
and 1848. These inquiries of the Governor and Mr.
Samson’s letter appear to have given fresh impetus to
the convict agitation. In December several gentlemen
interested in the colony held a meeting in Adelaide and
agreed to petition the Home authorities for the intro-
duction of convicts to Western Australia as the only
means of overcoming the difficulties that existed. This
was followed by a public meeting —the first definitely
called for the purpose —which was held in Perth on
February 23, 1849. That meeting viewed with alarm
the depressed state of the colony, resulting in a “steady
and constant emigration of labour,” and felt that the
only remedy that could be effective must be one that
would bring about a fresh supply of capital and labour.
It opposed the proposal to introduce ticket-of-leave men
from Pentonville as being calculated to make matters
worse instead of better, and quite unsuited to the wants
of the settlers, mainly because such a step would inflict
upon the colony all the evils of a penal settlement, with-
out giving any increased protection or expenditure of
Imperial funds. It felt that convicts could be usefully
employed in carrying out necessary public works and in
developing the mineral, timber, and other natural re-
sources that existed, and finally decided —“That applica-
tion shall at once be made to Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment to erect this colony into a regular penal settlement,
with the necessary Government establishment and ex-
penditure, the whole cost of the transmission, mainten-
ance, and supervision of all such convicts as may be
transported hither being borne, of course, by the Home
Government. ”
The resolutions were laid before the Governor, with
a request that he would forward them to the Secretary
of State. In doing so lie emphasized the depressed con-
dition of the colony and assured Earl Grey that, did
any other source of relief present itself, the settlers of
Western Australia would be the last to wish for a penal
settlement. In concluding he remarked: —“I am far
from recommending Your Lordship to adopt this pro-
position, as few, I think, would from choice select a
convict settlement as a residence for themselves and
families; but in the present state of affairs here I must
say that if Her Majesty’s Government wish to establish
another penal settlement in Australia the majority of
the inhabitants would gladly learn that Western Aus-
tralia was chosen as the site.”
Meanwhile, on February 12, a despatch (dated
August 7, 1848) in the form of a circular to the various
British colonies was received from Earl Grey. The
Secretary of State was an earnest advocate of trans-
portation and had evolved certain schemes which he was
anxious to see in operation. In this despatch he pointed
out that the system of making convicts undergo a period
of separate imprisonment in England, Bermuda, or
Gibraltar before being sent out to the colonies had been
found to be beneficial, and that such of these men as
had afterwards been transported to Port Phillip as
ticket-of-leave “exiles” had proved satisfactory. Certain
precautions, such as restricting them to particular dis-
tricts and enforcing the return of their passage moneys,
were to be observed, but otherwise they would be given
freedom. “Such,” Earl Grey continues, “being the
system under which it is proposed hereafter to proceed,
I think it right to point out to you that if the inhabi-
tants of Western Australia should be willing to receive
men with tickets-of-leave they will obtain the advantage
of a supply of labour, together with a probable addition
to the funds applicable to general emigration, or some
other public object of importance, while by the power
which is to be reserved of dispersing those men in dif-
ferent districts, together with the reformatory nature
of their previous punishment, there is reason to hope
that their presence in moderate numbers will not be
found injurious to the general character of the com-
munity.” He then concludes by pointing out that as
the colonists were clamouring for an adequate supply of
labour they might be prepared to receive men on the
terms proposed. He would be glad to learn whether
such would be the case.
The Governor’s reply to the suggestion to send out
Pentonville prisoners, which reached England in
February, 1849, was sufficient to show that the proposal
would meet the wishes of the settlers, and that view
was strengthened by the report of the public meeting of


February, which reached Earl Grey in July. In order
to carry the proposal into effect certain legal formalities
had to be complied with, and therefore on May 1, 1849,
an Order-in-Council was passed nominating Western
Australia as a place to which convicts could be sent
from the United Kingdom. This order was published
in the colony in November, and seems to have somewhat
disturbed the inhabitants, who after years of discussion
over the matter suddenly found that at one stroke Wes-
tern Australia had lost its boasted pre-eminence as a
free colony and had become a penal settlement. The
opponents of the measure were indignant; in the step
they recognized one more iniquity heaped upon them
by the Colonial Office. The Perth Gazette lamented the
prospective “contamination and infamy” inseparable
from a penal settlement. Earl Grey was blamed for
taking advantage of the opportunity afforded by the
Governor’s innocent request for 100 Pentonville prisoners
to saddle the colony with all the horrors of the convict
system. However, when the colony recovered from the
shock it was recognized that the advantages were many
and that the dangers to be apprehended were slight.
Convictism of 1850 differed greatly from the modified
slavery of New South Wales and Van Diemen Land of
the early years of the century, and though the very fact
of its introduction into a free colony is to be regretted,
there is little doubt that some innovation of the kind
was necessary to the development of the country. In
that direction its operation was beneficial, and there is
not to-day the slightest evidence of its having left any
moral taint.
The Legislative Council was summoned for Decem-
ber 20, 1849, primarily to consider the altered condition
of the colony, and to make the necessary arrangements
for the proper control of the convicts. An ordinance
was passed providing for arrest without warrant,
summary conviction, employment on public works,
restriction when on ticket-of-leave, and punishment.
Early in the following year further despatches were
received from the Secretary of State, containing infor-
mation that the Home Government intended to send
out free persons equal in number to the convicts. This
and the prospect of many necessary public works being
at last undertaken led the colonists to admit that at
any rate transportation offered “a gleam of hope —just
sufficient to drag us on in miserable uncertainty.” The
actual conditions under which the convicts would be
employed were stated by Earl Grey in a despatch of
December 20, 1849. They were to be at first entirely
under the control of the Government for employment
on public works—roads, harbours, buildings, and timber-
cutting. When they were set free from such labour, on
account of good behaviour, their services would be
available for colonists. The whole expense of the
system would be defrayed by the Home Government,
and a further sum would be set aside annually for
promoting free emigration.
Thus, twenty years after its foundation as a free
colony, from which convicts were by the conditions of
establishment debarred, Western Australia entered upon
a new phase of its existence, and became one of the
penal settlements of the British Government.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE CONVICT SYSTEM.
Deeming it to be the duty of the historian to
record facts rather than to discuss theories we do not
feel called upon to enter at any length into the question
of the merits or demerits of the convict system from a
moral point of view. Judged by the standard of pure
ethics it must be admitted that the commingling of a
convict element with the free inhabitants of a country
cannot fail to have, at any rate, some demoralizing
influence with concomitant results. At the same time
it is equally certain that the cheap labour resulting
from the presence of large numbers of convicts and
ticket-of-leave men tends greatly to the material pros-
perity of the community. Whether it is possible to so
organize a convict system as to give the material
advantages without any lowering of the ethical standard
of the people, and whether such was actually encom-
passed in Western Australia, is a matter for moralists
to discuss. So far as the historian is concerned two facts
stand out —in the hope of a prosperous future the
Western Australian colonists were on the whole prepared
to take the risk of contamination, and the Secretary of
State believed that he had evolved a wise system of
transportation from which no lowering of the moral
tone was likely to result.
That the new system of transportation differed
greatly from that in vogue in the early days of New
South Wales is unquestionable. In fact, throughout
the whole period during which felons were transported
to Western Australia, the terms “convict system’ ’ and
“penal settlement” as applied to that colony had
nothing in common with the same terms when used to
describe the state of affairs, often worse even than
slavery, that existed in New South Wales, Norfolk
Island, and Van Diemen Land during the early part


of the nineteenth century. Judged by the ordinary
meaning attached to the expression, Western Australia
was never a “penal settlement.” It was really a huge
gaol, the boundaries of which for the greater part of
the criminals sent out were the limits of the colony
itself. In accordance with the agreement made by the
Homo authorities with the colonists the men sent out
were ablebodied, not over forty-five years of age, well
conducted in prison and having at least half their
sentences to run, such sentences on conviction having
been for not less than seven years. It was also
stipulated on the part of the colonists —who must have
been very innocent if they thought the stipulation
would ever be observed —that no criminals of a reckless
or dangerous class should be sent out. Convicts from
Irish gaols were not to be transported, nor were female
offenders. This last condition was strictly carried out,
and to the absence of the corrupting effect of dissolute
women is probably due the fact that practically no moral
taint remains upon the Western Australia of to-day.
A brief description of the system as it existed in
the colony during the eighteen years of its operation
may be of interest, particularly as it shows how great
a change had come over the methods of dealing with
convicts during the previous half-century. In the first
place, the convicts before being transported were
subjected to a probationary period of confinement in one
of the great English prisons, and were selected, at any
rate ostensibly, for their good behaviour and the
apparent prospect of their redemption. On the voyage
out every care, so far as was possible, was paid to their
comfort and health, so that serious illness was infrequent
and death a very rare event. When they arrived at
Fremantle they were placed for about nine months in
close confinement in the penal establishment—called by
its compulsory occupants the “College.” Here they were
compelled to observe a strict prison regime, which did
not bear too harshly upon those amenable to discipline.
For those, however, who in any way attempted to flout
the system there were very definite punishments. A
diet of bread and water, additional imprisonment, the
chain-gang, the dark cell, the cat —up to one hundred
lashes —and even the gallows found a place when con-
sidered necessarv in the scheme of reformation. But
the punitive side of the remodelled system never pressed
so harshly that men, as in Norfolk Island, drew lots for
the privilege of committing murder in order to secure
a trip to Sydney, followed by the attentions of the
hangman. While the punishments were severe the
privileges for good conduct were many. A certain
degree of association with one another was permitted
and conversation with visitors was allowed. A library
was established for the use of the convicts and lectures
were periodically given within the prison. It is recorded
that in 1857 Governor Kennedy and a party visited the
convict establishment for the purpose of hearing a
convict lecture on music, with illustrative items by the
prison choir! During the period of confinement or
probation within the prison the convicts were employed
on necessary works of maintenance and on various
public works in and around Fremantle. When it was
over they were released on a modified or restricted
ticket-of-leave and sent out in parties to erect public
buildings in various parts of the colony, to equip
country depots, and to make roads. While so employed
the value of the work done was placed to their credit,
and enabled them to repay the £ls set down as the cost
of their passage out, and which it was necessary for them
to refund to the prison authorities before the coveted
conditional pardon could be secured. These parties
were not confined or under any kind of penal coercion.
Good behaviour was practically assured by the fact
that misconduct revoked the probationary ticket and
extended the time of service before the conditional
pardon could be obtained. The greatest liberty was
allowed to the road-making parties. These consisted of
from twenty to fifty of the best behaved convicts, who
lived in camps along the line of road to be made.
They were under the care of one warder, or in some
cases two, but there were also instances of parties being
sent out without any official in charge. In 1853 the
custom of making certain prisoners constables was intro-
duced, and found to be satisfactory, after which the
road parties were generally under the control of one
warder and one constable. Considering the liberty
enjoyed, it is amazing that there were so few attempts
at escape. The reason is probably to be found, in the
words of Captain Henderson himself, that the colony
itself was “a vast natural gaol.” The escaping convict,
even if he eluded capture, which was exceedingly im-
probable, stood a good chance of starving in the bush
or dying of thirst. He also knew that with good
behaviour his full ticket-of-leave, which practically
meant freedom, was only a matter of a little time and
not a .great deal of labour. In fact, some of the
descriptions of these road parties scarcely remind us of
the dreadful and dreaded “system.” Writing in 1864,
a special correspondent of the Melbourne Argus says: -
“No one can say that the convicts work hard, and, as
far as my experience goes, I found them remarkably
comfortable both as regards shelter and diet. They
are always as hospitable as they can be to a visitor. I
put up several nights with road parties, and partook of
meals with them which any man might heartily enjoy.
The meal over, the men would produce their tame
cockatoos or opossums, would enjoy a smoke or a stroll,
would read books from the prison library, or spin yarns
by the blazing fire. I found them all eager for infor


mation regarding the t'other side/ as they call the
eastern colonies, and one and all stated their determina-
tion to get there. After an evening spent thus, we
would turn in to comfortable beds and be up early
next morning for a wash in the creek. If they do not
return thanks for having their lives cast in pleasant
places the men are a most ungrateful set."
The duration of this period of probation, which had
to be served before full ticket-of-leave was granted,
varied, of course, with the term of the original sentence.
It also depended on the behaviour of the convict
himself. Prior to 1857 the date upon which a prisoner
serving a certain sentence would receive his ticket was
determined by a percentage method; after 1857 by a
system of marks adopted by Captain Henderson
from that compiled by Captain Knight for the peni-
tentiaries of Ire-
land. Under
either method a
convict sen-
tenced to fifteen
years could in
ordinary circum-
stances secure
his ticket at the
end of the fourth
year. He could,
however, behave
so excellently
as to secure it in
three, or so exe-
crably as never
to get it at all.
With the sys-
tem of marks
was coupled a
system of gratui-
ties. No convict
had, while in
prison, any claim
to payment for his services, but as a reward for
industry and good conduct a gratuity of 2d. for every
six marks earned by him. This could be forfeited,
wholly or in part, by misconduct, and in case of escape
the cost of capture was charged against the gratuities.
Thus by the time he was due for ticket-of-leave the
convict was sure of having some money in his pocket.
With his ticket-of-leave, the convict reached
another stage in his progress toward complete liberty,
though he was still subject to many and severe restric-
tions. The prison was behind him, no warder watched
him; he was free to seek outside employment and to
enjoy the fruits of his labours; but he must never lose
possession of his ticket —a parchment document giving
his name, number, description, age, and condition.
K
Printed on its face were the conditions by which he
must be guided. He was assigned to a certain district,
and without the consent of the Comptroller-General or
Resident Magistrate was not permitted to leave it.
If he travelled from one town to another he
must go by the usual road or by such road
as his pass directed, and must report to the
police both his arrival in and departure from a town.
After reaching his assigned district he was allowed a
fortnight during which to find work for himself; if
unsuccessful he had to return to the penal establishment
and was then sent to one of the country depots. From
the depot he could be hired by a settler, and was com-
pelled to take whatever wages were offered. According
to the instructions of the Home authorities the holder of
a ticket-of-leave who entered the service of a settler was
compelled to re-
main there for
twelve months.
This regulation
was, however,
found to be im-
practicable, and
therefore was not
enforced. Every
change of mas-
ter, as well as
every change of
residence, had to
be endorsed on
the ticket.
The ticket-of-
leave man was
permitted to ac-
quire property,
either leasehold
or freehold, and
could appear in
any action or suit
in the courts. He
could compel his employer to carry out a contract with
him, and was allowed to marry or to obtain his wife and
family from England free of expense. But with all these
privileges the hand of the authorities lay heavy upon
him. If he was guilty of any misconduct, whatever pro-
perty he had acquired became the possession of the
Crown. Under the Summary Jurisdiction Acts he could
be arrested without warrant, and at the instance of a
magistrate be awarded a term of imprisonment varying
in length from one to three years. He must not carry
firearms or be found upon a ship without permission,
and between ten o'clock at night and daybreak he was
not allowed to be away from his place of residence. Both
the magistrate and the police of his district must
practically be aware of his every action.
VIEW OF PERTH (LOOKING NORTH FROM TOWN HALL', 1891.


The convict who, for a period determined by the
length of his original sentence, managed to observe the
conditions and avoid the snares and pitfalls of his
ticket-of-leave became entitled to the much-coveted con-
ditional pardon. This document, which was granted
only by the Secretary of State through the Governor,
removed all restrictions, except one, upon the liberty of
the holder. He could not return to Great Britain, nor,
by special legislation, to Victoria or South Australia,
until the whole term of his sentence had expired. The
restrictions as regards the eastern colonies had been
found necessary owing to the fact that the gold discoveries
had attracted large numbers of conditional pardon men,
some of whom, in the absence of restraint, returned to
their former methods of evil living. According to
Governor Fitzgerald in his evidence before a Committee
of the House of Lords in 1856, it was only the imposition
of these restrictions that prevented every conditional
pardon holder leaving Western Australia for the
eastern goldfields. The practice of issuing conditional
pardons was not, it is said, viewed with favour by the
local officials of the system. That can scarcely have been
the case, as in 1863 we find the Secretary of State
drawing attention to the ease with which conditional
pardons could be obtained in Western Australia, and
suspending their operation as regards prisoners under
sentence of twenty years or more. Shortly afterwards
the conditions under which these pardons were granted
were made much severer, a course which was expected
to cause considerable trouble. That, however, never
eventuated, as in 1864 the Governor was notified that
transportation to the colony would cease entirely in three
years from that date.
The above sketch describes substantially, though
shortly, the convict system as it existed in Western
Australia. That it was formulated on sound and
humane lines is undoubted. Its underlying principle
was remedial —-to reform the prisoner and to offer him
every inducement to once more become a respected
member of society. Even in the hands of inhuman
officials, such as those we read of in earlier records, it
could never have brought about the awful horrors of
Van Diemen Land, though it might have gone some
distance along that path. The success that it
achieved was in the main due to the wisdom and
capability of the officers, more particularly to the Comp-
troller-General, Captain (afterwards Sir) E. Y. W.
Henderson, who with infinite tact, perseverance, and
impartiality, combined with a sound judgment,
organized and controlled the whole system in Western
Australia. That it was hardly penal is quite evident.
Even The Argus correspondent, sent especially to
find out the weak spots, and so strengthen the agitation
against transportation to any part of Australia which
was then being pursued with vigour in the eastern
colonies, admitted that "the West Australian convict
system has many excellent points. It does not, as was
the case under the old assignment arrangements of
New South Wales and Tasmania, place the convict
at the mercy of a master, who may be both brutal and
vicious. Neither is his punishment, as was the case at
Norfolk Island, simply cruel and vindictive. The men
have a constant inducement to behave well, as they
know that by doing so they better their condition.
During the probationary stage they are aware that each
mark they earn brings them nearer to their ticket-of-
leave, and when they obtain these a continuance of
good behaviour has been required to entitle them to
their conditional pardons. This requiring a man to find
employment before he is liberated upon his ticket works
well, forcing him for a time at least into habits of
industry. During his detention on the roads he sees
the settlers and learns what is to be done, and by the
time he has served his ticket-of-leave out, and is wholly
thrown upon his own resources, he ought to have
acquired some little money and a full measure of
colonial experience.”
Given good behaviour the life of the convict was
not unhappy. Cut off from his old associations he had
every chance of beginning life afresh, and in some
instances so appreciated the chance that he achieved
more than a competency. In any case his life was more
comfortable than that of a free labourer in England, if
not in the colony itself . The evidence of Royal Com-
missions and convict officers repeatedly shows that
transportation to Western Australia was actually sought
for. Of course, not all the convicts transported were
reformed. A proportion, the scum of English cities,
remained untouched by remedial measures, and during
the whole term of their residence in the colony these
were a menace and dread to the settlers, being often
debarred from criminal acts only by the want of oppor-
tunity. If the original intention to introduce only the
best class of convicts had been carried out this phase
would probably not have made its presence felt, but, as
Captain Henderson stated in 1856, the English prison
authorities were sending out “the men they do not
hang.” The joint Committee appointed in 1862 also
affirmed that “it has been shown that in one case the
Governor of Chatham Prison was specially instructed to
select for embarkation the convicts least fit to be dis-
charged at home.” Fortunately Western Australia was
saved from the crowning iniquity of a convict system —
the transportation of vicious and abandoned women,
though some women introduced in 1856 from London
workhouses proved almost as bad.
Considered as a whole it may be said that the
convict system in Western Australia was conducted on
such lines as to ensure the least possible baneful effect.
To-day, over forty years since its cessation, that effect


has become a vanishing quantity, and the stigma that
must necessarily be attached to a convict. colony has
faded away.
Whether the colonists of those early days could
have achieved success without the introduction of
convict labour it is, perhaps, impossible to say. But
whatever material advantages accrued from the convicts,
they were not, and could not be, sufficient to justify
their introduction. With brave hearts the early settlers
founded the colony on the proud principle that it was
to be free. In the face of adversity they yielded up
their principle on the altar of expediency, and all that
one can say is—it would have been infinitely better if
they had not.
CHAPTER IX.
1850-1853.
TRANSITION PERIOD: FREE COLONY TO PENAL ESTABLISHMENT—GOVERNMENT
LAND LAWS—FINANCIAL CONDITIONS—INDUSTRIES GENERAL DEVELOPMENT.
Having determined upon the establishment of a
penal settlement in Western Australia the Home
authorities lost no time in carrying that decision into
effect. Captain E. Y. W. Henderson was appointed
Comptroller-General of the Convict Establishment, with
Mr. T. H. Dixon as chief overseer and Mr. Manning as
clerk of works. Prisoners of exemplary conduct were
selected from Portland and a ship equipped as a trans-
port. This vessel, the barque “Scindian,” arrived at
Fremantle on June 1, 1850, and thus the colony cele-
brated its twenty - first birthday by assuming the
character of an actual penal settlement. On the
“Scindian,” under the charge of Dr. Gibson, R.N., as
Surgeon Superintendent, were seventy-five convicts,
fifty pensioners (sent out as a guard), forty-six women,
seventy-eight children, and fourteen immigrant girls.
Though the arrival of the convicts was expected, it was
not anticipated that they would arrive so soon after the
Order-in-Council had been made public. The colonists
were rather thrown into consternation when they saw
the first actual evidence of the result of their agitation
for convicts, and the local Government found itself
totally unprepared to meet the situation. The old
Fremantle Gaol at Arthur’s Head was much too small
to accommodate so large a number of inmates, even if
no others had been expected. To get over the difficulty
premises were rented from Captain Scott, and there the
first batches of convicts were housed until such time as
they had, by their own labour, built the large
Fremantle convict prison for their own safekeeping and
the safekeeping of the thousands of other unfortunates
who were to follow them. The stringent measures
adopted for ensuring the security of the convicts in their
temporary quarters, and the sense of safety that the
inhabitants of Fremantle must have felt at the presence
of this crowd of malefactors, may be gauged from the
away from the gaol and got drunk! When charged
with the offence it was stated in evidence that they
were able to leave the depot at any hour they pleased,
in any dress they liked, and visit publichouses ! This
little incident caused quite a scare among the
inhabitants of Fremantle.
The pensioners who had come out with the convicts
were not retained as a permanent guard over them. lu
most cases they were accompanied by their families, and
sought a livelihood among the settlers, being liable to
render assistance only in the case of any outbreak among
the prisoners. Every encouragement was given to
induce them to become permanent settlers. To each of
them was offered an allotment of ten acres, to be selected
by themselves, to be held on lease for seven years, after
which thev were to receive the freehold. To enable
j
them to make a start a gratuity of £lO was bestowed
upon each one, and they were promised the assistance of
convict labour in clearing the ground. Practically the
whole of them took advantage of the offer, as many
pensioner blocks still held by their descendants testify.
The actual establishment of the system and the
arrival of the first batch of convicts was the cause of
much rejoicing on the part of the colonists. On July 10
a public meeting was held at Perth at which resolutions
were passed expressing thanks to Lord Grey for the
promptness he had shown in acceding to the request of
the settlers, and asking that convicts be sent in large
numbers, as “unless the permanency, as well as the
magnitude, of the convict establishment be secured’*
only disappointment and distress could await the greater
part of the new arrivals. Later in the year similar
expressions of gratitude were forwarded from York,
Northam, Toodyay, and Wellington districts. In a
numerously-signed memorial from the country districts
embodying these opinions it was stated that the
fact that in October four of the prisoners quietly walked memorialists “consider the introduction of convicts on
k 2


a large scale the only means of placing the colony in a
prosperous condition, and urge their speedy introduction
as rapidly as circumstances will permit, accompanied
with a proportion of fret labour and sufficient protection
in the shape of troops and pensioners.” When all the
other colonies were strenuously objecting to convicts how
the Home Government must have chuckled to find one
not only willing but anxious to receive them, and, like
Oliver Twist, keep on asking for more. Even The Perth
Gazette , or, as it was then called The lude/pendem
Journal , after two years’ enmity to the idea, acknow-
ledged that much material prosperity was likely to
result, though at the same time it salved its conscience
by averring that the mere introduction of forced
labour did not constitute Western Australia a penal
settlement.
One of the earliest and, from the point of view of
the settlers, one of the most satisfactory features of the
new condition of affairs was a renewal of the stream
of immigration. For years previously there had practi-
cally been no gain to the colony by this means. When
therefore the “Scindian” landed 188 free persons in
addition to seventy-five convicts, and the ‘‘Sophia”
followed a couple of months later with over 200, the
inhabitants of the colony were convinced that the step
they had taken was in their best interests. Only one
other vessel, the “Hashemy,” arrived with convicts
during 1850. This was the ship which earned a good
deal of notoriety on account of the fact that she carried
the last draft of convicts sent to New South Wales —
the draft whose landing was at first strongly opposed by
the colonists there.
By the end of the year the benefits —and in some
ways the evil results —of a penal establishment began
to be distinctly manifest. In addition to the large
permanent prison, there were various other public works
under construction; depots for convicts were being
established in various centres and parties for the
purpose of making main roads of communication
between the towns were being organized. The increase
in the number of people and the large amount of money
distributed by the penal department provided both the
market for local produce and the means to pay for it,
so that by the beginning of 1851 the whole colony
seemed to have been roused from its state of lethargy
and gave every promise of rapid advancement. The
cost of maintaining the convicts was, of course, borne
by the Home Government; any large expenditure in
that direction was therefore viewed by the settlers with
a certain degree of satisfaction. Not so, however, by
the Imperial authorities. Nearly every despatch urged
strict economy on the Comptroller-General, and in
April, 1851, the financial affairs of the establishment
were placed in the hands of a board consisting of the
Colonial Secretary, the Comptroller-General, and the
Assistant Commissary-General, with strict injunctions
to prevent anything in the way of extravagance. One
of the first questions this board had to consider was the
proportion of the salaries of magistrates, police, and
other officers necessary for the public protection that
should be borne by the English Government. The
advent of the convicts had necessarily increased the
number of these officers, and it was felt that the whole
burden of their cost ought not to fall on the local
Government. It was ultimately arranged that the Home
Government should pay two-thirds of the police expendi-
ture, and make certain grants to the magistrates and
other officials. While on the question of protection it
may also be noted that at first there was no provision
for a permanent military guard over the convicts. The
pensioners who acted in that capacity on the voyage out
became settlers or servants on arrival, and had no
further liability except that they were expected to hold
themselves available in case of any outbreak of a
serious nature. This extremely unsatisfactory condition
of affairs was the subject of earnest representation
through the Governor, and resulted in the pensioners
arriving on one convict transport being engaged to
continue in the capacity of guard until the arrival of
a further detachment in the next succeeding convict
vessel. These pensioner guards were under the com-
mand of Captain (afterwards Colonel) Bruce. At the
end of 1851 the guard was further strengthened by the
arrival of a company of sixty-five sappers and miners
under the command of two officers of the Roval
j
Engineers. The necessity for strict control became
manifest early in the year, when four men succeeded in
getting away from Fremantle in a whaleboat, and another
party escaped from a road gang working north of Perth.
The first were captured at Shark Bay, and the second
practically gave themselves up, convinced that Western
Australia did not need artificial barriers to make it a
safe place to keep prisoners. On the whole, however,
the conduct of these early convicts was good, so much so
that the newspapers directed attention to them as
“instances from which our free settlers might take
example." As a result practically all the remaining fear
and opposition on the part of the colonists vanished.
During 1851 the "Mermaid,” “Pyrenees,” and
"Minden’’ brought 803 convicts and 268 free persons,
including children, to the colony. Not many of these
free immigrants were skilled labourers, consequently the
old cry of want of labour was again raised and com-
plaints made that the English Government was not
fulfilling its promises. There does not seem to have
been any great need of these workmen at the time, and
the only reason for the agitation that appears to have
existed was that the desire to agitate and complain
about something had grown into a habit with the
colonists. In any case the blame, if there was any, did


not attach to the officials of the Colonial Office, as the
Governor had advised them that there was difficulty in
placing those immigrants who had arrived in the
“Sophia/ When Earl Grey was informed that mechanics
were required he lost no time in sending them out.
One might have expected that the introduction of
a large population, which would in all probability con-
tinue to grow, would have stimulated the settlers to
larger production of foodstuffs. This does not seem
to have been the case. The Western Australian
farmers seem to have preferred to get a high price for a
limited output rather than a reasonable price for a
greater quantity. They were very incensed when the
Governor intimated his intention to import flour from
the eastern colonies, and held that local industry should
be encouraged, even though it cost £5 a ton more for
settlers could have wished. With them, however, the
Comptroller-General entered upon the construction of
various public works. Depots were prepared at York,
Toodyay, and Bunbury for the use of those prisoners
waiting to be hired out as servants, and as quarters for
those still in confinement who were working in those
neighbourhoods. Main lines of roads from each place
toward the capital were deemed the most urgent works.
The largest body of convicts, of course, remained at
Fremantle, both because the establishment called for the
erection of many public buildings and because better
control could be kept over the worst class of offenders.
The principal work on which they were engaged was the
erection of the prison itself. Some discussion took
place over the site of this structure. Captain Henderson
inclined to the idea that Mount Eliza would be the
Photo by Greenham and evans.
PERTH AND SWAN RIVER
flour to do it. The Governor referred the matter to most suitable site, but Western Australia was saved
Earl Grey, who replied sharply that ‘ convicts were not
sent to Western Australia in order that growers might
have an opportunity of selling their produce at a price
£5 a ton dearer than it could be procured without
their aid.” During the years 1851 and 1852 it proved
impossible to secure sufficient wheat and flour locally
at any price, consequently importations from the
eastern colonies were absolutely necessary, and in the
latter year wheat had even to be imported from Great
Britain.
By the beginning of 1851 many of the convicts of
1850 had become entitled to tickcts-of-leave, and others
were continually qualifying, so that the number avail-
able for Government works was not so large as the
from what would have been an act of desecration by
the opposition of the Governor, who finally convinced
the Comptroller-General that Fremantle was the proper
place for it. On May 16, 1851, the site was vested in
trustees and the work of erecting the prison commenced.
A good deal of the work was done by the convicts, but
skilled mechanics had to be sent for from South Aus-
tralia to assist. These public buildings and the making
of various roads occupied the attention of those convicts
who remained at the disposal of the Government up to
the end of 1852. During that year 491 men were sent
out, making a total since June, 1850, of 1,469, but of
that number only 156 were available for employment in
Perth and Fremantle ; 845 had already been released on


ticket and were in private service, and the remainder
were road-making. In pursuance of the agreement on
the part of the Imperial authorities to dispatch free
immigrants to those colonies receiving forced labour 381
persons of this class also arrived in Western Australia
during 1852, so that the colonial complaint of the
dearth of sufficient labour was more than met. In
addition the English Government reiterated its willing-
ness to send out free to the colony the wives and families
of those ticket-of-leave men who desired to have them.
There was no great anxiety on the part of the men to
take advantage of the concession, and in the case of
those who did ask refusal generally came from the wife.
In 1851-2 the Emigration Commissioners offered to send
out the wives and families of 60 men who had asked for
them, but in no single instance were they prepared to
accept the offer.
The general condition of affairs as far as the
convicts were concerned showed little alteration in 1853,
except that increased activity on the part of the English
prison authorities resulted in 1,129 men being sent out,
of whom 309 —sent out in the "Robert Small"—were
Irish prisoners, a class specially objected to in the first
agreement. The introduction of this large number made
it possible to carry on the policy of extension and
development more rapidly. Various buildings such as
hospitals, lunatic asylum, pensioners' depot, and others
were constructed and fair progress made with the bridges
required on the main trunk road between Perth and
Albany. All these things meant increased comfort and
facilities for the settlers, as well as a greatly-improved
financial outlook on account of the large expenditure of
money so that when in 1853 news was received that the
English Government was considering the whole question
of transportation, with a view to drastic alterations, the
settlers were considerably perturbed, jumping at once to
the conclusion that any alteration would mean discon-
tinuance. Recourse was had to the usual method of
protest —public meeting with a subsequent memorial—
and the inhabitants of Perth, Fremantle, and York
strongly opposed the cessation of transportation, urging
that from the standpoint of the colony great advances
had been made under the system, and from the stand-
point of the convicts that in the majority of cases they
had been successful in their endeavours to become once
more respected members of society. Great relief was
felt when shortly afterwards information was received
that the Home authorities had no intention of discon-
tinuing the arrangement so long as the colony was
prepared to receive convicts. The statement that the
men generally had rehabilitated themselves was not
strictly accurate. From time to time there were out-
breaks that called for stern repressive measures, and
many were the instances of added imprisonment and
corporal punishment. Cases wore not infrequent where
convicts by careful behaviour had secured conditional
pardons, only to relapse, in the absence of restraint, into
their old habits of vice and debauchery. The '‘Phoebe
Dunbar/' which arrived in August, seems to have
brought a particularly dangerous and violent horde.
The ship had scarcely anchored when several of them
managed to get rid of their shackles and indulged in a
drunken orgy that required the application of the
bayonet before it was quelled. In November four con-
victs managed to escape from a bathing party and made
their way to the Canning district, where they committed
various robberies and were captured only after an
exchange of shots. This was one of the cases where the
heavy hand of the system was quickly felt; three of the
men received five years' imprisonment, three weeks on
bread and water, and 100 lashes each; the fourth on
account of the ease of his capture, being let off the
imprisonment.
Had it not been for the establishment of the
convict system, combined with the law that no person
could leave the colony without giving notice to the
Colonial Secretary, Western Australia would in all
probability have fared badly at this time. The new gold
discoveries in Victoria were made known in 1851 and emi-
gration to that colony from every other part of Australia
at once set in. Western Australia was fortunate in not
losing more than 400 of her population before the end
of 1853, many of whom were immigrants who caught the
gold fever almost as soon as they landed and proceeded
immediately to the new Eldorado. The loss of even
that small number from a territory so large in extent
and yet possessing a mere handful of people in all was
a matter of no little concern. The settlers became
seriously alarmed, and Governor Fitzgerald did not
hesitate to enforce strictly every possible regulation that
could hinder or prevent the exodus. The newspapers
viewed the matter with almost as great alarm as those of
the eastern colonies did the emigration to Western Aus-
tralia during the nineties. As one method of stemming
the tide prospecting parties examined the eastern dis-
tricts of the colony in the hope of discovering a local
field. Unfortunately they did not proceed far enough,
and the treasures of this State remained locked in the
bosom of Nature for a further forty years.
The years 1849-53 may well be described as a tran-
sition period for all Australia. Transportation began
in Western Australia and ceased in all other parts with
the exception of Van Diemen Land; Port Phillip dis-
trict was no longer a part of New South Wales, being
erected into a separate colony under the name of Vic-
toria; Victoria by the discovery of her goldfields far out-
distanced the other colonies in material progress; and,
lastly, in 1850 the long-promised Act for the government
of the Australian colonies generally was passed by the
English Parliament. This Act, the Western Australian


provisions of which were not availed of for many years
afterwards, gave power to the colony under certain con-
ditions to establish a Legislative Council that should be
one-third nominee and two-thirds elected. The total
number of members of such Council was to be fixed
locally, and all questions of franchise and arrangements
of electorates were also left in the hands of the colonists.
The conditions precedent required by the Home Govern-
ment were that the concession should be asked for by
not less than one-third of the householders in the colony,
and that the colonists should be prepared to defray all
expenses of government out of the colonial revenue,
including those borne by the Parliamentary grants under
the old system. It was this latter condition which pre-
vented the settlers from taking advantage of the con-
cession ; though they ardently desired representative
government they felt that they were not in a position to
bear the whole cost of it, and it was not until 1870 that
the first Legislative Council under representative govern-
ment was established.
Several changes occurred in the existing Legislative
Council during the years under review. Dr. Madden,
the Colonial Secretary, resigned his position in 1848 on
the ground of ill-health and left the colony in 1849.
His departure was regretted by the people generally,
but not apparently by the officials. He it was who first
gave voice to the statement that Western Australia
appeared to be governed by about six families. From
1848 till 1851, when Major H. A. Sanford became
Colonial Secretary, the office and with it the Legislative
Council seat was held in turn by Messrs. R. H. Bland,
T. N. Yule, and C. A. J. Piesse. In 1852 Mr. G. F.
Moore, who had been Advocate-General since 1829,
resigned and returned to England, his place being tem-
porarily filled by Mr. B. W. Vigors until the arrival
in 1854 of the new Advocate-General, Mr. R. Birnie.
In 1852 Captain Henderson, the Comptroller-General of
Convicts, became an official, and Mr. W. P. Clifton an
unofficial, member of the Council, and about the same
time Colonel Irwin as Commandant gave place to Cap-
tain G. M, Reeves.
These alterations, however, which practically
affected the whole personnel of the Council, do not seem
to have inspired any general public confidence. For
years almost every act of the Council had met with
disapproval, and changes in the membership were con-
tinually advocated; but when those changes were made
they do not appear to have brought about any modifi-
cation of the public attitude. It is quite evident that
the object aimed at in this dissatisfaction was a repre-
sentative Council where the English Government should
find the money and the local authorities spend it without
restraint.
Quite a storm was raised in 1851 when the Council
increased the salaries of all public officers from the
Governor downward. Though he refused to accept any
increase for himself unless the people declared them-
selves in favour of it Governor Fitzgerald strongly sup-
ported the increases, and in the agitation which followed
did not preserve that strict neutrality so essential in a
constitutional ruler. He characterized the Press oppo-
sition as beneath contempt and went so far as to advo-
cate the establishment of another newspaper which
should be wholly under control and represent purely
official opinion. In return The Independent Journal
pointed out that the Legislative Council had put the
finishing stroke to one of the most flagrant deeds of
spoliation of public funds which even a despotic Govern-
ment like that of Western Australia had ever per-
petrated or even attempted; and in reply to the Gover-
nor said :— ‘ The ill-judged and contemptible abuse of
the Press which the members thought fit to make use of
during this extraordinary sitting of the Council is a
striking proof of how utterly unfitted they are for the
position they occupy as legislators.”
The Press appears to have been a little premature
in its concern for the conservation of the colonial
revenue, as a despatch was shortly afterwards received
from the Secretary of State to the effect that, on
account of the increase of work and responsibility caused
by the presence of the convicts, an addition of £SOO
yearly to the salary of the Governor and £IOO to that
of the Colonial Secretary had been sanctioned from the
Parliamentary Fund. The Governor was thus saved the
annoyance of receiving money from the colonists, who
only permitted because they could not prevent. Con-
sidering that even with the increases the Governor
received only £1,300 a year, the Surveyor-General and
the sole Judge £SOO each, and eleven Resident Magis-
trates distributed £925 among them, the officials of
those days could scarcely be said to have been overpaid.
The compilation of a set of land regulations which
should provide, in a manner satisfactory to all parties,
for tillage and pastoral leases continued to tax the
powers of the Colonial Office as well as of the local
Government. It will be remembered that in 1849 a
committee of the Legislative Council made certain sug-
gestions which received the unanimous disapproval of
the settlers, who suggested others in their place. Out
of the chaos thus brought about Earl Grey endeavoured
to get something like order. On March 22, 1850, an
Order-in-Council was passed dealing with both tillage
and pastoral leases over the waste Crown lands of AVes-
tern Australia. The Committee’s division of the lands
into two classes was with certain modifications adhered
to. Tillage leases over land in both classes could be
granted for any term not exceeding eight years, the
annual rental to be 2s. per acre with a minimum of £lO,
and the acreage leased not to exceed 320 acres. Pas-
toral leases could be granted for only one year at a time


over land in Class A, but up to eight years in Class B,
the annual rental to be £5 with an addition of 10s. per
1,000 acres, the maximum number of acres allowed
being 20,000. In the case of pastoral leases over B
land the Governor could put all or any portion of the
land up for sale at the end of any year, the lessee to
have the option of purchase. If he declined the value
of improvements was added to the value of the land and
in case of a sale paid over to the lessee. The Govern-
ment also retained the right to resume any portion for
public purposes and to grant mineral leases over the
property.
The price of 2s. per acre for tillage leases was con-
sidered prohibitive, and not conducive to that extension
of agricultural industries so necessary to the success of
the colony. Attempts were made by the Governor to
have the rental reduced to Is. per acre, but without
success, Earl Grey positively declining to make any alter-
ation. Additional regulations, framed locally and
mainly providing necessary machinery clauses, were
issued in August, 1851, after which no further altera-
tions were made for several years.
While on the subject of land, it may be noted that
in 1850 the price of town lots in Perth was increased
considerably. The minimum price for blocks in St.
George's and Adelaide Terraces was fixed at £22, for
Hay Street blocks £l7, and for other lots in the
town £l2. Another attempt was also made in this year
to launch a further settlement scheme, the land of Sir
James Stirling being selected for the purpose. Why
the promoters expected to realize success in a penal
settlement when only failure had resulted from similar
efforts in a free colony is hard to say. At any rate the
scheme proved abortive.
With the advent of the convict system the finan-
cial condition of the colony necessarily improved. The
total revenue, which (including the Parliamentary
grant) was £19,137 in 1850, had grown to £37,353 in
1853, and the expenditure in the latter year was £38,052
as against £16,656 in 1850. Imports, which in 1850
were valued at £62,351, had grown to £126,735 four
years later, principally owing to the requirements of the
system. Unfortunately there was no corresponding
growth in exports. Valued at £22,134 in the earlier
year they reached only £29,510 in the later one. This
was probably due to the fact that a larger proportion
of local products was required for home consultation ;
it may also be partly accounted for by the fall which
took place about that time in the only commodities
that Western Australia was able to send abroad. The
only export that appears to have held its own was wool,
which was responsible for nearly £20,000 in the export
value of 1853.
There does not seem to have been that development
of agriculture which might have been expected from the
improved conditions, the increased amount of money in
circulation, and the greater abundance of cheap labour.
The acreage under cultivation increased during the five
years from only 7,419 to 10,299. The reason, no doubt,
partly lay in the fear that additional production would
reduce prices, particularly as the ruling rates in the
colony were much higher than the outside market rates.
The comparatively easy task of rearing sheep for wool
and mutton and the large profits to be derived there-
from had also some effect in restricting cultivation :
but perhaps the chief cause may be found in the state-
ment that the unwonted prosperity of the settlers had
induced a feeling of lethargy, and they were disin-
clined to labour when labour in all probability would
not bring increased financial result.
New avenues of industry were found in the guano
deposits of the Abrolhos, in wine-making, in rearing
horses for the Indian market, and in pearl-fishing; but
none of them showed at that time any appreciable effect
on the value of exports. A royalty was charged on
every ton of guano exported, but very little accrued
from it. Most of the guano taken away was stolen —a
state of things that the authorities had no opportunity
of preventing. The existence of pearl oysters along the
north-west coast had been known since 1699, but no
attempt was made to develop a trade until Lieutenant
Tlelpman returned from Shark Bay with some pearls in
1851. Then an application for the exclusive right to
dredge for pearl-shell was made by a local firm and
granted by the Governor on condition that a royalty of
one-eighth of the value of shell recovered was paid to
the Government. Unfortunately this arrangement was
not only ultra vires , but conflicted with a concession
granted to a London firm by the Secretary of State in
May, 1851. Some friction ensued, but it was ultimately
laid down that the pearl fisheries should be open to the
public, and that no duty or royalty should be imposed
without the consent of the Imperial authorities.
The greatest industrial development during these
years was the settlement of Geraldton and the Champion
Bay district owing to the discovery, by Surveyor A. C.
Gregory in 1848, of lead and copper ore. As a result of
this find the Geraldine Mine had been established in
1849, and it so far succeeded that pig-lead to the value
of £1,200, as well as a small quantity of copper, was
exported in 1853. The chief benefit to the colony from
the establishment of the mine was, however, not so
much the quantity of lead secured as the fact that it
drew attention to the valuable nature of the surround-
ing country from an agricultural and pastoral stand-
point.
The district being new and the natives inclined to
be fierce the Government found that in order to work
the Geraldine Mine it was necessary to establish a mili-
tary post in the neighbourhood. Lieutenant Eliot with


a detachment was sent to Champion Bay for that pur-
pose, and under his escort the first party set out to
open up and work the ore deposits. With this party
were Messrs. Burges and Drummond, who, recognizing
the pastoral possibilities of the district, determined to
take up leases. These they afterwards changed into
freeholds and thus became the pioneers of a flourishing
pastoral settlement. In 1850 their example was followed
by Mr. S. P. Phillips, who leased 20,000 acres on the
Irwin River. In the same year the nucleus of the town
of Geraldton — named after the Governor —was surveyed
and the first lots sold. An attempt was also made to
witli exploration or the opening up of new country was
charged upon the colonial revenue and not upon the
Parliamentary grant.
In the matter of exploration these years were
devoid of interest. The settlers found their time taken
up in developing their holdings and in endeavouring
to meet the increased demand for foodstuffs, while the
officials were fully occupied by the abnormal increase
in public duties caused by the introduction of convicts.
In fact, the years 1849-53 formed a period of centraliza-
tion rather than extension. Labour was more plentiful
than it had ever been since the foundation of the colony.
VIEW IN QUEEN’S PARK, HAY STREET EAST, PERTH,
establish at Greenough Flats a settlement for pensioners,
each of whom was entitled to a grant of land. The
experiment, owing to the smallness of the allotments
and the distance from a market, was not successful.
The expense of opening up this district formed the sub-
ject of correspondence between the local Government
and the Secretary of State. The policy of the Colonial
Office was not favourable to the spread of settlement
over a large extent of country, believing that such a
course meant an unnecessary increase in the cost of
administration. Every expense, therefore, connected
and much of it was at the call of the Government at the
cheajoest rate possible. Consequently we find public
buildings and other necessary conveniences for the
settlers springing up in all the settled towns. The
money necessary for these, which came from the pockets
of the British taxpayer, added by its circulation to the
comforts of the colonists and the permanence of the
colony. The result was that more attention was paid
to its requirements, and we find in 1852 a regular mail
service commenced by the R.M.S. Company, which
had decided to make Albany a coaling station for its


steamers trading between London and Sydney. This,
though it took six days to bring the mail from Albany
overland to Perth, was an important development, as
regular and (for those times) fairly rapid communication
with England was a boon greatly valued by the
colonists and a step forward in the general progress of
the colony.
Perth now, as the capital, began to take upon itself
an added dignity. The mercantile portion to protect
its interests established a Chamber of Commerce, which
in some measure took the place of the Agricultural
Society, whose existence had terminated some years prc
viously. The more literary portion established the Swan
River Mechanics' Institute, which became the centre for
the discussion of topics of public interest.
The efforts to remove the bar at the mouth of the
Swan River, and so allow vessels to enter the river,
were continued in 1849, as it was thought that the
current was widening the opening. The attempt was
not, however, successful, and in a little time the
idea was abandoned. Greater assistance was given
to navigation by the erection in 1850-1 of two light-
houses —one on Rottnest Island and the other at Arthur
Head —which made the intricate passage to Gage Roads
anchorage much safer for incoming vessels.
In social and religious matters the period was
generally one of progress. The comforts of civilized life
were more apparent, and there was every evidence that
the hard pioneering days were over. Social amenities
began to be observed and the customs of older lands to
find place in the new. The religious progress consisted
chiefly of the extension of native missions and arrange-
ments for the spiritual welfare of the convicts. The
New Norcia Mission, under Father Salvado, showed the
good results that could be derived from energy and
whole-hearted service in the interests of the natives.
The only cloud on the religious horizon was an unfor-
tunate dissension that arose among the members of the
Roman Catholic Church, and which brought with it
great bitterness of feeling. From the very first
grave difficulties, financial and other, appear to have
beset that Church in Western Australia. The Bishop,
Dr. Brady, impressed with the vast missionary work that
required to be done, seems to have forgotten that for
monetary assistance he was largely dependent on the
few people, and those not of the wealthy class, who
composed his communion in the colony. That under
such circumstances the Church should become
encumbered with debt was inevitable. After strenuous
endeavours to cope with the position, in the course of
which he sacrificed his own personal property, Dr.
Brady, wearied in body and harassed in mind, deter-
mined in 1849 to ask for assistance in the administra-
tion. The total debt was then about £IO,OOO. At that
time Dr. Serra, one of the priests engaged in pioneering
the New Norcia Mission, was in Europe, lie had left
Western Australia in 1847 to seek for funds to carry
on. During his stay in Rome the question arose of
appointing a bishop of the then projected new colony in
the north of Australia, and he was appointed Bishop
of Fort Victoria (Port Essington). No further steps
in the direction of establishing that colony having been
taken, when the request of Dr. Brady for assistance
arrived in 1849 Dr. Serra was transferred to Daulia,
in 'partihus infiddimn , and made Coadjutor of Perth
and Administrator of the temporalities of the See.
No arrangement was made to place upon the shoulders
of Bishop Serra, who returned to the colony in
December of that year, the burden of the debts already
in existence, consequently the difficulties of the position
remained, with a good deal of confusion added. In the
hope of getting the whole matter straightened out Dr.
Brady left Perth for Rome, where he arrived in May,
1850. “During his stay in Rome/' says the late
Cardinal Moran, ‘ he strenuously advocated the interests
of the diocese and of the Australian Church, and at his
last audience with the Holy Father the Pope used the
words, ‘You must return to your people.' The good
Bishop set off at once for his distant diocese, forgetful
of the rule that missionary bishops when paying the
visit ad lirmna are not allowed under censure to return
to their Sees until they receive the sanction of the
Congregation of Propaganda." Dr. Brady reached
Fremantle at the end of 1851, and almost simultane-
ously with his return rumours were circulated to the
effect that he had when in Rome been degraded from
office and imprisoned in the St. Angelo. No confirma-
tion of these statements is forthcoming, but on April 9,
1852, an official communication was received by Dr.
Serra from the Vatican, stating that Bishop Brady had
been suspended, and appointing him (Serra) as Admin-
istrator with full powers, spiritual and temporal. On
the same date Dr. Brady was informed of his suspension,
the ground being the manner of his departure from
Rome. These documents proved to be all that was
necessary to convert the internal dissension in the
Church into a public scandal. Each party had its
supporters, who did not hesitate to vilify the other side;
charges and counter-charges both in the courts and in
the streets became distressingly frequent. So bad was
the position that it called for the intervention of the
Metropolitan, Archbishop Folding, of Sydney, who
arrived in June, and in July compelled the suspended
Bishop to acknowledge his submission and afterwards
proceed to Rome. Later he proceeded to his native
diocese of Kilmore, in Ireland, ultimately dying at
Amelu les Bains, in France, in 1871. It is worth
while recording that though not permitted to return
to Western Australia Dr. Brady did not resign, nor
was he deprived of, his Bishopric of Perth.


CHAPTER X.
1854-1860.
CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNMENT—IMPROVEMENT IN LAND REGULATIONS AND
CONSEQUENT AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL EXPANSION—DEVELOPMENT
AND EXTENSION OF THE CONVICT SYSTEM—GROWTH OF THE
COLONY DURING THE PERIOD.
When the Legislative Council in 1851 decided to
raise the salaries of the Public Servants the estimates
for 1852-3 framed in accordance with that decision had,
of course, to be transmitted to the Colonial Office for
approval. This was given in a despatch dated December
10, 1851, which arrived in the colony early in 1852, and
which also gave the information, previously noted,
that the additions to the salaries of the Governor and
the Colonial Secretary were to be charged against the
Parliamentary grant. The action of the Council,
however, appears to have had a further and wholly
unintentional effect. Giving evidence as it did of increas-
ing prosperity in the colony, it was seized by Lord Grey
as an opportunity for considering the question of
reducing the Imperial Parliamentary grant-in-aid. The
despatch went on to point out that the increase of
revenue and the stimulus given to commercial activity
were due to the introduction of convicts and might
reasonably be expected to continue; further, the colony
was receiving the benefit of the very large expenditure
made from British revenues on behalf of the convict
establishment. In view of these facts, Earl Grey
informed the Governor, the amount of the Parliamen-
tary grant must be reduced after the year ending March
31, 1853, provision being made for charging the colonial
revenue with the difference. This instruction was
received by the Legislative Council with feelings almost
approaching disgust. It never seems to have struck the
members that the Imperial Government would want to
reduce the amount of assistance in proportion to the
ability of the colony to bear its own expenses. They
were also afraid that this reduction meant the approach
of the time when the Legislative Council would become
elective under the Act of 1850, with the consequent
fall of the oligarchy, for there seems very little question
that in those early days Western Australia was governed
by a favoured few almost entirely in the interests of
themselves and their friends. The Governor stated that
he had asked for a continuation of the grant till 1854,
but beyond that he was not prepared to go, as he agreed
with the Secretary of State that the time had arrived
for reducing the amount of financial assistance. The
Council failed to see the matter in that light, and
resolved to ask that no reduction be made, on the
ground that it was not in accordance with the under-
standing of an implied contract on the part of the Home
Government that any portion of the grant should be
withdrawn before the revenue of the colony was able to
bear the whole expense of government, and pay the
already existing debt, without the imposition of new
taxes. It was also agreed that the adoption of any
course by which a proportion of the annual Parlia-
mentary grant should be defrayed out of colonial
revenue would “lessen the security of the maintenance
of a sufficient permanent provision for the Civil,
judicial, and ecclesiastical establishments of the colony
when it may become entitled to an elective Legislative
Council.” In reply to these resolutions the Secretary of
State refused to admit the existence of any implied
contract as stated. “It would/' he considered, “have
been entirely beyond the constitutional power of the
Executive Government to give any prospective pledge
on the subject. Nor is there the smallest ground, either
in theory or precedent, for the supposition that Parlia-
ment is pledged to grant any fixed amount without
abatement until such time as the colony can defray the
whole of its expenses without exception/' In a further
despatch bearing the same date (December 11, 1852)
he declined to accede to the Governor's request to
delay the institution of the change for a year, but in
order not to unduly harass the local government agreed
that for the time charges amounting to only £1,973
should be transferred from the Parliamentary grant
to the colonial funds, the larger amount —nearly £3,700
-representing one-half the total Parliamentary grant,
being deferred until 1854. When this was brought
before the Legislative Council in 1853 it was pointed
out that the only remaining expenses paid from
Parliamentary grants were those incurred through the
introduction of convicts, and should therefore come
from convict funds, so as not to preclude the inhabitants
of the colony from taking advantage of the provisions
of the Act of 1850 with regard to the establishment of
an elective Legislative Council. Mr. M. W. Clifton,
who was responsible for these statements, was the strong
advocate at this time for some change in the constitution
of the Legislaive Council which should have the effect
of giving to the people generally a greater voice in the
affairs of government. It was evident from the tenor
of the despatches of the Duke of Newcastle, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, that representative
government was not likely to be conceded so long as


the colony remained a penal settlement. The only course
left open, therefore, was to attempt to increase the
number of the non-official nominees. Mr. Clifton suc-
ceeded in having a resolution to that effect passed by
the Legislative Council in 1854, but the Secretary of
State took no action upon it.
The agitation with regard to the constitution of
the Legislative Council was renewed in 1855. In the
meantime Governor Fitzgerald had resigned his office
after nearly seven years' service and had been succeeded
by Captain (afterwards Sir) Arthur E. Kennedy. To
Captain Fitzgerald must in the main be ascribed the
introduction of convicts to Western Australia, though
it is only fair to point out that in urging that course
he was only giving effect to the wishes of the colonists.
Privately lie had doubts about the wisdom of the
action in the beginning, and as the years rolled by he
did not hesitate to express the conviction that the
colony ought never to have agreed to accept the
scourings of English gaols for the sake of possible
material prosperity. As an administrator Captain
Fitzgerald was conscientious and painstaking, and on
the whole his term of office may be described as success-
ful, particularly when the difficulties of guiding the
colony through so important a period as the inception
of a penal establishment are taken into consideration.
Like all his predecessors he had to submit to a
certain amount of public criticism, but before he left
the colony it was generally conceded by his critics that
their adverse opinions had been too hastily formed. If
the criticisms had been confined to the financial side of
his administration they would perhaps have been justi-
fied. The first difficulty that met Captain Kennedy
on his assumption of office in July was to find sufficient
money to pay the month's salaries. Captain Fitzgerald,
in a despatch dated June 28, 1855, had stated that on
December 31 of that year there would be a (estimated)
credit balance of £640; in place of that Governor
Kennedy found an actual debt of £14,205 and not a
farthing in the Treasury. Such a state of affairs was
rather unfortunate for the new Governor. It com-
pelled him to use the pruning knife somewhat freely, a
proceeding which exposed him at the very commence-
ment of his term to the danger of unpopularity. That
danger was not lessened in 1856 when, in order if
possible to arrange for the gradual liquidation of the
debt, he persuaded the Council to authorize additional
taxation estimated to yield £5,700 a year. These,
however, were matters which the responsibility of his
position compelled him to take action upon, and any
odium resulting from them would only have been
ephemeral. The same can scarcely be said of his action
in bringing forward an amended Licensing Bill. Being
impressed wirh the laxity of the liquor laws and
astounded at the prevalence of drunkenness he intro-
duced into this Bill—-and succeeded in passing—very
stringent clauses regarding the sale of liquor. Among
these was one providing that conditional pardon men
could not hold a licence. This met witli very strong
disapproval outside the Council, as there were at the
time several holders of licences who were of that class,
and it was contended that vested interests would be
interfered with, while at the same time men who were
entitled to freedom would be placed under a disability.
The whole question would be one of merely passing
interest if it were not that the opportunity was seized
by the advocates for representative government to renew
their agitation. A public meeting was held on August 6,
the largest held in the colony up to that time, for the
purpose of considering the Licensing Act and the con-
stitution of the Legislative Council. On the first subject
all those stock arguments in opposition that are always
used against any amendment of a licensing act were
brought forward; on the second a resolution was passed
affirming the necessity of increasing the number of
non-official members in the Council. Incidentally, the
whole tenor of the meeting was a strong condemnation
of the administration of Governor Kennedy. The resolu-
tions were in due course sent on to the Secretary of
State (Mr. Labouchere), who replied confirming the
Licensing Act and stating that Her Majesty's Govern-
ment was not prepared to advise the introduction of
elective members into the Legislative Council. As a
protest Mr. Samson resigned his seat on the Council
in October, 1856, and Mr. M. W. Clifton followed suit
in 1858. Mr. J. W. Hardey was appointed in
1855, and Messrs. S. P. Phillips and E. Ilamersley
in 1857, while Mr. Samson was reappointed in 1859.
The question of representative government was once
more raised in 1858 and again in 1860, when it was
stated that the absence of unofficial members from the
Council as then constituted would be quite as beneficial
as their presence.
But even with all this discussion over the constitu-
tion of the Council the colonists did not relax their
grasp on the old bone of contention—the land regula-
tions and the necessity for some alteration in them. By
the opening up of the country round Champion Bay one
phase, that of leasing, had assumed an important
aspect. The leadership in this agitation, too, seems to
have devolved upon Mr. Marshall Clifton, who was
generally to be found in the forefront of any progressive
movement of that period. His first suggestion, aimed at
preventing the acquisition of large estates and made in
1854, was to impose a tax of hd. per acre on all land,
to be remitted when the land was cleared and brought
under cultivation. This proposal failed to meet with the
approval of the other members and the matter was
allowed to lapse. Convinced that some alteration in
the land regulations was necessary, Mr. Clifton


returned to the charge in 1856 by proposing that the
minimum price of Crown lands at auction should be £1
per acre up to 50 acres, 10s. up to 100, and ss. per acre
afterwards. Mis objects were to try to break up big
estates, to restrain squatting, and to bring land under
cultivation. It was admitted that the newly opened
country round Champion Bay was held in large
squatting leases, the areas of most of which were out
of all proportion to the stock carried, and had in many
cases been selected only to prevent agriculturists from
getting a footing in the district. Always ready to
consider the question of altering the land regulations,
the Legislative Council agreed to remit the matter to
F. P. Barlee and A. O'Grady Lefroy was then ap-
pointed to take these replies into consideration and
formulate such amendments as seemed to be necessary.
This Committee reported in June, 1857, and had the
satisfaction of finding its report unanimously approved
by the colonists. No alteration in the regulations
governing town allotments was proposed, but drastic
amendments in those relating to Crown lands were
suggested. The price was to be reduced to ss. per
acre for cash, or 6s. for credit extending over three
years; sales by auction were to give way to sales at a
fixed price; the minimum amount allowed to be forty
acres; every adult paying cabin fare from England
VIEW OF KING’S PARK FROM OBSERVATORY, PERTH,
the Executive Council in the hope that some satisfactory
plan might be devised. The view that Mr. Clifton urged
was practically the same as that put before the House
of Lords Committee on the Convict System by Mr.
T. N. Yule and others, and which had so impressed
that Committee that it recommended the Imperial
authorities to make a large reduction in the sale price
of waste Crown lands in Western Australia.
The Executive Council, to which the matter had
been referred by the Legislature, endeavoured by send-
ing round a list of queries to learn the views of the
inhabitants generally. A Committee consisting of
Captain J. S. Roe (the Surveyor-General) and Messrs.
and purchasing 40 acres was to be allowed an additional
20 acres as a grant, such land to be selected within
twelve months of arrival and the selector to reside on
it for three years before he received a title ; application
fees were to be abolished and the cost of title deed
reduced to 20s. on all grants. In regard to pastoral
leases no alteration in the prices of either A or B
land, as set out in the Order-in-Council of March, 1850,
was suggested. It was proposed, however, to alter the
boundaries of Class A in some respects and to give the
Executive Council power to move into Class A any land
within a mile of future purchases. In Class B the Com-
mittee proposed that the maximum lease should be


Ship .
Convicts.
Date.
“General Godwin 57
15
March 30, 1864
“Sea Park”
304
April 5, 1854
“Ramillies 55
277
August 7, 1854
“Stag”
9
January 9, 1855
“Guide”
225
May 24, 1855
“Adelaide”
260
July 18. 1855
“William Hammond’ 5
250
March 29, 1856
“Runny mode 5 5
248
September 1, 1856
“Clara”
262
July 3, 1857
“City of Palaces 55
4
August 8, 1857
“Nile”
270
January 1, 1858
“Caduceus 55
1
February 5, 1858
“Lord Raglan 55
270
June 1, 1858
“Albuera”
11
October 26, 1858
“Edwin Fox”
280
November 20, 1858
“Sultana 55
224
August 19, 1859
“Francis 55
1
November 11, 1859
Total
2,911
10,000 acres instead of 20,000; that the term of lease
should be eight years as before, with the right of
renewal, but that in case of renewal the rent should
be raised 50 per cent., and another 50 per cent, in
the event of a second renewal; that during the first
year only the lessee should have the right to purchase,
and that for three years he should have a pre-emptive
right over two acres for every 100 comprised in the
lease; that subject to the restrictions mentioned any
person could select for purchase areas of not less than
40 acres, the price paid to be fixed beforehand, and the
lessee to be compensated for any improvements made on
the particular block. In view of the proposed reduction
in the price of land the Committee recommended the
abolition of tillage leases.
The report of the Committee, which to an extent
was in agreement with a Colonial Office despatch of
January 16, 1857, was unanimously accepted by the
Council. It was considered the broadest and most
satisfactory proposal put forward up to that time, and it
embraced most of the requests made by the colonists
during the previous twenty years. In due course the
land regulations thus amended were forwarded for the
approval of the Imperial authorities, and the reply
of the Secretary of State was considered at the session
of the Legislative Council in 1858.
Recognizing that the amendments represented the
unanimous opinion of the colonists, Lord Stanley
notified his approval of them, with only two exceptions.
He declined to fix the sale price of Crown lands at less
than 10s. per acre, and he refused to give any right of
renewal in the case of pastoral leases for eight years.
In coming to a decision he was guided by the opinion
of the Land and Emigration Commissioners, to whom
he had referred the whole question. In order to assist
further in preventing land monopolies, against which
the amendments had in part been framed, the Secretary
of State suggested the imposition of a tax on country
lands and of a poll tax on sheep and cattle. The
Legislative Council, strongly convinced of the wisdom
of its original proposals, and equally certain that a land
tax would be injurious, protested against the suggestions
of the Secretary of State, but without effect. In
August, 1859, a despatch dated May 19 was received
from the Colonial Office confirming the previous one
on the subject, and directing the Governor to bring the
regulations so amended into operation. This despatch
also was accompanied by a long report from the Land
and Emigration Commissioners in continuation of their
former report, and along the same lines. They con-
tended that if colonial lands were made too cheap
every colonist would become a landowner and not one
remain a labourer. The requirement of the colony was
not, in their opinion, cheap land and labour, but an
increase of capital, and capitalists were not tempted to
a country by the cheapness of the land, but by the
return which could be obtained from it. They also
supported the introduction of a land tax and
approved of the alterations made by the Secretary of
State. The fear that every colonist might become a
landowner seems curious in these days of closer settle-
ment, when the universal cry appears to be “Back to
the land.”
The land regulations passed in 1857 had therefore
to be altered in order to fix the minimum price per
acre at 10s. and to make the other amendments required
by the Home authorities. Though the colonists were
afraid that the alterations would defeat the objects
they had in view, that fear was to a large extent ground-
less. In an address to the Legislative Council in
October, 1859, the Governor brought forward statistics
which showed that the leasing provisions of the regu-
lations were largely availed of. Where the land
leased from the Crown in 1852 amounted to 2,356,239
acres, in 1859 it reached 5,003,336 or more than
double, with a corresponding increase in revenue. From
the Blue Book we learn that in April, 1860, when the
first applications for the purchase of land under the
new conditions were received, land to the value of
£3,050 was sold on the first day, and the receipts from
that source which in 1850 were <£7lß had grown in 1860
to £17,342. In fact, so successful did the operation
of the new regulations prove that no further attempt at
drastic alteration was made for some considerable time.
But while land questions and matters of govern-
ment are interesting to the economist and constitution-
alist, the history of the convict system, which reached
its greatest development during the years 1854-60,
appeals more strongly to the general reader. Up to
the end of 1853 Western Australia had been made the
dumping - ground for 2,598 criminals from various
English prisons. In the succeeding seven years a further
2,911 were landed, making a total for the ten years ot
5,509. The list is made up as under:


The presence of such a large number of criminals,
scattered as they were over a large area of country,
many of them under little or no restraint, could not
fail to afford periods of excitement to the free settlers.
And yet, curiously enough, acts of insubordination
were comparatively few. When they did occur they
were generally the result of carelessness or want of tact
on the part of some officer of the establishment. The
first of these happened early in 1854. In January of
that year the Rev. O'Neill, the Roman Catholic
chaplain, preached a sermon to the convicts which the
Comptroller-General deemed unwise to such an extent
that the chaplain was suspended. Some of the
Catholic prisoners took offence at this action and made
use of such mutinous remarks that they were ordered to
their cells. Before they could be seized others came
to their assistance and in the end the services of the
pensioner guard had to be requisitioned to quell the
riot. The ringleaders were punished and the chaplain
was withdrawn by Dr. Salvado, who was administering
the diocese in the absence of Bishop Serra. The Rev.
T. Donovan was then appointed to the chaplaincy, and
in 1856 he in turn became the cause of a much more
serious difficulty. A portion of the convicts' time was
spent in school, the studies being supervised by a
Protestant. Bishop Serra protested to the Governor
against Roman Catholic prisoners being compelled to
attend any school not taught by a Roman Catholic, as
such a proceeding was against the rules of the Church.
The Comptroller-General was opposed to any alteration,
as interference from outside was subversive of prison
discipline. He objected, too, to the expense of a
second schoolmaster. The Bishop then asked that the
whole matter be remitted for the opinion of the
Secretary of State, which was done. A further request
that Roman Catholics should be exempt from school
until the Home authorities had replied was refused.
The Bishop then informed the Governor that Mr.
Donovan had resigned his chaplaincy and that no other
chaplain would be appointed to the vacancy. As the
office was a Civil one the Governor declined to
receive any resignation not forwarded directly to him,
and pointed out that the chaplain was quite prepared
to continue in his position, a position he could
not leave without proper notice. The unfortunate Mr.
Donovan was thus between Scylla and Charybdis. If he
left his position he was guilty of insubordination to the
Civil authorities; if he retained it he incurred the
wrath of his spiritual superior, who had the power to
deprive him of his priestly office. The solution was
found in the grant of a year’s leave on full pay to the
chaplain, and before it had passed the Imperial
Government had upheld the Governor's action. The
chaplain was then reinstated without further opposition
from Bishop Serra.
As might be expected from the presence of such a
largo criminal population, many of whom were to all
intents and purposes at large, crimes both of a trifling
and serious character were fairly frequent, but never so
frequent as to be beyond the power of the police to
cope with. The question as to whether the Imperial
or colonial funds should bear the expenses of main-
tenance of the police force was for some time a bone
of contention. Under the original agreement the
Imperial Government agreed to pay two-thirds of the
cost of the police force, but when that cost amounted
in 1855 to £IO,OOO objection was taken on the ground
of extravagance, and the Secretary of State refused to
contribute more than £6,000 in any one year. Real
grievances being scarce, this was immediately seized by
the colonists. Meetings in protest were held in various
centres and memorials prepared for submission to the
Secretary of State complaining that the Home
authorities should bear at least two-thirds of the total
expense, as they had benefited by the erection of
prisons, depots, quarters, and so on, while the colonists
still looked in vain for their roads and bridges. The
memorial further directed attention to the fact that
the free immigrants promised were not being sent out,
while some of the convict vessels carried only men who
were entitled to their tickets-of-leave immediately upon
landing, and could not therefore be employed upon
public works. Governor Kennedy duly transmitted the
memorial, but displayed no enthusiasm in support of it.
In repl} 7 Mr. Labouchere, at the time Secretary of
State for the Colonies, fixed the Imperial contribution
at the £6,000 previously notified, and pointed out that
so far as emigration was concerned 3,786 free people had
been sent out by British funds up to the end of 1855,
while only 3,661 convicts had been transported during
the same period. He admitted that the colonists were
justified in asking that the convicts should be employed
on public works for some portion of their sentences, but
pointed out that there was not a sufficient number of
suitable convicts to meet the demands.
In addition to what one might term general
offences there were many instances of petty cases of
insubordination and attempted escape. One of the
most daring of these attempts took place early in 1859,
and is described by Kimberley in his “History of West
Australia.” Five convicts employed on public works at
Fremantle managed to elude the vigilance of the warder
and get away into the bush. Striking into the Canning
district they made their way to Point Walter, where
they seized a boat and pulled along, under the shadow
of the bank, toward the mouth of the river. Having
managed to run the gauntlet past the look-out at
Arthur’s Head, they made for Garden Island, where
there was a solitary cottage occupied by a Mr. Reid and
his family. This they plundered, having first bound


the occupants and then set out to sea in the whaleboat,
with a full stock of provisions and about XISO in cash.
Nothing more was heard of them until early in
O J
February, when they were seen at Champion Bay. A
vessel was sent in pursuit, and after a time sighted the
fugitives in Shark Bay. With the help of the men from
another vessel, the “Preston,” four of the men were
secured after an exchange of shots. The fifth man it
was said had died of dysentery, but the subsequent find-
ing of the body proved that he had been murdered. For
this crime one of the men was hanged and the others
found guilty of robbery under arms at Mr. Reid’s
house.
Another escape, possessing some ludicrous features,
happened at York in 1860. One James Lilly, a
ticket-of-leave man with distinct burglarious tendencies,
got away from the gang, and having stolen a horse
roamed the district at will, laying the settlers under
obligation to supply him with food. Finding firearms
necessary, he sold the horse to a shepherd and bought
two revolvers with the proceeds. Then he went back to
the shepherd and commandeered the horse. In
November he wrote to The Inquirer in the following
terms: “I, James Lilly, wish to inform the settlers of
my going into the bush through Henry Mead asserting
at the police station on the Canning, and brought
accusations against me for stealing his horse and calling
me a convict in the presence of the policeman’s
wife and family and several more besides in the district,
which I could not bear, and forced me to the bush and
to take up arms, and I do not intend doing any harm at
present, if His Excellency be pleased to allow me to go
to my friends in another colony, and what I have done
I will restore to everyone uninjured, and ? if not, would
sooner die than come in out of the bush, and do intend
making Mead and a few others remember me. I hope
His Excellency will take me into his clemency, which
will prevent me committing any more crime.” Shortly
afterwards he met Mr. S. S. Parker and jocularly asked
him to mention the meeting to the police. Parker did,
and Lilly was promptly captured. For this little
escapade Lilly received twelve months’ imprisonment
and 100 lashes.
The roll of crime was not, however, restricted to
the convicts. The first court martial held in the colony
sat in 1856 to consider the case of Captain Foss, who
was charged with embezzlement and with selling the same
property twice. In 1859 the surgeon of the Convict Estab-
lishment was arrested for insubordination and ordered
to England to await the decision of the Commander-in-
Chief. In the same year the Superintendent of Con-
victs was committed for fraudulent insolvency, though
never brought to trial. These were only the principal
cases. Many others against soldiers and minor prison
officials occurred, generally on the charge of stealing
from the Establishment.
Though the moral status of the community can
scarcely be said to have been raised by the introduction
of convicts there is little doubt that the colony as a whole
benefited, and that to a great extent, by their presence
Public works which had been anxiously desired ever
since the foundation of the colony were built, and
though the erection of bridges and the making of roads
did not proceed quite so expeditiously as the colonists
could have wished, considerable progress was made.
Many complaints of the want of permanent lines of com-
munication were voiced from time to time, but, as the
Governor somewhat sarcastically pointed out, it was no
light task to provide those means in a country number-
ing only 11,000 people, who were so scattered that it
required 11,000 miles of road to connect them. One cause
of the delay lay in the fact that many of the convicts
sent ont were entitled to tickets-of-leave immediately on
landing. The “Sea Park,” which landed 304 felons in
April, 1854, provided only one man for public works,
the remainder seeking outside employment under ticket-
of-leave. Though in a way it was fortunate that such
a good class of criminal was sent out, the colonists
scarcely looked at the matter in that light. To them
the convict system represented three things —the lavish
expenditure of British funds, cheap labour for their
public works, and a stream of free immigration paid
for by the Home authorities ; and to secure those they
were willing to take the risk of being saddled with an
incorrigible criminal population. Perceiving this the
Secretary of State from 1855 onward did not exercise
such great care in the selection, with the result that
criminals were transported who were a curse to human
society. They certainly were available for Government
works for a long period after arrival, but once they
were set free the colonists recognized that their services
had been dearly bought.
To give some idea of the extent of the work per-
formed by convicts during this period it may be
mentioned that buildings, bridges, and roads to the
value of over <£50,000 had been completed, or were in
course of construction, at the end of 1860. The prin-
cipal of these was the Convict Establishment itself,
erected at Fremantle, which now forms part of the
present Fremantle Gaol. Some hundreds of convicts
were engaged upon it, but, as might be expected, pro-
gress was slow, as the men had no fear of being dis-
missed on the ground of incompetence. The prison, with
the necessary officers’ quarters, pensioners’ barracks, and
other appurtenances, formed for many years the prin-
cipal work of the convicts, and the people of Fremantle
grew accustomed to the clank of the chain-gangs as
they passed to and fro. In fact, the unwonted activity
seems to have made them so proud of the town that in


1854 they seriously suggested (but without effect) to
Lord John Russell that the seat of government should
be removed from Perth to the port. Other works were
the construction of the present Government House,
estimated to cost £7,000, but which when completed in
1864 was found to have cost nearly £18,000; the erec-
tion of a new
gaol at Perth
on the site
now occupied
by the Pub-
lic Library,
Museum, and
Art Gallery;
the building
of country
depots or
branch con-
vict estab-
-1 i s hments
and invalid
depots; and
various police
stations,
courts, and
jetties. The
Perth - Fre-
mantle road
was also per-
manently laid
out, and a
large swampy
lake at the
back of the
capital, on
which the
Central Rail-
way Station
now stands,
was drained
into the river
at Cl aise-
brook. All
this activity
meant the ex-
penditure, as
has been
shown, of
large sums of
money, all of
which was provided by the British Government, and a
great part of which found its way into the pockets of the
colonists. A wave of prosperity passed over the colony,
and the settlers felt that their determination to receive
convicts had been amply justified, more particularly as a
large influx of free people had also resulted.
L
Two important matters concerning the administra-
tion of the system called for attention during these
years. It was the original intention of the British
Government that convicts when on ticket-of-leave should,
out of their earnings, refund £15 —the cost of passage
out —to the Imperial Treasury. This proved practically
u n w orkable,
its only effect
being to raise
the price of
labour. The
convict natu-
rally object-
ed to pay for
a voyage
which he did
not under-
take volun-
tarily, and
the employer
did not relish
having to
pay higher
wages in or-
der that his
employe
might reim-
burse the
British Trea
sury. Up to
the end of
1857 only
£4OO had
been paid
back out of
£7,000 then
due. When
giving evi-
dence on the
subject be-
fore t h e
House of
Lords Com-
mittee, Mr.
G. F. Moore
and others
advised that
th e regula-
tion be re-
considered, as
the expense entailed by it fell not upon the convict, but
upon the settler. The Committee in its report adopted the
advice. Captain Wray, who acted for some time as Comp-
troller-General, also advised that some alteration be made,
stating that the abolition of the regulation would “re-
move a widespread and very natural discontent among
VIEW OF SOUTH PERTH FROM KING’S PARK


the ticket-of-leave men and relieve the colonists from a
heavy tax by enabling them to reduce wages.” The Gov-
ernor supported this view, and it was approved by the
Secretary of State, who in order that there might not
be any dissatisfaction refunded the £4OO already paid.
It will be remembered that early in the fifties sug-
gestions having in view the introduction of female con-
victs had been made by the Home authorities, but had
been strongly opposed by the settlers. The revolting
condition of affairs in Tasmania consequent upon their
introduction to that colony was too well known, and
however anxious Western Australians might have been
to secure cheap labour they had a decided aversion to
that type of it. One of the reasons which impelled the
Duke of Newcastle to make the suggestion in 1853 was
the disparity between the sexes, there being nearly three
males to every female. Strangely enough, Mr. Clifton
favoured an experimental consignment, but public
opinion opposed it, and for a time the matter was
allowed to drop. It was renewed by the Secretary of
State in 1857, when the proportion of males to females
had risen to 100 : 11. A public meeting held at Fre-
mantle favoured the introduction of female criminals,
and in June of that year Mr. Clifton succeeded in pass-
ing a resolution in favour through the Legislative
Council; the Surveyor-General, the Colonial Treasurer,
and Messrs. Phillips and Hamersley voting against it.
The Governor was on the side of the majority. This
resolution led to public meetings, distinctly antagonistic
to the movement, being held at various centres, and so
strenuously was the idea opposed that in 1858 the
Imperial Government finally decided not to transport
females to Western Australia.
Ample evidence of the material advantages
derived from the convict establishment may be found
in the trade relations. The value of exports, which in
1850 stood at £22,134, had risen in 1860 to £89,246.
The principal articles exported were, of course, wool
and timber, followed by horses (for the Indian market)
and whale-oil. The imports had also increased con-
siderably and reached nearly £170,000 in 1860. This
does not, perhaps, indicate an altogether healthy state
of affairs, but apart from the fact that a portion of it
represented materials for public works and provisions
and clothing for the convicts it shows that the establish-
ment of the convict system had brought about the
introduction of a large amount of money, the benefits
from which were being felt by the community gener-
ally. The revenue and expenditure, too, had grown
equally with the trade. In 1850 the local receipts were
£11,722 and the disbursements (including that from
grants-in-aid) £16,656 ; in 1860 the figures were £43,399
and £61,744 respectively. The grants-in-aid from
Imperial funds, which during the first twenty-one years
of the colony’s existence amounted to £375,264, showed
a marked increase, reaching the enormous sum of
£906,000 during the decennial period 1851-60. When
we remember that of this amount £450,000 went in
pay and allowances and a further £250,000 in payment
for locally produced foodstuffs for the prisoners we
readily understand that at this stage, at any rate, the
colonists had no qualms of conscience over the intro-
duction of convicts.
In addition to trade expansion, to the erection of
public buildings, and the building of permanent roads
further evidence of the prosperity due to the altered
conditions was to be found in the acreage under crop,
24,705 (more than double the area in 1850), and the
number of head of stock, 302,000 (being an increase
during the ten years of over 100,000). Of the total
stock, sheep accounted for upwards of a quarter of a
million, showing that squatting had gained a firm hold
of Western Australia, as it had done of the eastern
colonies. In fact, the wool sent away from the colony
in 1860 —£49,000 —represented more than half the value
of all exports. Considerable success was also gained in
breeding horses, the proximity of India and the require-
ments of the Indian army particularly at this time
affording a ready market. Timber and whaling also
gave employment to numbers of people, and in every
centre of population there was evidence of activity and
progress. The stagnant settlement of 1850 had become
in ten years a hive of industry, a change which the
colonists believed to be wholly due to the introduction
of convicts. As Governor Fitzgerald put the matter
before the House of Lords Committee, the convicts had
saved the colony.
The gold discoveries of Victoria, combined with the
proved existence of lead and copper, served to keep
alive an interest in mining. That interest was stimu-
lated by Mr. R. Austin, one of the Government sur-
veyors, who as the outcome of a trip through the Mur-
chison district expressed the opinion that gold might
be found there. Fuel was added by the exhibition of
some specimens of gold said to have been found some-
where in the eastern districts. The locality of the find
could not, however, be fixed. As a result of these
leports prospecting was carried on with some degree of
assiduity, but without any discoveries being made. A
certain amount of activity was, however, being shown
in lead and copper mining. Lead of good quality was
secured from the Geraldine Mine, and other mines—
principally the Wanerenooka and the Wheel of Fortune
-were opened up and yielded copper of excellent
quality and in considerable quantity. These mines
would doubtless have had a prosperous career but for the
difficulties of transit to the seaboard at Geraldton. The
local Government was approached, without success, with
a request for a railway or tramway, and in 1859 the
Imperial authorities were asked to guarantee the cost


of construction. A refusal in this direction also, com-
bined with a serious fall in the price of copper which
occurred at the time, made profitable working almost
impossible, and in consequence the mines languished.
The search for mineral wealth and the opening
up of good pastoral country round Champion Bay led,
during these years, to a revival of exploratory work.
In 1854 x\ssistant Surveyor R. Austin was sent by
Governor Fitzgerald to examine the country to the
north and east of the settled districts with a view of
discovering minerals and of opening up further pas-
toral and agricultural land. This expedition, which left
Moumbakine, near Northam, in July, traversed and
examined a considerable tract of salt marsh country and
discovered several mountains and salt lakes. Further
progress was prevented owing to the death of his horses
through eating the poisonous box-plant, and Austin
was compelled to make for the coast. On his way a
halt was made at Mount Magnet and the district round
Mounts Magnet and Kenneth and Lake Austin
examined. This was afterwards described in his report
as probably “one of the finest goldfields in the world."
Austin finally arrived at the Geraldine Mine in Novem-
ber after suffering severely from want of water. Two
years later, in 1856, Mr. A. C. Gregory made his well-
known journey from the Northern Territory along Sturt
Creek to Lake Termination, in the north-east of Wes-
tern Australia, thence returning to his camp on the
Victoria River. To him is due the discovery of the
Denison Plains, to the south of the Kimberley goldfield.
The remaining explorations were conducted by Mr. F.
T. Gregory, who in 1857 returned to complete the sur-
vey of the unexamined portions of the Murchison River,
and in 1858 was sent out for the purpose of exploring
and reporting on the Shark Bay and Gascoyne River
districts. Leaving the Geraldine Mine in April Gregory
followed the Murchison River to the neighbourhood of
Mount Gould, proceeding thence to the head waters of
the Gascoyne. Tracing that river down to its mouth
he made his way back to Perth and reported that there
were several tracts of good, well-watered land in the
Gascoyne district admirably suited for pastoral purposes,
but suggested a further examination in the dry season
of the year.
No further explorations of this section of the
country were made in those years, but a good deal of
attention was bestowed upon the districts lying imme-
diately east of York and Northam. Various small ex-
peditions, urged by the desire to secure good land, went
out, and reported in fairly favourable terms upon land
that is now being tardily recognized as comprising some
of the best cereal-producing country in the State.
The material prosperity of the colony was in some
measure reflected in the progress made in religious and
educational affairs. The Church of England, which in
l 2
1850 had been made an archdeaconry under the con-
trol of the Bishop of Adelaide, was erected in 1856 into
a bishopric, and Perth by letters patent was constituted
a cathedral town, “thereafter to be called the City of
Perth." The first Bishop, nominated by Bishop Short,
of Adelaide, was the Right Rev. Matthew Hale, who
had been Archdeacon of Adelaide since the foundation
of the bishopric in South Australia. Bishop Hale, who
was not unacquainted with the colony, arrived in 1856,
but left for England toward the end of the year and
was consecrated there in March, 1857. He returned,
accompanied by several clergymen, in 1858 and imme-
diately set about the organization of his diocese. The
Rev. George Pownall was appointed Dean of Perth
and the Rev. James Brown, one of the official chaplains,
Archdeacon. In the same year the Bishop's School, the
progenitor of the present Perth High School, was opened
with twenty-three scholars, many of whom have since
won distinction in their native land.
Other denominations were also extending their
spheres of action. The Roman Catholic Church sur-
mounted its early troubles and entered upon progressive
work, its first district outside Perth being that of York.
The Congregational Church entered upon its work in
the colony in 1859, and the Wesleyans were rapidly
launching out in the manner so characteristic of that
sect. Educational interests were fostered both by the
Government and the various Churches, and while little
in the way of secondary education existed at that time
the bulk of the children were given an opportunity of
acquiring a knowledge of the primary subjects of in-
struction.
The native troubles which had formed so prominent
a feature in the early history of the Swan River settle-
ment had practically come to an end, except in the
newly established district of Champion Bay. Here the
thefts and other acts of vandalism were repeated, though
on a smaller scale, and called for the intervention of
both the settlers and the police. Rottnest Island was
again opened as a penal establishment and some thirty
or forty native prisoners confined there.
In one respect the colony suffered severely during
the period 1854-60. Many of the early pioneers, having
reached the allotted span of life or being worn out by
the hardships of the early years, rested from their
labours. Prominent among these were the Colonial
Chaplain, the Rev. J. B. Wittenoom, who died in 1855 ;
Mr. H. C. Sutherland, the Colonial Treasurer (1856) ;
Mr. R. Mcßryde Brown in the same year; and Judge
Mackie in 1860. These were all of the “first fleet,”
having arrived by the “Parmelia" in 1829. Judge
Mackie had retired in 1857 after twenty-eight years’
continuous occupancy of the judicial bench of the colony
and many years' membership of the Legislative Council.
He was, perhaps, the only one of all the first list of


officials who retained the unbounded confidence of the
settlers generally.
These deaths and some resignations brought about
various changes in the official life of the community.
Judge McFarland succeeded to the office, but not to the
popularity, of Mr. Mackie; Mr. Brown, and after his
death Mr. A. O'Grady Lefroy, became Colonial Trea-
surer; Mr. F. P. Barlee was appointed Colonial Secre-
tary in succession to Major Sanford in 1855 ; and toward
the end of the same year Lieutenant - Colonel Bruce
became Military Commandant. Mr. G. F. Stone
resigned the position of Registrar-General in 1854 to
become Advocate-General, and the former office fell first
to Mr. C. Sholl and afterwards to Mr. A. Durlacher.
The Legislative Council in 1860 consisted of the Governor
(Captain Kennedy), the Commandant (Lieutenant-
Colonel Bruce), the Colonial Secretary (Mr. F. P.
Barlee), the Comptroller-General (Captain Henderson),
the Advocate-General (Mr. G. F. Stone), the Colonial
Treasurer (Mr. A. O'G. Lefroy), and Mr. A. Hillman
(Acting Surveyor-General during the absence on leave of
Captain J. S. Roe), as well as of Messrs. J. W. Hardey,
S. P. Phillips, E. Hamersley, and L. Samson, who
formed the unofficial section of that body.
CHAPTER XI.
1861—1868.
RESIGNATION OF GOVERNOR KENNEDY AND ARRIVAL OF DR. J. S. HAMPTON
CONVICT ADMINISTRATION—INCIDENTS OF THE SYSTEM—PROGRESSIVE
PUBLIC WORKS POLICY CESSATION OF TRANSPORTATION
EFFECTS ON THE SYSTEM REVIEWED.
The changes in the personnel of the Government
during the period ending with 1868 were few. The
principal was the retirement of Governor Kennedy in
1862 through effluxion of time. Kennedy can scarcely
be said to have been a popular officer. A man of strong
opinions and determined will, once he had marked out
a line of action he pursued his course without any
regard to public favour. In this respect he was not
unlike Governor Hutt, but it must be admitted that he
had not always the same difficulties to contend with as
that gentleman. The Press, which presumably reflected
the general public opinion of the day, considered him
entitled to “every credit for great ability, and for great
unscrupulousness in carrying out his plans regardless of
public opinion however expressed.” And yet to
Governor Kennedy's careful guidance the settlers owed
the only system of land regulations that had up to
that time given anything like general satisfaction. His
unpopularity seems to have been caused by an obnoxious
Customs ordinance passed in 1860, an accusation of
interference with the magistracy, a refusal to spend
public money on roads to the Champion Bay Mines, and
a generally restricted policy of public works. The
opposition to the Customs Act certainly had some
justification, more particularly as regards those clauses
requiring the lightermen to enter into heavy bonds
before being allowed to discharge cargo. How ill-
advised was the attempt to press a highly technical Cus-
toms Act upon a still but half-organized community was
shown on the arrival of the first boat after the ordinance
was passed. No one could be found to enter into bonds,
and consequently the unloading of the ship had to be
carried out by the Government itself. The inconvenience
of such a proceeding was manifest even to the Governor,
who when the Bill was under consideration had stead-
fastly refused to admit the possibility of such an occur-
rence, and as a result the obnoxious clauses were
suspended and afterwards repealed. Captain Kennedy
incurred further displeasure in January, 1861, by the
removal of the names of Messrs. Drummond and Lukin
from the Commission of the Peace. It was generally
believed that the action was due to the objection these
justices had against being regarded as mere creatures
of the Executive, an opinion which was strengthened by
the removal shortly afterwards of Mr. Wallace Bickley’s
name from the Commission. Though there is not suffi-
cient evidence to prove the truth of the contention,
there are many indications that Governor Kennedy did
not view independence on the part of the magistrates
with anything like favour. That may have been owing
to the difficulty of handling a convict population, and
the fear that leniency or sympathy might bring about
an increase of crime, but it was certainly unwise for the
representative of the Sovereign to interfere in the
administration of justice. In refusing to spend public
money in order to increase the profits of a private
mining company by providing facilities for transport
which the company should itself have provided, the


Governor ought to have had the support and not the
opposition of the colonists, particularly as there were
many necessary public works in the centres of population
which could not be carried out through lack of funds.
Unfortunately there existed in the public mind an im-
pression that the Government was not hampered by any
lack of funds, but that the Governor was pursuing a
policy of parsimony in order to leave a surplus at the
end of his term and so secure the credit of being a
successful administrator. There certainly was a sum of
about £22,000 lying in the colonial chest in March,
in the fact that lie was not one of themselves. Courteous
in all his actions and punctilious to a degree, he never
forgot, nor did he allow anyone else to forget, that he
was Governor. Complaints against his administration
of the convict system were to some extent justified. It
lacked efficiency and was not usually in the interests of
the colony. In fact, all through his term Captain
Kennedy was an Imperial officer, bent on conserving
Imperial interests, and where these clashed with the
requirements of Western Australia he leaned in every
case toward the Motherland. In this respect he dif-
GOVERNMENT HOUSE, PERTH.
-1861, notwithstanding pressing demands for roads,
bridges, and buildings, but instead of that being due
to economy it was brought about by the fact that so few
convicts were arriving that there was not sufficient
labour to absorb it. Just prior to leaving the colony
Captain Kennedy authorized a scheme of public works
which far exceeded the money in hand. For this he
was accused of unwarranted extravagance, and of
seriously hampering the operations of his successor. The
colonists had apparently determined to show disapproval
of everything he did, and perhaps the real reason lay
fered from his successor, Dr. John Stephen Hampton,
who arrived in the colony in February, 1862. Dr.
Hampton had for a time been Comptroller-General of
Convicts in Tasmania, where he had achieved consider-
able unpopularity through being a strict disciplinarian.
He had a wide experience of convict life, and there is
no doubt that as regards the convict system his adminis-
tration of the government of Western Australia was
more successful than that of his predecessors.
The only other important official change during this
period (if we except the resignation of Captain Render


Ship.
Convicts.
Year.
“ Palmerston ”
296
1861
“ Lincelles ”
306
1862
“Norwood”
290
“York”
300
1863
“Merchantman*’...
192
“Clyde”
320
“ Dalhousie ”
270
“Clara”
301
1864
“Merchantman”...
260
“Racehorse”
280
1865
“ Vimeira ”
280
“Belgravia”
277
1866
“Corona”
306
“Norwood”
254
1867
“ Hongoumont ” ...
280
1868
Total
4,212
son, which will be dealt with later) was in the judicial
office. On the resignation of Judge Mackie in 1857
Judge McFarland had been appointed Commissioner,
and arrived early in 1858. His term of office was short
and not altogether acceptable. In 1861 he resigned and
was succeeded by Mr. (afterwards Sir) Archibald Pauli
Burt as Commissioner of the Civil Court and Court of
Quarter Sessions. Shortly after his appointment Mr.
Burt decided that under the constitution he had no
power to issue writs of habeas corpus or certiorari . To
meet this difficulty an ordinance was passed in June,
1861, creating a Supreme Court for the colony and
appointing Mr. Burt the first Chief Justice, with Mr.
G. F. Stone as Attorney-General and Mr. A. FI. Stone
as Master of the Court.
The convict system still continued to be one of
the most important features in the history of the colony.
In March, 1861, the Secretary of State replied to the
complaint of the Legislative Council concerning the
failure to keep up the supply of convicts. He explained
that while the Imperial Government recognized the
importance to the colony of an adequate supply of forced
labour, a difficulty was created by the limited number
of men who were being sentenced to periods of imprison-
ment sufficiently lengthy to admit of transportation.
The protest, however, appears to have had some effect,
as from 1861 till the cessation of the whole system in
1868 a reasonable supply was maintained. No doubt
the fact that Western Australia was the only place left
to which convicts could be transported had also some
effect in bringing about the increased supply. Up to
the end of 1860 the number of convicts transported to
the colony was 5,509; from 1861 to 1868 a further 4,212
were sent, making the total convict population 9,721.
The following list gives the names of ships, number of
prisoners, and year of arrival during the period under
review :
The Duke of Newcastle’s despatch was reassuring to
the settlers, as, while it did not give any guarantee to
send out yearly the thousand convicts which the Legisla-
tive Council considered the colony could absorb, it
showed that, for the time at any rate, there was no inten-
tion to abandon the system of transportation. There
certainly had existed, locally, a fear that transportation
might be abandoned, more especially as the inhabitants
of the other Australian colonies had expressed a desire
that it should cease over the whole continent, and some
of the Legislatures had even passed laws to prevent per-
sons who had been convicts in Western Australia from
corning within their limits. The question was referred
to by the Comptroller-General in his report for 1861, the
concluding paragraph of which states: -
‘‘Some doubt seems still to hang over the question
of the continuance of transportation to this colony, and
it may not be irrelevant to record once more that there
exist here facilities, and an almost certainty of success
of such a system as that now in force, which in all
human probability will never recur. An extensive
territory with innumerable resources slowly but surely
developing themselves, a large leaven of free settlers
anxious and willing to co-operate with the Government
in the progress of transportation as here established,
necessaries of life at a reasonable price, an excellent
climate, and a well-organized convict department with
all the means and appliances necessary for the full and
efficient performance of its duties in working a system
hitherto successful, form a combination of facts which
may hereafter be sought in vain.”
A further despatch from the Secretary of State,
dated March 18, 1861, informed the Governor that a
Committee of the House of Commons had been
appointed to inquire into transporcation generally, and
that the view taken by the. Council in Western Australia
would doubtless be considered. This Committee reported
in the following May that “while the Committee have
not thought it their duty to take evidence as to any
possible changes for the purpose of increasing the supply
of convict labour to Western Australia, they do not
think it advisable to interfere with the present arrange-
ments for transportation to that colony . . . when
Western Australia is anxious to receive such number of
convicts as this country may from time to time be able
to send there.”
Further reference was made to the subject in the
report of a Commission, under the chairmanship of Earl
Grey, appointed under the Sign Manual in December,
1862, to take into consideration the whole question of
transportation and penal servitude. Voluminous
evidence was taken by this Commission, and a vast
amount of information regarding the merits of the
system as carried out in Western Australia was given
by Captain Kennedy, Colonel E. Y. W. Henderson,
Dean Pownall, Major Sanford, and Captain Du Cane.
In its report, dated June 20, 1863, this Commission re-


commended that with the exception of those who were
physically or otherwise unfit, all convicts sentenced to
penal servitude for any term of years should be
ultimately sent to Western Australia. The “physically
or otherwise unfit” were defined as those not fit for
manual labour or those who had been convicted of
unnatural crimes. This restriction upon the class of men
sent out was of practical value to the colony in
bringing about an improvement in the morals of those
transported. That a very dangerous element had pre-
viously been sent out was apparent from the evidence
inven before the Commission. One witness stated that
o
in addition to men convicted of unnatural offences, con-
cerning whose sanity there might be doubts, twenty-
eight lunatics had been introduced, while at one time
in 1861 there were more than that number of murderers
in Fremantle Prison.
The Commission also recommended that the system
of granting conditional pardons which had obtained in
the colony up to that time should be abolished. Strong
objection to the system was taken by witnesses from the
eastern colonies of Australia, who pointed out the
dangers that might arise from an exodus of these men
to the other more prosperous colonies. This objection
was largely sentimental, as there was little or no evidence
that conditional pardon men who had proceeded to Vic-
toria or South Australia had ever been reconvicted.
The recommendation was no doubt chiefly due to the
strong opinion expressed by Captain Kennedy that the
practice of granting these pardons should be discon-
tinued, as the men were subject to no special control,
and it often happened that an industrious and well-
behaved holder of a ticket-of-leave became a confirmed
loafer and parasite on obtaining his conditional pardon.
The question of the wisdom of granting these par-
dons had already engaged the attention of the Secretary
of State, who in a despatch of April, 1863, ordered the
suspension of the privilege in the case of convicts under
sentence of twenty years or upwards. Later in the year
it was decided to abolish the system altogether as far
as it concerned convicts sent out after September 26,
1863, and to require that every convict should remain
in Western Australia under surveillance until the com-
pletion of his sentence. That the new system did not
meet with the approval of the convicts is evident from
the more frequent and desperate attempts at escape
which took place after the end of 1863.
The principal recommendation of the Commission—
the adoption of extended measures of transportation to
Western Australia as a permanent policy—was, how-
ever, set aside at the earnest solicitation of the eastern
colonies. Though somewhat disheartened by the tem-
porary rebuff which the report of the Commission gave,
the Legislatures and people of those places continued to
urge upon the Home authorities the injustice accruing
to the eastern part of the continent through the presence
of a penal settlement in the West. New South Wales
and Tasmania had cast off the convict yoke; Victoria
and South Australia had never come under its baleful
influence; and all joined in energetic protest against its
continuance in any part of Australia, even though the
local authorities in that part desired it. The arguments
used in the east were not always quite fair to Western
Australia —it is, for example, very doubtful whether the
eastern colonies in any way suffered through the pre-
sence of conditional pardon men from the West —but
the overwhelming moral force exhibited in the desire
to make Australia a free, law-abiding, clean land could
nob fail, sooner or later, to bring about the object
aimed at.
No doubt the Imperial authorities were helped to a
decision on this momentous subject by the discovery of
further rich pastoral land in the north, around Nickol
Bay. The local authorities sought consent to send
batches of convicts to this district. People in the
eastern colonies were also desirous of securing land
there, but objected to do so so long as the chance re-
mained of convicts being drafted to it. The local
application to send convicts came before the Secretary
of State at a time when various schemes for a general
reorganization of the convict system were being put for-
ward, and the Minister not only refused to assent but
informed the colonial authorities that at the end
of three years the whole system of transportation would
cease. In a despatch dated November 26, 1864 ? Mr.
Cardwell states:
I need not remind you of that with which you are
so familiar —the past history of this most embarrassing
question. You are well aware that the report of a Com-
mission of the highest eminence, which recommended the
adoption of extended measures of transportation to Western
Australia as a permanent policy, was set side in deference
to the earnest remonstrances of the eastern colonies, and
that all the evils which that Commission attributed to
uncertainty and to the limited number of the convicts sent
still continued. It was not possible to increase the number
of convicts, and so long as the system continued at all its
probable duration could not but be most uncertain. Taking,
therefore, into view the interests of Western Australia, as
well as the interests, the feelings, and the deep convictions
of the eastern colonies, Her Majesty’s Government have
arrived at the conclusion that the introduction of convict
labour into the new districts should be prohibited by the
regulations, and that this opportunity should be taken for
fixing a definite time beyond which transportation to any
portion of the colony should not be continued. This
definite period they propose should not exceed three years.
This decision, so far as it related to the introduction
of convict labour or of persons under a penal sentence
into the newly-discovered country, met with approval
both in England and Australia, and there is no doubt
that it saved Governor Hampton, who was favourable
to convict labour, from committing a grave error of
judgment. Having come to that decision the Home


authorities were practically compelled to face the whole
question of the continuance of transportation, for
reasons admirably set forth in an article in The Times
commenting upon the despatch:
“While the expediency of gradually abolishing trans-
portation to Australia was under anxious discussion in the
Colonial and Home Departments a most interesting event
was reported to the Secretary for the Colonies by the
Government of Western Australia. It was no less than
the discovery of a fertile tract, containing between five
and six millions of acres in the north-western part of that
colony. Mr. Banter, the leader of the exploring expedition
which opened out these new plains called the ‘District of
the Glenelg/ describes them as clothed with the finest
pasturage, capable of carrying upwards of 3,000,000 sheep,
besides forests of timber trees and land available for agri-
cultural purposes. This discovery could not fail to mark
an epoch in the history of Western Australia. When a
new country is thrown open for settlement in Australia the
admission or non-admission of convict labour becomes a
matter of the first moment. It is analogous to the alter-
native between free and slave labour in the American ter-
ritories. if the latter be tolerated the former will be
repelled. It would have been possible no doubt to place
the new settlement under different regulations from the
old, but had this arrangement been made the feud now
existing between Western Australia and the Eastern
Colonies must have arisen in an aggravated form between
the North and South of Western Australia itself. There
was a judicious way, and one only, of meeting the diffi-
culty, and that was to cut the knot of it and solve the
convict question by the same stroke.”
Possibly owing to the omission to state a definite
date upon which transportation would cease the decision
was not at first taken very seriously in the colony, but
the Inrperial Government wasted no time in showing
their earnestness in the matter. Early in 1865 the
House of Commons was informed that the system would
come to an end in three years’ time, and on May 12 the
Secretary of State forwarded a despatch to the Governor
stating: "The present intention of the Government is
to send out two ships containing from 270 to 280 con-
victs, in each of the years 1865, 1866, and 1867, at the
end of which transportation will cease.” A reference
to the list of ships given on a preceding page shows that
that intention was carried out, the last convict vessel to
arrive being the Miougoumont,” which reached
Fremantle on January 10, 1868.
When the intention to put a stoj3 to transportation
became known locally, the cry for compensation—so
usual when a concession is withdrawn —was immediately
raised. The Perth Chamber of Commerce, with a self-
confidence befitting the tailors of Tooley Street, resolved
that “no time should be lost in asserting the claim of
the colony to compensation; that free emigration at the
expense of the Imperial Government should be continued
for ten years; that the Home Government should
furnish a steamer for coast communication; that, as the
convicts have been employed in the erection of buildings
for their own occupation, and that now when those
buildings are completed we are to be deprived of that
labour which should be available for roads, a grant of
£250,000, paid annually in sums of <£25,000, from the
Imperial funds, be asked for.” Outside the Chamber
these requests were treated with ridicule, but at the
same time serious attempts were made by colonists and
others interested to secure some compensation to Wes-
tern Australia for the withdrawal of the convicts.
Major Sanford and Mr. Mangles interviewed the
Secretary of State upon the subject, but received no
satisfaction beyond the assurance that some allowance,
though not in money, would be made.
Ajoart from this the cessation of transportation
appears to have come about without any great demon-
stration on the part of the colonists. As in the begin-
ning opinions had been fairly evenly divided in the
matter of inaugurating the system, there seemed at its
close to be much the same evenness of opinion as to the
wisdom of abandoning it. On the whole, perhaps, the
balance was in favour of the Imperial Government’s
action, as many of the colonists felt that they could not
derive further benefit from the convicts, while the pre-
sence of them debarred the colony from a fuller voice
in the management of its own affairs. From the stand-
point of the good achieved both to and by the convict,
The Inquirer gave a very fair summary of the results :
We have made roads and bridges and constructed many
public works which without the aid of the convict system
we could not have performed. A large Imjrerial ex-
penditure in the colony has maintained a trade and
strengthened the hands of the settlers. It has supplied
the country with cheap labour —not the most suitable
kind, certainly, yet not the least desirable. And, while
it has thus helped us forward, it has brought us but
little to detract from the good. Black has not shown
itself to be very black after all. We have learned that
the criminal is not all evil, that the angel within is not
forever expelled by the verdict of a jury, that it may and
does survive many deviations from the path of rectitude,
and leaves us at times to marvel at the good that lingers
around the hearts of even the hardest offenders needimr
o
but little kindness from one to another to bring it out.”
That there was a good deal of truth in the statement is
apparent from two facts—the very great progress made
by the colony under the convict system, and the almost
complete absence of after ill-effects of a moral character.
But that it was time for the system to come to an end
there is not the slightest doubt. Public opinion on the
subject of the treatment of criminals was undergoing a
drastic change, and the report of the Convict Superin-
tendent in 1865 shows that convict officials realized it.
Soonei oi later, he says, 'the industrial employment
of prisoners will be abandoned in all civilized countries,
and for it will be substituted a system of comparatively


short sentences to be passed in the strictest solitary con-
finement, on a reduced diet, without books other than
the Bible and a few of the best religious works, without
the possibility of communication with fellow-prisoners
or friends, without any of those reliefs and consolations,
whether physical, moral, or mental, which constitute
the external mechanism of enjoyment, cheerfulness, and
happiness to mortal man."
Though the actual transportation of convicts ceased
at the beginning of
1868 years passed
before the final ad-
justment of affairs
was made between
the Imperial and
local authorities.
One contentious
matter was that of
the number of free
immigrants intro-
duced at the ex-
pense of the Home
G overnment. Ac-
cording to the
arrange men ts mad e
in 1850 the English
authorities, in con-
sideration of the
colony receiving
convicts, agreed to
despatch an equal
number of free
immigrants. For a
few years preceding
1868 this supply
had not been kept
up, and in July of
that year the Legis-
lative Council ap-
pointed a Commit-
tee to consider the
question. By count-
ing two children
as one adult this
Committee came to
the conclusion that
only 6,122 immigrants had been introduced as
against 9,680 convicts, leaving the Imperial Gov-
ernment still liable for a- further 3,558 free per-
sons. The report also claimed that the dearth of
farm labourers, shepherds, and domestics showed an
urgent need for an immediate supply, and asked that
two emigrant ships be equipped at once by the Imperial
Government. The Governor forwarded the report to the
Secretary of State with a recommendation, but the only
reply was one practically refusing the request. In a
despatch, dated July 26, 1869, the Secretary of State
wrote: ‘The claim put forth on the part of the colony
exceeds in amount what Her Majesty’s Government
could in any case recognize, partly because certain
immigrants who ought to be included in the calculation
of immigrants are omitted, and partly because the com-
putation is not, as it ought to be, of the number of per-
sons sent out, but of the number of statute adults . But
apart from consid-
erations of detail
Her Majesty's Gov-
ernment feel serious
doubt as to the
obligation of this
country to continue
the emigration now
in question. It has
already been laid
down as a condi-
tion of that con
tinuance that the
immigration should
be wanted and such
as the colony can
provide for, but it
is clear from the
census returns that
the large majority
of those persons who
reach Western Aus-
tralia do not re-
main in it. There
is, therefore, the
strongest prinia
facie evidence that
the immigration is
not wanted." This
answer, it need not
be said, did not
give satisfaction in
the colony. The
Secretary’s ignor-
ance was deplored,
his good faith im-
pugned, and his
value to his country gravely doubted. The matter,
however, rested there.
The number of men actually under control at the
end of 1868 was 3,158, the difference between that and
the total number sent out (9,721) being made up of
those who had served their sentences, were out on con-
ditional pardon, or had died. Unfortunately the
sources of information are not too complete. Two fires
amongst the records during the early sixties, and the
TOWN HALL, PERTH, 1870.


official destruction of many papers and documents on the
withdrawal of the convict establishment have consider-
ably restricted the opportunities for securing infor-
mation.
The most important event in the local administra-
tion of the system was the resignation early in 1863 of
Comptroller-General E. Y. W. Henderson, who left the
colony in the ship “York" on January 31, having reached
the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel. He had, with one
short absence on leave, controlled the system from the
date of its inauguration, and its success was no doubt
largely due to his wisdom and tact. A strict discip-
linarian, he was always just, and impressed upon all
who had charge of convicts that they must regard them
as men who though they had transgressed man’s laws
must not be regarded as necessarily for ever without the
pale. To Colonel Henderson more than to anyone else
is due the fact that convictism has left no degrading
mark on Western Australia, and never gave rise to
those horrors, so frequent and appalling, that occurred
in New South Wales and Tasmania. Recalled to active
military command, Colonel Henderson subsequently
became Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police of
London, a position which he held until his death in
1896. Captain Newland, his successor, arrived in the
colony on January 14, 1863. With the system so well
organized his task was not a hard one, but unfortunately
continual diagreements with Governor Hampton made
the position untenable and he resigned early in 1866.
Pending the arrival of a successor, the Governor bestowed
the acting appointment upon his son, Mr. G. E.
Hampton. This gave rise to bitter controversy and
opposition. Mr. Hampton had no particular qualifica-
tions for the post; he already held more than one
lucrative office; he was personally unpopular; the
general opinion was that the position should go to Mr.
A. O’Grady Lefroy; and, above all, there was the
charge of nepotism on the part of the Governor involved.
When to those reasons is added the fact that high-
handed proceedings generally on the part of the Gover-
nor had caused his early popularity to wane, the strong
disapprobation of public, Press, and convicts may be
readily understood. This was accentuated in May by
the decision of the Governor to grant his son the lodging
allowance of £IOO per annum to which the Comptroller-
General was entitled. As Mr. Hampton resided at
Government House it was not considered likely that he
would apply the money to the purpose for which it was
granted, “unless," wrote The Rerih Gazette , “His Excel-
lency intends to charge him rent for the rooms he occu-
pies in his residence, in which case, of course, the
amount will be jffaced to the credit of the colonial
revenue under the head of ‘Miscellaneous Receipts.’ "
That as a result of the feeling displayed charges of
inefficiency should be continually urged aganist Mr.
Hampton was only to bo expected. Probably many of
them were the result of this, and had no basis of justifi-
cation, but there is no doubt that the efficiency of the
system suffered under his control and the convicts
chafed more under restraint. Attempted escapes became
more numerous, due partly to sending out on road-
parti.es men who ought to have been kept in durance at
Fremantle, and partly to the fact that well-behaved
convicts were for trivial offences consigned to the chain-
gangs. During the eight months ending March, 1867,
over ninety attempts at escape were recorded —more
than three times the number of any previous period of
the same length.
Evidence of the want of wisdom in the appoint-
ment and of inefficiency on the part of Mr. Hampton
was not wanting. Accusations of tyranny and oppres-
sion were made, and some colour was given to them
by the abolition in March, 1867, of the Board of Visit-
ing Magistrates, the only protection against officialism
winch the prisoners possessed. A convict charged with
attempting to murder a warder in the prison said that
harsh treatment had made him callous and regardless
of life. He stated that he was placed in solitary con-
finement in a cell with a concrete floor; that one night
Mr. Hampton entered the cell, ordered the bedding and
bed and his clothing to be taken away, and left him
to pass the night on the bare floor without covering;
that his clothes were returned the following day but
the irons on him were doubled in weight. Four days
later Mr. Hampton again paid him a visit at night,
and then, says the report of the evidence, “for twenty-
two days the man remained under the same treatment
in the cold, damp cell, lying like a brute curled uj3 on
the stone floor. The impression this statement made
on the jury before whom the case was tried was evi-
dently a conviction that the man was right in attributing
to it a tendency, as he said, to make him desperate,
and a favourable verdict was given." A further case
happened where a convict who had barricaded himself
in his cell was left in darkness without food or water
for seventy-two hours. The London Review , commenting
upon Mr. Hampton's administration, gives another case.
“Eight men having been charged with running away
from the Fremantle Bridge, the magistrate before
whom they were brought said he was directed by the
Governor to sentence them to two years’ hard labour in
irons, and this remarkable judgment having been
delivered, the Acting Comptroller-General stood up and
read the following additional sentence from the Gover-
nor for the same offence: ‘These men are to be kept in
dark cells on bread and water until the surgeon reports
they can no longer stand it without danger to their lives.’
We have no desire to shield the Australian convicts
from the just punishment which their offences deserve,


but they should not be deprived of that protection
which the law allows them.”
Fortunately this condition of affairs, of which other
instances could be quoted, and which smacks of the
treatment meted out in Tasmania, did not long con-
tinue. The Imperial Government reproved the
Governor for making the appointment, and appointed
Mr. Wakeford to the position. This officer arrived in
May, 1867, and assumed duty at once, making imme-
diate inquiries into the circumstances under which
special punishments had been given, and remitting
many of them, at the same time greatly reducing the
chain gang. The system so carefully built up by Colonel
Henderson, and which had proved so successful, was, in
fact, quickly reverted to, and the causes of dissatisfac-
tion removed.
The criminal statistics show that there was an
appreciable increase in crime during the years 1861-68.
This, of course, was due to the larger number
of convicts in the colony, the distribution of whom
tended to become a means of contamination. And yet
most of the cases were for drunkenness, common assault,
and breaches of the regulations. Serious offences con-
tinued to be few in number; out of 3,644 convictions in
1867 only thirty-six were at the hands of the Supreme
Court. This state of things may have been due to the
strict supervision of the police, or to the success of the
regenerative methods adopted by the convict adminis-
tration. In either case it goes to show that the presence
of a large convict population is not necessarily a source
of danger to a community. Mention may here be made
of some of the more serious offences and of the
characters concerned in them, particularly as some of
the compulsory sojourners in Western Australia pos-
sessed more than local notoriety. For the descriptions
of these we are in great measure indebted to Kimberley’s
History of Western Australia.
The ship “Edwin Fox,” which arrived in November,
1858, brought amongst others three men, who from their
undoubted gifts might easily have made their marks in
more respectable walks of life —Rev. William Beresford,
Leopold Redpath, and William Robson. Beresford, a
clergyman of the Church of England and nephew of
Lord Decies, was convicted of forging the endorsement
to a bill of exchange and sentenced to transportation for
life. A man of distinct ability and of good address he
became, after securing his conditional pardon, a
journalist and tutor, and for some years conducted with
some success The Herald newspaper, but ultimately died
in an invalid depot in 1881. Beresford may have been
the victim of circumstances or too weak to stand against
temptation, but Redpath was the type of man who can
only be described as a skilful and determined criminal.
His career might almost be looked upon as romantic,
and is so celebrated in the annals of crime that it may
be excusable to refer to it shortly. Beginning life as a
lawyer’s clerk, he afterwards joined the staff of the P.
and O. Company, leaving that office to enter upon busi-
ness as a broker. Of a charitable nature, more especially
where other people’s money was concerned, the distribu-
tion of his client’s funds soon ended his career in that
direction. We next find him as a clerk in the Great
Northern Railway Company, rising by diligence to the
position of registrar, in which capacity he controlled the
share register. This he did to such advantage that for
ten years he reigned as a social magnate, patron of art,
and lavish dispenser of charity, giving the impression
that his wealth was due to successful speculation. A
trifling incident brought about an examination of his
books, when it was found that the share registers had
been manipulated and false stock to the value of
£220,000 issued. Redpath fled to Paris, then doubled
back to London, where he was arrested, and after trial
sentenced to transportation for life. He is considered
to have lived at the rate of £20,000 a year during the
period of his magnificence, and possessed on his convic-
tion property to the value of over £50,000. In prison
Redpath, according to the Newgate chronicles, “behaved
so as to justify a belief that he had been a gaol-bird all
his life.” Soon after he arrived in Western Australia
he received his ticket-of-leave and later his conditional
pardon. Mr. Howard Willoughby, who visited Western
Australia in the interests of The Argus in 1864,
described Redpath as “a tall man, of good address,” who
always maintained a position above the ordinary class
of ticketers. Even in prison he never made his own
bed nor cleaned out his cell; obsequious convicts, anxious
for the reward of his smile, being always ready to per-
form those offices for him. His brother ticketers
touched their hats to him in token of their respect; he
wrote clever letters to the Press under a nom de guerre ,
and was the founder and honorary secretary of the
Working Men’s Association. During his term in prison
he was employed as clerk in the Commissariat Stores,
and by his industry and ability effected considerable
saving therein. By the free classes of course he was
specially shunned as a dangerous man and social
agitator. Greatly desiring to get to Melbourne he
applied during the early sixties to be transferred to
Victoria, but without success. In 1871, however, he left
Fremantle for Adelaide, and was afterwards understood
to be earning a comfortable livelihood in Melbourne.
Another criminal of much the same type of character,
but lacking the personal charm and attractiveness, was
William Robson. Starting life also as a lawyer’s clerk
he ultimately became manager of the share transfer de-
partment of the Crystal Palace Company, and in that
capacity defrauded the company of about £27,000.
Having fled from arrest he was captured in Sweden, and
subsequently sentenced to two terms of transportation


of fourteen and twenty years respectively. In Western
Australia lie was employed with Redpath in the Com-
missariat Department, and secured his ticket-of-leave
as quickly as good conduct would allow. Apparently he
left his good conduct behind when he was released from
the prison, as in June, 1860, he was found guilty of
embezzlement. His general character was not good.
Dissipation formed his chief employment, interspersed
with effusions of poetic fervour mostly after the style of
Byron and Gray, and some of them the actual work of
those authors. In 1861 he established and edited The
II extern Australian Literary Magazine , which, how-
ever, was short lived, only four numbers appearing.
Ollier historic convicts were Moondyne Joe and
John Boyle O'Reilly. Moondyne was a very ordinary
criminal, successful only in prison-breaking, and his
fame lies chiefly in the novel ’founded on fact” record-
ing his history and written by O’Reilly. O’Reilly was
one of the band of Fenians who arrived by the
“Hougournont” in 1868; he afterwards succeeded
in escaping by swimming off to an American whaler in
the neighbourhood of Bunbury. tie reached the United
States safely, and for many years was engaged in
journalistic work, earning the respect of his fellow men.
He died in America a few years ago.
Serious offences, though never very numerous, con-
sidering the class of population in the colony, were
more prevalent during this than any other period
during which the system was in operation. Murders,
burglaries, and bushranging seem to have been the
prevalent crimes; in fact, bushranging seems to have
been the usual occupation of many of the escaped con-
victs. Escapes, too, grew more frequent and attempts
more desperate. The cause of these was undoubtedly
the abolition of conditional pardons, and the regulation
that every convict must remain in the colony until the
expiry of the full term for which he was sentenced.
Some excitement was caused by the fact that the
‘ Hougoumont,” which was the last convict vessel to
arrive, brought amongst ethers thirty-eight Fenians.
Fearing that attempts might be made to rescue them the
vessel wavs escorted for some distance from England by a
man-of-war. Fenian cruisers were said to be on the watch
to effect a rescue. The knowledge that these people were
coming to Western Australia caused some consternation,
not only in the colony but in Victoria and South Aus-
tralia as well. The Governor promised to send to
Sydney for a warship, and did so almost immediately
after the ‘TTougoumont” arrived, with the result that
H.M.S. "Brisk” was sent over early in February and re-
mained at Fremantle for several months. The Fenians,
however, were model prisoners—until the time was ripe,
when they effected their escape in quite a dramatic
manner.
The period 1861-68 was one of distinct progress as
regards public works. Operations in this direction had
somewhat languished during the previous couple of
years, mainly on account of the fact that convicts in
sufficient numbers to keep works going had not been
forthcoming. It was also said by the colonists, though
without reason, that Governor Kennedy was delaying
the construction of necessary buildings in order to leave
behind him a satisfactory credit balance. it will be
remembered that as an answer to that accusation Cap-
tain Kennedy, just before leaving the colony, authoiized
public works to an extent which not only absorbed all
the money then available, but so earmarked prospective
funds as to make the task of meeting expenses during
the next couple of years somewhat hard for his successor.
In fact, Governor Hampton found himself not only
unable to authorize new works for 1862, but had to
submit measures for legalizing £25,375 unauthorized
expenditure on the part of his predecessor. In refusing
requests for new works he assured the colonists that he
would use every endeavour to render convict labour
available for purely colonial work. To that end he
increased the numbers employed on the Government
House, finished the permanent road between Perth and
I remantle, built the Swan River wall, and improved
the lines of road between various centres. In 1863,
after the liabilities left by Governor Kennedy had been
discharged, large parties were set to work improving the
streets around Perth and its suburbs, making excava-
tions preparatory to erecting the North Fremantle
bridge, and building and repairing other roads and
bridges. During the same year a summer cottage for
the Governor was erected at Rottnest, and the large
pensioners barracks at the head of St. George’s Terrace
commenced. These when completed contained 120
rooms, with hospital, magazine, and other appurten-
ances attached. The activity was continued throughout
the following years, as may be seen from the Governor’s
Speech to the Legislative Council in 1864, in which,
inter aha , he said : “The public works now in progress
are bridges at North Fremantle, Perth Causeway,
Greenough Flats, Beverley, and Ferguson River; jetties
at Bunbury and Busselton; additions to the Poorhouse,
Perth, and the police stations at Pinjarra and New-
castle; new police stations at Baylup, Staunton Springs,
and the Lakes; and the reconstruction of the Swamp
drain at the back of Perth. Forty-nine road parties
are distributed in different districts. With the excep-
tion of the Pinjarra police station and the two jetties
all the works are being carried on by convict labour,
which costs the colony literally nothing for supervision
and maintenance, or for the tools used by them, and
the material benefit thus derived by Western Australia
from transportation is further enhanced by upwards of


£90,000 Imperial money being expended annually in the
colony.” The Perth Causeway and the North Fremantle
bridge, both of which are still in use, were finished, the
one in 1865, the other in 1867. On the latter the
chain-gangs were mostly employed, particularly in
quarrying the stone for use in the foundations and
approaches of the bridge and in widening and deepen-
ing the channel at the mouth of the river in its vicinity.
The Swamp drain was that locally known as the Clai-e-
--brook drain, the plans for which were prepared by
Lieutenant (afterwards Sir) William Crossman; it
drained the whole swamp area upon which the Perth
Railway Station is now built. Another building, prac-
tically the last under the convict system, projected by
Governor Hampton and commenced in 1867, was the
present Perth Town Hall. Like many structures erected
by forced labour, it occupied some years in building,
and though it
is now scarcely
imposing enough
for the city was
at the time one
of the architec-
tural features of
Perth. In the
same year the
main road to Al-
bany was formed
and macadam-
ized. Thus right
up to the end
of the convict
regime the pri-
soners were em-
ployed with con-
siderable advan-
tage upon public
works of per-
manent value to the colony itself. In fact, Mr. Hamp-
ton proved himself in that direction a most capable
administrator, and would have received nothing but
praise but for the fact that the employment of convicts
meant the abandonment of contracts and consequently
did not meet with universal approval.
With 1868 the convict system came to an end.
Reviewing it as a whole it must be admitted that from
a material standpoint it conferred lasting advantages
upon Western Australia. Public works were erected,
lines of communication opened, and shipping facilities
provided which the colonists themselves could not pos-
sibly have procured, having neither the labour nor the
money. The impulse given brought about results which
without convicts Western Australia could not have
achieved after years of struggling. Faith in the colony
was strengthened by the presense of those large sums of
money which the system distributed, and general pros-
perity made itself felt with the wider market thus pro-
vided. From these points of view transportation was an
undoubted success, and though it is not perhaps possible
to say the same from a moral standpoint, the passage of
time has proved that whatever moral taint existed was
merely evanescent in character. The opponents of the
system blamed it for every sign of moral deterioration
and physical degeneracy that appeared; for the increase
in drunkenness, crime, and lunacy —for, in fact, all
those evils which were reputed to follow in the train of
transportation. But statistics prove that the convict
was little more addicted to drink than the free man;
that serious crime has never been an outstanding feature
of Western Australia; and that the colony has held, and
still holds, a lower percentage of insane and imbecile
than some of the other Australian States which have
always been free.
Improvidence
was certainly a
marked feature
in the lives of
convict expirees,
and raised a fear
that the colony
might in the
long run have to
pay dearly for
the present help.
In a measure this
was true, and
there are still
some few receiv-
ing Government
assistance. But-
on the other hand
many men were
reclaimed to
society, and after completing their sentences became
possessed of competences and raised themselves once
again to respected positions in life. Even Mr. Wil-
loughby, who at the request of The Argus examined the
conditions existing in 1864, and who could scarcely be
said to look upon the system with a favourable or un-
prejudiced eye, admitted that a visitor saw little that
was exceptional. Captain Du Cane told Earl Grey’s
Committee in 1863 that even then no moral influence of
an injurious character was apparent in the colony. Even
if there were it was not permanent in effect, for
no one will claim that any moral deterioration exists in
the Western Australia of to-day. Of course there does
exist the fact that Western Australian history has been
tainted by a convict period —and no material prosperity
that ensued at the time will ever efface the stain. At
that price all that accrued was dearly purchased.
THE PENSIONERS’ BARRACKS.


CHAPTER XII.
1861-1868 (continued),
EXPLORATIONS —OPENING UP THE NORTH-WEST—TRADE AND INDUSTRY—NATIVE
TROUBLES AGITATION FOR REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
Perhaps the most important phase in the history
of Western Australia during the sixties was the atten-
tion paid to exploration, more particularly of that por-
tion of the territory lying northward of Geraldton, to
which the term “The North-West” is popularly applied.
Beyond the surveys of King and the incidental notices
of earlier navigators little was known of that part of
the colony, and it was therefore inevitable that the
desire, apparently inherent in the British, to explore
the unknown—generally in the hope of material profit-
should find vent in that direction.
To Mr. F. T. Gregory, one of the assistants in the
Survey Department, belongs the honour of opening up
this vast territory. In 1860 it was announced that he
and Mr. W. Burges were in communication with Sir
Roderick Murchison and were arranging to get together
a strong expedition for the purpose of exploring the
north country, the expenses of which were to be in part
borne by the Imperial Government and the Royal
Geographical Society. In January, 1861, a communica-
tion was received by the Legislative Council from Mr.
Gregory in which he asked that the local government
should vote a certain sum toward the cost of the work.
In that letter he pointed out that the intention was to
land in Nickol Bay and explore the country inland from
that place; that Messrs. W. and J. Burges, T. Brown,
and W. Padbury were prepared to supply men and
horses; and that he was ready to devote six months’
salary—<£2so—toward the funds. After some considera-
tion the Council voted <£1,350 —the amount asked for.
Arrangements having been made the party, which
consisted of F. T. Gregory (leader), J. Turner (second
in command), E. Brockman, Maitland Brown, J.
McCourt, Harding, and Walcott, sailed on April 23,
1861, in the barque ' Dolphin” for Nickol Bay. From
Gregory’s journal we learn that he landed there
near the mouth of the Maitland River (where Karratha
Station now stands), and followed the river to its rise in
the ranges. Crossing the watershed he turned south-
wards, proceeding until he reached the Fortescue River,
a few miles below Millstream, a district marked by
rough and precipitous ranges. Still continuing to the
south, he crossed the Hamersley Range, and followed
the Hardey River to its junction with the Ashburton,
and from that position he sighted Mount Augustus and
the Lyons, which he had visited on a previous trip up
the Gascoyne. Retracing his steps up the Ashburton
he noted the excellent pastoral country on Baring
Downs, and then turned eastward back through the
Hamersley Range, crossing the headwaters of the Yule
and Shaw Rivers and ultimately reaching the branch of
the De Grey River, now known as the Nullagine. This
he traced to its junction with the Oakover, which in
turn he followed to its source near Mount McPherson.
In this waterless territory he got into difficulties, and
but for the superior powers of endurance of Maitland
Brown would probably have perished of thirst. On his
return to the coast Gregory marked on the plan the fine
areas of pastoral country on the De Grey and Lower
Yule, the broad Sherlock Plains, and that fine stretch
of volcanic country between the Sherlock and Roebourne
on the Harding River, and also further west across the
Nickol to the Maitland River. Then, after a trip of six
months, as the weather was getting hot and the water
scarce, he shipped his horses and camp equipment on to
his vessel and returned to Fremantle, arriving ’Miere
about the middle of November. Gregory had thus
explored practically the whole of that large stretch of
country unfavourably commented upon by King and
Stokes, and so far from finding it hopelessly barren
proved it to be capable of great development. The
rivers Ashburton, Fortescue, De Grey, and Oakover
were fresh and carried fish far inland; excellent land
was discovered, of which over 3,000,000 acres were suit-
able for grazing purposes and over a quarter of a mil-
lion for tropical agriculture; in addition, numbers of
pearls and many tons of pearl shell were secured from
the neighbourhood of Nickol Bay.
The report attracted considerable attention, not
only from the leading settlers in the colony itself, but
from many squatters in Victoria and South Australia,
who, like all colonists of the Eastern States, had pre-
viously looked upon Western Australia as for the most
part a barren desert, with here and there patches of fair
arable and pastoral land.
The pioneer of settlement was Mr. Walter Pad-
bury. He secured from Mr. Gregory a definite expres-
sion of opinion to the effect that the north-west was a
stony country not so fertile as Queensland, but far
beyond the average in the settled districts of Western
Australia, and afforded a fair prospect of success to
judicious settlers. Convinced that the country was at
least worth a trial, Mr. Padbury applied to the Govern-
ment for special concessions. This application directed


the attention of the authorities to the necessity for
special land regulations, which were accordingly pre-
pared, and with the approval of the Secretary of State
came into operation at the beginning of 1863. These
applied to two districts termed respectively the “North”
and the “East.” The North district comprises all that
part of the colony lying north of the Murchison River
and of a line drawn due east to the boundary through
the summit of Mount Murchison. The East district was
comprised of the country lying east of the meridian 121°
E. longitude and south of latitude 30° S. The lands
were divided into two classes. Class A included the
islands off the coast and all mainland within two miles
of the sea, while Clasis C comprised the remainder.
Class A land could be held only on annual licence, but
land in Class C could be secured on pastoral lease for
eight years. In order to encourage settlement the
Government offered to persons desiring to settle in these
districts free pasturage for twelve months. During this
time they could select land to the extent of 100,000
acres which they were allowed to occupy free of rent
for a further three years, and after that under the
ordinary conditions for an additional eight years. A
further concession was made in July, 1864, when a re-
mission of rent on 100,000 acres was offered to the first
person who drove stock from any part of Western Aus-
tralia (not within the Northern district) to any other
part situate to the north of the Tropic of Capricorn.
The object of this was to establish, if possible, an over-
land route between the settled districts in the south-
west and the newly opened northern areas.
So far the regulations had dealt only with lease-
holds, but in January, 1865, a new set was issued deal-
ing with the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation of
waste Crown lands within the Northern district, and
also for the sale and letting of mineral lands generally,
auriferous land and coal measures being excepted.
Under these regulations the first 150,000 acres selected
were to be sold at a price of 7s. per acre, but if not
purchased within twelve months then the price was to
be raised to 10s. per acre or whatever happened to be
the minimum price established in the colony generally.
Applications for country lands had to be for 80 acres or
some multiple thereof, and purchasers of 160 acres or
more could obtain a town allotment of half an acre at
the same price. The most pertinent clause in the whole
regulations was the following:—“No convict or person
holding a ticket-of-leave, or person under sentence or
order of transportation or of penal servitude, shall be
introduced or allowed to remain within the northern
portion of the territory of Western Australia to which
these regulations apply.” This was by direction of the
Secretary of State, included, in spite of the opinion of
Governor Hampton, at the request of settlers both in
Western Australia and the Eastern colonies. Lands
deemed to be mineral lands, those bearing gold or coal
excepted, were offered at £3 per acre in lots of not less
than 80 acres. They could also be secured on yearly
licence at a fee of not less than £B, or on lease for
periods up to ten years at a rental of Bs. per acre.
While on the subject of land regulations it may be
mentioned that the regulations affecting the colony
generally were subjected to revision about this time. It
was felt that those framed in 1860 had not proved
entirely satisfactory and required some alteration. To
that end a Committee, consisting of the Colonial Secre-
tary, the Acting Treasurer, the Surveyor-General, and
Messrs. J. W. Hardey and L. S. Leake, was appointed
in August, 1863, to rectify the defects. This Committee
reported in the following month, their recommendations
being principally confined to mineral lands, which they
advised should be sold at a minimum of £5 per acre in
blocks of not less than 80 acres, to be paid, £1 on
approval and £1 in annual instalments. So far as the
general conditions were concerned they considered that
where fee-simple grants were held the owners should be
allowed free pasturage for stock over the surrounding
waste lands to the extent of one head for every ten
acres held. They also advised that at the expiration of
a lease of Class B land the lessee should have a pre-
ferential claim to a renewal. These suggested amend-
ments were forwarded to the Secretary of State for his
consideration, and in the meantime an expression of
opinion was asked for from the Agricultural Societies.
The principal suggestions from these were a right of
renewal for a further eight years of expiring leases of
Class B land, and a readjustment of the boundaries of
the lands comprised in Class A. They also asked that
mineral lands should be leased at 2s. per acre for the
first year and 3s. afterwards, with a right of purchase
in 100-acre blocks at the end of two years for £2 per
acre. Ultimately the suggestions of the Committee were
in the main adopted by the Government and the new
regulations were gazetted in August, 1864. As regards
mineral lands they were the same as those mentioned
above, which were adopted in 1865 for the northern
areas.
But to return to the settlement of the north-west.
With characteristic foresight, anticipating favourable
concessions in the regulations, Mr. Padbury procured
stock from the east toward the end of 1862 and made
full arrangements to enter upon the task of pioneering
in the new district. Early in 1863 he procured a small
vessel, the “Mystery,” to maintain communication be-
tween Fremantle and Nickol Bay, and also chartered
the “Tien-Tsin” to convey his party and the stock to
their destination. The “Mystery,” with Messrs. C. C.
Hunt and Turner on board, left Fremantle on April 4


and proceeded slowly up the coast, taking soundings in
various harbours as they went. The “Tien-Tsin” fol-
lowed on the 24th, with Messrs. Padbury, Samson,
Ridley, McCourt, Nairn, Brown, Jones, Swift, and five
natives, and carrying the consignment of stock —11
horses, 6 bullocks, and 540 sheep. Hunt and Turner,
having found that the mouth of the De Grey did not
provide a suitable landing-place for stock, selected
one to the west of the De Grey and named it Tien-
Tsin Harbour. The animals having been safely landed
the surrounding district was searched without success for
satisfactory pasturage. Padbury then, with Captain
Jarman and Messrs. Samson, Turner, and Nairn, pro-
ceeded down the Harding, and leaving the party there
returned to Fremantle in the “Tien-Tsin.” The vessel
sailed again for Nickol Bay with further stock in June.
These were under the care of Mr. McCourt, who pro-
ceeded to look for the first party. After some time it
was found that they had moved on to the De Grey River
and established a settlement there. The next squatter
to settle in the north was Mr. J. Wellard, who was
accompanied by Messrs. S. Hall, H. Logne, W. Scott,
and others.
Mr. Ridley, one of the original party which accom-
panied Mr. Padbury, was a Government surveyor
charged with the duty of making a full report to the
Government. This report was couched in such favour-
able language that it led to other attempts to find good
squatting areas in the north. In May, 1863, Messrs. K
Brown, S. Hamersley, A. Brown, B. Clarkson, F.
Pearce, and Dr. Martin chartered the “Flying Foam”
and left Fremantle for Camden Harbour and the
Glenelg. They sailed up the river as far as the rapids
—about 28 miles—and there landed the stores and
equipment. In July Messrs. K. Brown, Clarkson, and
Dr. Martin, with five horses, set out for Camden Har-
bour, which they reached without difficulty. The
country traversed was, they rejoorted, a very fine one
with abundance of grass and water. Later in the month
a second party went farther up the river in boats. They
experienced some trouble with the natives, and had to
use their firearms to scare them away. This was the
country which Grey had reported as among the finest
in the world, with grass so high that he could not see
over it. The later explorers not only confirmed the
opinion expressed by Grey, but considered he had not
done justice to the luxuriance of the grass.
Favourable as this report was, it did not result in
any immediate development of that particular district,
though settlement generally was proceeding apace in the
north. In September, 1863, Mr. C. von Bibra selected
a large tract of land on the Gascoyne River, and by the
end of the year there wore three runs of 100,000 acres
each being stocked in the newly-opened area. In
January, 1864, a squatter from Victoria applied for a
lease of Dirk Hartog Island, which was said to contain
over 200,000 acres of good feeding-ground with excellent
water. In March Mr. Withnall sailed for Nickol Bay
in the “Sea Ripple” with 650 sheep, 5 horses, and 2
cows, and took up a further large area. Mr. Maitland
Brown, about the same time, proceeded to Shark Bay
and established a station in the neighbourhood of Frey-
einet Harbour, while a month or two later the Burges
Brothers tried the district round Exmouth Gulf. This
proving barren, they moved on to the Gascoyne River.
Thus not only was extensive settlement proceeding along
the north-west coast, but it was being established in such
manner as to provide links of communication with the
older settled districts and make an overland route
practicable.
The efforts of Messrs. Padbury, Wellard, and With-
nall were by this time showing signs of success, and the
arrival at Fremantle in August, 1864, of the first wool
clip—seven bales —had the effect of establishing con-
fidence in the possibilities of the territory. Unfor-
tunately, carried away by the desire to become rich
quickly and with little exertion, and dazzled by the
Government’s liberal land regulations, many others made
attempts to settle, but without the success that attended
the endeavours of the hardier and more experienced
men.
Another expedition went to Exmouth Gulf and
Camden Harbour in 1864 as the result of a tale cir-
culated by a convict named Wildman. This man, who
•
at one time had been a ship’s officer, stated that while
repairing his ship near Camden Harbour in 1856 he had
made a trip up a river and there secured gold to the
value of £416, which he had afterwards sold in Liver-
pool. He offered to disclose the locality provided the
Government would, when the story was confirmed,
remit the sentence of fifteen years which he was then
undergoing. The mere mention of gold was sufficient
to rouse public expectation, and an expedition was
rapidly equipped to test Wildman’s story. To this the
Government, after, it is said, testing the truth of the
story as regards selling the gold, contributed £l5O. Dr.
Martin was commissioned to act as Surveyor and
Botanist, and the leadership was given to the Inspector
of Police, Mr. Panter, who took with him Messrs.
Turner, Stokes, Langoulant, F. and IT. Caporn, Scott,
and Du Boulay, as well as Wildman and a couple of
natives. As might have been expected under the cir-
cumstances no trace of gold was discovered. Wildman
either could not or would not divulge the locality where
he had previously found it, and independent searches
by the party proved unsuccessful. In other respects,
however, the trip was not without result. The sur-
rounding country was carefully inspected, and on the


way back Panter called at Roebuck Bay and made fur-
ther explorations. In his report he spoke very favour-
ably of that country, pointing out that there were
thousands of acres of excellent pasturage, and that
water was easily obtainable at a depth of a few feet.
Dr. Martin was even more explicit and pronounced.
Vegetation, he said, was luxuriant, animals, birds, and
fish abundant, pearl oysters plentiful, and, above all,
millions of acres of good pastoral country were avail-
able.
The outcome of these reports was the formation of
the Roebuck Bay Pastoral and Agricultural Association
Limited, the provisional committee consisting of
to choose a satisfactory location. With them went In-
spector Pan ter as a guest. Meanwhile a meeting of the
shareholders was held and Messrs. F. P. Barlee, G.
Glyde, C. Wittenoom, S. E. Burges, E. W. Landor, G.
Shenton, and Major Crampton were elected directors.
Two vessels, the “Nile” and the “Hastings,” were
chartered to convey the stock, which numbered some
hundreds, to Roebuck Bay, where they were pastured,
according to Mr. Harding’s report, upon excellent
country which promised every prospect of success.
The inception of the work was followed by an
appalling disaster. On November 9, 1864, Messrs.
Panter, Harding, and Goldwyer left the camp with the
MUNDARING WEIR.
Lieutenant-Colonel Bruce, F. P. Barlee, Major Cramp-
ton, G. Shenton, C. Wittenoom, J. G. C. Carr, and G.
Farmaner, with R. J. Sholl as Secretary. The capital
was fixed at £20,000 in £lO shares; the outlay was
estimated at £lO,OOO, £2,500, and £3,500 for the first
three years, and the profit (somewhat prematurely) at
l 2h, and 18f per cent, on the outlay. So strong
was the general public belief in the possibilities of the
Roebuck Bay district that before the end of August,
1864, the share list was closed.
The company secured the “Flying Foam,” and in
October an advance party consisting of Messrs. J. R.
Harding, L. C. Burges, and six others was sent forward
M
object of exploring the country toward Lagrange Bay.
They had provisions sufficient for about three weeks,
and when that time passed without their return Mr.
Burges became somewhat anxious for their safety. He
tracked them as far as a mangrove swamp in Lagrange
Bay, but there lost all trace of them. When the “Nile”
left Roebuck Bay early in January, 1865, they were
still missing. When the news was received in Perth a
search party was immediately organized by the
Government, and instructions given to the leader
(Mr. Maitland Brown) to search thoroughly the
whole country between Roebuck Ray and Mr. Pad-
bury’s location on the De Grey. The party, which,


ill addition to the leader, comprised Messrs. Burges,
Francisco, Williams, D. Brown, and two native
policemen, left at once in the “Clarence” packet, and
on arrival at Roebuck Bay plunged straightway into the
bush. In a little while they learnt from some natives
that three white men and four horses had been seen
some three months before by the Wargnarry tribe at the
River Boolu Boolu. The informers went on to say that
the white men slept by the river and on the next day
were attacked by natives, whom they succeeded in
repulsing without injury to themselves. The following
night the blacks, in stronger force, made another attack,
in the course of which the whites were wounded, though
not seriously, but over a dozen of their adversaries were
killed. Knowing that Ranter and his companions were
wounded the natives appeared with further reinforce-
ments soon after daybreak, and by overwhelming force
of numbers speared and clubbed the unfortunate white
men to death. As the same story was told by other
natives, two of them were seized and ordered to conduct
the search party to the scene. After leading the party
astray they attempted to escape, but were shot by the
native policemen. Finally Mr. Brown was rewarded by
finding the bodies at Lake Ingedana, in Lagrange Bay.
Nothing had been stolen, showing the act to have been
one of brutal murder to satisfy the savage lust for
blood. From Mr. Ranter’s diary it was evident that
they were killed on November 13, only four days after
leaving the settlement. While returning with the bodies
Brown’s party was followed by large numbers of natives,
and on one occasion had to fight its way through an
ambush —with disastrous results to the blacks. The re-
mains were brought back to Perth and interred in the
East Perth Cemetery on May 17, 1864, in the presence of
practically the whole population. Mr. Brown received
the thanks of the Government and was appointed to a
magistracy.
This gruesome tragedy does not seem to have
deterred settlement to any considerable extent. An ex-
haustive pamphlet on the resources of the district, pre-
pared by the Surveyor-General (Captain J. S. Roe),
probably had some influence in directing attention to
the north-west. Settlers from Victoria and South Aus-
tralia determined to try their fortunes there. In Mel-
bourne there was formed the Camden Harbour Pastoral
Association Limited, with a capital of <£20,000 in £IOO
shares. The provisional directors were Messrs. W. T.
Sellars, J. H. Wood, C. S. Affleck, A. Mattingly, W.
Harvey, S. Hart, and J. Meadow. The object of the
Association was “to settle the very superior well-watered
pastoral and agricultural country round Camden Har-
bour by placing one head of cattle on every 1,000 acres.”
With the £20,000 the promoters expected to secure
4,000,000 acres of land and 4,000 breeding cattle to
stock it. Each share entitled the holder to a passage
to Camden Harbour, rations for twelve months, and a
lease of 20,000 acres for twelve years (the first four
rent-free) and twenty head of cattle. The Company
also claimed to have a pre-emptive right over the area
leased. This, of course, was a deliberate misstatement,
as the land regulations gave no privilege of the kind.
The promoters were evidently of opinion that a pros-
pectus should be glowing rather than truthful. The
Secretary further stated to a meeting of those interested
that the harbour was only 270 miles north of Perth,
instead of 1,300, and that settlers could go back 270
miles from the coast, 40 miles of which was on the sea
side of the ranges. The existence of mountainous
country close to the coast was quietly ignored. Probably
the directors thought that anyone going there could find
out such small matters for himself. That public interest
in Western Australia was roused is shown by the fact
that by the end of 1864 seventy-three applications had
been made by Victorians for land in the Camden Har-
hour district. Each applicant required 100,000 acres
and promised to place from 40 to 150 sheep upon it.
It is a pity that so much enthusiasm should have been
wasted on a movement doomed to failure.
The first vessel to leave Melbourne under the
auspices of this Association was the “Stag,” on Novem-
ber 16, 1864. Among those who went by her were
Messrs. Ellwood, T. C. Murray, E. T. Hooley, A. J.
McGrae, and J. Hindhaugh. They landed in December,
perhaps the most forbidding time of the year. All the
country round was parched and burnt; the tall waving
grass had disappeared, water was almost unobtainable,
and a fierce sun beat down upon them with a most
intense heat. Being young and sturdy they set about
improving their position at once. Some of them struck
out for the Glenelg, and were surprised—and not a
little disappointed—to find that it was a tidal river. On
the way back they were fortunate enough to discover a
small pool of fresh water, and on arrival at the Harbour
learnt that Mr. Murray had discovered an excellent
spring.
By the end of December two other vessels with a
large number of settlers and some 4,000 head of stock
put in an appearance. The only pasturage was that
round Murray’s spring and was totally insufficient.
Added to the scarcity of water was some disease among
the stock. The sheep died in hundreds from some un-
known cause, possibly an undiscovered poison weed. To
save the remnant a move was made farther inland to
good dry grass and abundant water. The tropical rains,
too, made their appearance and luxuriant grass sprang
up like magic. Nothing, however, seemed to lessen the
increasing mortality among the sheep. Hooley and
others explored toward the north-east along Prince


Regent’s River, but could not find a more suitable loca-
tion. While grass was abundant and the scenery
majestic, the locality was altogether too rough for pas-
toral purposes. By the end of March little more than
one-fourth of their stock were alive, and by August even
those had succumbed.
Other causes, too, combined to make the men sad
and dispirited, and to bring about total failure of the
attempt at settlement. Three men died within a few
days of their arrival. One of the ships, the "Calliance,”
struck a reef on the way to Camden Harbour and was
saved only after a good deal of difficulty. When she
arrived at her destination the wind drove her on to
another reef, and she became a total wreck, the captain
(Edwards) losing his life in an attempt to secure assist-
ance. In face of all these hardships it is no wonder
that many of the settlers took the first opportunity to
leave the district. During January and February
seventy-two departed, and many of the others remained
only till they could manage to get away.
The possibility of a permanent settlement being
effected induced Governor Hampton to appoint various
officials to exercise control within its confines. Mr.
R. J. Sholl was appointed Resident Magistrate, with his
son as clerk; Mr. Phelp was sent as the surveyor, and
there were in addition a surgeon, a customs officer, and
three policemen. Mr. Sholl reached his sphere of duty
early in 1865, and his report of the condition of affairs
was anything but complimentary to the Camden Har-
bour Association. The members of the Association who
were on the spot were, he considered, a good type of
individual, but they lacked all knowledge of bushcraft
and of management. There was no leader, no arrange-
ment of the stores or settlement, with the result that
every man was doing as he pleased, and the provisions
were left lying on the beach at the mercy of the sun
wind, and tides. The sheep which might have been
saved were neglected through ignorance, and no at-
tempt made to shield them from the tropical heat or the
tropical rains. As to the country itself, Mr. Sholl con-
sidered it to be very deceptive; while it appeared to be
excellently grassed and in every way suitable for pas-
toral purposes, it really consisted of a series of rocky
knolls, so covered with verdure that the stony nature
was hidden. The great extent of fertile country seen
from Mount Lookover, he said, "consisted mainly of
grass-covered stones.”
Convinced that the venture had no chance of suc-
ceeding the Governor instructed the Resident Magis-
trate to assist those remaining to get away if they could
not provide funds for their own passages. In this way
numbers were removed to Fremantle or eastern ports.
Some, however, desirous of making further efforts,
petitioned for permission to exchange their land for
m 2
selections in the Nickol Bay district. This was granted,
and we find that 12,500 acres at Nickol Bay were
assigned to R. Batten; Mr. Bolger received 34,500 and
J. Patterson 11,500 acres on the Harding River; J.
Sloss, 100,000 ; C. Purdue, 23,000; S. Connell, 11,500;
R. Bell, 23,000; J. Inglis, 11,500; and A. Cane, 34,500
acres, on the De Grey; and J. Smith, Stirling, and
Simmons, 11,500 acres each on the Fortescue River.
So much for the fortunes of the Camden Harbour
Pastoral Association. A failure from the very start, it
had ceased to exist in May, 1865, though it was not
finally abandoned by the Government Resident until the
following October. Within a year it had ruined most of
those who had embarked upon it, had been responsible
for the deaths of several, and had cost the Western Aus-
tralian Government over £5,000.
Being practically freed from official duties Mr.
Sholl employed the time between May and October in
exploring the district. During April he made a trip to
the south of the Glenelg, finding the country to be mostly
of a rocky nature, with precipitous hills, but with grass
everywhere, and here and there indications of gold.
His progress was stopped by the Leopold Ranges. Soon
after his return to the camp the Harbour was visited
by a fleet of Malay proas and canoes, containing about
300 men. The visit apparently was for the purpose of
securing natives as slaves.
The next trip was made by Mr. Treverton C. Sholl
and party out to the Leopold Ranges. During this
expedition, the journals of which were lost, Mr.
Sholl visited the Glenelg Basin, ascended and named
Mount Page, discovered the Berkelman River, and
crossed the Harding Range in face of almost insuper-
able difficulties. He reported the existence of about
500,000 acres of good pastoral country round the Wal-
cott River.
The district was not finally abandoned without
further disaster. One of the Government boats having
been stolen by natives Mr. Sholl and party set out in
the pinnace in the hope of recovering their property and
inflicting punishment upon the thieves. Next morning
they went ashore at a point about ten miles south of
Camden Harbour and were at once attacked by natives.
In the course of the fight Mr. Treverton Sholl and Con-
stable Gee were seriously wounded. Regaining the pin-
nace they found that the tide was too strong, and they
were making no headway. The anchor dragged, and
finally the boat was swamped. One of the party, M.
Quinlan, was drowned, but the others reached the shore
in safety. They had then to face an overland journey
of some 40 miles through unknown country back to
Camden Harbour. Their provisions had been lost with
the boat, most of their clothing had been cast off when
in the water, their firearms were lost, fresh water was


almost unobtainable. Under those conditions they set
out on their dangerous tramp, and after three days
arrived back at the settlement more dead than alive.
The strain proved too much for the wounded constable,
who died a few days afterwards.
Satisfied that nothing further was to be gained by
staying at Camden Harbour, Mr. Sholl abandoned it on
October 29 and sailed with all his party for Port Wal-
cott, Nickol Bay, in the ‘‘Kestrel.” On his way he
stopped for a few days at Roebuck Bay and sent Mr.
Cowle the assistant surveyor, with some of the party, to
proceed overland to Port Walcott. Leaving the bay on
January 10, 1866, Cowle arrived at Port Walcott at the
end of February, and reported that for the most part
the country was well grassed and quite suitable for pas-
toral purposes.
Another association, formed shortly after the
Camden Harbour venture, met with the same fate. The
Denison Plains Association, established in Melbourne
in 1865, proposed to land settlers on the head-
waters of the Victoria River, and send them
forward to Denison Plains. Neither the promoters nor
shareholders seem to have had any definite idea of the
exact position of Denison Plains or of the class of
country comprised in them, so that the failure of the
venture is not to be wondered at. To break up their
homes, spend large sums of money in stock and equip-
ment, and sail for an unknown territory, are not qualifi-
cations that give evidence of the foresight necessary in
those who would be successful pioneers. The first band
of prospective settlers left Melbourne by the “Warrior,”
and arrived at Fremantle early in May, 1865. The
leader of the party was Mr. C. E. Broadhurst, and
among the names of those who embarked on the ven-
ture were Mr. and Mrs. Broadhurst, Mr. and Mrs.
Wedge and family (5), Miss Anderson, Dr. Baynton,
Mr. and Mrs. Mullen and children (4), and Messrs.
Venn, Brodie, Edmonstone, Sayers, Hodgkinson, Han-
low, Mackay, Fraser, Graham, Gardiner, Hicks, Sayes,
Simson, Macintosh, Cane, Bush, Jeffrey, and Filchey.
During the stay of the vessel at Fremantle Mr. Broad-
hurst was informed by the Governor of the failure
of the Camden Harbour project, and advised to proceed
with very great caution. On the way up the coast the
party stopped at Nickol Bay and obtained land in that
locality. Various trips inland, west of Roebourne and
along the Fortescue and Ashlmrton rivers, were made,
principally under the leadership of Mr. H. W. Venn, in
the hope of discovering satisfactory pastoral country.
The party never reached Denison Plains. Those who
were competent and saw a chance of success in the nortlo-
west were not prepared to be bound by co-operative con-
ditions, whilst those who saw nothing but failure in
front of them had only one desire —to get back to the
eastern colonies as quickly as possible. The association
was wound up early in the following year, and the stock
divided amongst the creditors.
Notwithstanding the want of success of these large
undertakings, small private bands and individuals were
establishing themselves in various parts of the north-
west, and were proving that it was possible to achieve
good results. In April, 1865, Messrs. J. E. and A. R.
Richardson, Edwin Anderson, Mackenzie Grant, and
John Edgar, from Victoria, landed at Tien-Tsin Har-
bour with 1,600 ewes, and founded Pyramid Station of
200,000 acres. Two of them, Messrs. Grant and Ander-
son, afterwards, in conjunction with Charles Harper,
established the De Grey Station, one of the most suc-
cessful holdings in the north-west. About the same time
(April, 1865) two of the members of the abandoned
Camden Harbour Association, Messrs Hooley and
Murray, landed in Tien-Tsin Harbour and examined the
country in the neighbourhood of the Harding, Sherlock,
Fortescue, and Ashburton rivers, crossing in their
travels the Hamersley Range. They found that for the
most part travelling was very rough, and the range was
covered with dense spinifex bush, not inviting to the
pastoralist. Most of these private trips resulted in the
selection of new areas of country, and by the end of
1865 the initial stages may be said to have been passed
and the prospects of an extensive pastoral settlement
assured. From the newspaper files we learn that the
following station holders had firmly established them-
selves: —Messrs. Padbury, Withnall, Wellard, A. and
J. McLeod, Simson, Baynton, Lockyer, Viveash, Ander-
son, J. E. Richardson, W. and W. H. Knight, Mac-
kenzie Grant, and W. A. Taylor with 100,000 acres
each; J. Edgar with 26,000; and S. Mullen with 20,000;
all at Nickol Bay. In addition, areas of 100,000 acres
each had been selected or applied for on the Ashburton
and Harding rivers by Messrs. Anderson, Mount,
Murray, Hooley, F. and C. Broadhurst, Hartley, and
Holmes. According to the Blue Book, 2,946,000 acres
were held under lease in the north-west at the end of
1865, and that they were stocked with 16,000 sheep, 300
cattle, and 120 horses.
Settlement was further assisted by Mr. E. T.
Hooley’s success in opening up an overland route from
Geraldton to Nickol Bay about the middle of 1866.
Starting out with 1,920 sheep, he arrived with a loss
of only eight, proving that there was excellent food and
water on the way, and that stock could be transported
by land both more cheaply and with greater safety than
by sea.
Permanent settlement being assured it was deter-
mined to form a township near Port Walcott, and in
1866 the site of Roebourne —named after the Surveyor-
General —was surveyed, the first town lots being sold
on September 3 at an upset price of £5 each.
Owing to various circumstances the progress of the


district was greatly hindered during 1867. Far away
from Perth, the settlers had to depend for provisions
mainly upon the small vessels that traded up and down
the coast. Through various causes several of these
were wrecked, with the result that the new com-
munity was brought within the reach of starvation. One
of these boats, the ‘■Emma/’ was lost with all hands,
amongst whom were Mr. Treverton Sholl and nearly
thirty other
passengers. The
famine was
averted by the
action of Mr.
Charles Harper,
who led a small
party overland to
Champion Bay
under ci r c u in-
stances of great
difficulty. The
"‘Flying Foam 7 ’
was dispatched at
once from that
port, and arrived
at Roebourne not
a moment too
soon. As the out-
come to some ex-
tent of these diffi-
culties, selections
aggregating over
1.000. acres
were abandoned
in 1867, but over
2.000. were
taken up afresh,
making the total
unde r leasehold
at the end of that
year 5,805,000
acres. Two runs
of 100,000 acres
each lapsed dur-
ing 1868, but the
stock had in-
creased to 38,580
sheep, 444 cattle,
and 208 horses.
Together with the exploration and settlement of
the north-west renewed activity was shown in examining
and opening up the country to the east and south-east
of the settled districts round York. Most of this work
was done by Messrs. C. E. and A. Dempster, Charles
Harper, and B. Clarkson. leaving York in July, 1861,
(hey successfully penetrated the dense scrub and salt
lake country to the east previously considered to be irn-
passable, and traversed a large portion of the district
which now forms the Yilgarn goldfield, their furthest
point being Mount Georgina. In the following year they
made an attempt to get still further into the interior,
but after proceeding about 70 miles they found their
progress barred by an unusually wet season, and were
compelled to turn back.
The York Agricultural Society next took up the work
and through its
efforts an expedi-
tion under the
leadership of Mr.
IT. M. Lefroy
travelled east-
wards into the
interior for the
purpose of dis-
covering new
country suitable
for sheep farm-
ing. This was
partially success-
ful, and Lefroy
reported the ex-
istence of good
agricultural
country, but con-
sidered settle-
ment out of the
ques ti o n until
wells had been
sunk, as surface
water was not ob-
tain a b 1 e. He
reached longitude
122° 3' E., nam-
ing Lake Lefroy,
to the south of
Kalgoorlie, and
traversed a large
portion of the
present Coolgar-
die goldfields.
In the follow-
ing year Messrs.
B. D. Clarkson,
C. Harper, andL.
Lukin left Tood-
yay and travelled north-easterly for some distance
without finding satisfactory land, while Mr. C. C. Hunt
left York about the same time, and crossing the Hamp-
ton Plains passed over the actual site of Coolgardie.
He was compelled to return owing to want of water.
Two years later he made an almost similar trip across
the Hampton Plains, but with equally disappointing
results. This latter trip was principally made with th«
ST. GEORGE'S TERRACE, PERTH.


object of cutting a track through to the plains and
sinking wells so that the land might be available for
jjastoralists. No use was made of the track at the time,
but thirty years later it remained in sufficiently good
order to become the highway to Coolgardie. The pre-
sent eastern railway practically follows the same course.
The only other important trip from York was one made
by the Messrs. Monger, who in 1868 travelled north-
ward in the hope of discovering good country to the
east of Champion Bay. This they found between the
tracks of Gregory (1848) and Austin (1854), and in
the course of their wanderings they discovered and
named Lake Monger. They afterwards selected 100,000
acres in the district.
While these various expeditions were pushing out
northward and eastward others were made into the
south-east corner of the colony. Captain Delisser made
two trips, in 1862 and 1865, from Fowler Bay across
the borders of South Australia, and in 1865 Mr. A.
Dempster travelled northward from Esperance as far as
the Dundas Hills, but was prevented by want of water
from going further.
In the meantime settlement was also extending
rapidly in the settled south-western and eastern dis-
tricts. Mr. (afterwards Sir) James Lee Steere took up
100,000 acres on the Blackwood in 1861, and other
squatters were rapidly establishing themselves in the
Warren and Donnelly River areas. The acreage under
licence and lease, which in 1861 amounted to 6,500,000
acres, had increased by 1868 to a little over 11,000,000,
mostly held for grazing purposes. During the same
period 75,000 acres were sold at or above the minimum
of 10s. per acre.
The expansion of the colony during 1861-68 was
not limited to exploration. Trade and industry showed
signs of distinct revival, and with the cheap labour
available every phase of development showed signs of
renewed vigour. The report of Gregory’s explorations
of the north-west coast in 1861 directed attention to
pearling and the pearlshell industry, but no success was
attained for some years. The export of shell to the
value of £556 in 1867 was sufficient, however, to prove
that the work was worth taking up seriously, and in
1868 some ten boats were employed, the divers being
principally natives —many of them women. The results
were beyond expectation, the value of pearls and shell
exported reaching in that year the respectable total of
£5,556.
Wool, of course, continued to be the staple export.
In the eight years the export value totalled £620,330,
that for 1868 being £98,254 as against £54,300 in 1861.
The number of sheep had increased from 260,000 to
600,000. The trade in sandalwood was equally lucrative,
maintaining throughout these years an average export
value of over £20,000 annually, and rising in 1868 to
nearly £27,000. The same could not be said of timber
generally. The value of jarrah and karri sent away,
which represented £2,500 in 1861 and rose in 1865 to
£13,490, had by 1868 declined to £638. The market
for such woods does not seem to have been extensive at
that time, though the amount exported is no criterion
of the amount of output, a great deal being used locally
on the various public works. Agriculture also expanded
to a considerable extent. The 27,387 acres under crop
in 1861 had extended to 50,014 in 1868, while flour and
grain, which in 1861 were only sufficient for local needs,
became by the end of 1868 very appreciable items in the
export trade, representing in the latter year a total of
£21,467.
The Champion Bay lead and copper mines were also
responsible for a considerable value in the colonial trade,
though the increased cost of production and the distance
from the markets of the world were rapidly reducing
them below the level of paying industries. Copper
showed a distinct falling off from 1864, but lead in-
creased very decidedly, the two together being valued
for export in 1868 at £14,500. Other products, such as
whalebone and oil, gum, wine, and raisins, also figured
on the list of exports, but not to any great extent.
The actual state of the colony and the expansion
that had taken place may be seen from a comparison of
the figures representing the first and last years of the
period under review:—Exports, £95,789 and £192,635;
imports, £147,912 and £225,614; income of colony,
£67,161 and £99,495; expenditure, £81,087 and
£89,726. In 1868 the colony was free from public debt.
Attempts were made about this time, principally
by the York Agricultural Society, to encourage the cul-
tivation of cotton and tobacco, but neither seem to have
gone beyond the experimental stage, though the forma-
tion of a cotton company with a capital of £20,000 was
attempted in London.
Interest still continued to be displayed in the search
for gold. In 1861 parties prospected over the Darling
ranges, and got indications, but not sufficient to justify
actual mining. Inspector Banter, after scouring the
district round Northam, returned to that town in De-
cember with specimens. On the strength of these £2,500
was collected in the town towards further investigations,
O '
and the Government supplemented the amount by an
equal sum. Five thousand pounds was also offered to
the discoverer of a payable goldfield within 150 miles of
Perth, the condition being that 5,000 ozs. should be
secured before July 1, 1863. Needless to sav the reward
was not paid. Being of the opinion that the country
was worth testing, the Government engaged Mr. E. H.
Hargraves in 1862 to prospect for a period of six months
He reported unfavourably, being of opinion that gold in
any quantity would never be found in the colony. In
1864 he contributed a paper to the Royal Geographical


Society in London “On the non-auriferous character of
the rocks of Western Australia/' A little over thirty
years later this “barren” territory was recognized as one
of the greatest gold-producing countries of the world!
Among the miscellaneous events of these years it
may be mentioned that efforts were made, but without
success, in 1860 and 1861, to establish in the colony a
sanatorium for Indian troops. The Surveyor-General
gave evidence before a Royal Commission appointed by
the Imperial authorities to choose a suitable site, but
though he endeavoured to prove that the climate and
situation of Western Australia could not be improved
upon for the purpose nothing came of the idea.
In 1861 the Legislative Council decided to organize
a volunteer military force, and in pursuance of an
ordinance to that effect companies were raised in Perth,
Fremantle, Guildford, York, Pinjarra, and the Vasse.
For a little time the work was enthusiastically entered
into, but soon lapsed, except in Perth. The Perth Rifle
Volunteers continued in existence for some years; in
fact, it may be said that the present 11th Australian
Infantry Regiment is the direct descendant of that
movement.
The following year saw the establishment of a
Money Order Office, and in 1863 the Post Office Savings
Bank was opened.
Eighteen sixty-two was remarkable for an unusually
wet winter. Most of the low-lying lands on the banks
of the Swan were submerged, and floods occurred in
nearly all the settled districts of the south-west. The
bridges over many of the rivers were carried away,
buildings were demolished, and orchards and gardens
destroyed. The total damage, public and private, was
estimated at <£30,000.
With the general expansion of the material side
there was also a corresponding increase in the religious
establishments of the colony. By the end of 1867 there
were twenty-two churches and chapels at various centres.
The Roman Catholic cathedral in Victoria Square was
completed in 1863, and in the following year the
Anglican cathedral was enlarged, and the old Trinity
Church erected. The present Wesley Church, Perth,
was commenced in 1867. The spread of educational
facilities was equally extensive, there being in the colony
in 1868 forty-three public schools in addition to the
Bishop's School.
The native trouble had by this time practically
vanished from the south-western districts, but it began
to crop up in the districts further east and in the newly-
opened north-western areas, where the aborigines were
physically stronger and much more bloodthirsty than
those around Perth. We have already referred to
several fatal attacks upon whites which occurred during
the various exploratory trips in the north. After settle-
ment further murders on the part of the natives were
frequently reported, calling for drastic action on the
part of the police. Nine aborigines were hanged for the
murder of Mr. Jas. Rudd and his shepherd in 1864 at
Bundeen on the Upper Irwin, and three more for the
murder of Mr. B. D. Clarkson at his station 80 miles
east of Newcastle in 1865. Rottnest Prison was also
well Ailed with native evildoers, the annual number
being between fifty and a hundred, most of whom were
either from the north or the far interior.
The agitation for representative government, which
had of necessity lain dormant during the convict period,
was revived when it became known that transportation
would cease altogether in 1868. The Secretary of State,
it will be remembered, had before 1850 stated that Wes-
tern Australia would be able to secure some form of
elective representation as soon as the colonists were pre-
pared to do without a parliamentary grant, in other
words as soon as the local revenue was sufficient to meet
all the colonial expenses. The Imperial Act of 1850
(13-14 Viet. c. 59) for the better government of the
Australian colonies provided that when that stage had
arrived the existing Legislative Council could, on a
petition from one-third of the householders of the
colony, pass an ordinance establishing a new Legislative
Council, one-third of whose members should be
nominated and the other two-thirds elected. Simul-
taneously with the passing of that Act, however, came
the establishment of the convict system in Western Aus-
tralia. This, the Secretary of State pointed out, mad©
it impossible for the Imperial authorities to agree to
any form of representation, as the bulk of the expenses
of the colony under the circumstances would of necessity
fall u]3on the Home Government.
This difficulty being removed by the decision to stop
sending out convicts, a public meeting under the chair-
manship of the Sheriff was held in Perth on February
21, 1865, and a committee was appointed at that meet-
ing to draft a petition for presentation through the
Governor to the Legislative Council. On being pre-
sented the petition, which contained 1,303 signatures,
was referred to a committee consisting of the Colonial
Secretary, Commandant, Attorney-General, and Mr.
Samson, to examine the signatures, call witnesses, and
report to the Council. In the course of examination
the number of signatures was reduced to 898, the others
being struck out as those of persons unknown, convicts,
or non-householders. As this total was still in excess of
the one-third householders required by the Act, the
committee reported that the petition was in form and
fulfilled the necessary requirements.
The members of the Council, while not prepared to
concede the full request of the petitioners, were prepared
to do something toward introducing a popular element.
An amendment to the petition was therefore carried, the
effect of which was to add two additional non-official


members to the existing four and to restrict the term of
office of the whole six to three years. This amendment,
which really negatived the petition, was a severe blow
to the progressive party, and objections were raised
against the Council s action. Mr. Samson, in a formal
protest, asserted that the fulfilment of the conditions
laid down in the imperial Act made it obligatory on
the part of the Council to agree. The Attorney-General,
however, ruled that the Council had discretionary power.
Public opinion seems at this stage to have been
divided upon the matter, though on the whole there was
a leaning toward representation. A petition, circulated
in September with the object of upholding the action of
Mr. liardey (who had moved the amendment), while ap-
proving the appointment of six non-official members
finished by declaring that an election by the people
would be preferable.
As in all progressive movements, the temporary re-
verse, especially as it was brought about by official
action, only served to fan the flame. Meetings were
held and resolutions carried protesting against the rejec-
tion of the petition, so that by the following year a cer-
tain degree of enthusiasm in favour of representative
government existed.
The Governor (Dr. Hampton) carefully refrained
from any expression of opinion while the subject was
under discussion in the Council, but in a despatch to the
Secretary of State, dated July 21, 1865, he
stated that' he had reason to believe that the
majority of the colonists would vote against the
requests contained in the petition. By the middle of
August, however, his view seems to have undergone some
change, as on the 22nd of that month he informed the
Secretary of State that he was convinced it would be
impossible to arrest the movement unless some concession
was made. By December he had veered round still fur-
ther and wrote, when forwarding the original petition :
' Such a change, to me, seems to be very immaterial,
seeing that to whatever extent I might be allowed any
voice in the matter, I should endeavour to nominate the
persons most acceptable to the free inhabitants generally,
and fairly representing every interest throughout the
colony —a very difficult task which I would gladly see
delegated to the electors.”
Mr. Cardwell, at that time Secretary of State for
the Colonies, seems to have pigeon-holed the documents
and forgotten all about them. Hence some delay
occurred before a reply was received. A change in the
occupancy of the Colonial Office brought the documents
to light again, and in September, 1867, a reply, dated
July 9, was received from the Duke of Buckingham
signifying the assent of the Crown to the Legislative
Council's proposal to appoint non-official members equal
in number to the official and to limit the term of office
to three years. No mention was made of the petition
or of Mr. Samson’s protest against the action of the
Council. The decision was received with mixed feelings,
but the steps taken to carry it into effect were such that
the new Council was practically a representative body.
A public meeting, presided over by the Sheriff, was held
in October, at which it was agreed to accej)t the con-
cession approved by the Secretary of State, an amend-
ment to the effect that no concession except the franchise
be accepted being rejected. A resolution was then
passed affirming that the colonists should be allowed to
select the non-official members, and a committee was
appointed to carry the resolution into effect. The mem-
bers of this committee were L. S. Leake, C. A. Man-
ning, R. King, T. Fawcett, E. Newman, S. A. Barker,
A. Francisco, S. S. Parker, J. Drummond, S. Burges, T.
Burges, J. G. Lee Steere, F. Lochee, P. Clifton, T. C.
Gull, E. Stirling, J. T. Cooke, W. Padbury, E. Birch,
IL. Saw, G. Glyde, B. Mason, J. T. Reilly, J. Hardey,
T. Farrelly, B. B. Ranford, J. G. C. Carr, R. De Burgh,
G. Shenton, W. D. Moore, and G. Johnson. The com-
mittee met a few days after the public meeting, and
transmitted the resolutions to the Colonial Secretary
with a request that the Governor should favour them
with suggestions. The Governor strongly supported the
steps proposed, and promised to give official assistance
in securing a proper ballot. As it was necessary to
choose representatives quickly so as to give time for the
Governor to get the consent of the Imperial authorities
to their appointment, letters were sent to all the promi-
nent settlers asking for their assistance. The colony
was then divided into six districts—Perth, Fremantle,
Champion Bay, Eastern Districts, Guildford and the
Swan, and the Murray, and each district given the right
to elect one member. All free males of adult age had
the right to vote, but no proxies were allowed. The
elections resulted in the .selection of J. G. C. Carr
(Perth), W. Bateman (Fremantle), W. L. Brockman
(Guildford), J. G. Lee Steere (Murray), and E.
Hamersley (Eastern District). The Champion Bay set-
tlers refused to take advantage of the concession to select
a member, and Governor Hampton had in consequence
to select a sixth man. His choice fell upon J. W.
Hardey, the man responsible for the amendment which
defeated the original petition. The six names were
then submitted to the Governor and by him to the
Secretary of State for approval. On July 7, 1868,
an order in Council was jmssed appointing them mem-
bers of the Legislative Council of Western Australia for
a period of three years.
As might be expected from a Council thus con-
stituted, the tendency was towards representative
government, and no time was lost in bringing the whole
question forward once more. At a public meeting held
in February, 1868, at Perth, it was agreed that imme-
diate steps should be taken to secure representation, and


that a second petition in favour should be circulated
for signature and presented to the Legislative Council
at its next meeting. A committee was appointed to
carry out the decision, and Mr. Lee Steere was re-
quested to introduce the memorial, when ready, into
tli© Council.
The requests contained in the petition had, how-
ever, been forestalled in part by Governor Hampton,
who, in December, 1867, when recommending the
appointment of the six names selected, had also recom-
mended that at the end of the three years half the
Council should be elected by popular vote and the other
half should consist of official nominees, the Governor to
have a casting vote. To this suggestion the Secretary of
justified. His interference in matters relating to the
convicts, his tyrannical methods toward them, and his
action in appointing his son to the position of Acting
Comptroller-General, were strongly, and without doubt
justly, resented. There certainly was not equally good
ground for accusing him of delaying the inauguration
of representative government, though it is questionable
whether he would have urged it had not the force of
public opinion became too strong to be resisted. There
was one phase of his administration, however, that was
eminently successful —that of the erection of public
works. More than any previous Governor he applied
himself to meet the needs of the settlers in that direc-
tion, and many public buildings still in use bear testi-
VIEW AT ROTTNEST
State, in March, 1868, gave his approval, but recpiircd
that the electoral subdivisions proposed and the
qualifications of electors should be submitted to him
before being finally settled by the local authorities.
When the Governor announced the course that was to
be followed there was some demur on account of the
casting vote, which in popular opinion left the balance
of power still on the side of officialdom. Consequently
signatures to the petition continued to be sought for.
This was the position in November, 1868, when Dr.
Hampton resigned and left the colony. His administra-
tion could scarcely be described as peaceful, and there
is no doubt that much of the public criticism of it was
mony to the success of his efforts, lie used convict
labour largely for these purposes, it is true; but, after
all, Western Australia was entitled to any benefit she
might receive from that labour as some return for con-
senting to allow the incubus of a criminal population
to rest upon her. On the whole the benefits he con-
ferred were lasting in nature, while his mistakes were
but ephemeral.
During the period which elapsed between Dr.
Hampton’s departure apd the arrival of his successor
the affairs of the colony were administered by the Com-
mandant, Lieutenant-Colonel Bruce. The only matter
of interest that occurred at this time was the visit of


the Duke of Edinburgh, who landed at Fremantle on
February 3, 1869, and remained in the colony for four
days, during which there was much feasting and rejoicing.
It was generally believed that Sir Benjamin Pine
would succeed Governor Hampton, but about the middle
of the year information was received that the vacancy
had been filled by the appointment of Air. Frederick
Aloysius Weld.
CHAPTER XIII.
1869-1875.
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNOR WELD—CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGES—PROGRESSIVE
LEGISLATION—LAND LAWS—RAILWAYS AND TELEGRAPHS—GENERAL
DEVELOPMENT—EXPLORATION.
The new Governor, Mr. Frederick A. Weld, arrived
in the colony on September 30, 1869. lie was not with-
out colonial experience, having spent many years in New
Zealand, during which he had on more than one occa-
sion been a Minister of the Crown. From 1864 to 1865
he was Premier of that colony, resigning on account of
ill-health. The position of Governor of Western Aus-
tralia was offered to him to mark the Secretary of State’s
appreciation of his successful management of New
Zealand affairs. One of his first acts in his new sphere
of duty was to gain a practical knowledge of the terri-
tory he was called upon to govern, and with this end
in view he travelled over most of the settled districts of
the south-west and east, forming his own conclusions of
the j3ossibilities of the colony. In a despatch upon the
subject he described the country from north to south,
except where areas had been cleared for cultivation, as
one vast forest in the sense that it was heavily timbered.
While the good land so far as wheat-growing was con-
cerned was patchy and scattered, yet in most places it
was possible to grow something. The lightness of the
crops was ‘ 'owing in a great measure to overcropping
and slovenly farming.” Vine-growing, in his opinion,
deserved very much more attention than it received, and
the wine produced, though unscientifically prepared,
was likely to possess many of the qualities of Spanish
wines. The roads (as might be expected where convict
labour had been at work) he found wonderfully good,
and the country had great facilities for the construction
of roads, railways, and telegraphs.
All this goes to show not only that Mr. Weld was
an accurate observer, but that he had a first-class know-
ledge of the things that were necessary for the country’s
prosperity, and his administration proved that he had
both the energy and ability required to put them into
successful operation.
The principal matter that he had to deal with at
the outset of his term was that of representative govern-
ment. Successive Secretaries of State had informed
Governor Hampton that the imperial authorities were
favourable, but the conclusion of his term arrived be-
fore the idea could be carried into effect. The petition
prepared in accordance with the resolution of the public
meeting of February, 1868, was presented by Mr. Lee
Steere to the Legislative Council in 1869. It was suffi-
cient, containing as it did 1,649 authenticated signa-
tures, to show the mind of the settlers upon the ques-
tion. As the new Governor was expected to arrive
within a little time Lieutenant-Colonel Bruce asked that
consideration of it be postponed till he came, but agreed
to the appointment of a committee to draft a Bill and
divide the colony into electoral districts. Mr. Weld on
his arrival took the earliest opportunity of showing his
sympathy with the movement. Speaking at Bunbury
early in 1870 he stated that the new system of govern-
ment would be introduced as quickly as possible. At
the same time he warned them that the natural outcome
of representative government was responsible govern-
ment, a consummation for which in his opinion the
colony was not prepared. Further, whatever scheme of
representation was evolved, it would be necessary for the
Home Government to have a strong voice in local affairs,
at any rate while large amounts from Imperial funds were
being expended in the colony. To some this speech
seemed too vague and indefinite to be satisfactory, but
any doubts that may have arisen were set at rest soon
after Mr. Weld’s return to Perth. In communicating to
Mr. Lee Steere the tenor of a despatch from Lord Gian-
ville supporting the wishes of the colonists, he con-
cluded : “It is unnecessary for me to say that I shall
very cordially co-operate in the work that now lies be-
fore us, and 1 trust, with God’s blessing, and the sup-
port of the people of this colony, to conduct it to a suc-
cessful issue.”
The advocates for the change did not allow public
feeling to grow cold. Meetings were held at various
centres, and resolutions urging the introduction of the
Bill were passed. At Bunbury Mr. Steere expressed


himself forcibly to the effect that ‘die was shocked and
indignant at the indifference shown to public opinion
by the Executive; that it was the arbitrary will of one
man prevailing over a Council of ciphers in the
machinery of government.” The Governor, while
advocating the desires of the colonists, did not, however,
hesitate to express to the Secretary of State his candid
opinion of the conditions existing in the colony. ‘T see
no reason,” he wrote, ‘ to suppose that under the present
system the colonists will ever become more fitted for self-
government, and 1 greatly dread that if its introduction
be long deferred they will become far less fitted. At
present there are still men among them whose English
education and English reminiscences would guide them
in the almost forgotten path; the younger generation
may grow* up with less political education and far less
thought, I fear, of the real responsibilities of good
citizens and loyal subjects. An almost primitive sim-
plicity and kindliness of manners, very jheasing to see,
strangely enough co-exists in the same country that
holds a large proportion of the criminal class; and I
should be unjust were I not to point out with gratifica-
tion that it is not uncommon to find men formerly
belonging to the latter classes who have made good set-
tlers and have raised themselves to a position of
res]3ectability and independence. An influx of popula-
tion and riches, such a ‘rush’ as has heretofore taken
place in almost every other portion of the Australian
colonies, would, did it find us under the present system,
result in an almost irresistible demand for universal
suffrage and responsible government at a time when
such a concession would be unsafe and pregnant with
disastrous consequences.”
By the provisions of 13-14 Viet., c. 59 (1850), and
certain provisions of 5-6 Viet., c. 76 (1842), and 7-8
Viet., c. 74 (1844), which relate to the constitution of
the Legislative Council, and under which the new Bill
was prepared, the Governor was empowered, subject to
the assent of the Imperial Government, to establish a
new Legislative Council on providing for the payment
out of colonial funds of all expenses of the civil establish-
ment. Such Council should consist of nominated and
official and elected members, the nominated and official
to number together one-third of the wdiole, and the
elected to represent electoral districts which were to be
determined. With any increase in elected members
there must be a corresponding increase in nominees to
preserve the ratio of one-third to two-thirds. Every
adult man of twenty-one years of age was to be entitled
to vote, provided he owned property worth £IOO, was
a householder paying £lO a year, or held a depasturing
license. No person could be elected as a member unless
he possessed property of the annual value of £IOO or
the capital value of £2,000. The nominated members
were to hold office for five years, except in case of a
dissolution, and were to be appointed by the Queen.
Power of appointment might be delegated to the Gover-
nor. Forfeiture of a seat followed upon absence for two
successive sessions, insolvency, or fraud. The term of
election was five years. The Council must meet at least
once in every year at such time and place as the Gover-
nor deemed expedient, and the Governor could prorogue
or dissolve the Council whenever he considered such a
course necessary. A member of the Council must be
elected as Speaker, and the election approved by the
Governor, before any business was transacted.
The Governor, who under the new system ceased to
be a member of the Council, was required to transmit
for the consideration of members such Bills as he desired
to introduce. All Bills before becoming law must, after
passing through the Council, be assented to by the
Governor, who was bound by the provisions of the Act
and also by whatever instructions he might receive from
the Imperial authorities. Permission to make laws for
the appropriation of Crown lands was specially withheld,
and Bills dealing with certain other questions as, e.g .,
divorce, must be reserved for Imperial sanction. Altera-
tions in the Constitution also required the assent of the
Crown. Beyond these matters the Council had general
legislative authority. These were the main provisions of
the Act of 1850. Any Constitution framed under it was
to come into effect upon the issue of the writs for the
elections.
The Bill which was introduced by Governor Weld
on May 23, 1870, in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, provided for a Council of eighteen, of whom
twelve were to be elected, three to be nominated by tile
Governor, and three official members —the Colonial
Secretary, the Surveyor-General, and the Attorney-
General.
The fact that the Governor retained the power of
veto rather discounted the value of the concession in the
eyes of some, whilst others were disappointed because
the local legislature would not be able to make land
laws. A few were anxious, notwithstanding the finan-
cial aspect, to secure full responsible government, and a
still smaller section, representing the old conservative
element, could see no prospect of advantage in any
change at all. The Bill, as Governor Weld said, was
not perfect, but there is no doubt that it was a distinct
step forward, and provided all that could reasonably be
expected under the circumstances.
The Bill caused an animated discussion in the Coun-
cil, opinion being very much divided upon the subject.
Several members failed to see that any advantage would
be derived from it, while others opposed any alteration
of a system that seems to have suited their particular
requirements. On the second reading, however, it was
carried by seven votes to five, those in favour being
Governor Weld, the Colonial Secretary (Mr. F. P.


Bailee), the Attorney-General (Mr. G. F. Stone), and
Messrs. Lee Steere, Carr, Brockman, and Newman, and
those against, the Commandant (Lieutenant-Colonel
Bruce), the Surveyor-General (Captain Roe), the
Colonial Treasurer (Mr. A. Lefroy), and Messrs. Phil-
lips and Hardey.
The Bill was finally passed on June 1, a date already
memorable as the day of the foundation of the colony
and the date upon which the first convict shiq3 arrived,
immediately after the passing of the Bill the formal
opening of Perth Town Hall took place, and the occasion
under the circumstances was made one of double re-
joicing.
The writs for the new Council were issued on July
18, 1870. There were ten electoral districts—Perth,
Fremantle, Geraldton, York, Toodyay, Swan,
Greenough, Wellington, Vasse, and Albany. Perth
and Fremantle were entitled to elect two representa-
tives, and the other constituencies one each. The elec-
tions were held during October and the early part of
November, with the following result:
Perth —J. G. C. Carr and L. S. Leake.
Fremantle —E. Newman and W. D. Moore.
Swan—T. C. Gull.
Albany —John McKail.
York —J. IT. Monger.
Geraldton—Major Logue.
Greenough—George Shenton.
Toodyay —James Drummond.
Wellington —Jas, G. Lee Steere.
Vasse —J. G. Bussell.
These twelve gentlemen, with the six nominees-
three official and three unofficial —formed the first Legis-
lative Council under representative government in Wes-
tern Australia. The official members were the Colonial
Secretary (F. P. Bailee), the Surveyor-General (Mr.
Fraser), and the Attorney-General (R. J. Walcott) : the
unofficial nominees were Messrs. S. P. Phillips, M.
Brown, and W. E. Marmion. Two old and tried ser-
vants of the colony retired from their positions on the
inauguration of the new system. These were the
Surveyor-General (Captain J. S. Roe) and the Attorney-
General (Mr. Geo. F. Stone). Both pioneers, and
had done sound and excellent work for their adopted
country. To Captain Roe, who had held office as
Surveyor-General from 1829 and had been a member of
the Legislative Council since 1832, Western Australia
is especially indebted. His ability, wisdom, tact, and
judgment were always at the service of his fellow-
settlers, and no official did more —if any did so much—
to further the interests of the colony.
The new Legislative Council met for the first time
on December 5, 1870. Mr. Luke S. Leake was elected
Speaker and Mr. J. G. C. Carr Chairman «f Committees.
parties in the House. The Colonial Secretary, the
leader of the Government, was supported by the nominee
and official members as well as by the more conservative
of the elected representatives, while the more radical
section followed Mr. J. G. Lee Steere, who was the
accepted leader of the Opposition. At the outset it also
became plain that the Council did not intend to be a
mere echo of the Executive, but was determined to exer-
cise to the full the legislative powers conferred upon it.
This was especially noticeable on the introduction of a
Bill to amend the representation in the Council whereby
it was sought to remedy a defect in the wording of 13-14
Viet., c. 59, under which conditional-pardon men were
unintentionally excluded from the franchise, and also to
remove the qualification necessary for members. The Bill
was referred to a committee, which enlarged its scope by
allowing persons holding Government contracts to sit,
but debarred those who had been guilty of felony or
other infamous offences from holding office. The sugges-
tions of the committee were adopted by the House, with
the result that the Governor referred the Bill back
for further consideration. The Council promptly re-
turned it without alteration, and it was then reserved
for Her Majesty’s assent, notification of which arrived
in the colony late in July.
The first distinct step in the direction of local
government was taken during this session. In the past
the towns and rural districts had been subject to Roads
Trusts, bodies with power to levy rates for certain pur-
poses, more particularly the making and maintenance
of roads, jetties, and other means of communication.
The Municipalities Act, passed in 1871, gave the local
councils jurisdiction over roads, drains, wharves, public
buildings, pounds, boundaries, fences, and sanitation,
with power to rate and also to borrow money for the
purposes set forth. Under this Act Perth was pro-
claimed a municipality early in January, and was fol-
lowed shortly afterwards by Fremantle, Guildford,
Albany, Bunbury, Busselton, Geraldton, and York. At
the time Perth had an estimated population of 4,500.
The first municipal elections were held on March 8, and
resulted in the return of Messrs. J. B. Roe, W. Adkin-
son, and B. Smith for the East Ward; J. Dyer, J.
Dyson, and G. Randell for the Central Ward; and J.
Snowball, M. Smith, and B. Ranford for the West
Ward. Mr. Geo. Glyde, who for some years had been
chairman of the Town Trust, was elected Chairman,
being succeeded in 1874 by Mr. G. Randell.
About the same time a Local Roads Boards Act
was passed for the government of those rural districts
which were not prepared to assume the responsibilities
of municipalities. Both these Acts were amended in
1876. In the Municipalities Act the right of voting
was given to the owners or occupiers of property who
From the very first it was evident that there were two had paid their rates and had not been in receipt of


public relief. Property rated under £25 carried one
vote, with an additional vote for every increase of £25
in annual value up to a maximum of four votes. Any
voter could become a councillor, but the Chairman must
be qualified to serve as a Grand Juror. Under the
Roads Boards Act the qualification was somewhat lower.
A rateable value of £SO per annum secured the
maximum of four votes.
Probably feeling that it was incumbent upon a
i epiesentative body to do something in the way of
developing the icsources of the country, one of the early
actions of the Legislative Council was to pass a Loan
gaol, £885; coast surveys, £3,000; and extension of
Fremantle jetty, £1,675. These figures show, at any
rate, that it was not the intention of the new body to
continue in the state of stagnation reached by its pre-
decessor.
The second session of the Council was opened in
July, 1871, when several matters of grave moment to
the prosperity of the colony were decided. Principal
among these were those relating to education and the
land regulations. For years it had been the custom of
the old Legislative Council to pass an annual grant for
educational purposes. There had been growing dissatis-
VIEW AT GUILDFORD.
Bill authorizing the raising of £IOO,OOO for carrying
out public works. This seemed to the Governor so great
a departure that he reserved the Bill for the Imperial
assent, which was not given until a considerable time
had elapsed, and then only for £35,000, and under
guarantee that the interest would be met. The amount
was raised (at 6 per cent.) in 1872, and was apportioned
as follows; —Telegraph stations, £1,870; purchase of
telegraph shares, £12,000; railway surveys, Geraldton,
£1,675; Gage Roads anchorage, £1,000; jetties,
£3,340; improving the Swan River, £2,330: light-
houses, £2,500 ; Mandurah Estuary, £400; Albany
faction on the part of the Catholic community with
the manner in which this grant had been apportioned
Addresses were presented to the Council in 1869 asking
that Catholics be allowed a separate grant. Upon this
being refused, a petition was forwarded to the Secretary
of State requesting that a proportionate part of the
grant be allotted for Catholic schools. Convinced that
the matter was one for the local administration, the
Imperial Government declined to interfere, leaving it
to the representative Council to deal with. That body
also declined at its first session to make any alteration
in the existing system, but the whole question became


so acute during the recess that at the second session an
Elementary Education Act was passed and a satisfac-
tory settlement arrived at. Under the provisions of the
Act Government schools confined themselves to a purely
secular education, while the schools founded by the
various religious denominations gave instruction in
accordance with their creeds. These latter were en-
titled to receive Government aid to the amount of the
income they derived from fees or subscriptions. Re-
ligious teachers could also give instruction in Government
schools for one hour either before or after the ordinary
day’s work, the attendance of scholars being voluntary.
Inspectors could not examine in religious subjects. All
children between the ages of six and fourteen, residing
within three miles of a school, were required to attend.
The Central Board of Education consisted of the
Colonial Secretary as Chairman and four laymen of dif-
ferent denominations appointed by the Governor for
three years. This Board had control of all schools re-
ceiving Government aid, but only so far as secular in-
struction was concerned. District Boards, subject to
the Central Board, were also established ; these consisted
of five members elected for three years by the people
of the district. In order to thoroughly carry out these
provisions, £6,181 was placed on the Estimates of 1871
for educational purposes. This Act met the needs of
the community admirably, and with slight amendments
continued in operation till 1895, when the enormous
expansion of the colony due to the discovery of the gold-
fields rendered a more modern measure necessary.
As one of the grounds of opposition to the old
Council had been its ingenuity in framing land regula-
tions that did not meet with the approval of the
colonists generally, it was only to be expected that the
representative body would take the subject into con-
sideration at an earlv stage of its existence. New regula-
tions were framed in 1871, under which all land fit for
the purposes of agriculture were reserved for sale as
agricultural areas, the price being fixed at Bs. per acre,
payable in annual instalments of Is. per acre under cer-
tain conditions relating to occupation and improvement.
In the opinion of some members of the Council the price
was too high, but at the request of the Governor, who
feared the Secretary of State might object, no reduction
was made. Rural sections were fixed at 100 acres, with
provision for selecting smaller plots for garden purposes.
Under special circumstances other unreserved lands
could be reduced in price. Pastoral leases for twenty-
one years at low rents to secure improvement were ap-
proved and the fee simple offered for clearing and
fencing poison lands. New mineral regulations were
also framed, restricting the area to 200 acres and allow-
ing a right to mine for two years on payment of £1 a
year rent. Leases for twenty-eight years for mining
purposes could also be secured, starting at ss. per acre
and rising; by ss. ner acre every seven years. A Com-
O J i. *•
missioner of Crown Lands was appointed to carry out
the provisions of the regulations. Crown lands being
one of the subjects that required Imperial consent, the
proposed regulations were forwarded to the Secretary
of State for his approval. This was given, with slight
amendments, towards the close of the year, and the
regulations came into force in March, 1872, remaining
in operation until the introduction of the Torrens system
in 1875 rendered them practically obsolete. Earl Kim-
berley’s despatch showed how difficult it was for a man
without practical knowledge of colonization to under-
stand the conditions existing in a new country. Like
most of his predecessors in office he deprecated the ex-
tension of settlement into new districts, mainly on ac-
count of the increa.se in the administrative expenses that
would necessarily ensue. The despatch also refused to
allow the Governor in Council to make alterations in
the regulations, as that would involve the surrender by
the Crown of its control over waste lands.
The stumbling-block over which the first repre-
sentative Council finally came to grief was the question
of Customs duties. These had been imposed only from
the standpoint of revenue purposes, the general public
opinion being always in favour of freetrade. That was
still the view when the new Tariff Bill was introduced
into the Council at the close of 1870, the provisions of
which did not make any drastic or far-reaching altera-
tions. Under the Tariff Ordinance of 1867 spirits were
charged with a duty of 15s. per gallon, tobacco Is. 9d.
per It)., and the remaining articles of import were re-
quired to pay a duty of 7 per cent, on the invoice price.
Stock, grains, flour and meal, agricultural implements
and machinery, and other goods specially exempted by
the Governor were admitted free. The Bill of 1871,
which came into force on January 1, restricted the free
list to stock, flour and meal, plants and seeds, coals and
fuels, and several other articles not in general use. The
duties on wines, beers, spirits, tobacco, and cigars were
raised considerably, and the remaining goods subjected
to a general ad valorem duty of 7 per cent. The duties
were proposed not from the standpoint of protection but
as a means of increasing the revenue, which was show-
ing distinct signs of falling off owing to the diminishing
convict expenditure, poor seasons, and a general fall
in prices of those commodities which the colony was able
to export. Several of the country members, however,
no doubt looking for a good local market, were anxious
to see duties placed on flour and other articles that
could be locally produced ; in other words, favoured a
protective tariff. The question was warmly debated
during the recess, and soon after the second session of
the Council met in July, 1871, it formed a subject for
further consideration.
Early in August Mr. Logue moved that flour and


meal be removed from the free list and charged with a
duty of 20s. per ton. This was strongly opposed, and a
rather strenuous debate followed, the principal argu-
ment in favour ol the proposal being that it would con-
fer a distinct benefit upon the farmers and at the same
time assist the revenue. In the end the advocates for
protection—some of whom professed to be freetraders—
won the day by the narrow majority of one. When the
proposal was embodied in a Tariff Bill it passed the
third reading by a majority of throe, ten voting for it
and seven against.
The members of the Freetrade League, which was
at this time a particularly active institution, waited
upon the Governor and asked him not to assent to the
Bill. Convinced that the tax would not produce much
there would be little to attract attention in the amount
of work performed, there is no doubt that in a small
colony (which from the standpoint of population Wes-
tern Australia then was), hitherto ruled by an official
class which did not always see eye to eye with the people,
the results of the Parliament marked a very distinct
step forward. The Survey Department had been re-
organized ; more liberal land regulations passed ; a com-
prehensive and equitable educational system brought
into operation; and a useful programme of public works
arranged. On the whole there was every reason to feel
satisfied with the change brought about by the intro-
duction of representative government.
The new Council met on July 20, 1872. The official
members remained the same, but Messrs. W. E. Mar-
HOMESTEAD, STATE FARM, NARROGIN.
in the way of revenue, and that it would press harshly
upon the poorer classes, Governor Weld on August 17
applied the veto. As the notification of the Queen’s
assent to the Act to amend the representation of the
people had been received just previously, Mr. Weld con-
sidered the time opportune for putting it into force,
and thus by a dissolution solve the difficulty created by
his rejection of the Tariff Bill, and allow the people as
a whole, by means of a fresh election, to express their
opinion upon that matter.
The Legislative Council was therefore formally dis-
solved on the date mentioned, with an expression of the
Governor's confidence in the beneficial effects of those
free institutions which he had endeavoured to foster
during his term of office. Though in a larger community
mion, A. P. Bussell, and W. Bickley took the places of
the previous unofficial nominees. Of the elective mem-
bers nine were returned again, the other three—Messrs.
W. D. Moore, T. C. Gull, and J. Mclvail giving place
to Messrs. W. S. Pearce, W. L. Brockman, and T. C.
Carey. The previous Speaker and Chairman of Conn
mittees were re-elected to those positions. One of the
burning questions during the elections was that of
tariff reform. The Governor was in favour of low
duties, if not of complete freetrade, and chose as his un-
official nominees gentlemen who held the same views.
The representatives of the larger towns also supported
the Government, but those from the rural constituencies
were strongly protectionist. When the question came
up for consideration it was evident that the protectionist


section had a majority, and the resulting Tariff Act,
though it would scarcely be called protective nowadays,
had a distinct leaning in that direction. The general
duties were raised to 10 per cent. ; corn and grains, rice
excepted, were charged with 6d. per bushel ; bran, pol-
lard, meal, and hay, 20s. per ton; butter, 3d. per It).;
potatoes, 10s. per ton; spirits, 14s. per gallon ; beer and
cider, 9d. per gallon : sugar, 4s. per cwt. ; tea, 4d. per
ft).; tobacco, 2s. 6d. per ft). ; and cigars, ss. per ft).
Flour, agricultural implements, and machinery, fencing-
wire, and so forth were placed on the free list, though
flour only remained there after a stubborn fight and by
a narrow majority.
Out of these discussions upon the tariff question
arose the beginnings of the agitation for responsible
government. In the first place the attitude of the
Governor towards the suggestion of protective duties
raised the question whether officialism was not still
supreme. To throw greater power into the hands of
the representatives of the people, Mr. Lee Steere pro-
posed to double the number of elected representatives.
In order to prevent such a drastic step from being taken
Mr. Weld compromised by offering to increase the repre-
sentation by creating two new constituencies, claiming
at the same time an additional official nominee. These
proposals were embodied in a Bill introduced by the
Colonial Secretary in July, 1873. The new districts
were termed the Northern and the Murray and Welling-
ton. To this Bill Mr. Lee Steere, who seems to have
been the spokesman for the more radically inclined mem-
bers of the community, moved a series of sweeping
amendments to the effect that the constitution of the
Executive Council should be altered by the addition of
elected members, so as to bring its decisions more into
harmony with the Legislature and with public opinion ;
that with the exception of four officials —the Colonial
Secretary, Attorney-General, Surveyor-General, and
Colonial Treasurer, all members of the Legislative Coun-
cil should be elected by a constituency; that the con-
stituencies returning one member should for the future
elect two; and that provision be made for regulating
voting by proxy. The suggestions were vigorously op-
posed by the Colonial Secretary as leader of the Govern-
ment, and ultimately all of them, with the exception
of that relating to proxy voting, were withdrawn, and
the Bill was passed.
All this is evidence of a growing feeling in favour
of a wider form of government. Representative govern-
ment it was considered had not fulfilled the people’s
expectations. Mr. Lee Steere, one of the strongest advo-
cates in favour of it, confessed that it was “ill-suited
for the requirements of this colony or any other,” and
many others who had been among its warmest advocates
became bitter opponents. Such opinions, widely dis-
seminated, were bound to lead in the direction of respon-
sible government, and by 1874 the desire for a change
became the burning question of the hour. In June of
that year a public meeting was held at Bunbury in
favour of the change, and Mr. Lee Steere —who had
previously doubted the wisdom of such a course —agreed
to support responsible government in and out of the
Council. In the following month he moved a resolution
in the Legislative Council affirming that responsible
government would tend to the future progress of the
colony, and asking for a Select Committee to frame a
constitution. After some discussion an amendment
moved by Mr. Crowther was passed, affirming the in-
tegrity of the existing Government and asking the
Governor to introduce a Bill providing for autonomy,
and to recommend Her Majesty to approve of it.
Governor Weld, rightly judging that the wisest
course to pursue was to assist rather than oppose, pro-
mised to prepare such a measure, and in case of its adop-
tion to recommend it to the favourable consideration of
the Crown. In pursuance of that promise, a Bill to
establish a Constitution for Western Australia and to
grant a Civil List to Her Majesty was introduced into
the Council on August 3, 1874, by the Colonial Secre-
tary. It provided for the establishment of an Upper
and a Lower House, the one to be wholly nominated by
the Governor-in-Council and the other to consist of
twenty-five elected members. The Lower House was to
have the sole power of originating money Bills and of
imposing, altering, or repealing taxes. It was to be
elected for five years. Judges, ministers of religion,
and public contractors were debarred from sitting in
either House, and any member accepting an office of
profit under the Crown would thereby forfeit his seat.
The control of the lands was to come under the Parlia-
ment, subject to a Civil List charge of £9,729 annually.
Compensation was provided, either by way of pension or
retiring allowance, for those officers whose positions
would be abolished by the change.
Owing to the nominee character of the proposed
Upper House the scheme did not meet with any degree
of acceptance. Mr. Lee Steere proposed that considera-
tion of the measure be postponed until the country had
been given an opportunity of expressing its opinion.
This was negatived by the House, but acted upon by
the Governor, who dissolved the Council on the follow-
ing day. The result of the election showed that public
opinion strongly favoured responsible government. The
matter was not, however, brought before the new House
which met in November to pass supply, Governor Weld
explaining that as he was on the eve of departure from
the colony it would be more fitting to allow his successor
to deal with it, especiallv as Mr. Robinson would prob-
ably be more in touch with the views of the Home
authorities. At the risk of anticipating a little, it may
be said that the proposal for responsible government


came to nothing at that time. One of the first actions
of the new Governor (Sir William Robinson) was to
read to the Council a despatch from the Secretary of
State mildly censuring Governor Weld for being a little
too precipitate in his desire to meet the wishes of the
colonists, and pointing out that the Imperial Govern-
ment was not prepared to recommend responsible govern-
ment, more par-
ticularly as Mr.
Weld himself
had on previous
occasions depre
cated any such
extension. After
referring to this.
Lord Carnarvon
continued: “It
is with some sur-
prise and regret
that I now learn
that without any
previous intima-
tion that such a
measure was con-
templated, or any
reference to the
opinions of Her
Majesty's Gov-
ernment, the
Governor has
publicly pledged
himself that this
most serious
change shall im-
mediately be
made, and that
a Bill dealing
with many ques-
tions of diffi-
culty, in respect
of which care
must in any case
be exercised, has
been considered
by the Council.
We are
dealing with a
colony of vast
extent, at pre-
sent inhabited
by a population estimated at 26,000 persons, of
whom it is stated some 8,000 are adult males,
and of these, as I understand, between 5,000
and 6,000 are persons formerly transported as convicts
from this country.” After pointing out the large in-
crease in expenditure that responsible government would
N
entail in the way of administration as well as in the
direction of providing for the supervision of the remain-
ing convicts, and stating that he had promised Governor
Weld to give the matter due consideration if a clear
majority of the people desired it, he concluded : “But
on a calm review of its present circumstances and con-
ditions, 1 cannot but question whether this great altera-
tion is not some-
what premature,
and I feel it my
duty, though not
a grateful one to
me personally, to
withhold any
hasty consent,
and to interpose
such prudent de-
-1 ays as will
secure a full and
dispassionate con-
sideration of a
decision which is
fraught with
such important
consequences to
the colony.” This
despatch practic-
ally settled the
matter for the
time being.
Every now and
again an endea-
vour was made
to resuscitate it,
and the Press
occasionally in-
ferred that it
was on the eve
of being granted,
but Governor
Robinson gave it
little or no sup-
port, and gradu-
ally the whole
discussion fell
into abeyance.
Notwithstand-
ing the large
amount of time
and interest that
was given to constitutional questions during the
term of office of Governor Weld, opportunity was also
found to consider many matters of vital importance
to the material wellbeing of the community. As re-
gards facilities for communication and transit, Western
Australia lagged far behind the rest of the civilized
KING KAURI, 242 FEET HIGH, 40 FEET GIRTH


world. Up to 1869 there was not a single mile of tele-
graph line or railway in the colony. Requests had been
repeatedly made to the old Legislative Council to take
these matters in hand, but always without result. The
first move was made by two private citizens, Messrs.
Edmund Stirling and Gumming, who on their own
responsibility erected a telegraph line between Perth
and Fremantle and opened it for public business in
June, 1869. This created such a stir that in 1870 the
Government felt compelled to take the question of tele-
graph extension into consideration. In May of that
year a resolution was passed by the Legislative Council
at the instance of the Colonial Secretary authorizing
the construction of lines between Perth and Albany,
Bunbury, York, and Newcastle. The work was to be done
by an Electro-Magnetic Telegraph Company, which was
formed with a capital of £12,000, the interest upon
which was guaranteed by the Government. The direc-
tors were Messrs. Leake, Carr, Shenton, Birch, Glyde,
Moore, King, McKail, Clifton, Steere, and Monger,
with Major Crampton as Chairman and A. J. Hillman
as Secretary. A second company was formed shortly
afterwards, but the two were amalgamated in 1871.
Tenders were invited for the construction of the various
lines, and by the end of 1872 the work was completed.
When the loan of £35,000 allowed by the Secretary of
State was floated in 1872, £12,000 out of the proceeds
was applied to the purchase of these lines by the Govern-
ment, and arrangements were made for rapid extension.
The loan was soon absorbed, and in 1873 a further
amount of £lOO,OOO was authorized. The first moiety
of this was raised in Melbourne in 1874, and the second
shortly afterwards. It was wholly applied to railway
and telegraph extension. Communication by wire was
established in 1874 between Newcastle and Geraldton,
and in January, 1875, just prior to leaving the colony,
Governor Weld installed the first pole of an overland
line between Perth and Eucla. This line was completed
by the end of 1877, and as Eucla was already connected
with Adelaide, and Adelaide with London, it brought
Western Australia into touch with the outside world.
The length of the line is about 749 miles, and the cost
of its construction about £42,000, nearly 30s. per head
of the population at that time.
Following closely upon the institution of the tele-
graph came the development of a railway system. The
first efforts in that direction were made by private com-
panies operating in the timber forests, and the lines
were built primarily to facilitate the transport of timber
to the coast. Towards the end of 1871 the Western
Australian Timber Company built and opened a line
connecting their jetty at the Vasse with the timber
forests about 12 miles away. Shortly afterwards
Messrs. Mason, Bird, & Co., who were working a timber
concession in the Darling Ranges, established a railway
from the Canning to Rockingham and a tramway from
Canning to the jarrah forests.
Movement by private firms in the direction of rail-
way extension seems to have spurred the Government on
to take action. In 1871 a committee, consisting of the
Surveyor-General, Mr. Drummond, and Mr. Gull, was
appointed to report on the subject of a railway to York
and the eastern districts. The public and the Press
urged that this should be undertaken, together with one
from Geraldton to Northampton, so as to cheapen the
cost of transport for agricultural produce and for
minerals. In December it was decided to accept the
services of a Melbourne engineer to make accurate sur-
veys of these lines. The result of these was the decision
to construct the Geraldton-Northampton line, but the
want of funds delayed the commencement of the work
until after the loan of 1874 had been floated. The first
sod was turned on October 22, 1874, but the line was
not completed until 1879. Its actual cost was far in
advance of the original estimate of £50,000. By the
time rolling stock had been secured and the telegraph
line erected £147,217, or about £4,300 per mile, had
been expended. For the first few years its earnings
were not sufficient to meet working expenses.
Contrary to expectation, it was not until 1873 that
any suggestion was definitely made to connect Perth
with Fremantle and Guildford by a railway. In that
year it was discussed in the Council, and though a re-
solution was passed favouring a trial survey, it was
apparent that the weight of opinion was against it.
There seems to have been a fear that it was too great
an undertaking for a small community, as well as a
suspicion that it would in some measure interfere with
vested interests, such as the carrying trade on the river.
Consequently the question was allowed to lapse for the
time.
Notwithstanding the generally hopeful feeling that
prevailed on Governor Weld’s assumption of office, the
revenue and expenditure during the early years of his
administration gave some cause for disquiet. The cessa-
tion of transportation naturally brought about a de-
crease in the convict expenditure. Added to this, the
year 1870 was subject to a severe drought, greatly affect-
ing both the pastoral and agricultural industries, and
a scourge of red rust, which had first made its appear-
ance in 1868, grew more pronounced. These causes com-
bined brought about a shrinkage in income which at
first promised to be serious, and called for the use of
the pruning-knife in retrenchment, more especially as
the expenditure, through the operation of the very same
causes, increased yearly by a fairly considerable amount.
The general expansion of trade and industry fortunately
acted in some measure as a counterpoise, and by the
end of 1872 the balance was once more on the right
side. The fluctuations of revenue and expenditure and


Income.
Expenditure. | Imports.
Exports.
£
£ £
£
1869
103,661
103,124 256,729
205,502
1870
98,131
113,046 213,258
200,984
1871
97,605
107,147 198,010
199,120
1872
105,300
98,248 226,656
209,196
1873
134,831
114,269 297,327
265,217
1874
148,072
143,266 364,262
1
428,836
of imports and exports during the years 1869-1874 may
he seen from the accompanying table;
The income in each year included about ,£15,000
contributed by the Imperial Government towards the
cost of the police, magistracy, and charitable relief.
During the period the Imperial expenditure upon the
convict establishment dropped from £107,023 to
£78,759. This reduction was due to the fact that the
number of convicts under control was yearly becoming
less, and it consequently became possible to concentrate
them at Fremantle and close the various depots through-
out the country, a course which in the opinion of the
colonists was more in the interests of the Home Govern-
ment than of Western Australia.
In spite of the operation of these various factors,
the depression was of slight effect and of but momentary
duration. In 1872 there were signs of returning pros-
perity all along the line, though it was not until 1874
that the corner was turned and the colony became an
exporter in place of an importer. Wool, of course, con-
tinued to be the staple commodity —even though the pas-
toral industry was hampered by dry seasons and other
drawbacks —the quantity sent away in 1874 being valued
at £215,624. After wool came sandalwood, timber,
pearls and pearl shell, guano, and minerals. The
sandalwood trade varied with the local demand for
general labour, and also with the prices ruling at Singa-
pore and other ports to which it was sent, but during
these years it reached its highest point of development.
From 1869 to 1874 the total value exported was £273,838,
of which £70,572 was dispatched in the latter year.
The hardwood timbers were not quite so much sought
after, though the foundations were being laid for the
important trade in these woods which has since been
developed. In 1869 Lieutenant-Colonel Bruce informed
the Legislative Council that over £lOO,OOO worth of
orders for jarrah from India had been refused owing
to the difficulty of transport to the sea. This was sur-
mounted by railways and tramlines, and the industry
began to forge ahead. In 1871 a Victorian company
began operations at Wonnerup, and others followed.
The inclusion of jarrah (1872) and karri (1873) by
Lloyds among the A class of ship-building timbers
brought these hardwoods more prominently before
buyers, and the export trade, which in' 1872 had fallen
to £2,500, rose in 1874 to £24,194.
n 2
The development of the pearl and pearl shell in-
dustry, which had attracted considerable attention dur-
ing the early sixties after the opening up of the North-
West, received a strong stimulus early in 1869 through
the discovery of a pearl valued at £260. Like the find-
ing of a nugget to the mining industry, this caused a
mild rush to engage in pearling, especially as shell at
that time would bring £IBO per ton. The number of
boats engaged in the trade was largely increased, and
pearling became one of the recognized industries of the
colony. In 1869 about 54 tons of shell were raised, and
sold for £6,490 ; from that onward the amount increased
every year, and in 1874 308 tons were sold for £61,600,
as well as pearls to the value of £12,000.
The principal fishing grounds were off the coast
around Nickol Bay, but inferior shell of little value was
also secured in Shark Bay. The diving was performed
by natives, many of whom were women, and the treat-
ment of these latter was certainly not in many instances
creditable to the white pearlers. So acute did the moral
aspect of the question become that in the interests of
the aborigines the Legislative Council was compelled
to pass an Act prohibiting the employment of women
as divers. To interference with the native women may
be attributed many of the murders committed by
aborigines in and around the pearling station. In
January, 1873, two pearlers, R. Shea and S. Miller,
left their camp on the coast near the De Grey to look
for certain native deserters. In the following month
their mutilated bodies were discovered. Several natives
were tried for the murder, and in the course of the
trial it transpired that Miller had been murdered in
mistake for a well-known settler conduct had
been such as to call for retaliation on the part of the
blacks. The prohibition against employing women led
to the engagement (often compulsory) of Malays, who
were found to be more satisfactory in the deeper waters.
In 1874 some 500 divers of all classes were engaged
along the coast.
The lead and copper mines in the Champion Bay
district continued to be adversely affected by the difficul-
ties of transport, and the output fluctuated consider-
ably. In 1870 1,209 tons of ore, valued at £14,514.
were raised, but in the following years there was an
appreciable decrease, and it was not until 1874 that
any evidence of progress was apparent. In that year
2,209 tons of lead and copper ore were exported and
sold for £26,723. Five mines were working the
Geraldine, Wheel of Fortune, Yanganooka, Gwalla,
Wanerenooka, and Gelira. The first two had reached
a depth of over 300 ft., and the others between 100 and
200 ft.
The search for gold still continued, spurred on by
the Government’s offer of a bonus of £5,000, which had
been extended to cover the discovery of a payable field


within 300 miles of any declared port. In 1869 traces
were discovered at North Dandalup, on the strength of
which the prospectors applied, without success, for the
reward. In 1870 several reports of discoveries were re-
ceived —one on the Blackwood River and others on the
Murchison. Gold certainly was found on the Upper
Irwin, but not in sufficient quantities to make it worth
mining under the extremely unfavourable conditions
that existed, though several attempts were made. This
district had previously been described as auriferous by
the Rev. C. G. Nicolay and Mr. Simpson, whose
opinions have since been verified. During this year
(1870) the Secretary of State notified that the Crown
waived all rights to minerals on Crown lands, but the
concession did not bring any payable field to light.
Samples of quartz from Kelmscott, Newcastle, and
Baylup, assayed in Sydney in 1872, were all found to
contain traces of gold, and the Rockingham Bay Mining
Company found it on the Serpentine. These discoveries
over such a wide area induced the Council in 1873 to
procure sixteen practical miners from Ballarat to pros-
pect, and a private party found specimens at Kendenup,
about 40 miles from Albany. A company was formed
to work this district, but its endeavours were without
result. To afford every facility a quartz battery was
erected at Fremantle in 1874 to crush specimens found.
All efforts, however, were fruitless, and though reports
of gold discoveries continued to be made known, the
colony was not able at that time to add gold to the list
of exports. Boring for coal was also carried on, but
without any satisfactory result.
Amongst all the energy and activity displayed, it
is regrettable to find that the great primary industry
—agriculture—suffered a serious reverse. Fields that
had been tilled regularly for years were abandoned and
some of the smaller settlements almost deserted. The
reasons for this unfortunate state of things were many.
Foremost among them were the bad seasons and the
repeated attacks of red rust in the wheat. Then ignor-
ance of proper farming methods had almost exhausted
the soil, and consequently the yields diminished even
in good seasons. Timber-cutting and pearling also exer-
cised some influence, and many of the farmers turned
to those callings which, though more hazardous, pro-
mised greater returns for considerably less labour and
afforded better opportunities for social intercourse.
Perhaps, too, the absence of specie and the system of
barter that obtained in most of the rural districts had
some effect. There was little desire for increased re-
turns when the increase could only be exchanged for
other commodities and was rarely the means of bring-
ing actual money to the producer.
The areas affected by red rust were principally the
Victoria, Champion Bay, and Irwin districts. In 1869-
70 (he trouble was accentuated by drought. To prevent
the ruin of many of the small holders Colonel Bruce,
as Acting-Governor, spent over £3,000 in seed wheat
for distribution under a bond for repayment after the
harvest. This temporarily gave heart to the farmers,
and a fall in the price of sandalwood in 1871 caused
many who had deserted to return to the plough as at
any rate a surer means of livelihood. In that year
flour to the value of £4,822 was exported. A return
of the red-rust plague in 1872 brought great distress
to the settlers in the districts mentioned, and the flour
exported that year was reduced by half. The evil was
more apparent still in the succeeding years. In 1873
the area under wheat was 7,000 acres less than in the
previous year, and in 1874 a further drop of 2,000 acres
occurred. In both these years, and for many years
afterwards, flour and grain became articles of import
in place of export. This loss of interest in agricultural
pursuits is the one instance of retrogression during
Governor Weld's administration.
Settlement in the North-West received a severe
setback in March, 1872, through a hurricane of excep-
tional violence. The district had previously been
visited by cyclones, but none had done such serious
damage. Within half an hour the little town of Roe-
bourne was destroyed by the wind and rain, and many
of the townspeople were injured. Cossack—a new town
on the coast —also suffered, though not to the same
extent. The various station-holders round about were
disastrously affected. On the Nickol River Mr. Venn
lost 2,000 sheep and several horses; Mr. Mackay's house
was carried away by the flood and 1,500 of his sheep
were drowned. At East Harding Mr. Withnell lost 600
sheep and some horses, and about 1,000 sheep belonging
to Pyramid Station were destroyed. In fact, every
squatter within the sphere of influence of the cyclone
suffered to some extent; in a few hours almost, the re-
sults of many years' privation and hard work were swept
away. Fortunately the limits of the storm were cir-
cumscribed, and settlers along the De Grey River
escaped. It took some years to repair the damage, and
in some measure the occurrence adversely affected the
expansion of settlement in the North-West.
The importance of the convict establishment rapidly
dwindled with the cessation of transportation. Where
in 1869 there were 2,836 men more or less under prison
control, in 1878 there were but 608. One serious feature
was the growing number of convict paupers and infirm
persons. In 1871 there were estimated to be nearly 800
in the colony who had to be supported by the Govern-
ment. An attempt was made to persuade the Imperial
Government to bear this burden, but without success.
It was one of the penalties that followed in the wake
of the system, and for years was a heavy tax upon the
community. More than 8 per cent, of the revenue in
1872 went to support gaols, hospitals, and poorhouses.


Crime naturally diminished, though the statistics show
that it was still large. Many were hanged, but not as
previously, in public. This barbarous custom was
abolished in 1872. Attempts at escape continued. In
one case a prisoner crawled into a tub on an outgoing
boat; some days later he emerged more dead than alive,
only to be returned to Fremantle for a further term of
imprisonment. Some trouble was occasioned by several
Fenians who were allowed to leave the colony in 1869-71
on conditional pardon. The P. & 0. Company refused
to take them, but several managed to get away on a
steamer to New Zealand, intending to proceed to the
United States. Although they were ignorant of the
fact, special legislation was in force in New Zealand
to insert in all conditional-pardon certificates that the
holders of them are excluded from going to any of the
Australian colonies. This direction to enforce the pro-
hibition greatly affected numerous men who were pre-
paring to leave Western Australia for the eastern colonies.
Out of a question of convict administration there
arose in 1870 a very serious case involving the liberty
of the Press, which not only created widespread public
interest but gave rise to a bitterness of feeling that
lasted for very many years. A ticket-of-leave holder
named Young was brought back to the prison on the
warrant of the Comptroller-General for (it is believed)
making reflections on the management of Fremantle
Prison. Doubting the legality of the proceedings
LOG HAULING. BLACKBUTT, MORNINGTON
prohibiting the landing of conditional-pardon men.
They were consequently arrested and threatened with
deportation back to Western Australia, but the oppor-
tune arrival of a vessel bound to California saved them;
they were allowed to proceed to San Francisco. The
New Zealand Government made strong representation
to the Western Australian authorities for allowing these
men to disregard the prohibition against entering their
domains, to which the Western Australian Government
replied pleading, like the men themselves, ignorance of
the existence of such an Act. New Zealand then com-
plained to the Secretary of State, who admitted their
right to exclude, and in 1872 instructed Governor Weld
Young’s wife retained Mr. (now Sir) S. H. Parker, and
instructed him to apply for a writ of habeas corpus.
Mr. Parker had an interview with Young, who was in-
clined to wait the result of an appeal for mercy to the
Governor before taking other steps. This appeal failed,
and when Mr. Parker applied to see Young over the
matter his application was refused on the ground that
Young had declined to see him. Mr. Parker visited
the prison, but was refused access, whereupon he made
the affidavit supporting the application himself. The
Comptroller-General complained that the affidavit was
materially wrong, as it did not state that Young de-
clined to see Mr. Parker. Mr. Parker urged that the


point had really nothing to do with the question, as he
had actually been refused access to the prisoner. Judge
Burt, however, thought differently, and fined Mr.
Parker for malpractice and misconduct. Smarting
under what he felt was an injustice, Mr. Parker wrote
a letter to The Inquirer criticizing the judge's action
and practically imputing prejudice —an imputation
which an impartial review of the whole affair will
sustain. The Perth Gazette also espoused his cause, and
made some scathing remarks about both the judge and
the Comptroller-General. Out of these remarks arose
the second stage of the proceedings, which came dan-
gerously near a travesty of justice. Stirling Brothers,
editors of The Inquirer , and Arthur Shenton, editor of
The Gazette , were called by Judge Burt before himself
to explain their actions. The editors regretted publica-
tion, but Mr. Shenton made some attempt to justify
what he had done on the ground that the actions of
jiublic men were open to fair and legitimate comment.
Judge Burt then, after making some attempt to explain
why he sat in judgment on a case in which he was one
of the most interested parties, sentenced the Stirlings
to thirty days’ imprisonment, and poor Shenton to two
months with £IOO fine in addition. At a subsequent
stage Mr. Parker was also fined <£loo for his share in
the proceedings. The editors went to gaol, but yielding
to persuasion they agreed to publish apologies and were
released. Shenton then petitioned for a remission o±
the fine, but without avail. The judge threatened
attachment unless the fine was paid forthwith. Both
Mr. Shenton and Mr. Parker then petitioned the Secre-
tary of State, but he declined to interfere. Ultimately
Mr. Shenton's fine was remitted, but not until after
his death, when the judge's harshness could follow him
no further, though it may have contributed towards his
decease. The incident then closed, but The Express , a
younger newspaper, was not far from the truth when it
declared that the whole community was “seriously
alarmed at the discovery of what a fearful engine the
laws apparently provide and place in the hands of the
sole judge." The community ought to have been more
concerned about the purity of the administration of
justice.
Native troubles, except in the North-West, had by
this time practically disappeared, and the efforts of the
Legislature were directed rather toward the protection
of the aborigines than toward repression. A Select Com-
mittee in 1871 suggested grants of land under certain
conditions, and in a revision of the land regulations
made some years later this idea was carried into effect.
A case showing the desire of the Government to
afford the natives the protection of the law arose in
1872. Mr. L. C. Burges was charged at Perth before
the P.M. (Mr. E. W. Landor) and three justices
for shooting at a native with intent to kill. As a
matter of fact the black was actually killed in attempt-
ing to escape after capture for stealing Burges' saddle
while the settler was making a trip from Nickol Bay
to Geraldton through a district infested with savages.
After hearing the evidence the magistrates reduced the
charge to one of shooting with intent to do bodily harm.
For this Governor Weld, no doubt actuated by a desire
to protect the natives, suspended Mr. Landor on the
ground of “want of capacity, or partiality, or both, in
favour of the accused, who was a member of an in-
fluential family. The justices then resigned in protest.
Burges was tried at the Supreme Court in September,
and the jury were instructed by Judge Burt to return
a verdict of murder or manslaughter. He was found
guilty of the latter and sentenced to five years' penal
servitude. The severity of the sentence caused a great
outcry, and the Secretary of State was appealed to.
That official reduced the sentence to one year, and
directed the Governor to reinstate Mr. Landor and re-
place the three justices on the Commission of the Peace,
but refused to- remit the sentence altogether. The
wisdom of punishing Mr. Burges at all may be doubted.
Although in the settled districts little trouble was
caused by the natives, they were still hostile in the
North-West, and murders of white settlers caught nap-
ping were not infrequent. Men who undertook the bur-
dens of pioneering and went out into unknown districts
carried their lives in their hands, and to shoot quickly
was often their only safeguard. Such men may have
been technically guilty of murder, but even that was
preferable to being stalked like game and treacherously
slain by bloodthirsty savages.
In the matter of exploration the period under
review was perhaps the most important in the history
of Western Australia, embracing as it did the memor-
able series of journeys undertaken by Sir John Forrest
and his brother, Mr. Alexander Forrest, which have
made the name of Forrest famous in the geographical
annals of the world. Up to 1869 every attempt to
secure information about the great interior of Australia,
stretching eastward from the coastal districts of the
West to far within the borders of South Australia, had
been unsuccessful. Stuart from the eastern side of the
continent, Eyre along the southern coast, A. C. Gregory
from the North-West, and Hunt, Lefroy, and the
Gregorys travelling eastwards from Northam and York,
had all been forced back by the great desolation which
met them on the edge of the desert, barren so far as
could be gauged of everything necessary to sustain life.
To the men who had sufficient hardihood —perhaps reck-
lessness —to penetrate that awful barrenness and give
to science an accurate knowledge of it, Australia owes
a debt of gratitude that no expression of admiration
can fully repay. The first attempt, that made by Wes-
tern Australia’s greatest son, John Forrest, was


primarily undertaken in the hope of solving the mystery
surrounding the fate of Leichhardt. While exploring
in the Hampton Plains district in 1866 Messrs. Hunt
and Roe had been told by the natives stories of white
men murdered further east, on the shores of a great
lake. The accounts were so circumstantial that hopes
were raised that at last the fate of Leichhardt’s party
was to be set at rest. Dr. (afterwards Baron) von
Mueller, who had accompanied A. C. Gregory in 1856,
and was in 1866 in the employ of the Government of
Victoria, offered to lead an expedition to the spot, and
the Legislative Council made a grant towards defraying
the expenses of the trip. Fortunately, perhaps, for Aus-
tralian discovery, Von Mueller found that his engage-
ments would not permit him to go, and the leadership
was conferred upon John Forrest, then a young officer in
the Survey Department. With him went Messrs.
George Monger (as second in command), Malcolm
Hamersley, and David Morgan, as well as two native
guides, Tommy Windich and Jemmy Mungaroo.
Leaving Perth on April 15, 1869, Forrest made for
the locality where the bones were said to lie, question-
ing the natives as he went. The result of these interro-
gations led him to believe that the bones were not those
of white men, but those of Austin’s horses lost near
Poison Rock in 1856. Satisfied that to proceed further
in that direction would be fruitless, he turned his steps
eastwards and continued as far as longitude 122° 50'
east, naming as he went his various discoveries —Lake
Bar lee, Mounts Ida, Leonora, Malcolm, Margaret, and
many smaller features of the country. Returning by a
more northerly route through barren territory, the ex-
plorers reached Newcastle on the 4th and Perth on
August 6, having been absent 113 days, and having-
travelled over 2,000 miles. Though he failed in the
main object of the expedition —to set the fate of Leich-
hardt at rest—Forrest “obtained a reliable survey of
a district hitherto unknown, and withdrew one more
district from the unexplored regions of the colony.” The
country traversed was, he stated, worthless for pastoral
or agricultural purposes, but would well repay thorough
geological examination, as it gave every indication of
being an auriferous zone.
Soon after the return of the explorers, Dr. von
Mueller suggested that Forrest should be placed in
charge of an expedition to thoroughly examine the
country between the Murchison River and the Gulf of
Carpentaria. Governor Weld felt that such a journey
would involve too great an expense. At the same time
he was anxious to secure further information concerning
the southern coast, and consequently in the following
year (1870) Mr. Forrest entered upon his memorable
trip from Perth to Adelaide by way of Eucla. Since
Eyre’s trying experience no one had succeeded in
traversing the whole distance, though Major Warbur-
ton had, in 1860, from the South Australian side,
reached a point nearly a hundred miles beyond the
head of the Great Australian Bight, and Delisser in
1865 had just crossed the border from the east.
Funds were voted, and arrangements were made
for the schooner "Azur” to meet the explorers with sup-
plies at Esperance Bay, Israelite Bay, and Eucla. Ibe
party consisted of John Forrest (leader), Alexandei
Forrest (second in command), H. McLarty, W. Osborne,
and Tommy Windich and another native. lire party,
with fifteen horses, left Perth on March 30, 1870, being
accompanied for a few miles out by Governor Weld.
Taking a south-easterly course through Kojonup and
across the Fitzgerald and Phillips Rivers, Forrest
reached Esperance Bay, where the schooner met them
with supplies. From that point an easterly stretch of
130 miles brought the explorers to Israelite Bay. Start-
ing afresh from there on May 30 they were compelled
through want of water to strike northwards to a per-
manent supply discovered by Eyre, and then make a
dash through waterless country to Eucla, where the
schooner was to await them. On this portion of the
journey they suffered severely from thirst, intensified
by the difficulties they had to encounter. After a short
trip inland Forrest left Eucla on June 24, and entering
South Australian territory pressed on to Adelaide,
which he reached on August 27, having accomplished
the distance between the two capitals in five months.
Forrest’s opinion of the country passed through on the
Western Australian side was distinctly favourable. The
land was well grassed, and in some places water was
procurable at moderate depths. “If,’ he said, water
could be procured on the tableland, it would be the
finest pastoral district of Western Australia. The
party returned to Perth by sea, arriving there on Sep-
tember 27, after an absence of 182 days.
In 1871 Alexander Forrest with a small party set
out eastward in search of new pastoral land, but owing
to the lateness of the season when they started the
leader was compelled to make for the coast after
penetrating for some distance beyond the spot upon
which Kalgoorlie now stands. After reaching Esper-
ance he returned to Perth, having traversed some 600
miles and discovered pastoral country, much of which
has since been occupied.
The tale of exploration was now taken up, both
officially and privately, in South Australia, and en-
deavours were made by travelling westward from the
overland telegraph line to secure more definite know-
ledge of the still unknown interior. The first of these
expeditions was commanded by Ernest Giles, an old
digger and Government official, who must always remain
in the front rank of those explorers who have conferred
great benefit upon Western Australia. Being provided
only with horses, Giles failed in his first attempt in


-1872 to even reach the border, and in his second only
succeeded in penetrating a little beyond it, being driven
back by want of water from a district which he described
as a ‘horrible region . . . dry, stony, scrubby,
and barren." The desire to penetrate the great Aus-
tralian desert still, however, remained, and in 1873 two
expeditions went out. One of these, jDromoted by the
Government of South Australia, was under the leader-
ship of Mr. William Christie Gosse, Deputy Surveyor-
General of South Australia, and the other, due to the
liberality of Mr. (afterwards Sir) Thomas Elder and
Captain Walter Hughes, was commanded by Major P.
Egerton Warburton. Gosse left Alice Springs in April,
and though he did not succeed in reaching the west
coast, entered Western Australia near the Tomkinson
Ranges, and examined those and the Cavenagh and
Barrow Ranges. Major Warburton’s expedition was
more successful. Starting from Alice Springs on April
15 with a small party, and using camels in place of
horses, he reached a tributary of the Oakover on Decem-
ber 4 and De Grey Station on January 11, 1871.
Though the desert had been crossed little information
was gleaned about the country. Owing to repeated
delays provisions ran short and sickness occurred. War-
burton therefore determined to push through as quickly
as possible, travelling by night, and thus there was
little opportunity of examining the character of the
surrounding desert. Such opinions as they were able to
offer were distinctly unfavourable: the country was
sterile, watercourses of a permanent nature did not
exist, and any attempt to cross with horses must end in
disaster.
Meanwhile John Forrest was urging the desirability
of a further expedition setting out from Perth with a
similar object in view : to settle the question as to the
character of the great central desert and ascertain
whether a practicable route could be found between
Western Australia and the more advanced eastern
colonies. In 1872 he offered to lead an expedition from
Champion Bay along the course of the Murchison River
and across the interior to the South Australian tele-
graph line. The Governor recognized the value that
such a result would have, and the Legislative Council
voted £4OO towards the cost of the expedition, the
public subscribing the remainder. The official instruc-
tions were to ' obtain information concerning the im-
mense tract of country from which flow the Murchison,
Gascoyne, Ashburton, De Grey, Fitzroy, and other
rivers falling into the sea on the western and northern
shores of this territory.” After that, the further course
of the expedition was to be at the discretion of the
leader. The party, which consisted of John Forrest
(leader), Alex. Forrest (second), James Sweeney, James
Kennedy, and the native Tommy Windich and another
aboriginal, left Perth, equipped with twenty-one horses
and eight months’ stores, on March 18, 1874. Leaving
Yuiu a month later, and striking Murchison River,
they followed it as far as the Robinson Range, and then
turned south-east to Mounts Bartle and Russell, whence
they followed a north-easterly course to the Kimberley
and Frere Ranges and reached Weld Springs, where an
abundance of excellent water could be obtained. So
far they had met with no difficulty, having traversed
a district admirably suited in the main for grazing pur-
poses, but from Weld Springs eastwood the country
was principally spinifex desert, with fresh water only
here and there. So greatly did they suffer from want
of water that a return on their tracks at one time
seemed inevitable. The indomitable courage of the
leader, however, encouraged them to press forward, and
ultimately they reached permanent water at Barlee
Springs in a neighbourhood already traversed by Giles
and Gosse. From this point on, though difficulties and
privations were encountered, they were not to be com-
pared with those they had surmounted, and the whole
party reached the Peake Telegraph Station on Septem-
ber 27 and Adelaide on November 3. The course had
been largely determined by the possibility of finding
water. Forrest was unable on this account to proceed
as far into the tropics or explore as much to the south
as he wished, but in spite of these drawbacks the jour-
ney will always rank as one of the most remarkable
feats of endurance on record. Starting with twenty-
one horses to cross a desert where it had been declared
horses could not live, he saved twelve of them, and that
without hurrying. Careful notes were made of all the
country traversed, and every precaution taken to make
the results valuable to geographical science. To no one
does the history of Australian exploration owe more
than to John Forrest.
In the following year (1875) Giles, through the
generosity of Sir Thomas Elder, was enabled to make
a third attempt to cross the continent. This time,
equipped with camels, he succeeded with comparative
ease, and demonstrated the great superiority of those
animals over horses in exploratory work over waterless
country. Reaching Perth on November 18, he started
on his return journey in the following January, taking
a course between those of Warburton and Forrest. This
journey also he accomplished in safety, thus gaining the
honour of having twice traversed the continent. His
experiences confirmed those of Forrest, that the in-
terior of Australia is a sandy desert unfit for settle-
ment of any kind. The desert had been pierced in four
places, and though it showed no trace of land suitable
for agricultural purposes, the successes of the expedi-
tions were invaluable to science, and set at rest for good
the question of the existence of an inland sea.
Of miscellaneous occurrences the most important
seems to have been the succession of storms and hurri


canes that visited the coastal districts about this time.
Reference has already been made to the damage done
by disturbances on the North-West coast. In 1869 the
curious sight of a waterspout was seen on the Swan,
opposite Government House, and the accompanying
cyclone did considerable damage to the gardens along
the banks. Three years later continuous rain for some
weeks caused heavy floods on the Avon and Swan, which
resulted in serious loss to the settlers along the banks
o-f those rivers. Heavy gales on the coast during 1873
created havoc among the shipping, many of the smaller
craft being driven ashore.
Towards the end of 1874 Mr. Weld was appointed
Governor of Tasmania, and left Western Australia in
December for his new sphere of duty. As Governor of
Western Australia he was not intensely popular.
Several of his actions failed to meet with approval.
Perhaps the chief cause was to be found in the deter-
mined opposition he showed toward a protective tariff,
and to the fact that during his administration the
people learned how small was the kernel within the nut
of representative government. Viewed from a distance
of nearly half a century, Governor Weld's term of office
marks the turning point in the history of Western Aus-
tralian settlement. The change involved by the cessa-
tion of transportation, with the necessary diminution of
Imperial expenditure, was brought about without any
ill results; modern methods and conveniences were
brought into operation : extensive exploration was en-
couraged and furthered ; and every effort made to bring
Western Australia into line with her more favoured
sisters in the east. Farseeing and determined, and yet
at the same time courteous and conciliatory, Frederick
J *
Weld must be considered one of the most successful
Governors who had up to that time guided the destinies
of the colony.
CHAPTER, XIV.
1875—1883.
AGITATION FOR ALTERATION OF CONSTITUTION—LEGISLATION LAND LAWS AND
REGULATIONS—IMMIGRATION—RAILWAY DEVELOPMENT—RESOURCES AND
INDUSTRIES—CONVICT ESTABLISHMENT—EXPLORATIONS—
MISCELLANEOUS.
Governor Weld’s successor, Mr. (afterwards Sir)
William Cleaver Francis Robinson, arrived at Fremantle
from Albany in the “Georgette” on January 11, 1875.
Trained in the Imperial Service, Mr. Robinson differed
from previous Governors in that he was conversant with
Colonial Office methods and intentions, and had there-
fore a better idea of how colonial aspirations were likely
to be viewed by the Llome authorities. We have seen
how he used that knowledge to discourage the proposals
for responsible government. The agitation was revived
with the advent of Sir Harry St. George Ord as Gover-
nor in 1877, but he was equally disinclined to give it
any favourable support. The same attitude was observed
by Sir William Robinson during his second term, which
lasted from 1880 to 1883; consequently but little head-
way was made in bringing the matter to a head. In
May, 1878, Mr. (now Sir) S. H. Parker, then newly
elected to the Legislative Council, moved for the intro-
duction of a Bill to amend the Constitution. The debate
showed that the members were not at that time prepared
to assent to any drastic change, though it was generally
admitted that continued vexatious interference on the
part of the Colonial Office would inevitably strengthen
the hands of those who desired responsible government.
Though Mr. Parker’s motion was lost, he did not cease
to advocate a change, and there is no doubt that the
grant of full self-government to the colony some dozen
years later was largely due to the earnest efforts which
he put forth. An attempt was made, though without
any marked success, to make the question a vital one
during the election campaign for the Legislative Council
in 1880, and in 1882 Mr. Parker was again defeated on
moving that an address be presented to the Governor
asking for the introduction of a Bill. He then moved,
and this time with success, that an address be presented
asking the Governor to obtain from the Secretary of
State a statement of the terms and conditions upon
which autonomy would be granted to the colony, as it
was felt that the financial requirements of the Act 13-14,
Viet., c. 59, could be carried out. Here the matter
was allowed to rest for the time, more especially as the
Council was then, and had been for some years pre-
viously, busily engaged over questions of more immediate
concern to the material welfare of the people. Out of
the discussions, however, there came what appeared to
the colonists to be an advantage—an alteration in the


constitution of the Executive Council. In 1873 Mr. Lee
Steere had urged that this body should be made con-
sultative rather than be allowed to remain as it really
was, the actual governing power of the community; and
this expression of opinion was not without effect. On
July 4, 1878, the Governor was empowered by Order-
in-Council “to appoint, in addition to the ex officio
members, such persons as he may think fit to be mem-
bers of our said Executive Council, but so that the
number of such unofficial members shall never exceed
the number of two.” Of course any such appointments
were to be subject to the approval of the Crown. At the
same time provision was made whereby the Governor
could appoint some particular member to preside in case
of his absence, failing which the senior official member
would act. Additional Royal instructions were received
in 1879 limiting the official members to six and
regulating their precedence, the two unofficial appoint-
ments being still allowed. The permission to include
unofficial members in the Executive Council was not
really acted upon until 1884, when Mr. J. G. Lee Steere
was appointed, although Mr. J. H. Thomas, Commis-
sioner of Public Works, had been made an “unofficial”
member in 1879. The only alteration which took place
in the Legislative Council was made in 1882, when by
the creation of Gascoyne district the membership was
increased to twenty-four. Proxy voting had already (in
1877) been abolished in favour of the system of voting
by ballot in vogue in the eastern colonies.
Before dismissing the constitutional question, it
may be well to note certain changes of importance in
various official positions which took place during these
years. Mr. R. J. Walcott, who had succeeded Mr.
Stone as Attorney-General, gave place to Mr. H. H.
Hocking, who held the office until 1879, when he re-
turned to England. The position was temporarily filled
by Mr. G. W. Leake and Mr. E. A. Stone in turn, no
permanent appointment being made until 1881, when
Mr. A. C. Onslow arrived from London to take up the
appointment, only to resign it two years later to Mr.
A. P. Hensman. Many of these changes were due to
recurring vacancies in the judicial office. Sir Archibald
Pauli Burt, the Chief Justice, died towards the end of
1879, and until the arrival of his successor, Mr. H. T.
Wrenfordsley, the position was filled by Mr. G. W.
Leake. Mr. Wrenfordsley resigned in 1883, and Mr.
A. C. Onslow was then appointed Chief Justice. In
1875 Mr. F. P. Bailee, who had for several years been
Colonial Secretary and had been the leader of the Legis-
lative Council since the establishment of representative
government in 1870, went to England on leave, and re-
signed his position in 1877. Mr. R. T. Goldsworthy
was appointed to the vacancy, and remained in office
until 1880, when he gave place to Lord Gifford, who was
in turn succeeded in 1883 by Mr. Malcolm Fraser. The
vacancy in the Survey Office created by Mr. Fraser’s
promotion was filled by the appointment of Mr. John
Forrest as Surveyor-General and Commissioner of Crown
Lands.
In the matter of legislation the period 1875-1883
was not particularly prolific. The tariff question, which
seems to have become a hardy annual in Australian
politics, was again raised in 1876, when a Committee,
consisting of Messrs. 11. H. Hocking (the Attorney-
General), J. G. Lee Steere, G. Shenton, and W. E.
Marmion, was appointed to report upon the advisability
of revision. This Committee recommended that corn,
flour, meal, salt meat, and various minor commodities
should be placed upon the free list. Although these
were the very articles over which the advocates of pro-
tection and freetrade had had some very warm argu-
ments, the report seems to have been agreed to almost
without remark, and freetrade to have been recognized
as the accepted policy, duties being restricted to the
requirements of the revenue. But as the taxation
amounted to almost <£3 6s. Bd. per head, the freetrade
principle must have been considerably modified by pro-
tectionist practice. This became more apparent in 1879,
when the colony was faced with a depression, and cus-
toms duties were looked to as a means of securing suffi-
cient revenue. These duties, imposed at the instance of
the Government, had, it was explained, nothing to do
with the principle of freetrade, but were merely a matter
of expediency and would only last for three years. The
Speaker, Sir Luke S. Leake (who had been knighted in
1876), and Mr. S. H. Parker, strongly opposed the pro-
posals, but in face of the necessity of securing money by
some form of taxation they were agreed to. The cry
that the duties were a burden upon the working classes
was quickly raised, and during the succeeding two years
efforts were made to have them reduced, but without
avail. In fact, when the three years for which they were
imposed had expired, instead of being abrogated the
duties were confirmed and made permanent, the general
feeling then being that if money for the necessary
public works was to be secured the policy of the country
must be one of protection.
Besides the tariff, the only matters of importance
from a legislative standpoint were a reform in the
method of issuing land titles and various revisions of the
land regulations. Colonel Torrens, in South Australia,
had evolved a simple method of transferring land titles
which had been found to work admirably. By its opera-
tion the whole complex system of conveyances was swept
away and its place taken by a simple document, which
not only showed at a glance the various transactions
that had taken place with regard to land, but also
disclosed at once to the purchaser any encumbrances in
the way of mortgage or charge that might be in exist-
ence; “everything was concentrated into one plain and


portable compass.” A Bill based upon the South Aus-
tralian Act was introduced into the Council in 1874 and
became law in July, 1875 ; amendments have been made
from time to time, but the principle still remains in
operation. The establishment of this system was con-
sidered a favourable opportunity for a complete revision
of the land regulations, and a Committee was appointed
by the Council to draft necessary alterations. Included
in these was one made at the instance of the Surveyor-
General, providing that persons holding a special occupa-
tion licence or the fee simple should have the right to
depasture four head of stock on adjoining Crown lands
for every 100 acres, with a maximum of twenty head.
settlement than any English Minister was likely to
possess.
The new regulations, under which the Surveyor-
General became in addition Commissioner of Crown
Lands, divided the colony into four districts —the Cen-
tral, Central-Eastern, Northern, and South-Eastern-
the lands in each being classified as town, suburban,
rural, and mineral. All rural lands in the Central dis-
trict were available for sale in lots of not less than 40
acres at a minimum of 10s. per acre; in the other dis-
tricts 400 acres was the minimum section and ss. per
acre the upset price. Pastoral lands were divided into
two classes instead of three as formerly; first-class land
APRICOT ORCHARD. MOUNT BARKER DISTRICT,
If the land owned or licensed was cultivated, then the
owner or licencee could depasture one head (up to
twenty) for every seven acres under cultivation.
The draft regulations were considered during 1 STO-
TT, and were forwarded during the latter year for the
approval of the Secretary of State for the Colonies. This
assent, which was notified in 18T8, was much more easily
gained than in previous years. The Imperial authori-
ties seem to have been slowly learning that the colonial
legislatures were fairly competent to deal with local
matters, and that as regards land regulations particu-
larly they had a more intimate knowledge of the condi-
tions necessary for the develojnnent of successful land
was that comprised in the area bounded on the south
and west by the sea coast, on the north by the Murchison
River, and on the east by a line drawn from the summit
of Mount Bompas through the summits of Wongan Hill
and Mount Stirling to the mouth of the Fitzgerald
River; while the second-class comprised the remaining
pastoral lands in the colony. First-class land could be
secured by annual licence in blocks of not less than
3,000 acres, except where other boundaries intervened,
or could be leased for fourteen years in blocks of 10,000
acres or over. Second-class land could be leased for
fourteen years in blocks of 20,000 acres, the rent to be
ss. per 1,000 acres for the first and 10s. per 1,000 for


the second seven years. Lessees could also under certain
conditions secure a pre-emptive right during the cur-
rency of the lease over blocks of not less than 1,000
acres, but in such cases an annual rental of £5 per 1,000
acres had to be paid in advance. The cost of the fee
simple of such land in the northern district was ss. per
acre during the first seven years and 10s. per acre
afterwards; in other districts 2s. 6d. and ss. per acre
according to the time of purchase. The regulations also
provided for timber licences at the rate of £2O for each
640 acres of timber country; such licences, however, did
not permit the cutting, hewing, and removing of logs
and piles. For cutting and removing timber in bulk
or for piles, a fee of £3 per month for each man em-
ployed was required, and for each sawyer ss, per month.
Licences to cut sandalwood or bark cost 2s. 6d. per
month. Special leases for fourteen years for cutting
timber could also be procured. Little or no change
was made in the existing regulations regarding poison
and mineral country, but special grants were allowed
to volunteers who had served two years or more and to
immigrants. This latter concession was not, however,
sufficient to induce suitable persons from the United
Kingdom to emigrate to Western Australia.
The opening up of the Kimberley district made it
necessary that special regulations should be framed deal-
ing with the lands of that area. These were issued in
November, 1880, and provided that the price of the
fee simple in rural sections of not less than 200 acres
should be 10s. per acre. A bonus of 500 acres in
fee simple was offered to the person or company pro-
ducing tropical or semi-tropical products, with an addi-
tional 500 acres to the first two persons who earned
the bonus. The minimum areas of pastoral leases were
50.000 acres with a river frontage and 20,000 without,
the leases to extend to the end of 1893. The rent was
to be 10s. per 1,000 acres, on condition that before
the expiry of two years from the date of the lease each
1.000 acres was to be stocked with two head of cattle or
twenty sheep.
In 1882 these special regulations were included in
a revision of the land regulations generally, when cer-
tain modifications were made in those published in 1878.
Instead of four the colony was divided into five dis-
tricts, Kimberley being the fifth. The limit of two years
for stocking in the Kimberley district was increased to
three, but no drastic alterations were made in the
general regulations.
These regulations were condemned without hesita-
tion by the Commissioner of Crown Lands (Mr. John
Forrest) in 1883, who pointed out that the right of free
and unfettered selection by purchase permitted, if it
did not compel, leaseholders to buy up the springs and
waterholes on their leases in order to secure their runs
from outside purchasers. The result was that the whole
country was being spoiled by small fee-simple locations
being dotted all over it. It would have been better, he
considered, to have given leaseholders reasonable protec-
tion and longer leases if necessary, but not a pre-emptive
right over any portion of them. When necessity arose
the squatter should be required to give way to the
agriculturist, but until that state of things actually hap-
pened, he should be made secure in his lease. A Com-
mittee, of which Mr. Forrest was a member, was ap-
pointed in 1883 to consider the matter, and recom-
mended, though not unanimously, that the squatter
should be entitled to a renewal of his lease for a further
term. As the recommendation meant leasing the land
until 1901 at the same rent as was paid at the begin-
ning, considerable diversity of opinion was shown, but
in the result the principle of renewal in the case of
Kimberley pastoral leases was conceded by the Legis-
lative Council and approved by the Secretary of State.
Though these two matters —the Tariff Act and the
Land Regulations—constituted the bulk of the legis-
lative work during these years, the Government was
particularly active in the directions of immigration and
of public works, especially railways. Provision for
encouraging immigration had been made in the land
regulations, but had not achieved any distinct result;
the growth of industries and the development of an
export trade, which might reasonably have been expected
to bring new people, had not done so, neither did any
influx follow the cessation of transportation. Not only
were these causes looked to as means for bringing about
a satisfactorjr addition to the population from outside;
they were reasons why such addition was necessary. The
cessation of convicts meant that ticket-of-leave men were
not available to supply the labour market; the develop-
ment of industries could not proceed without labour;
and land settlement could not be extended unless far-
mers with some means and agricultural experience could
be induced to make Western Australia their home.
Other means having failed, the suggestion of assisting
immigration was mooted in 1873, and in 1874, after some
discussion, the Legislative Council voted £IO,OOO for
immigration purposes, £I,OOO of it to be spent in bring-
ing out Chinese or Javanese coolies. Steps were at once
taken to carry out the purpose of the vote, and between
1875 and 1877 nearly 2,000 persons were brought to the
colony at a cost of nearly £IB,OOO. To hold them after
they arrived, it was provided that each adult immigrant
of the labouring class would, after two years' residence,
be entitled to select up to 50 acres of the unimproved
Crown lands open to selection, while those between the
ages of sixteen and twenty-one were allowed 25 acres.
No family could, however, receive in the aggregate more
than 150 acres. Certain improvements had then to be
effected within three years to secure the fee simple.
The inducements, however, do not seem to have proved


sufficiently strong. A large proportion of those assisted,
attracted no doubt by the superior advantages and more
settled conditions of the eastern colonies, made their
way thither, and it became evident that practically
Western Australia was paying away money to increase
the population of Victoria and New South Wales. To
prevent this all immigrants landed after 1876 were, at
the suggestion of Governor Robinson, compelled to enter
into an agreement to remain for three years in the
colony or refund the whole of their passage money.
Even with this restriction, the number of people
who arrived was far from satisfactory, and in 1878 it
was decided to spend <£2,500 on obtaining Chinese or
coolie labour, and £4,500 on German immigrants. On
account of the decided opposition manifested towards
the idea, only a few Chinese were imported, and these
under a three years' contract. The conduct of these
was deemed by some to be so satisfactory that it was
proposed to spend an additional £2,000 in 1879 on the
introduction of others. This was very warmly debated,
and though ultimately approved bv the Council was
never carried out, as Governor Ord, evidently impressed
by the arguments of the Opposition, considered the in-
troduction of contract aliens would be extremely un-
satisfactory. The general question of introducing
Chinese into Australia was considered at an Inter-
colonial Conference held in Sydney in 1881, at which
Chief Justice Wrensfordsley represented Western Aus-
tralia. Though instructed not to enter into the dis-
cussion, he unofficially pointed out that a policy of non-
introduction which suited Victoria and South Australia
might not be agreeable to either Queensland or Western
Australia, both of which had tropical areas to develop.
The Conference, being strongly opposed to the importa-
tion of Chinese into Western Australia, decided to refer
the matter to the Secretary of State, who replied
that he would require definite information of serious
injury to the eastern colonies to justify him in inter-
fering with the arrangements of the Western Australian
Government. Other immigration was not successful;
any increase through arrivals was more than counter-
balanced by departures; the population, which in 1878
stood at 28,166, had only reached 31,700 in 1883, an
»
increase which the births would fully account for.
Even if it did not in every way give that satisfac-
tion which was expected from it, representative govern-
ment certainly justified its establishment by the energy
with which it undertook a progressive public works
policy, more especially in the direction of railway exten-
sion. The Geraldton-Northampton line, the first
Government line in the colony, was, after many vicissi-
tudes caused through questions of gauge and unexpected
expenditure, opened for traffic in 1879. Before that was
accomplished it had also been decided to construct a
lino from Fremantle to Guildford through Perth, lo
form the first section of a trunk line to the eastern dis-
tricts. It was originally suggested that this line should
be built by a private company, the Government
guaranteeing 6 per cent, interest on the capital for a
term of years. The Secretary of State (Lord Carnarvon)
did not look with favour upon the proposal, as in so
many cases of private construction of national utilities
the ultimate burden fell upon the public purse, and
often meant larger outlay than would have occurred in
case of Government construction. He intimated that
he would be prepared to authorize a loan for the pur-
pose if he were satisfied as to the necessity for the line
and were furnished with an estimate of the cost. The
Governor replied that the Director of Public Works (Mr.
J. H. Thomas) had prepared estimates showing that a
line along the south bank of the river would cost
£99,121, as against £87,098 for one on the northern
side, and that the estimated balance of profit upon work-
ing, after paying interest and expenses, would be over
£12,000. As usual in such cases, a battle of routes was
entered upon, and after much discussion the northern
route was fixed, and a contract for the work let to Mr.
John Robb, of Adelaide, for £74,591. The first sod was
turned on a spot near the present Perth station by
Governor Ord on June 3, 1879. To pay for the con-
struction a loan of £200,000 was authorized. The rail
way was formally opened by Governor Robinson on
March 1, 1881, and up to the end of the year earned
a profit of £lO5 over and above expenses and interest.
Its failure to earn more was due principally to the con-
tinued popularity of river carriage for the transport of
goods. The total cost of construction, exclusive of sur-
veys, was £123,504. The loan of £200,000 authorized
in 1878 having been floated at 41, per cent., it was
determined to continue the line eastward in the hope
of securing better returns for the Guildford-Fremantle
section. The question of route again became a matter
of moment. Three were advocated —one to Northam by
way of Spencer's Brook, a second to the same destina-
tion by way of Chidlow's Well, and a third via Clutter-
ing to Newcastle. The Act finallv passed by the Council
authorized the construction of a line to Chidlow's Well
and then on to York, provided the Secretary of State
would approve a further loan of £150,000. This money
was required for other purposes in addition to the rail-
way. Through some error in the method of book-
keeping a false idea of the state of the finances existed.
In 1876 Mr. Lefroy assured the Council that there was
a surplus of over £26,000, and a portion of this money
was devoted to the erection of the Eucla telegraph line.
In 1879 it was asserted by Mr. Carey that the figures
were wrong, and that as a matter of fact there was a
deficiency in 1876. An examination of the accounts
proved that he was right, that in 1876 there was really
a deficit on general account of £17,885, which had in


Imports.
Exports
£
£
1875
... 349,840
391,217
1876
... 386,036
397,292
1877
... 362,706
373,351
1878
... 379,049
428,491
1879
... 407,299
494,883
1880
... 353,669
499,183
1881
... 404,831
502,769
1882
... 508,755
583,055
1883
... 516,846
444,764
W ool.
Sandal-
wood.
Other
Timbers.
Pearls
and
Pearl
Shell.
Minerals.
Guano.
Horses
and
Stock.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
1875
182,112
66,456
23,965
76,642
30,359
—
2,758
1876
165,151
65,772
23,743
83,292
30,483
367
10,822
1877
199,624
31,850
30,979
22,450
48,268
6,060
8,775
1878
150.592
35,064
63,901
37,652
43,545
66,095
11,638
1879
175,281
35,000
69,742
98,405
33,300
54,184
12,425
1880
271,412
51,970
66,252
51,710
15,468
6,650
8,975
1881
256,689
77,165
79,277
50,923
11,204
—
11,125
1882
301,234
96,050
93,650
53,670
14,348
—
8,643
1888
225,279
56,250
79,760
49,416
7,266
2,964
12,064
creased each year until in 1879 it stood at £35,000. At
the end of that year it was found that even the later
figures were short of the mark, and that the actual
indebtedness was close upon £BO,OOO. This was reduced
by July, 1881, to £59,844, and with the help of an
improved revenue and the repayment of sums properly
chargeable to loan account, the ledger was balanced by
the end of July, 1882.
Meanwhile tenders for the second section of the
line—from Guildford to Childlow’s Well —had been
called, and that of 3. Wright for £53,043 accepted.
Certain private lands had to be resumed, and this caused
some slight delay, but the work was started in the fol-
lowing March. The construction was pursued with as
much rapidity as straitened finances would allow, and
the line was opened in March, 1884, the actual cost
being £80,472. To pay for this and provide money for
the further extension to York, another loan of £254,000
at 4 per cent, was authorized by the Council in 1882.
Mr. Clayton T. Mason, then acting as Commissioner of
Railways, estimated the whole cost of the Guildford-
York section at £192,350, which proved to be not far
wide of the mark, as the tender for the Chidlow’s Well
to York section was let to Edmund Keane in 1883 at
£105,312. The whole line from Fremantle to York was
opened for traffic at the end of June, 1885, and though
the expectations of greatly increased revenue were not
at first realized, there is no doubt that the railway
cheapened production and assisted very materially in
the development of all the eastern districts.
The trade returns, disclosed by the following
statistics, show, however, that development was not con-
fined to those districts which were favoured with rail-
ways :
Thus the colony until 1883 held its position as an
exporter rather than an importer, a fact of no little
moment in a consideration of its financial condition,
especially since, during all these years, enormous quanti-
ties of material for railways and telegraphs had neces-
sarily to be imported. The principal items of export
are given, with their values, in the subjoined compara-
tive statement, and show that wool, timber of various
kinds, and pearls and pearl shell, still continued to be
the principal items, minerals rapidly diminishing in
value until they became almost a negligible quantity for
the time :
The one omission of importance from this table is
the item comprising wheat, grain, flour, and agricultural
produce generally. Unfortunately the blight that had
overtaken farming since 1869 still continued, and the
area under crop remained stationary or showed a slight
decrease. This, in conjunction with the increase of
population, made the importation of flour, grain, and
other produce a necessity, and from 1875 to 1883 the
value of these commodities imported reached some hun-
dreds of thousands of pounds. In other avenues of trade
and industry, however, the table, notwithstanding a
temporary depression in revenue between 1876 and 1880,
shows that solid progress was being maintained in every
other direction except the raising of lead and copper
ore, where the cost of production, in face of a falling
market, made mining operations less and less lucrative.
Pearling, particularly during the years 1875, 1876,
and 1879, yielded a rich harvest, in spite of the
many disastrous storms and the restrictions placed by
the Government upon the employment of natives and
Malays as divers. That these restrictions were necessary
is quite evident from the many recorded instances of
cruelty and ill-usage. The trade seems to have had the
effect of brutalizing those connected with it, and though
pearlers were nominally compelled by the Pearling Act
to observe certain conditions in the treatment of their
divers, supervision in such out-of-the-way places was
fairly lax, and there were not wanting disreputable
traders whose only aim was to get every possible ounce
of work, short of actually killing him, out of the unfor-
tunate native who had signed on as a diver for the period
of twelve months allowed by the Act. So unhealthy
were the conditions under which the divers worked and
so cruel their treatment by unscrupulous white masters
that the Dutch Government at Timor was compelled to
make regulations governing the conditions under which
Malays could be secured for the trade. It must not for
a moment be thought that all white pearlers were guilty


of inhuman treatment, but the reputation of the pearl-
ing industry suffered greatly from the acts of those who
were, and every effort was made to formulate conditions
of employment stringent enough to include the worst
cases. An inspector of Pearl-shell Fisheries (Mr. B. E.
Mayne) was appointed to see that the Act was carried
out, and by that officer's vigilance considerable improve-
ment in the treatment of native divers was effected.
The most serious trouble that the industry had to
face was the loss of life and damage to property result-
ing from the periodical cyclones which swept over the
pearling grounds. In 1876 one of these storms caused
the loss of four schooners with practically the whole of
their crews, and a still more severe visitation in 1881
wrecked over a dozen boats and was responsible for a
serious loss of life. In this case the storm was accom-
panied by a tidal
wave said to
have been 30 ft.
in height, which
submerged Twin
Islands and ma-
terially altered
the position of
the various shoals
and banks, while
the wind travel-
ling up the Ash-
bur ton River
did considerable
damage among
the stations in
the locality. For-
tunately these
storms, which
still cause great
loss and suffering
amongst the pearl -
ing fleets, are re-
stricted in operation, and consequently the whole extent
of the fisheries, which spread from Shark Bay along the
north-west coast, is never devastated at the one time.
A new source of export during these years was
found in the guano deposits on the islands off the north-
west coast. Some attempt had, it will be remembered,
been made in 1850 to turn these deposits to profitable
account, but without success, and practically nothing
further was heard of them until 1876. In that year an
American named Roberts landed at the Lacepede Islands
from a French vessel, and claimed them as an American
possession on the ground that they were more than a
league from the mainland. Some time previously the
Western Australian Government had given a Melbourne
firm (Messrs. Poole, Picken, & Co.) permission to remove
the guano, with which the island abounded, on payment
of a royalty of 10s. a ton. Vessels were at the time
being loaded by Mr. Geddes, the firm's representative.
Roberts, on the authority of the American Consul at
Melbourne, laid claim to the cargoes of these vessels, a
claim which Geddes strongly disputed. Geddes then
proceeded to Roebourne to complain to the Government
Resident, and being sworn in as a special constable re-
turned to attach the French vessel chartered by Roberts,
who publicly proclaimed American sovereignty over the
islands and asked for £30,000 as compensation. The
Government Resident, untroubled by any question of
sovereignty, fined Roberts £lOO, and ordered the cap-
tain of the French barque to pay the costs. The captain
discreetly sailed for Fremantle, and having paid the
royalty of 10s. per ton, made off with the cargo for Mauri-
tius. The next step was taken by the American Consul.
One of Poole,
Picken, & Co.'s
boats, carrying
guano, arrived at
Melbourne and
was attached on
behalf of the
American Gov-
ernment, instruc-
tions being given
to take the same
action at Mauri-
tius in regard to
the French
barque. The Con-
sul then visited
Perth to discuss
matters of com-
pensation. Ar-
rangements were
made for remit-
ting the question
of sovereignty to
the Governments concerned, Roberts being in the mean-
time permitted to load guano on payment of the royalty,
such royalty to be refunded if his contention was upheld.
The American Government at once admitted that the
Consul's claim was without foundation, and the only
result of the whole proceedings was a good advertise-
ment for the guano industry. To prevent the recur-
rence of trouble 9 legislation was passed in 1877 dealing
with trespassing on Crown lands, which Lord Carnarvon
(the Secretary of State) approved, though he considered
the penalties for illegally removing guano were very
severe. The amount of guano exported from the Lace-
pede Islands during 1878 and 1879 was very large, but
unfortunately for the Government the supplies were not
inexhaustible. A contract, was made with Beaver and
Co. to take away a certain number of full cargoes, but
WHEAT STACKS, FREMANTLE WHARF.


when the time for fulfilment of the contract arrived it
was found that only inferior guano remained, and not
sufficient of that to load the ships. In consequence the
firm claimed compensation, and a Select Committee of
the Council appointed in 1881 awarded £6,968, remark-
ing that the Government was entirely to blame and had
been guilty of a want of business acumen that deserved
to be called by a harsher name. During 1881 and 1882
no guano at all was exported, but the trade was revived in
1883 by Mr. Charles E. Broadhurst, who secured a lease
of the Abrolhos Islands, on which were large deposits of
phosphatic guano, and continued to export until 1904,
when the lease expired, and further export was pro-
hibited.
As may be seen from the table the trade in sandal-
wood reached its highest point of development during
this period; thereafter it began to decline, but its place
was more than taken by the increasing demand for hard-
wood timbers, which were being recognized as being
perhaps the best possible woods for certain classes of
work, as they were impervious to the attacks both of
white ants and sea worms. New mills were opened and
the old ones extended, and the early stages of the enor-
mous trade which has since been developed were laid.
Tramways and other means of transport were provided
and greater endeavours made to meet the demands of
a continually increasing industry.
The pastoral industry, to the success and develop-
ment of which Western Australian progress was still
chiefly indebted, received an immense impetus through
the discovery of the Kimberley pastoral country in 1879
as a result of an exploratory trip made by Alexander
Forrest, accompanied by Messrs. Fenton Hill, Matthew
Forrest, John Campbell, James Carey, Arthur Hicks,
and two natives. Forrest was instructed to examine,
map out, and report upon the country between the
De Grey River in Western Australia and the Victoria
River in the Northern Territory. Leaving the De Grey
River Station on February 25, he reached Beagle Bay
on April 10, and started upon the actual work of the
expedition. Proceeding eastward to King Sound he
followed the Fitzroy River for some distance, finding it
deep and rapid, and then tried to penetrate the rugged
passes of the Leopold Range. Realizing this to be an
impossibility, he was compelled to go round and steer
a course up the valley of the Margaret River, discovering
on the journey the well-watered Nicholson Plains, which
he deemed the finest part of Western Australia he had
seen. Still keeping an eastward course he came to the
Ord River, which seemed likely to repay examination,
but want of provisions and sickness amongst the party
compelled him to make all speed for the overland tele-
graph line, which he struck at Daly Waters Station after
much suffering and privation in the beginning of October.
Mr. Forrest reported that about 25,000,000 acres
were suitable for pastoral development or tropical
agriculture, while at Beagle Bay there was a good site
for a township. The country along the Fitzroy was
liable to floods during the wet season (from December
to March), but from the river across to the South Aus-
tralian border this drawback did not exist, though the
whole area was well watered. The scientist (Mr. Hill)
found traces of copper, and hazarded the opinion (to be
afterwards confirmed) that gold would probably be
found among the ranges and toward the headwaters of
the Fitzroy.
The discoveries made by this expedition were of the
greatest possible importance to the colony, and the open-
ing up of the Kimberley district for pastoral and grazing
purposes, which resulted from the reports made by Mr.
Forrest, marks a new era in the development of Western
Australia. Good country such as this could not remain
unused, and the Government was besieged with
inquiries as to the conditions under which settlement
would be permitted. These conditions were set out in
the special land regulations for the Kimberley district
issued in November, 1879, to which reference has already
been made. Though the regulations were not considered
entirely satisfactory, they did not prevent extensive
occupation of the territory during the succeeding years.
Within the tropics, and a long distance from the settled
areas, life in the Kimberleys was even more trying than
in the North-West district, but the land was richer and
results more certain; consequently many were found to
endure the trials, and their endurance was rewarded
with success.
Settlers were attracted from all parts of Australia,
but more particularly from Victoria. Pastoral associa-
tions to work portions of the land were proposed, and
though they were generally abandoned, private settle-
ment spread rapidly. Large selections were made in
1880, and in 1881 leases to the extent of 5,500,000
acres were taken up, an amount which, though large,
was according to the Surveyor-General's report more
than trebled by June of the following year. The task
of surveying these leases, many of which were larger
than some European principalities, was one of no little
difficulty, and partook largely of the nature of explora-
tion. So actively was it carried out that in July, 1883,
the Governor reported to the Legislative Council that
lands to the extent of 43,000,000 acres were leased and
were producing an annual rental of £21,348.
Following out the suggestion of Mr. Forrest, the
settlers fixed upon Beagle Bay as the first landing place,
the pioneer pastoralist being Mr. J. Brockman, who
landed there in 1882. The Murray River Squatting
Company (Messrs. A. R. Richardson, S. R. Elliot, W.
Patterson, and H. Cornish) followed with 2,000 sheep,
and took up a run on the Meda River. Then came
Messrs. W. Lukin, Lowe, F. Monger, Bostock, and


Brown (anting on behalf of Messrs. W. Lukin and J. 11.
Monger), who chose the Lennard River as their location.
This party had started with 4,500 sheep, 2,700 of which
were lost through various causes before a landing was
effected at Beagle Bay. The Kimberley Pastoral Com-
pany, consisting of Messrs. Marmion, Shell, A. Forrest,
and others, with Mr. ,7. P. McLarty as manager, landed
0,000 sheep at Roebuck Bay in 1883 and formed a
station on the Fitzroy River. Some residents of the
Williams district, styling themselves the Meda River
Pastoral Company, took up a lease on the Meda River
in the same year, and about that time Mr. G. C.
Rose, acting for Mr. J. A. Game, of London, settled
on the Fitzroy with 2,000 sheep, and subsequently
bought the interests of the Murray River Company.
The Ord River district was pioneered by Messrs. Osborne
and Panton with stock driven overland from Queens-
land, a journey which occupied over two years. Out of
6.000 cattle which started the trip, 4,500 were safely
landed by Mr. Buchanan, who had charge of them.
Messrs. Durack and Kilfoyle chose the same district,
and settled there with 5,000 cattle in 1885. These are
the more prominent of those who opened up the Kim-
berley district, and the number of cattle and sheep
established there by them shows that from the pastoral
standpoint the Kimberley was by far the most important
territory discovered up to that time in the colony.
The Surveyor-General (Mr. John Forrest) visited
the district in 1833 and furnished an interesting report
of the progress of settlement. From it we learn that
there were at the time eight stations in the Kimberleys
employing some fifty-two white men besides numbers of
natives. These eight stations were owned and stocked
as follows:—J. A. Game, 10,000 sheep, 50 cattle, and
45 horses; Kimberley Pastoral Company, 8,000 sheep
and 30 horses; Meda River Pastoral Company, 4,000
sheep and 8 horses; Lukin & Monger, 2,800 sheep and
12 horses; Daly, 600 sheep and 4 horses; Poulton and
Riley, 1,400 sheep and 6 horses; Roy, Cowan, and
Company, 600 sheep and 14 horses; and Hogan and
McDermott, 600 sheep and 8 horses; making in all
28.000 sheep, 50 head of cattle, and 127 horses.
This, although the principal factor in the expansion
of the pastoral industry, was by no means the only one.
Development of a satisfactory nature was taking place
in the North-West (Gascoyne) district, which would
have shown even better results than were apparent had
it not been for the repeated occurrence of cyclonic
storms. Some of these, particularly those of 1881 and
1882, caused considerable damage to stations on the Ash-
burton and to the districts round Roebourne and Cos-
sack, on one holding alone—that of Forrest, Burt, and
Company—over 1,000 sheep being destroyed.
Strenuous efforts were also made to settle pas-
toralists in the Eucla district, concerning which very
o
lavourable reports had been received. Messrs. Muir,
Kennedy, and McGill pioneered the way, but there was
no eagerness to follow their example, though by the end
of 1883 about 35,000,000 acres had been leased at a
rental of £9,067. The great drawback was the absence
of permanent water. This reduced the chances of suc-
cess to a minimum. Artesian boring it was thought
might overcome the difficulty, but there was little in-
clination to undertake the expense, especially as ample
land of the same quality was available in districts not
by any means so arid. The time for seriously working
land in the neighbourhood of Eucla had not then arrived.
Exploration during these years was practically limited
to the expedition of Mr. Alexander Forrest which has
been already referred to, and to the success of which
the opening up of the valuable Kimberley districts was
due. A surveying trip which partook largely of the
nature of an exploration was, however, made through
the same district in 1883 by Mr. John Forrest, accom-
panied by surveyors H. F. Johnston, J. S. Brooking,
G. R. Turner, and G. J. Walsh. Landing at Roebuck
Bay they examined most of the Kimberley division.
From La Grange Bay they made their way to the
Fitzroy River and tested the country as far as St.
George’s Range, finding it to consist in the main of
well-elevated, richly-grassed, and well-watered plains.
Round the lowest part of the Ord River the land was
equally good. In the course of their travels the party
examined the Fitzroy, Margaret, May, Lennard, and
Richenda Rivers, and made accurate surveys of the
country through which they passed. With them was
the Government Geologist (Mr. E. T. Hardman), who
compiled a valuable geological map of the district, and
reported that there were distinct indications, in various
parts, of the existence of gold. The surveying work was
continued in 1884 under the command of Mr. Johnston
and the triangulation from Mount Pierre to the junction
of the Negri and Ord carried out. The course was some
distance to the south of Alexander Forrest’s track in
1879, and led to the discovery of several rivers and
watercourses, among them being HalTs Creek, upon
which is located the township of that name, the head-
quarters of the East Kimberley goldfields. Mr. Hard-
man’s second report regarding the possibility of gold dis-
coveries was confirmatory of his former one.
In the year 1883 an expedition was also undertaken
by Messrs. W. J. O’Donnell and W. Carr-Boyd. Start-
ing from the overland telegraph line, they crossed in
the direction of Roebourne, and added further areas
to the already large amount of good country discovered
in the Kimberley district.
The existence of the convict system was rapidly
drawing to a close, and in 1886 the establishment was
disbanded and the few remaining convicts handed over
to the control of the Colonial Government. The


Comptroller-General and all the organized machinery
disappeared, and the Sheriff of the colony and the local
prison system took its place. Most of the convicts had
served their terms and were free men in Western A us-
tralia or other places. The few remaining became
ordinary prisoners until such time as they had completed
their terms. Road parties and other convict bands
vanished from the country districts, and only the build-
ings and a few dissolute and debauched paupers re-
mained to show that Western Australia had ever suffered
from the harassing effects of a penal colony. Long
years before its actual disestablishment it had dis-
appeared from the place of importance it formerly held,
but there still remained various matters of administra-
tion that required settlement before the colony could be
said to be wholly free. From the inception of the con-
vict system the proportion which the Imperial Govern-
ment should contribute toward the expenditure upon
the police and magistracy had been a matter of
contention. In 1853 an arrangement was arrived at
under which the Home authorities agreed to pay £I,OOO
a year toward the expenses of the magistracy and two-
thirds of the cost of maintaining an efficient police force,
with a maximum contribution of £6,000. This arrange-
ment held for a number of years so far as the proportion
was concerned, but the actual amount paid from the
British Treasury at the time of the cessation of trans-
portation was considerably over £15,000. The largeness
of the sum attracted attention in 1864, when it was
suggested that the Imperial proportion be reduced to
one-half, but in view of the contemplated cessation of
the system consideration was deferred until after that
event had taken place. Either by accident or design
the question was not raised again until 1877, when
Governor Robinson proposed that the sum should be
£15,000 for 1877-8, and should decrease by a certain
amount annually until 1893, in which year it would
expire. The Assistant Comptroller-General recom-
mended as an alternative that there should be an imme-
diate drop to £IO,OOO and a diminution of £I,OOO a year
until 1887, when the contribution would finally cease.
Neither of these suggestions quite met the view of the
Lords of the Treasury, who decided in November, 1877,
that the grant for 1877-8 should be £14,000, that it
should sink by £I,OOO a year till 1883-84, and then by
£2,000 annually until 1887-8, when —twenty years after
transportation had come to an end —it would cease alto-
gether. The terms were in themselves fair and equit-
able; the sting lay in the concluding portion of the
despatch: "My Lords have only to add, in regard to
both these grants-in-aid for magistrates, police, and
chaplains, that payment of them will depend absolutely
upon the colony not being given . . . responsible
government. If such form of government be insisted
upon all payments will cease.’ The Treasury also pro-
posed to disband the pensioner force, as its continuance
seemed unnecessary since all the remaining prisoners
were confined in Fremantle Gaol. On further considera-
tion, however, it was decided to retain the services of
the pensioner guard until 1887. The terms, or rather
the conditions attached to them, were not altogether
palatable to the local authorities, but it was ultimately
agreed to adopt them, and thus another phase of convict
administration automatically came to an end in 1888.
In the meantime the various establishments neces-
sary to a convict system had by arrangement been trans-
ferred to the colonial authorities. The pensioner force
which it had been decided should continue till 1887 was
disbanded in 1880, and in its place a contribution of
£4,000 was made toward the cost of maintaining order.
In 1883 the Lunatic Asylum, built originally for the
care of insane convicts, was handed over to the colony,
a payment of £42 per annum per head being made for
each convict lunatic. In the same year negotiations
were commenced for the transfer of the prison itself.
This building, erected to hold 600 men, contained only
seventy-five at the time, and the Governor suggested
that the Colonial Government should accept control in
return for an annual payment of £45 for each Imperial
convict and the transfer to the colony, free of charge, of
all buildings and stores remaining under the charge of
the Comptroller-General. At the same time Imperial
officers were to be pensioned by the Home authorities
and allowed, without loss of pension, to accept office under
the local government. The Secretary of State (Sir
William Harcourt) asked in reply that the Legislative
Council should submit definite terms. A committee was
appointed in 1884 to consider these, and in its report,
dated July 13, 1885, advised that the terms suggested
by the Governor be adhered to, with the addition that
the Imperial Treasury should pay the cost of the water
police between 1881 and 1885. The date suggested for
the transfer was December 31, 1885. The Secretary of
State, after some hesitation, approved of the terms
generally, and the transfer was effected on March 31,
1886. There were at the time barely 200 convicts re-
maining, and less than half of these were under actual
control, the rest being at liberty under ticket-of-leave
or conditional pardon. Those in prison were of the type
likely to remain a charge upon the colony, and, as a
matter of fact, after gaining their liberty had to be
maintained in the old men's depot. From 1886 they,
with the colonial prisoners, were employed pumping
water from wells within the prison enclosure in order
to provide an efficient water supply for Fremantle.
Thus, after thirty-six years' existence, an end was put
to the colony's Esau-like method of improving its position.
The only incident of interest in connection with


the Establishment itself during these years was the escape
of six Fenian prisoners in 1876. This was effected
through the instrumentality of an American (John
Collins), assisted by Captain Antony, of the American
whaler “Catalpa.” Arriving at Fremantle late in 1875
Collins secured employment in a carriage factory and
quietly made himself thoroughly conversant with the
methods of the Convict Establishment and the nature of
the country to the south of Fremantle. Through the
medium of a Fenian expiree (James Wilson) he was
brought into communication with six Fenian convicts
who, on account of their good behaviour, were not sub-
jected to strict supervision. A favourable moment for
escape arrived when the "Catalpa" put into Bunbury.
By arrangement the six men left Fremantle in buggies
on April 18, 1876, for Rockingham. When their depar-
territorial waters. The two ships met outside Rottnest.
The Superintendent of Police demanded the convicts
and threatened to fire. The captain of the "Catalpa"
denied that any convicts were on board, and quietly
pointed to the American flag. The police, chagrined,
had to return empty handed to Fremantle, after in-
timating that the United States Government would be
communicated with. Governor Robinson forwarded a
full account to the Secretary of State, who after inves-
tigating the circumstances decided that the matter was
not one for diplomatic negotiation, and the Fenians re-
mained under the United States flag. The incident
created great irritation in the colony, which felt itself
flouted, but no doubt the British Government was not
displeased to get rid so easily of men who, after all, were
only political prisoners.
Photo by E.L. Mitchell.
ture became known they were hotly pursued by the
police, who found on arrival at Rockingham that the
convicts had been picked up by a whaleboat in waiting,
which had then put out to sea. The "Catalpa" being
the only whaler known to be on the coast, the police
returned to Fremantle and put off in the police boat
in search of her. After sighting her they fell in with
the steamer "Georgette/' also in search, and learned
that the "Catalpa" had been spoken to, but denied
having convicts on board. Deciding to watch they saw
the whaler move northward, and on following observed
a whaleboat making toward her. An exciting chase
ensued, but the police were unsuccessful in preventing
the "Catalpa" from picking up the boat and had to
return to Fremantle. The "Georgette" was then sent
out armed in the hope of meeting the whaler in
o 2
The natives in the north-west and in the far south-
east still continued to give considerable trouble, though
the more enlightened methods pursued in regard to
them and the earnest endeavours to conciliate them
were not without effect. Henry Clarkson was murdered
while driving sheep overland to Nickol Bay in 1875,
and some two years later John Eakin was speared by
natives at Mr. Wittenoom's station on the Murchison,
while in the same year Mr. John Moir, a station-holder
at Esperance, was killed by two natives whom he had
punished for some fault. In this, as in most cases of
native murders, the desire to retaliate for some injury
or some outrage to native women seems to have been
the underlying cause. Unfortunately the sufferer was
often some innocent selector or shepherd who had not
even a knowledge of the crime.
MURRAY RIVER AT RAVENSWOOD.


In 1881 and 1882 serious allegations of depredations
by natives in the Murchison district were made by the
squatters, and Mr. Robert Fairbairn was sent by the
Government to make inquiries. He found that the losses
suffered were in many instances greatly exaggerated,
and were usually due to either laxity of supervision or
laxity of morals on the part of the white settlers. Thefts
were only to be expected where sheep and cattle were
placed in the care of native shepherds far away out in
the bush, while reprisals were not to be wondered at
when white settlers failed to let the native women and
girls alone. Mr. Fairbairn’s report, though unpalatable
to many of the settlers who desired to be a law unto
themselves, was warmly approved by the Governor, who
was anxious to put a stop to the intercourse that was
going on. “Their women,” he wrote, “are surely as
valuable to them as our flocks and herds are to us, and
so long as we outrage those feelings which human nature
has planted in a greater or less degree in even the most
savage breast, what right have we to expect that they
will respect the property of the aggressor ? What right
have we to be surprised when we hear that a native,
'sulky’ with a shepherd for taking his woman away, has
put the white man to death ? Let us set them a good
example, and then, perhaps, we may talk of the iniquity
of their proceedings —proceedings which, after all, con-
sidering the utter savages we are dealing with, have not
been so black as they are painted.”
How to put a stop to the practices that were going
on was, however, a difficult question. Some attempt to
solve it- was made by increasing the police protection
and by appointing an itinerant magistrate (Mr. Foss)
with power to deal with cases of wrongdoing as they
arose. This had some effect in reducing the trouble
within limits, but it was impossible to put an end to it.
Cases of native depredation and murder and of inter-
course between white and black continued to occur, and
are not unknown even now, though the march of civiliza-
tion and a more enlightened public opinion has brought
their number down to a minimum.
The population of the whole colony at the end of
1883 was only 31,700 —an increase of less than 5,000
during the eight years under review—not more than
that of an ordinary English town. More than half of
these were resident in the towns and villages, which
clamoured for recognition as duly organized municipali-
ties. Perth, with a population of about 5,000, was raised
to the dignity of a mayoralty in 1881, the first occupant
of the chair being the present Chief Justice (Sir Stephen
Henry Parker). His successor was the late Sir George
Shenton. Fremantle became a corporation in 1883, and
others followed shortly afterwards.
In ecclesiastical affairs, beyond the general develop-
ment resulting from a progressive community, little of
moment occurred beyond the resignation of Bishop Hale
in 1875 and the appointment of Bishop Parry as his
successor, under whose episcopate the foundation-stone
of the present St. George’s Cathedral was laid in 1880.
CHAPTER XV.
1883-1890.
GOVERNOR BROOME’S ADMINISTRATION—LAND REGULATIONS—TARIFF REVISION-
FINANCES—RESOURCES, INDUSTRIES, AND TRADE PUBLIC WORKS:
RAILWAY AND TELEGRAPH EXTENSION GOLD DISCOVERIES:
KIMBERLEY AND YILGARN GOLDFIELDS—AGITATION
FOR AUTONOMY CONTINUED—RESPONSIBLE
GOVERNMENT.
After the departure of Sir William Robinson in
February, 1883, the Chief Justice, Sir Henry Wrens-
fordsley, administered the government until June, when
the new Governor (Sir Frederick Napier Broome) arrived.
With a short recess from November, 1884, till June,
1885, during which he visited England for the purpose
of floating a public works loan of £525,000, that officer
held the reins until the end of 1889, when he returned to
London, leaving Sir Malcolm Fraser in charge. Sir Mal-
colm continued to act as administrator until October,
1890, w’hen Sir William Robinson was again appointed
Governor and entrusted with the task of inaugurating
responsible government in the colony.
Governor Broome arrived at the time when settle-
ment in the north and north-west was rapidly extending
and agitation for more liberal land regulations was be-
coming more pronounced, aided and furthered by the
known opinions of the Commissioner of Crown Lands, Mr.
John Forrest. In order to delay any further alteration,
the Governor in 1884 suggested that as a general election
was pending it would be unwise for an expiring Council
to take so important a question into consideration. When


the new House met in July, 1885, he deprecated any un-
necessary interference with the regulations, but pointed
out that as many of the older leases were coming to an
end the time might be opportune for a reconsideration of
the whole subject. He was no doubt assisted toward this
decision by a complete scheme for a more liberal system
which Mr. Forrest had put forward just previously. The
object of this scheme was, as the Commissioner stated, to
settle population
—“a bold peas-
antry —on the
soil; to see the
country utilized
and occupied ; to
encourage the
agricultural pro-
gress of the col-
ony; and, while
doing this, to
give as much
security as pos-
sible to the pas-
toral tenant,
especially in
centres not suited
for agricultural
development." To
do this he ad-
vised that the
tenure of leases
be extended, that
improvements be
compulsory, and
that rents be re-
duced. Governor
Broome was
doubtful about
the wisdom of
some of these
recommend-
ations, but re-
mitted them in
full to the Coun-
cil in order that
the fullest pos-
sible considera-
tion might be
given to the
Photo by C. P. Farr.
whole question. The Legislative Council appointed a
Select Committee, consisting of the Surveyor-General
(Mr. Forrest), Messrs. Brown, Harper, Burt, Crowther,
Grant, Marmion, Lee Steere, Venn, and Wittenoom, to
report upon the proposals. The report of this Committee,
which was not on all points unanimous Messrs. Lee
Steere, Brown, Venn, and Wittenoom dissenting—was
presented on September 9, when final discussion was post-
poned till the following session. During the recess the
Governor gave the Committee s draft close consideration,
and when the time came for discussion upon it in 1886
was prepared with certain amendments. These were con-
sidered in conjunction with the draft, and certain of
them adopted. Other alterations were made, and the
whole draft regulations, thus amended, were then passed
and forwarded by
the Governor for
approval of the
Secretary of
State. This was
given in due
course, and on
March 2, 1887,
the new regula-
tions—the most
liberal and satis-
factory yet
f r amed —wer e
proclaimed. Un-
der themx land
could be ac-
quired, subject
to certain condi-
tions of residence
and improve-
ment, upon very
liberal terms, and
pastoral leases
could be secured
without the har-
assing limitations
that had pre-
viously existed.
The colony was
divided into six
district s —t he
South-West, Gas-
coyne, North-
West, Kimber-
ley, Eucla, and
Eastern. The
South-West com-
prised the origin-
ally settled areas
in the south-
western portion of the colony, and the Eastern dis-
trict comprised the central portions. Eucla was formed
into a division in the hope that the inducements offered
would bring about settlement in the far south-east.
Town and suburban allotments in all divisions were
to be sold by public auction, at such upset price as the
Governor-in-Council deemed reasonable, and any pros-
PERTH FROM KING’S PARK.


pective purchaser could apply to have a surveyed allot-
ment put up for auction on depositing 10 per cent, of the
upset price. Land in the South-West district, which was
recognized as the agricultural portion of the colony, could
be obtained under four different modes of conditional pur-
chase : —(1) By deferred payment, with residence,
within agricultural areas; (2) by deferred payment, with
residence, outside agricultural areas; (3) by deferred
payment, without residence, irrespective of the location;
and (4) by direct payment. The Governor-in-Council
had power to declare agricultural areas of not less than
2.000 acres. No one could secure selections of less than
100 or more than 1,000 acres, the price being determined
by the Governor, but not to be less than 10s. per acre,
payable in twenty annual instalments of 6d. per acre.
On the approval of any application a licence was in the
first instance granted for five years, the licensee being
compelled to reside upon the land within six months and
to fence the whole selection within the five years. Pro-
vided the conditions were carried out a lease was then
granted for fifteen years, and the Crown grant could be
secured during its currency or on its termination, on
proof that improvements to the value of the purchase
money had been made and the full purchase money paid.
In case the applicant did not intend to reside, the cost
was 20s. per acre instead of 10s. and the yearly payments
Is. in place of 6d. per acre. The other conditions neces-
sary to secure the full grant were the same. Under the
fourth mode a maximum area of 1,000 acres within and
5.000 without an agricultural area might be secured at
a price fixed by the Governor-in-Council. The land had
to be fenced within three years, and improvements to the
value of ss. |3er acre effected within five years. Garden
land in plots of from 5 to 20 acres could be secured
at 20s. per acre on the condition that the plot was fenced
and one-tenth of it planted with vines, fruit, or vegetables
within three years. In the other districts the area that
could be secured on conditional purchase was not less than
100 or more than 5,000 acres, the price and conditions
being the same as in the declared agricultural areas.
Squatting leases were granted for twenty-one years
at a rental that varied according to the district and the
class of land. The rental for every 1,000 acres was:-
South-West division, in blocks of not less than 3,000
acres, 20s. ; Gascoyne and Eucla divisions, in blocks of
not less than 20,000 acres, 10s. for each of the first seven
years, 12s. 6d. for the second seven, and 15s. for the
third; North-West division, in blocks of not less than
20.000 acres, 10s., 155., and 20s. for each year of the
three periods; Eastern division, in blocks of not less than
20.000 acres, 2s. 6d., 55., and 7s. 6d.; Kimberley division,
in blocks of not less than 50,000 acres with river frontage
and 20,000 without, 10s., 155., and 20s. The Kimberley
squatter (if within five years he had placed ten sheep or
one head of cattle for every 1,000 acres upon his run) and
the Eucla squatter (if he had fulfilled the same condition
or had spent £8 per 1,000 acres upon water conservation)
could obtain a reduction of rent to the extent of one-half
for the first fourteen years; while in all divisions except
the South-West double rent was imposed where the stock-
ing conditions were not carried out within seven years.
Mining leases (not auriferous) could be secured over lots
of from 20 to 200 acres on payment of ss. per acre yearly
rent, the leases to run for seven years and to give way
to a Crown grant when machinery to the value of <£3 per
acre had been erected. New timber regulations were also
provided, and the Government was permitted, with the
approval of the Legislative Council, to make concessions
of land in return for the construction of railways, the
establishment of industries, or the promotion of settle-
ment. These land regulations, with trifling amendments,
remained in force for many years.
As soon as the land regulations were settled in
1886, the question of tariff revision called for attention.
Since 1882 no change had been made in the Customs
duties except to impose a special charge of 20s. per lb.
upon opium. The burden upon the finances, however,
due principally to the borrowing policy necessitated by
railway extension, began to be so heavy that means had
to be sought to increase the revenue. As in the past, in-
direct taxation through the Customs was considered the
most feasible method, especially as, in the opinion of
several members of the Council, it had the effect of foster-
ing local industries. A Tariff Commission appointed in
1887 recommended a general increase “to promote the
establishment of new industries and encourage the
development of industries and manufactories already
established.” A Customs Bill was introduced in Decem-
ber, 1887, and in the course of its passage through the
House Mr. Alexander Forrest, the leader of the few who
acknowledged themselves to be protectionists, succeeded
in increasing the duties on live stock in order to jrrotect
the local grower. The new tariff, which was assented to
in 1888, materially increased the duties all round, and
was an undoubted admission that the future policy of the
colony must be one of protection.
An Agricultural Commission was also appointed in
1887 to consider the whole question of agricultural de-
velopment, and suggest, if possible, a means of ending
the stagnant condition into which the industry had cer-
tainly fallen during the previous fifteen years, during
which the acreage under crop had for all practical pur-
poses remained stationary. The members of the Com-
mission made a close study of the subject, and their
report, published in 1891, forms a valuable record of the
progress of agriculture in the colony. They expressed the
opinion that though agriculture as a pursuit had not all
the elements in its favour necessary to make it a
thoroughly prosperous industry, Western Australia
under a fair system of farming was not behind the other


Revenue.
Expenditure
1883
... £284,363
£240,565
1884
290,319
291,306
1885
323,213
308,848
1886
388,564
394,675
1887
377,903
456,897
1888
357,003
385,129
1889
442,725
386,001
1890
414,314
401,737
Imports.
Exports,
1883
... £516,846
£444,764
1885
650,390
446,691
1886
758,011
630,393
1887
832,213
604,656
1888
786,250
680,345
1889
818,217
761,392
1890
874,447
671,813
Year.
Wool.
Pearls
and Pearl
Shell.
Lead
and
Copper.
Sandal-
wood.
Timber.
Guano.
Gold.
Tin.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
1884
249,255
25,312
6,642
20,960
68,936
7,560
—
—
1885
248,400
58,496
5,047
36,216
67,850
3,432
—
—
1886
332,578
119,964
8,012
27,450
50,092
66,023
1,148
—
1887
333,786
125,425
5,175
34,533
28,384
20,527
18,517
—
1888
423,762
84,311
6,848
33,525
42,060
12,440
13,273
—
1889
395,904
118,355
4,404
57,465
63,080
8,488
58,872
300
1890
261,352
126,293
2,271
51,355
82,052
7,983
86,664
5,400
colonies in the productivity of certain soils. “Close obser-
vers of cause and effect,” says the report, “will be able
to trace many conditions under which agricultural pur-
suits have suffered, but these conditions are incidental to
the peculiar circumstances of the colony; its early settle-
ment, its isolation from general commercial intercourse
with the other colonies; to the absence of those attrac-
tions which have taken people past our shores to the sister
colonies; and are not directly traceable to any inherent
infertility of soil.” Stagnation in enterprise was attri-
buted to “the absence of cash sales and the establishment
of a barter system” which provided only a precarious
market, and not one likely to stimulate production. The
commissioners also drew attention to the question of
bonuses such as those in operation in Victoria, to State
aid to farmers, and to all matters likely to be of assistance
in the development of farming or the diffusion of agricul-
tural knowledge.
The industry seems to have received some slight
impetus in the two years following the publication of the
report, but it was not until many years later that agricul-
ture in the colony began to receive that serious attention
to which its importance and the capabilities of the soil
entitled it. But though increasing requirements made
further taxation necessary, and though no assistance was
received from the great primary industry, the returns of
the revenue and expenditure of the colony from 1883 to
1890 as shown in the attached table prove that the public
finances were in a distinctly healthy condition:
The indebtedness under loan authorizations had, it
is true, grown from nothing at the establishment of repre-
sentative government to £1,367,444 at the end of 1890.
This was a fairly heavy burden for a population of 46,290
persons to bear, but as the greater part of it was invested
in reproductive works which, if not revenue producing, at
least met the working expenses and interest, the weight
of debt did not press too heavily. When, however, the
ordinary income failed to meet the expenditure in 1889
Governor Broome thought it necessary to sound a note
of warning concerning new expenditure. “Loans,” said
he, “cannot be looked upon as a remedy for depression or
as a substitute for real progress and development.” This
was brought home to the Government in the following
year, when another deficit was followed by a loan
authorization to meet it. To this the Secretary of State
refused his sanction, but agreed to the issue of Treasury
bills. The returns for 1889, however, showed a balance
on the side of revenue which went a long way toward
adjusting the accounts.
The comparative statement of imports and exports is
not so reassuring :
In every instance the value of imports was greater
than that of exports, showing that the colony had lost its
position as an exporter. This was in part due to the fact
that the discoveries of gold at Kimberley and Yilgarn
had attracted considerable increase in population, con-
sisting chiefly of miners or those interested in mining.
These had at least to be fed and clothed, and this neces-
sitated larger importations of foodstuffs. An examina-
tion of the schedules of imports shows that in every year
the excess of value in imports is represented practically
by the amount paid to outside sources for agricultural
produce —commodities that the colony itself could easily
have produced in abundance, and probably would have
done but for the lethargic condition into which the
farming industry had fallen, a condition from which not
even the existence of so excellent a market at their very
doors seems to have aroused the farmers.
In other avenues of industry steady progress is
evident. Wool, pearls and pearl shell, sandalwood,
timber, guano, and lead and copper ores continued to
form the principal articles of export, wool accounting for
nearly half the total value, and pearls and pearl shell
averaging over £lOO,OOO a year for the years 1886-1890.
In 1887 another of those distressing storms to which the
North-West is so subject swept over the pearling areas,
carrying ruin and disaster with it, and flooding a large
part of the Kimberley district. In the course of the
tempest it is estimated that from 150 to 300 persons,
mostly Malays, perished.
A comparative statement of the values of the prin-
cipal articles exported each year from 1884 to 1890 is
given in the following table :
From this it will be seen that in 1886 gold and in


1889 tin two commodities destined to play an important
part in the history of Western Australian development
made their first appearance in the list of exports.
fuming from financial matters to questions affecting
the internal polity of the colony, it may be mentioned
that early in the eighties were heard the first whisperings
of that desire which twenty years later was realized in
the establishment of the Australian Commonwealth. In
1880, at the instance of Sir Graham Berry, a conference
of representatives of New South Wales, Victoria, and
South Australia was held in Melbourne to discuss the
question of border duties. Other questions cf wider im-
portance being raised, it was decided to adjourn the con-
ference till January, 1881, and invite representatives
from all the colonies. Western Australia being a Crown
colony, the only one remaining in Australia —the Cin-
derella of the group, as Sir William Robinson with
curious foresight termed her —it was impossible to send
from there a representative with power to speak upon
any subject with finality, as all doings of the local Govern-
ment were subject to Imperial approval. This difficulty
was explained, and it was finally agreed that Chief Jus-
tice Wrensfordsley should attend as delegate from Wes-
tern Australia for the jmrpose of watching the proceed-
ings and expressing an opinion on behalf of the colony, on
the understanding that such opinions would be subject to
the approval of both the local and Imperial Governments.
The principal matter affecting Western Australia that
was dealt with was the erection, at the joint expense of
all the colonies, of a lighthouse on Cape Leeuwin, but
from a general standpoint the importance of the confer-
ence lay in the introduction by Sir Henry Parkes of the
Federal Council of Australia Bill, really a proposal for
a modified form of federation. Owing to general lack of
interest in the subject the Bill lapsed at the time, but its
proposer had sounded a new note in Australian politics-
one destined to have far-reaching results. A further con-
vention was held in Sydney in 1883, when the proposal
to establish a Federal Council for Australia was ap-
proved. The necessary provisions to enable Western
Australia to become a member of the Council were passed
by the Legislative Council in 1884, and during 1885 the
Federal Council Act (49 Viet., No. 24) was passed and
came into operation at the close of the year. As all the
colonies did not join in the scheme its usefulness was con-
siderably restricted, but it helped to the way for
the wider movement which followed, and which was fore-
shadowed by Governor Broome when proroguing the
Council in 1885 :— ‘ It will be a matter for congratulation
in the future that the Legislature of Western Australia
lias from the first heartily supported a scheme which, as
I believe, will in the course of time result in uniting the
whole of this portion of the Empire in a political
organization similar to that which has given strength and
greatness to the Dominion of Canada.”
The first meeting of the Council was held at liobart
in January, 1886, Mr. J. G. Lee Steere, a member of both
the Executive and Legislative Councils, being commis-
sioned to represent Western Australia. Its deliberations
were confined chiefly to simplifying legal processes be-
tween the colonies and facilitating legal proof of official
documents. Defence was also considered, and on the
motion of Mr. Lee Steere it was agreed that King George
Sound and Torres Straits should be fortified for the
general protection of the continent.
A second session of the Federal Council was held at
Hobart in 1888, when the only question of importance
discussed was one relating to the Queensland beclic-de-
mer fisheries.
In addition to this movement a Colonial Conference
was held in London in April, 1887, in order to give the
representatives of the colonies an opportunity of discuss-
ing matters of general import with the Imperial Govern-
ment. The delegates from Western Australia were the
Honourable John Forrest and Mr. Septimus Burt.
Although Sir Frederick Broome displayed many
qualities of statemanship in dealing with large issues,
more particularly those arising during the latter portion
of his term, his internal administration was marred by
repeated disagreements with prominent officials and
others who occupied important positions in the com-
munity. A man of strong will, imperious disposition,
and combative to the last degree, he resented any
apparent encroachment upon his functions, and was
inclined to reject, upon many points, the advice of those
whose intimate local knowledge fully qualified them to
venture an opinion. With the Surveyor-General, Mr.
John Forrest, he was continually in conflict, and that the
official generally got his way was jn'obably due to the fact
that he possessed the same qualities as the Governor in
an even more marked degree. The Attorney-General
(Mr. A. P. Hensman) next incurred the Governor’s
opposition, and deemed it wise, after justifying his own
position, to retire from the Executive. The most serious
disagreement took place between the Governor and the
Chief Justice, Mr. (afterwards Sir) A. C. Onslow. Mr.
Onslow was not then sole Judge, Mr. (now Sir) Edward
A. Stone having been appointed Puisne Judge in 1883.
The trouble began to assume a serious aspect in 1884, and
was perhaps influenced to some extent by the relations
between the Governor and Mr. Forrest. The Chief Jus-
tice had on one occasion declined to advise the Governor
upon an ad misericordiam appeal for a remission of
sentence. Sir Frederick Broome, doubting the stand
taken by Mr. Onslow, referred the point to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies (Sir Henry Holland), who de-
cided that the Judge was right in the particular case, but
that it was his duty to advise upon petitions other than
ad misericordiam . Certain other petitions were now
referred by the Governor, but Mr. Onslow again refused


to advise and appealed to the Secretary of State. Pend-
ing a reply to his communication lie unwisely retained
possession of the petitions and refused to allow the
Governor to have access to them. The Governor then
charged the Chief Justice with detaining important State
documents in disobedience of direct orders, and called
upon him to show cause why he should not be suspended.
The Judge thereupon returned the petitions and for-
warded the whole correspondence to the Press.
In September, 1887, the correspondence was pub-
lished showing that Mr.
Onslow had made serious
accusations against the Gov-
ernor to the Secretary of
State. “I protest, ”he wrote,
‘against the manner in
which the Governor persists
in harassing me, as being
calculated to lower and in-
sult myself and my office
and degrade the adminis-
tration of justice in the
colony.” Sir Frederick
Broome, naturally incensed,
declared the statements were
untrue, and called upon the
Chief Justice to withdraw
them in writing within a
given time. In reply the
Judge took up the attitude
that the matter was in the
hands of the Secretary of
State, and that the Gov-
ernor could not legally
take any action. Governor
Broome, however, was not
the type of man to sit
down tamely and wait.
The Executive Council was
appealed to, and the Chief
Justice was informed that
he must retract or he
would be suspended. Con-
tinuing to be recalcitrant,
Mr. Onslow was "‘inter-
dicted’' by the Governor
from exercising the functions of his office, and
Mr. G. W. Leake was appointed Acting Chief Justice.
By this time the dispute had become a matter of national
concern. The legal fraternity expressed their sympathy
with the deposed official, and the public generally took
sides for and against. A public meeting held in Perth
indignantly demanded the removal of the interdict and
the recall of the Governor, whom it considered to have
been guilty of “a. gross interference with the inde-
pendence of the Bench and an attack upon the liberties
of the people.” To conclude the proceedings, which must
have been fairly interesting in themselves, a torchlight
procession was formed and the Governor burnt in effigy.
Similar meetings were held in the other centres of popula-
tion. That the unofficial portion of the community
should favour the Chief Justice is not surprising. From
the date of the colony’s foundation there had practically
been two sections in the community, the Governor and
officials forming the one and the ordinary population
the other. Every Governor
had fallen more or less
under the ban of popular
displeasure. In this case it
was more pronounced be-
cause, probably, something
in the nature of a reason
existed.
Governor Broome, unde-
terred by ebullitions of
popular feeling, called a
meeting of the Executive
Council for December 5, and
summoned Mr. Onslow to
show cause why he should
not be suspended. That
gentleman demanded that,
as the proceedings would be
of the nature of a criminal
trial, the case should be
heard in public, and that he
should be allowed to employ
counsel. These requests were
refused, and he declined to
appear. The Council met
as summoned, and decided
to suspend the Chief Justice
on half-pay.
Public feeling became
more acute after this second
development. The W est Aus-
tralian supported the case
of the Governor, while The
Inquirer , true to its tradi-
tions as an opposition jour-
nal, sympathized with the
Chief Justice. Early in 1888 information was received
that the Secretary of State had referred the whole matter
to the Privy Council, the decision of which was received
by cable in the following May. The three phases of the
dispute were considered in turn. On the first the Privy
Council was of opinion that there was not sufficient
ground for a formal charge against the Chief Justice,
though he had certainly acted indiscreetly in refusing to
return the documents; on the second the decision stated
VIEW IN PERTH GARDENS


that though, through irritation apparently arising from
the first charge, the Chief Justice had used improper
language in his letter to the Governor, there were no
adequate grounds for a charge intended to lead to suspen-
sion; on the third the Council looked much more seri-
ously, inasmuch as the letter last referred to, and the
letter to the Secretary for the Colonies, couched in lan-
guage of great animosity to the Governor, had been
handed to the newspapers for publication, together with
confidential information which the Chief Justice had not
the right to give. Taking these facts into consideration,
the Committee of the Privy Council had some hesitation
in not confirming the suspension, but as no moral laxity
in the exercise of his judicial functions was imputed to
the Chief Justice, it decided to remove the suspension, at
the same time remarking that the relations between the
Governor and the Chief Justice must be prejudicial to
the colony, and if continued would lead to deplorable
results. The Privy Council decision having been con-
firmed by Order-in-Council and the suspension removed,
Mr. Onslow took his seat on the Bench as Chief Justice
on May 15 amid the congratulations of the Bar, voiced
by Mr. Hensman. Unfortunately this was not the end of
the trouble. Several libel actions pending against Messrs.
Harper and Hackett, the proprietors of The West Aus-
tralian, were tried before the Chief Justice. Mr. A. P.
Hensman, who had been the advocate for Mr. Onslow all
through the dispute with the Governor, obtained dam-
ages against the newspaper, and an application for a new
trial was refused. Their being only two judges, in case
of a disagreement between them in Full Court cases, the
opinion of the Chief Justice carried the day. Another
libel action (referred to later), brought by the Rev. J. B.
Gribble, was also tried by the Chief Justice, who was
accused of showing partiality toward the plaintiff.
From these and other instances the proprietors of
the newspaper were convinced that Mr. Onslow’s decisions
were not impartial. They therefore drew up two docu-
ments, couched in almost similar language —the one a
petition to the Legislative Council and the other a
memorial to the Secretary for the Colonies. The con-
cluding paragraph, practically the same in both, shows
how acute the position must have been : ‘ For nearly five
years have we suffered as we have set forth. Our busi-
ness, our properties, our reputations are imperilled. The
baser kind of journalist and public speaker assails us con-
fidently and with impunity. We cannot obtain justice
in the Supreme Court. Persecuted, plundered, and in-
suited, we are helpless and without relief before the chief
tribunal of our Queen. To Your Honorable House [Your
Lordship] we appeal to aid in ending a state of things
which is a scandal to the Bench, a menace to the welfare
of the colony, and a dishonour to the Crown.”
The petition to the Legislative Council, which asked
that the Governor be requested to appoint a third Judge,
was presented by Mr. Parker. After a long and not
always courteous debate it was decided to refer it to the
Chief Justice for his answer. When that was received,
further consideration was deferred, pending the reply of
Lord Knutsford to the memorial. Mr. Onslow about the
same time forwarded his side of the case to the Secretary
of State, accusing Messrs. Harper and iiackett of making
’outrageous and malicious statements/’
In January, 1889, the Executive Council held an
exhaustive inquiry into the whole matter in the presence
of the parties, but came to no decision, preferring to leave
the question, which was really of a judicial character, to
the Privy Council. The Secretary of State then re-
quested the Legislative Council to consider it, and on
April 10 lengthy resolutions were carried by that body
to the effect that in certain cases the Chief Justice had
used language not becoming the dignity of his office, and
had shown decided sympathy with the plaintiff in the
Cribble case, which ought to have been left to the second
Judge; that there was no reason to impugn His Honor's
integrity of purpose, but that his warm, impulsive tem-
perament led to hasty and unconsidered condemnation;
and that as the community had been divided into hostile
camps over the matter, peace and harmony could not be
hoped for so long as Mr. Onslow remained in the position
of Chief Justice. These resolutions were forwarded to
Lord Knutsford, and at the same time the Chief Justice
applied for and obtained twelve months’ leave of absence
to visit England, Sir Henry Wrensfordsley being ap-
pointed Acting Chief Justice. Mr. Onslow remained in
London till 1891, during which time the Privy Council
considered the whole question and finally exonerated him
from the charges laid against him. In that year he
returned to take up his position again as Chief Justice
of the colony, to the apparent satisfaction of everyone
and without any sign of a recurrence of the old trouble.
Meanwhile Sir Frederick Broome’s term of office had
come to an end, and a third Judge, Mr. A. P. Hensman,
was appointed shortly after Mr. Onslow’s return.
The Gribble case referred to above arose out of an
article published in The Inquirer and a lecture delivered
in Perth by the Rev. J. B. Gribble on the ill-treatment
and cruelty meted out to the aborigines in the Gascoyne
district. Mr. Gribble had travelled the district for some
months as a missionary, and was deeply impressed with
the unsatisfactory condition of affairs. His enthusiasm,
and perhaps lack of judgment, led him to make serious
accusations against the squatters without due considera-
tion of all the circumstances. These utterances were
strongly resented, and resolutions condemnatory of them
were passed by the Legislative Council. That they had,
however, some effect is shown by the passing during the
year of an Act for the protection of the aborigines, pro-
viding for the punishment of those guilty of offences
against the natives. The Act was not wholly successful.


and the Governor in the following year expressed a desire
to amend it.
Notwithstanding the resolutions of the Council, Mr.
Gribble continued on every possible occasion to reiterate
his views. The West Australian then published an
editorial reflecting upon his character, terming him a liar
and a canting humbug. In return the missionary in-
stituted proceedings for libel. Contrary to ordinary
practice it was decided that the two Judges —the Chief
Justice and Mr. Justice Stone —should sit together,
without a jury, to hear the case. The trial lasted a month,
and the verdict was not given till some weeks afterwards.
The decision declared that the defendants had proved
their plea of justification and were entitled to a verdict.
The proprietors of the newspaper, however, considered
that though the Chief Justice gave a verdict for them
he delivered judgment in favour of the plaintiff, and his
action in the matter was made one of the charges in the
petition and memorial presented against him.
Matters such as the foregoing are, however, only of
passing interest. The outstanding features of permanent
value to the development of the colony and of paramount
importance in its history were the progressive public
works policy, particularly in the direction of railway ex-
tension; the gold discoveries at Kimberley and Yilgarn;
and the successful consummation of the long-continued
agitation in favour of responsible government.
The financial results of the railways in operation up
to the end of 1885 had by no means equalled the expecta-
tions —on the Eastern line there was a profit of £65 and
on the Geraldton to Northampton line a loss of £899-
but the convenience afforded convinced both the Govern-
ment and the public that further extension was both
necessary and desirable. Proposals had been made to
build branches on the land-grant system from the main
line to the various agricultural and pastoral centres, but
the Government, no doubt keeping in mind the Secretary
of State’s opinion, decided that any extensions or
branches must be part of the Government policy. 1 his
decision did not, however, refer to suggestions then in
the air to build a railway on the land-grant system from
Albany to Beverley or York, thus connecting with the
existing Eastern line. When these suggestions came to
be considered as practical proposals it was found that the
concessions asked for the York-Beverley portion were too
great to be granted, and the Legislature therefore passed
an Act authorizing the construction of this section from
loan funds. The contract was let to Mr. Edward Keane,
the price being £59,878, on April 21, 1885, and the line
was opened in August, 1886. In order to give equal
facilities to Northam and Newcastle, and so bring the
whole of the then existing agricultural area within reach
of the railway, it was decided in 1886 to throw out a
branch from Spencer Brook to Northam and in 1887
from Clackline to Newcastle. The first of these was
opened to traffic in October, 1886, and the second in
January, 1888. Authority was also given for the con-
struction of a line from Geraldton to Greenough and of
a tramway from Roebourne to Cossack. These were
opened in 1887.
The desire to build railways to almost every town-
ship and village in the colony irrespective of the results
likely to accrue seems to have actuated many of the colon-
ists during these years. Suggestions, mostly on the land-
grant or other principle advantageous to the proposers,
were made to connect Busselton, Albany, Eucla, Gerald-
ton, and even the far north by railway with Perth.
Most of the suggestions were, wisely, not heeded by the
Legislature, but a Parliamentary Committee advocated
the construction of a line through Pinjarra to Busselton
by a private company under a guarantee of interest. The
Council itself listened favourably to the proposal, but
the Secretary of State vetoed it.
The idea of a land-grant railway to connect Albany
with the terminal of the Eastern railway was first mooted
in 1880, and in reply to Governor Robinson the Secretary
of State promised to give Imperial sanction to any scheme
proposed by responsible and competent persons the terms
of which were advantageous to the colony. In Septem-
ber, 1881, the Colonial Secretary requested the Legis-
lative Council to vote £6OO for the purpose of securing
information about the country through which the line
would pass, and of bringing the idea before English
capitalists. The Surveyor-General (Mr. Fraser) sug-
gested in a report 'That in consideration of European
capitalists constructing a railway of a similar class to the
New Zealand lines (3 ft. 6 in.), and undertaking the
settlement of not less than, say, 5,000 people in the
colony, the Crown shall grant in fee 2,000,000 acres of
land, to be selected by them between Beverley and King
George Sound.”
Offers to construct the line were quickly forth-
coming. In January, 1882, Mr. Jules Joubert, on behalf
of a syndicate in the eastern colonies, proposed to build
and equip the line and hand it over to the Government
by the end of 1885 on the following terms: —The con-
tractors to introduce not less than 2,000 European immi-
grants who should accept land in part payment for their
services; the Government to grant to the syndicate in fee
10,000,000 acres, one-half along the line of railway, one-
fourth east of the line toward the South Australian
border, and the other fourth westward toward
Geographe Bay. The cost of construction was estimated
at £1,000,000. The Governor, who favoured the
acceptance of the offer, submitted it to the Council, which
after long consideration decided that the offer was not in
the best interests of the colony, and wisely declined it.
The next proposal came from Mr. Audley Coote,
who, on behalf of a Tasmanian syndicate, offered to build
the line provided the Government would guarantee 3-k


per cent, interest on £1,000,000 for twenty-five years.
1 he net profits above 7 per cent, on capital was to be
divided between the Government and the syndicate, the
former to have the option of purchase at any time on
giving one year’s notice. Much as the Western Austra-
lians desired the railway, they were not prepared to
assent to terms so onesided, and the Council without
much ado rejected the proposal.
Three other offers on behalf of separate syndicates
were put forward during the following year. The most
important of these was that made by Mr. Anthony Hor-
dern, which, after amendment, was ultimately accepted
by the Government. Mr. Hordern offered to construct,
equip, maintain, and work a line of railway from York
to Albany upon the same gauge as the Government rail-
ways, the line to be completed within five years from the
date of acceptance of the conditions. In return the
syndicate asked for alternate blocks of land in sections
of 12,000 acres along the line of route for every mile of
railway construction, the grants to be made upon the
completion of each 20 miles, with the option of select-
ing land south of Perth and east and south of York, when
the land along the route was unsuitable. To enable this
to be done the Government was to withdraw from sale
for eight years all land within ten miles of either side
of the line. The syndicate also asked for the privilege
of declaring alternate townsites along the route and for
the admission of all materials of construction free of duty
and free of railway freight charges. The syndicate fur-
ther proposed, after completion of the York-Albany
section, to continue the line on the same terms along the
western seaboard northward to Cambridge Gulf, and
conjointly with the scheme to introduce 50,000 European
immigrants, for doing which they would require 120
acres for each adult and 60 acres for each child over
fifteen years of age.
Mr. Hordern’s proposal was referred forthwith by
Governor Robinson to a committee consisting of the
Colonial Secretary, the Director of Public Works, Messrs.
W. E. Marmion, G. Shenton, G. Randell, J. Morrison,
J. IT. Monger, W. T. Loton, and Sir T. Cockburn Camp-
bell, with instructions to make full inquiry into the
matter. This Committee reported in March. In the first
place the members pointed out that most of the land
between York and Beverley was already alienated, and
that it was impossible to compensate with grants of land
any syndicate for constructing a railway between those
places. Such a line ought to be built by the Govern-
ment, and Beverley made the starting-point for any pro-
posed land-grant railway to Albany. In regard to Mr.
Hordern’s proposal the Committee considered that the
route should be fixed by the Government, and no
deviation that would lengthen any section of 20 miles
by more than three permitted without the approval of
the Government engineer; that the permanent way and
rolling-stock should be equal to that used on Government
lines; that one train should start from either end daily,
the tariff being subject to Government approval; and that
materials for construction be admitted duty free, but
freight at a reduced rate charged for carriage over
Government lines. So far as the provisions for land grants
were concerned, the Committee advised that all un-
alienated land within 30 miles of the railway on either
side be withdrawn from sale until the full amount agreed
upon had been assigned to the syndicate, which should
have power to declare townsites along the route; that
12.000 acres for each mile constructed was fair com-
pensation, but that it must be selected in blocks of not
less than 60,000 acres within the limits set out by the
Committee, and that 25 per cent, of the land should not
be handed over until the satisfactory completion of the
contract. With regard to the immigration jDroposals, the
Committee felt that there was not sufficient data to war-
rant their immediate but advised that the
syndicate should be paid £lO per statute adult for 5,000
immigrants, to be introduced within five years from the
commencement of the railway.
Following upon this report Mr. Hordern submitted
an amended proi3osal, practically embodying the condi-
tions laid down by the Committee, but suggesting in addi-
tion that upon the agreement being signed the syndicate
should be allowed 240,000 acres, representing the first
20 miles of the line, so that land might be immediately
available for immigrants and workmen. The idea of
building a line to Cambridge Gulf was dropped, but the
large immigration scheme was further urged at consider-
able length. At the same time negotiations were com-
menced with the South Australian and Western Aus-
tralian Governments with the object of constructing on
the land-grant principle a transcontinental line from
Albany to Eucla, but as the South Australian authori-
ties declared themselves averse to the proposal it neces-
sarily lajDsed.
In the meantime two other offers to construct the
Beverley to Albany —known as the Great Southern—line
were received by the Government. Colonel McMurdo
offered to construct the line to Albany, and thence to the
border of South Australia, in return for a grant of
10.000 acres per mile (to be selected in alternate blocks
along the lines), and power to issue mortgage bonds to the
value of £4,000 per mile upon which the Government
should guarantee 3| per cent, in interest for thirty years.
In lieu of taxes, stamp duties, and other charges the
Government was to receive 10 per cent, of the net earn-
ings yearly. The syndicate also agreed to introduce forty
selected immigrants for each mile of the lines.
A more ambitious scheme was put forward by Sir
Julius Vogel and Mr. Audrey Coote. They offered to
build a railway from Beverley to Eetakup, and thence
easterly and northerly to Eucla, skirting the coast as sur


veys to be made might suggest. The conditions were in
the main those laid down by the Committee, the most
important exceptions being that trains should be run
twice a week unless additional services were required to
connect with mail steamers, and that twelve years be
allowed for the completion of the work. An amended
proposal offered as an alternative a line from York
through Hampton Plains to Eucla. The syndicate also
proposed to undertake the improvement of Fremantle
Harbour in return for payment partly in land and partly
in debentures, or wholly in debentures.
The thi *ee proposals were referred by the Legislative
Council to a Select Com-
mittee, consisting of Sir T.
Cockburn-Campbell (chair-
man), the Commissioner of
Railways, the Commissioner
of Lands, and Messrs.
Brown, Randell, Lee Steere,
and Shenton. This Com-
mittee recommended that
negotiations be entered into
for the construction of two
lines: (1) From Beverley
to Albany and (2) from
York through the Hamp-
ton Plains to Eucla.
These routes were likely
to be most beneficial in
promoting the internal de-
velopment of the colony,
and the latter would be
the most direct for com-
munication with the Eastern
colonies. Recognizing that
the completion of a line
through Eucla to Adelaide
would possibly make Fre-
mantle the terminal port
of call for mail steamers,
and that in such case the
harbour facilities would be
required there, the Com-
mittee inclined toward the
Photo by C. E. Farr.
proposal submitted by Sir Julius Vogel and Mr. Coote.
At this stage Governor Broome asked for and ob-
tained permission for the Government to conclude
negotiations, on the understanding that if radical altera-
tions were made in the terms they would have to be
ratified by the Legislative Council. The receipt of Mr.
Hordern’s amended proposals made it necessary to
appoint a further Select Committee. This consisted of
the same members as the previous one, except that Mr.
Shenton was omitted and Messrs. Marmion and S. H.
Parker included. The report of this Committee favoured
(-he schemes of Sir Julius Vogel and Mr. Hordern, but
as the South Australian Government had shown itself
opposed to a transcontinental line on the land-grant
principle the York to Eucla section was allowed to drop.
This left Mr. Hordern’s Great Southern Railway proposal
to be considered by the Legislature. After discussion
terms, consisting in the main of those recommended by
the Committee, were agreed to, and the contract was
signed on October 25, 1884. The line being 243 miles
long, the syndicate was entitled to 2,916,000 acres of
land. They deposited £lO,OOO as a guarantee for the
fulfilment of the contract, and agreed to introduce 5,000
immigrants at the rate of
not under 700 or over 1,000
a year.
Mr. Hordern's schemes
for the development of the
colony were not confined to
building railways. In 1884
he proposed, on behalf of a
syndicate, to erect a college
of agriculture, the suggested
curriculum of which would
really have made it a tech-
nical school. The syndicate
asked for the right to select
in any district of the colony
25,000,000 acres of land
upon a ninety-nine years'
lease at an annual rental
of not more than 40s. per
1,000 acres for first-class
and 20s. per 1,000 acres for
second-class lands, with the
option of purchase at any
time during the lease at the
upset price fixed by the
land regulations of 1882.
The college was to be built
and an experimental farm es-
tablished upon the first land
selected, and the syndicate
required the right to sell or
lease other areas to students
or farmers who might desire to cultivate them under the
guidance of the college authorities. As a guarantee, the
syndicate proposed to make a first selection of 100,000
acres and expend a sum of at least £5,000 in erecting
buildings and other improvements, failing which the
whole would revert to the Crown at the end of five years.
If successful the scheme would be enlarged by the erec-
tion of further colleges and the establishment of butter,
cheese, and oil factories and wine-making plants. After
fully considering the proposals the Legislative Council
decided not to agree to them. The same course was taken
HAY STREET. PERTH


in the case of suggestions by Mr. Hordern to build tram-
ways between Perth, Fremantle, Bunbury, Busselton,
and Kojonup.
In order to carry out his agreement to build the
Great Southern Railway Mr. Hordern formed in London
the Western Australian Land Company, with a capital
of £300,000 and a debenture issue of £500,000, Mr.
T. W. Powell being the first Chairman of Directors. Mr.
Hordern then left London with the intention of organiz-
ing operations in the colony, but unfortunately fell a
victim to the heat of the Red Sea and died before
reaching Albany. His contract was transferred to the
Western Australian Land Company by the Legislative
Council in April, 1888, with the exception of the clauses
relating to immigration. Several large bands of immi-
grants were introduced in 1886 and 1887, but in June
of the latter year the Company declared itself unable to
absorb any more and asked to be released from the obliga-
tion. Judging from the ideas put forward, Mr. Hor-
dern’s death, at a comparatively early age, was a dis-
tinct loss to Western Australia. A man of large outlook
and immense business capacity he would almost certainly
have done much to develop the colony’s resources and
raise it to a position of prominence in keeping with its
undoubted possibilities. To the withdrawal of the guid-
ing mind may be ascribed the want of success of the Land
Company.
The contract to build the Great Southern line was
secured by Messrs. Millar Brothers, of Melbourne, who
commenced at both ends and proceeded so rapidly that
the line was opened to traffic on June 1, 1889. While
under the direction of the Company it was only a modified
success, caused probably by the failure of the Company
to dispose of the lands along the route. Only a small
portion was sold or leased, and still less cleared and
cultivated. Townsites were declared at Lakeside, Mount
Barker, Cranbrook, Broomehill, Katanning, Wagin,
Narrogin, and Pingelly. Apart from the interests of the
Company the line proved a great convenience to estab-
lished settlers along the railway, and was of considerable
service to the colony. The Company’s property, including
the railway, was purchased by the Government in Decem-
ber, 1896, for £1,100,000, and formally taken over on
January 8, 1897.
Other schemes for land-grant railways followed upon
the agreement with Mr. Hordern. Between 1885 and
1889 several attempts were made by a syndicate holding
land in the Esperance Bay and Hampton Plains districts
to secure an agreement to connect the two by railway
under conditions similar to those adopted for the Great
Southern line, but the Legislative Council declined to
give its assent. A provisional agreement was entered
into in 1889, but was never carried out. Another proposal
was made in 1888, by Dr. Boyd, to build a line from
the eastern terminus of the Government line to Eucla,
The offer was referred to a Select Committee, which
recommended that the gauge should be 5 ft. 3 in., that
20,000 acres should be allowed for each mile constructed,
and that £50,000 be deposited as a guarantee that the
work would be carried out. The conditions proving too
stringent the proposal lapsed, and another —the last for
several years —opportunity of connecting east and west
by railway was lost. Other offers were made by syndi-
cates to build lines from Derby and from Wyndham to
the newly-opened Kimberley goldfields on either the
land-grant principle or Government guarantee, but the
authorities declined to approve of them.
The only other railway on the land-grant principle
that was built was the outcome of a proposal made by
Mr. John Waddington in 1884 to construct a line from
York to Geraldton by way of Northam and Newcastle.
The terms were based upon those in the agreement with
Mr. Hordern. The proposal was referred to a Select
Committee consisting of the Commissioner of Railways,
the Commissioner of Lands, Sir T. C. Campbell, and
Messrs. Marmion, Lee Steere, Loton, Brown, Randell,
and Crowther, which advised that the line should start
from Guildford and run via the Victoria Plains, Upper
Irwin, and Dongara to Walkaway, the southern terminus
of the Government line from Geraldton. On the recom-
mendation of the Committee the Government was em-
powered to negotiate with Mr. Waddington on the same
terms as with Mr. Hordern, except that the land taken
for the railway in passing through townsites and freehold
property should be only one chain in width, and that no
land should be reserved from sale until the agreement
had actually been concluded. The area of 12,000 acres
for each mile of railway was to be selected in alternate
blocks within 40 miles of either side of the line and so
as not to interfere with freeholds already granted. The
agreement was signed in February, 1886, and the con-
tract for building the railway was let to Mr. Edward
Keane. The cost of the work, complete with rolling-
stock and other appurtenances, was estimated at about
£1,000,000 sterling. AVant of success on the part of Mr.
Waddington in obtaining the necessary capital caused
the suspension of operations in 1887, but they were re-
sumed in 1888 with the assistance of certain English
capitalists, and the whole line was opened to traffic in
1894. It still remains the property of the Midland Rail-
way Company, which during recent years has fallen into
line with the Government in the endeavour to extend
the agricultural possibilities of Western Australia.
Concurrently with the building of railways there
was considerable extension of the telegraph system, all
of which was carried out by the Government with the
assistance of money derived from loans. The only offer
made to build a telegraph line on the land-grant system
was one to connect Geraldton with Roebourne, which was
declined. In 1882 the Council authorized the work out


of loan funds, and the contract was let to Messrs. J. & W.
Bateman. The line was opened in 1885, the total cost
being £56,531. By it Shark Bay, the Gascoyne, Ash-
burton, and Fortescue were all linked with Perth, and
an extension was almost immediately made to Cossack.
In 1889 the line was continued to Derby, a distance of
about 500 miles, and eventually carried on to Wyndham
and Hall Creek.
In 1883 Sir Julius Vogel proposed to lay a cable to
the North-West coast to connect with the European sys-
tem, but afterwards abandoned the idea. Messrs. Millar
Brothers then suggested (in 1888) running one from the
North-West coast to India or Ceylon, but before negotia-
tions were concluded the Colonial Office arranged with
the Eastern Extension Company to extend its system
from Banjoewangi, in Java, to Broome. This was
opened in February, 1889, and under agreement Western
Australia agreed to transmit all cables to and from the
eastern colonies over local lines at half rates, £I,OOO a
year in receipts being guaranteed. In 1887 the Perth
Telephone Exchange was opened, and the same conveni-
ence given to Fremantle in 1888.
We have already seen that in connection with
various land-grant railway schemes offers were made to
construct harbour facilities at Fremantle. Other sugges-
tions had been made from time to time during the history
of the colony, but none of them had inspired confidence
in their practicability. During the seventies plans were
submitted to Sir John Coode, who proposed two possible
schemes —one to provide 29 ft. of water in a safe
anchorage at a cost of £638,000 and the other to provide
20 ft. at a cost of £242,000. To consider either in the
then financial condition of the colony was out of the
question. The matter was therefore allowed to rest until
1886, when Sir John Coode was invited to visit the colony
and make suggestions after an exhaustive inspection. In
his report he expressed the opinion that the difficulties
attendant upon the formation and maintenance of suit-
able and safe approaches in Cockburn Sound were so
great, and would be accompanied by so large an expendi-
ture, that there would be no alternative but to consider
the utilization of the shelter and deep water as entirely
unattainable. With regard to a proposal to build moles
and cut a canal through to Rocky Bay, he considered that
the cost of sheltering moles erected in suitable positions
would be so great as to make the idea inadmissible. There
was a grave objection to a corresponding treatment of the
existing entrance to the river, as the limited tide and
consequent small backwash for scouring purposes would
probably cause a sandbar to form at the improved en-
trance and thus materially affect its utility. The Rocky
Bay project he did not think was feasible. To provide
for the unimpeded movement of the sand it would be
requisite that any sheltering work at Fremantle must
be detached from the mainland, connection with the
shore being effected by means of an open viaduct, so
arranged as to admit the unrestricted passage of the sand
without causing its deposition. Altogether Sir John
Goode’s report was not favourable to the construction of
a harbour at Fremantle, and the Government felt com-
pelled to drop the matter for the time, and do what was
possible toward the improvement of existing anchorages.
The belief that at some time gold in payable quan-
tities would be discovered in Western Australia seems to
have existed almost from the inception of the colony. The
“colour” had repeatedly been found, now here, now there,
but beyond intermittent attempts at prospecting no
strenuous endeavour had been made to discover payable
metal. Specks of alluvial from Dardanup, small scraps
from somewhere east of Northam, “colour” from the
Blackwood, and the suggestion of it from the Darling
Ranges comprised the total result up to 1850. Zest was
then added to the search by the discovery in Victoria of
goldfields rich beyond description, and the flame of desire
kindled anew. The old navigators’ reports that the
North-West seemed to be a land wherein the precious
metal might lie hidden were remembered, but at that
time it was “undiscovered country” so far as Western
Australian colonists were concerned, and no one was
hardy enough to brave its possible dangers. Being of
opinion, however, that the territory within reach should
be tested, the Government imported half a dozen pros-
pectors from Ballarat and engaged a geologist of more
or less competency to advise upon mineral areas. In 1854
Surveyor Robert Austin, passing through the Murchison,
expressed the view that around Mount Magnet lay pos-
sibly one of the richest goldfields of the world. But the
renewed activity was doomed to disappointment, and for
a further thirty years the treasures remained beyond the
ken of man. The only result was the careful preparation
of papers for learned societies on the non-auriferous
nature of Western Australian rocks. Little further was
done for many years. After the opening up of the North-
West the Government Resident (Mr. R. F. Sholl) and
some of the settlers occasionally drew attention to what
appeared to be promising mineral areas, and in 1882 a
small nugget weighing 14 dwt. was found between Cos-
sack and Roebourne by Mr. Alexander McCrae. After
that Governor Broome, in a despatch to the Colonial
Office, predicted that the discovery of payable gold was
almost certain, and suggested that regulations should be
framed “for immediate application in case of necessity.”
The actual discovery of gold was due to the advice
of the Government Geologist, Mr. E, T. Hardman, a
scientist of proved ability and experience. Mr. Hardman
accompanied Mr. H. F. Johnston in the Kimberley sur-
veying expeditions of 1883 and 1884, and in each case
issued comprehensive reports on the geology of the
country. In the first report, dated April, 1884, he re-
gretted that the hurried nature of the survey made a


systematic examination for gold impossible, but he con-
sidered it extremely likely that that part of the district
occupied by the metamorphic rock would eventually
prove to be, in some degree at least, auriferous. He re-
commended that a thorough search be made in the
country between the Napier Range and Mount Broome,
on the Leonard and Richenda Rivers, particularly about
10 or 12 miles up, where the slate country commenced.
J Fe stated that he had observed continuous exposures of
metamorphic rocks and numerous quartz veins, varying
in width and apparently bearing north-west.
The survey of 1884 passed through the Ord River
country, and Mr. Hardman was especially careful to
examine it, as repeated discoveries of fine alluvial gold
had been made by settlers along the course of the river.
His report was more hopeful than before, and, curiously
enough, though he never secured sufficient gold to cover
a threepenny piece, the places pointed out by him as prob-
ably gold-bearing were afterwards proved by practical
miners. The gravel along the bed of the Ord, Elvire, and
Panton Rivers yielded good prospects wherever tested,
and the granite rocks stretching for many miles from the
McClintock Ranges were intersected with quartz veins in
which gold was here and there visible. He found that
it was possible to secure indications over a distance of
nearly 150 miles.
Mr. Hardman’s report —the first from a competent
authority—led to preparations for a prospecting party.
By resolution of the Legislative Council the horses of the
Kimberley surveying expedition were lent, and Messrs.
John Slattery, Chas. Hall, J. McCoque, John Campbell,
Alex. Nicholson, and JT. A. Poult —who came from the
eastern colonies —left Yeeda Station at the end of
August, 1885, for the locality named by Mr. Hardman.
Following the Panton River to its junction with the
Elvire, they prospected in the neighbourhood for some
days, and succeeded in collecting about 10 oz. of gold.
They then tried the Margaret, Ord, and Panton Rivers,
finding indications everywhere, but were compelled to
leave the spot through lack of provisions and make for
Derby, some 400 miles away. Their claim to be regarded
as the discoverers of the Kimberley goldfield was, how-
ever, disputed by Mr. Carr-Boyd, an explorer, who prior
to their advent had sent a parcel of stone from the district
to Melbourne to be treated. Tn any case the finding of
the gold was a much more important matter to Western
Australia than the question of who found it. The success
of Slattery and party was quickly noised abroad, and
other prospecting parties followed in their wake. The
reports which from time to time were received from these
roused general excitement throughout Australia, and in
1886 the Kimberley rush set in. Men came from the
eastern colonies to try their luck, and most of them were,
at anyrate, rewarded by the sight of gold. By April,
1886, 400 oz. had been received at Derby, and soon after
Carlisle and party arrived with 56 oz., Keelau with 24,
and others with smaller quantities. In May the Kim-
berley goldfield was proclaimed, and by June it was
estimated that between 200 and 300 miners were scat-
tered over the area embraced within its boundaries.
Derby being somewhat distant from the field, a new
port —Wyndham —was established at Cambridge Gulf in
August, and the Government officials stationed there.
At the opening of the Legislative Council in June
Governor Broome reported with satisfaction “the dis-
covery of an extensive goldfield of rich promise” in the
Kimberley district, and advised that an Act to control it
be at once passed. This (50 Viet., No. 18) was assented
to in August, and provided that miners’ rights should be
issued on payment of £1 per year, but that no right be
issued to an Asiatic or African alien during the first five
years after the proclamation of any goldfield. Con-
solidated miners’ rights could be obtained by companies
on the basis of the number of individual rights under
which the claims were first taken possession of. Leases
could be granted for twenty-one years at a rental of 20s.
per acre, and could be surrendered with the consent of
the Warden provided the conditions had been carried out
up to the time of surrender. Business and residential
licences could be secured at a rental of £4 per year for
ten years, and these could be transferred on payment of
ss. No lease could be for more than twenty-five acres or
be granted until two years after the field had been pro-
claimed. Any portion of Crown lands could be pro-
claimed a goldfield by the Governor, and pastoral leases
existing over it suspended or cancelled. The administra-
tion of the Act was carried out by a Warden, who had the
general powers of Justices in Petty Sessions. The
Governor-in-Council could reward discoveries of a gold-
field with a sum not exceeding £I,OOO. A few days later
an export duty of 2s. 6d. per oz. was imposed.
Before the end of 1886 the excitement in Western
Australia, and indeed throughout Australia generally,
was intense. Nearly 2,000 men were at work throughout
the district, and the Government was busily occupied in
providing proper means of communication. Derby and
Wyndham were both used as landing ports, and became
for the time busy and prosperous centres. Late in the
year Mr. C. D. Price was sent by the Government to the
district, and reported that when he arrived at McPhee’s
Gully, four miles from the point where cart traffic from
Derby stopped, he found numbers of men camped, some
of them prepared to give the field a trial, but more about
to return to Derby or Wyndham, disappointed and dis-
heartened. Crossing over to Elvire Gorge, the terminus
of the Wyndham road, he found men scattered all over
the area, but congregated chiefly at Hall Creek, the
Twelve-mile Camp, Elvire Gorge, and the neighbouring
gullies. He was not pleased with the prospects of the
field. There was no alluvium, no lead; the usual prac


tice was to scrape the surface of the ravines and test
the soil by dry-blowing or to seek for grains in the
bars of the creeks. The average result was about a
pennyweight a day; occasionally more was found in
isolated pockets, but the majority of the men barely
secured enough to keep body and soul together. They
stayed merely in the hope that the rainy season would
bring about an improvement. Finding that it did not,
their only desire was to get away. Mr. Price reported
that the loss of valuable property was very great—*
expensive outfits were sacrificed to enable the owners
to leave, horses were sold for one-fourth of their value,
and in many cases waggons and carts were abandoned.
New arrivals were discouraged from the outset, and
returned so little (£3O) by the end of June, 1887, that
the Legislature decided to repeal it.
Mr. Price's opinion was somewhat modified in
1887, but he still felt sure that the field would not
realize the expectations formed of it. By February
there were only about 600 men remaining, and these
were congregated chiefly at Twelve-mile Camp and
Brockman's River. In the latter place water was diffi-
cult to procure; for domestic purposes it had to be
carried about seven miles, and the fact that two or
three hundred men were prepared to walk that dis-
tance for it every day led him to believe that they
were, at any rate, securing payable results, but he was
unable to get any reliable information. After the
VIEW IN KING’S PARK, PERTH
many of them never ventured farther than the end of
the cart track. So adverse were the reports that met
them that they had only one desire —to get rid of their
impedimenta at whatever price was offered and leave
the country in disgust. Mr. Price intimated that the
average cost of outfit was at least £lOO per man, and
that very few took that amount away in gold.
Notwithstanding Mr. Price's gloomy report, a cer-
tain amount of gold was secured. The Blue Book gives
the export in 1886 as 302 oz., valued at £1,147, but
this does not by any means represent the whole output.
The miners objected to the export duty of 2s. 6d. per
ounce, and whenever possible got out of the country
without declaring their gold. In fact, the duty had
p
December rains rich patches were occasionally dis-
covered, and of course led to those rushes to the spot on
the part of less fortunate diggers in other places which
are so common a feature of mining camps. The heaviest
pieces of metal were found on the Panton River, the
coarsest on the Brockman, and the finest near Mount
Dockrell toward the south-west. The prospects of
alluvial mining were not, however, in themselves suffi-
cient to keep the men on the field. The real inducement
was the existence of quartz outcrops giving fair indica-
tions of gold. These encouraged the prospectors to con-
tinue the search. The first reef to be opened up was the
Jackson, at Hall Creek, on the Elvire, in September,
1886. Gold was then obtained from the Lady Broome,


Lady Margaret, and Brockman reefs, and in places
sufficient of the metal to pay expenses was secured by
“dollying” the surface stone. But the ore did not improve
with depth. The Jackson reef was traced for a consider-
able distance, and showed gold all along the way. Two
reefs north of the Panton were tested; rich leaders were
discovered at Mount Dockrell, Spear Gully, and at Two
Mile Gully, east of McPhee Gully. From the last-
named 130 oz. of gold were quickly secured. Mr. Carr
Boyd took 11 cwt. from the Jackson reef to Melbourne
for treatment, and reported that it yielded 43 oz. to the
ton. By the middle of June, 1887, thirty-four quartz
claims had been registered —twenty-four at Hall Creek,
four at Brockman River, five at Mount Dockrell, and
five at Panton River, the number of men employed
being 147. It was found that the leasing clauses of the
Goldfields Act were very unfavourable to quartz mining,
as no lease could be procured until two years after the
proclamation of the field. The Government Geologist,
Mr. H ardman, strongly advised that the clause should
be repealed. Mr. Price, to wdiom the suggestion was re-
ferred, just as strongly opposed it. The object of the
clause, he pointed out, was to prevent large areas of
untried ground, which might maintain numbers of in-
dividual miners, being taken up by speculators who had
no intention of working them, but whose only object was
to float bogus companies. As an instance he quoted the
Northern Territory of South Australia: “There, with
equally stringent regulations, hundreds of acres are
locked up, and have been for years; not a man at work,
and costly machinery utterly destroyed through neglect.”
All this, he considered, was due to the fact that leases
were granted when the field was first discovered. Not-
withstanding this adverse view, the Act was amended in
1888 so as to allow leases to be granted immediately.
As usually happens in new mining settlements
where men are intent upon the one object, the finding
of gold, the men at Kimberley suffered greatly from
want of proper sanitary precautions and from scarcity
of provisions. Disregard of sanitation in an area so well
within the tropics brought in its train fever and ague,
scurvy and dysentery, diseases that were increased in
severity by the want of proper nursing and nourishment,
and the mere fact that so many stayed there is evidence
either that they were making more than a competency
or were strongly inoculated with the virtue of persever-
ance. The prospects certainly improved during 1887.
Good alluvial gold was discovered in various places and
small nuggets occasionally brought to light. One party
conveyed over 1,500 oz. to Derby in one trip. Com-
panies were formed to work the quartz mines, and
machinery for one of them —the Nicholas, on the Mar-
garet reef —reached Hall Creek in November. The
Lady Carrington Mine was purchased by a London
syndicate, conditionally upon the first crushing yielding
2 oz. to the ton —not usually a difficult condition to
fulfil. Other mines were also successfully floated, and
a belief in the permanency of the field began to arise.
The official returns show that 4,873 oz., valued at
<£18,517, were entered at the Customs for export during
the year.
Developments were continued in 1888, and at the
same time the search for alluvial gold was carried on.
The returns were not so large as for 1887, the total
export being 3,493 oz., valued at £13,273, not quite all
of which came from Kimberley. Further extensions of
plant in the way of batteries and so forth were made
during 1889 and 1890, but it became evident that the
cost of raising the ore and treating it was greater than
the value of gold secured. The returns show that in
1889 the district yielded 2,494 oz., and 4,074 in 1890,
but by the end of that year the ‘‘Golden Crown” was
the only mine paying expenses, and most of the others
were shut down. Though gold had been proved to exist
both in reefs and as alluvial, the want of capital and
the cost and difficulties of transit made it impossible to
work the field on a large scale at a profit. Doubtless
when these obstacles can be overcome attention will once
more be directed to the district, with better prospects of
success. After 1890 the population of the field dwindled
to about 300. These eke out a living more or less com-
fortably in searching for alluvial, or in the hope of
securing a Government bonus are testing the old reefs
from which rich stone was formerly obtained. But
though the Kimberley field, from which so much was
expected, must be regarded as a comparative failure, it
served an excellent purpose in directing attention to the
fact that gold did exist in Western Australia, and that
there was every reason to expect that the country would
well repay examination by those whose experience and
ability fitted them for the task. This impression was
strengthened by an incident that happened in 1887. In
that year Mr. Chas. Glass, of Mugakine, while digging
a tank on his property situated about 100 miles east of
Newcastle, found a large speck of metal which on
examination proved to be gold. This, combined with
the fact that from time to time indications of gold had
been reported from the country east of Northam, led to
proposals to equip a prospecting party to thoroughly test
the question. At the instance of Mr. (afterwards Sir)
George Shenton, the Legislative Council voted £3OO
toward such a project, and with this assistance the
Settlers’ Association of the Eastern districts fitted out
a party under the leadership of Mr. B. N. Colreavy.
Colreavy worked over all the country between Newcastle
and the Yilgarn Hills, a distance of some 200 miles, but
his labours were practically fruitless, though he was so
much impressed with the appearance of the country that
he immediately set out on a trip on his own account.
While Colreavy was out on his second trip quite a sensa


tion was caused by the return of Mr. Harry Anstey from
Yilgarn with some rich specimens of quartz. Mr.
Anstey, on behalf of a syndicate, had gone out in the
same direction as Colreavy, and had discovered an out-
crop at Lake Deborah, from which a member of the party
named Paine had broken off the first specimen. Anstey
returned to Perth with the stone, while the rest of the
party remained, and in course of prospecting found four
other reefs, one of which was traced for 1,200 yards.
Another party under Mr. Seabrook also discovered quartz
reefs in the same neighbourhood, and some excellent
specimens were obtained by Mr. von Bibra. Unfor-
tunately it was found that
Anstey’s reef, though good
at surface, soon pinched
out and showed no indi-
cation of gold upon sinking
a shaft. This happened just
about the time that Col-
reavy, who was prospecting
at Golden Valley some 30
miles to the south, dis-
covered a reef that carried
gold throughout, and Mr.
W. J. Parker, some 40
miles farther south, again
discovered good indications
at a place which he called
Parker Range. This caused
a mild rush, with the result
that various new reefs were
struck to the south and
east by Riseley and others—
representing the Phoenix
Company —who named their
principal find some 30
miles east of Golden Valley
—Southern Cross, by reason
of the fact that they had
used the constellation as a
guide when travelling by
night.
In February, 1888, Mr.
IT. P. Woodward, F.G.S.,
who had been appointed Government Geologist in succes-
sion to Mr. E. T. Hardman (who died in 1886), visited
the fields and reported very favourably upon their pros-
pects, deciding that Colreavy's claim was well worth
developing. The Government at a later date awarded
Mr. Anstey £5OO, and Messrs. Colreavy and Huggins
£250 each, as rewards for the discovery of the Yilgarn
goldfield.
The chief difficulty that faced the prospectors was
want of water. To surmount this the Government spent
£l,OOO on water conservation during 1888, and on Octo-
p2
her 1 of that year proclaimed the district as a goldfield.
Mr. A. F. Thompson was appointed AVarden (being
shortly afterwards succeeded by Mr. J. M. Finnerty)
and Mr. E. A. F. Compton Mining Registrar. Very
little development took place until the following year,
and then not so much around Golden Valley as in the
neighbourhood of the newly-discovered Southern Cross.
Here true lodes, holding rich quartz, were found, and
companies to work them were formed in Perth and Fre-
mantle and in Adelaide. The Central, Central Ex-
tended, Fraser’s, and Fraser’s South Mining Companies
were floated and machinery ordered. Condensers for
supplying fresh water were
erected, stores set up, and
the beginnings of a mining
township soon in evidence.
The Government Geologist,
convinced that the district
would prove productive,
advocated the building of
a railway. The activity
abated toward the middle
of the year, as from
want of machinery no
returns had been secured
by the companies. Mills
were started at the Central
and Fraser's toward the
close of 1889, and after
some difficulty the pure
gold was separated from
the black muddy amalgam
caused by the action of
the salt water on the refuse
from the machinery. The
results gave confidence in
the prospects of the dis-
trict, and combined with
continual new discoveries
of quartz brought about an
air of permanence, though
the unpleasant nature of
the climate and the uncom-
fortable conditions under
which work had to be done led the Government to
grant exemption to the mines during the heat of sum-
mer. As an instance of the primitive conditions prevail-
ing it may be mentioned that the court-house was a bush
structure and that the AVarden dispensed justice while
sitting on a gin-case, a candle-box being provided for
his clerk. During the year seventy-one leases, repre-
senting 684 acres, were applied for; two claims and
eighteen protection areas were occupied; and nineteen
business licences and 394 miners’ rights issued. The out-
put of the field for 1889 was 1,858 oz. A breakdown of
WELLINGTON STREET, PERTH (SOUTH SIDE).


the machinery at Fraser’s Mine during the early part of
1890 had a tendency to lessen public confidence in the
prospects generally, but the declaration of a dividend —
the first on the field—of 6d. a share in the following
November did much to restore it. The Commissioner of
Crown Lands visited the district in June, and was met
with quite a number of requests, most of which, being
impressed with the possibilities of the locality, he re-
commended, but they were not carried out at the time
owing to constitutional changes being imminent. The
amount of gold exported from Yilgarn in 1890 was 2,277
oz., valued at £8,652.
Yilgarn did not, however, show such encouraging
results as another gold-producing area discovered about
the same time. In 1888 a lad named Withnall, at Mal-
lina, some 70 miles east of Roebourne, found a speck
of gold in a stone he was about to throw at a bird. The
Kimberley excitement having made everyone alert, the
district was prospected, and two promising reefs—the
Mallina and the Pedawah—were discovered, and shortly
afterwards several others were found. In July a rich
alluvial find was made at Pilbara Creek and a large
quantity of gold secured in a very short time. Several
nuggets of from 30 to 40 oz. each were unearthed, and
in November Mr. A. Villars secured one weighing 127 oz.
The Pilbara goldfield was proclaimed on the same day
as the Yilgarn—October 1, 1888 —and Mr. C. W.
Nyulasy appointed Warden until June, 1889, when Mr.
W. L. Owen took up the position. The discovery of rich
alluvial at points scattered throughout the district
caused quite a rush during 1889, the excitement extend-
ing beyond the confines of the colony. Syndicates were
formed in Melbourne and other centres to work the mines
at Pilbara and Mallina, and prospectors were soon scat-
tered over the whole field. The chief centre of the gold-
field was called Marble Bar, from the fact that at the
place where it was erected a bar of mottled quartz, be-
lieved at first to be marble, crossed the Shaw River.
Most of the miners were to be found where alluvial gold
was richest. Early in the year a party of prospectors
discovered good alluvial diggings on the Oakover, from
which some hundreds of ounces of gold were gathered in
a very short time. At Nullagine many alluvial claims
were returning handsome yields. In August a new field
was discovered 11 miles east of Roebourne by a China-
man, and named the Nickol field. It was only of small
area, and being near the sea was covered with water at
high tide. No great results were obtained from it.
In the same year gold was found near Lake Austin
on the Murchison, and also on the Ashburton, but no
returns were secured sufficient to justify any excitement.
Gold was also taken from the district south of Cudding-
warra, and specimens were obtained from the Wongan
Hills, some 60 miles north-east of Newcastle, but during
1889 and 1890 the principal yields came from Pilbara.
In 1889, out of a total export of 15,492 oz., 11,170
came from that field, and in 1890, out of 22,806 oz., it
accounted for 16,055.
Another commercial metal —tin —was also dis-
covered in 1888, owing probably to researches made by
Mr. E. T. Hardman some years earlier. On one occasion,
when engaged officially in the Blackwood district, he
was accompanied by Mr. Stinton, to whom he suggested
the probable occurrence of tin-bearing deposits. Having
this in mind, Mr. Stinton in 1888, while out kangaroo
hunting at Greenbushes, found a small quantity of
stream tin in a gully near the Blackwood River, just off
the main road, and about nine miles from Bridgetown.
Several leases were taken up, but as the mining regula-
tions did not at the time contain any labour clauses, very
little work was done. In 1891 Mr. Stinton’s discovery
was rewarded by a grant of £250 from the Government.
We now turn to the last phase of the long-drawn-
out struggle for responsible government. It will be re-
membered that in 1882 Mr. Parker asked that the
Governor should obtain from the Secretary of State
definite information as to the terms and conditions upon
which autonomy would be granted. Feeling convinced
that the finances of the colony warranted the step, he did
not wait for a reply, but in 1883 moved in the Council
“that the time has arrived when it is desirable that the
colony of Western Australia should adopt a system of
responsible government.” The motion gained consider-
able support, mainly because there was an impression
that the Government was holding back funds that ought
to be spent in various works of development. It was,
however, defeated by an amendment proposed by Mr.
Lee Steere to the effect that having asked for the opinion
of the Secretary of State no definite steps ought to be
taken until a reply had been received.
The then Secretary for the Colonies (Lord Derby)
appears to have been disinclined to commit the Imperial
authorities to any decisive course of action. So far from
encouraging the idea of autonomy, he seems to have
thought it his duty to stand in the way. In his despatch,
dated July 23, 1883, he followed the line of Lord Kim-
berley and pointed out the difficulty of administering
the northern and southern parts of the colony together,
inferring that this could be more satisfactorily done if
Western Australia remained a Crown colony. After
pointing out that the separation of Queensland from
New South Wales became unavoidable long before its
districts in the latitude of Kimberley had been occupied,
and that most probably the same would occur between
the northern and southern portions of Western Aus-
tralia almost immediately after responsible government
had been granted, Lord Derby proceeded : “I am there-
fore not disposed to anticipate that the request for
responsible government will be pressed at this time, or
that, if urged by the residents in the southern part of


the colony, it would be equally acceptable to those who
are now developing the tropical districts in the belief
that their interests are protected by the Crown. And
while 1 am of opinion that under responsible government
the control of the Crown lands generally would have to
be vested in the Colonial Parliament, it appears to me,
as at present advised, that it would be necessary to make
an exception in respect of those northern Crown lands
which would be likely to form a separate colony at an
early date. With a view to meet a contingency (which,
however, I hope may not arise for a considerable time,
as there appears to be no reason why the colony should
not continue to prosper for
a further period under its
present form of govern'
merit), I think it desirable
that a separate account
should be kept of the re-
venue raised and expended
in each district of the
colony; and it will also have
to be considered whether, in
any future loan Bill, it must
not be declared that the
lands and revenues of the
Kimberley and some other
portions of the northern dis-
tricts will not form part of
the security for the loan/’
The despatch concluded by
requesting that a full state-
ment of the condition of
the colony, with exhaustive
tables and financial returns,
should be forwarded by the
Governor to the Colonial
Office, in order that if the
demand was persisted in the
Imperial authorities might
be in possession of all pos-
sible information.
As the Colonial Office,
almost from the inception
of the colony, had been looked upon by the settlers as
the chief obstacle in the way of progress, this despatch,
which was not only aimed at discouraging the desires of
the colonists but seemed to contain a veiled threat
as to what would happen if the agitation were continued,
had the almost immediate effect of stimulating public
interest in the question. Many of those who had been
more or less apathetic awoke to an active interest in the
situation. Governor Broome compiled the report asked
for, and forwarded it on April 9, 1884, giving not only
tables and other necessary data, but a clear expression
of his own opinion. “Though T see no valid reason,” he
wrote, ‘‘for withholding free institutions from the colony
after its inhabitants shall have expressed a general and
decided wish to take upon themselves the burden and
the responsibility of that form of government, 1 am
strongly of the opinion that until such a wish shall have
been expressed, which certainly it has not been as yet, it
would be a mistake to make this great and irretrievable
change. Furthermore, while I concede that the colony
has reached a stage at which a claim to its birthright, if
deliberately insisted upon, should not be refused, I
nevertheless think that Western Australia would do well
to delay its majority for a time, until its wealth and
population shall have still
further increased, and until
(what is hardly the case
as yet) the community con-
tains within itself a good
ballast weight of public
opinion, and a sufficient
complement of qualified
public men to govern on
the party system. By quali-
fied public men I mean
not only men of ability
and capacity for public
affairs (for these already
exist in full proportion),
but men in wdiom good
social standing is joined to
means and leisure sufficient
to allow' them to devote
themselves to political busi-
ness. It is in this respect
a deficiency would, I think,
be felt. But the deficiency
is not so serious as to
be absolutely prohibitive.
With respect to the class
of politicians to whom the
affairs of the colony would
be confided under respon
sible government, the con-
stituencies at present place
in the Legislative Council gentlemen who are among the
most leading, most intelligent, and most public spirited
men of the colony, and who would be a credit to any
community. There is no reason to suppose that the
electors would cease to do this under responsible govern-
ment.^
The Governor then proceeded to advise ‘‘that Her
Majesty’s Government should intimate that responsible
government would not be refused if a very decided and
general wish for it should find utterance at the elections
which must take place not later than next year”—a
wish that had not so far been expressed —but concluded
SERPENTINE FALLS.


by pointing out that he did not consider a change neces-
sary or desirable so long as representative government
gave reasonable satisfaction.
Governor Broome’s estimate of the existing state of
affairs was both accurate and impartial; there was not at
the time any decisive public desire for autonomy, but
his report and the reply of Lord Derby to it went a long
way toward creating one. in a despatch dated July
14, 1884, which was vague, indefinite, and unsatisfac-
tory, the Secretary of State wrote: —“I am not prepared
at present to authorize you to announce that responsible
government could be granted, if at the general election
of next year there should be a strong expression of
opinion in favour of the change; because, as I pointed
out in my despatch of last year, there are important
political and financial questions which would have to be
satisfactorily settled before any such steps could be
taken, and I confess that 1 anticipate considerable diffi-
culty in dealing with some of those questions. If, how-
ever, the electors should declare themselves very
generally and decisively in favour of a change in the
Constitution, having had before them the considerations
explained in my despatch of July 23, 1883 [regarding
the possible separation of the northern portion of the
colony], Her Majesty’s Government would not refuse to
examine the details of the arrangement which it would
be necessary to make if responsible government should
be introduced; but, without full and careful inquiry,
they would not be prepared to give any definite assurance
that the introduction of responsible government is now
practicable.”
But few references were made to the subject during
the 1884 session of the Legislative Council, which was
held before the receipt of the foregoing despatch. The
opinions that were voiced were mainly from opponents,
and were designed really to raise the bogey of possible
separation of the northern districts if the agitation for
autonomy were continued. At no time does there seem
to have been any desire for separation evinced by the
settlers in those districts, but the fact that the Secretary
of State’s despatches hinted at the possibility was suffi-
cient for the opponents of responsible government to use
it as an argument. To strengthen their case they quoted
the dissatisfaction that existed over the land regula-
tions, the small amount of public money spent in the
Kimberley and Gascoyne districts, and the useless way
in which the money that was voted was expended. The
discussion was, however, purely academic; the settlers
in the north took no interest in it, and it must be ad-
mitted that at that time, at any rate, it had no practical
bearing on the question of autonomy. All that the nor-
thern settlers wanted was better representation in the
existing Legislature, and this they secured in 1886, when
the Kimberley electorate was formed, of which Mr.
Alexander Forrest was the first elected representative,
Mr. D. K. Congdon being at the same time nominated
to a seat in the Council.
The elections referred to in Governor Broome’s
despatch were held in October and November, 1884. The
desire for responsible government was made as far as
possible a test question, but the results were not
markedly in favour of any change. The official members
of the new Council consisted of M. Fraser (Colonial
Secretary), A. P. Hensman (Attorney-General), C. T.
Mason (Director of Public Works), and John Forrest
(Surveyor-General); the nominees were J. G. Lee Steere,
G. Randell, W. T. Loton, and T. Burges; and the elected
representatives consisted of Sir T. C. Campbell, W. E.
Marmion, W. S. Pearse, M. Brown, E. H. Wittenoorn,
C. Crowther, S. Burt, McKenzie Grant, A. C. McCrae,
Sir Luke Leake, S. IT. Parker, H. Brockman, G. Shen-
ton, G. Layman, H. W. Venn, and C. Harper.
In the absence of any definite mandate from the
people no pronounced movement was made by the Coun-
cil in 1885. Certain information as to the terms under
which Queensland and Victoria were separated from
New South Wales was obtained, and questions bearing
upon the possible separation of the northern districts
were asked, but beyond that the agitation was allowed
to slumber. Before the Council met in 1886 certain
changes had taken place in its personnel which had prob-
ably some effect in making the demand for autonomy
more insistent. Sir Luke Leake, who had been Speaker
ever since the introduction of representative government,
died in London, and Mr. J. G. Lee Steere was elected
to the position. Dr. E. Scott was elected to represent
Perth in the place of the deceased knight, and about the
same time Mr. Maitland Brown and Mr. Septimus Burt
gave place to Mr. R. F. Sholl and Captain T. Fawcett.
The Attorney-General (Mr. A. P. Hensman) resigned
his office early in the year owing to a serious disagree-
ment with the Governor, who formally interdicted him
from exercising the functions of his position. As usually
happened when Sir Frederick Broome exercised the
power of interdict the Colonial Office cancelled it, but
Mr. Hensman did not again take up the Attorney-
Generalship. For a time it was held by Mr. S. Burt, and
then by Mr. G. W. Leake until a new Attorney-General
(Mr. C. N. Warton) arrived from England.
No reference was made to the question of autonomy
by the Governor in his opening address to the Council
in 1886, but later in the session a motion proclaiming
that the time had arrived when Western Australia should
adopt responsible government was moved by Mr. H. W.
Venn, whose views seem to have been received with dis-
tinct favour by the audience, if not by the Council. The
motion was seconded by Dr. Scott and strongly sup-
ported by Captain Fawcett, both of whom were con-
vinced that by responsible government alone could the
prosperity of the colony be assured. Mr. Crowther op


posed the motion on the ground that seven-tenths of the
people were averse to any change, and Mr. Charles
Harper and Mr. George Shenton moved and seconded an
amendment to postpone consideration till the following
session, mainly on the old cry that the time was inoppor-
tune. Mr. Parker, the acknowledged leader of the move-
ment, objected to postponement, but in the end it was
carried by eleven votes to eight, the official members at
the request of the Governor abstaining from voting. The
vote was probably affected by the fact that it was not
moved by Mr. Parker, and was not regarded as the
official utterance of the party favourable to the change.
The reason for this was that important alterations of
the land regulations were under consideration at the
time, and it was felt that they ought to be disposed of
first as being of more pressing necessity than prospective
alterations of the Constitution.
The discussion had, however, one important result.
It led the people to consider the question in all its bear-
ings and to take an active interest in it. Both news-
papers —The West Australian and The Inquirer —were
on the side of change, and the former, which had
come under the direction of Mr. (now Sir) John
Winthrop Hackett, began to assume that leading posi-
tion in the affairs of the colony which it has ever since
held.
The Governor communicated the substance of the
Council debate to the Secretary of State, and ventured
the opinion that from the indications available the advo-
cates for responsible government appeared to be gaining
ground. The presumption of mere colonists in daring
to suggest that they knew enough about their own colony
to govern its affairs seems to have angered the Colonial
Office, and the Secretary of State replied sharply, re-
iterating the statement of his predecessor, “that if
responsible government were introduced it would not be
practicable for Her Majesty’s Government to surrender
to a Parliament, representing a small population prin-
cipally resident in the southern districts, the control of
all the vast territory now included in Western Aus-
tralia.” How it could be better done by practically one
man removed by thousands of miles from the spot, and
absolutely ignorant of local conditions and requirements,
he did not attempt to explain.
Governor Broome referred to this despatch at the
opening of the session of 1887, and gave it as his opinion
that though he was not opposed to responsible govern-
ment, separation would be too great a price to pay
for it, particularly if by waiting a year or two the
threatened division of the colony could be avoided. At
the same time he was prepared, should the Council adopt
an address in favour of it, to transmit such address to
the Secretary of State and request the views of the Im-
perial authorities on the matter. Upon the receipt of
those views he would make them public and at once dis-
solve the Legislature so that the constituencies might
pronounce their judgment.
In agreeing to transmit an address, if presented to
him, Sir Frederick Broome had probably a fairly good
idea of what was likely to occur. On June 24 Mr. Parker
presented to the Council a petition from residents, prin-
cipally of the southern districts, asking for responsible
government, and on July 6 he followed the petition up
by moving—“ That in the opinion of this Council the time
has arrived when the Executive should be made respon-
sible to the Legislature of the colony; and that it is
further the opinion of this Council that Western Aus-
tralia should remain one and undivided under the new
Constitution.” A long and interesting debate ensued,
in which every possible argument for and against seems
to have been adduced; in the result the first resolution
was carried by thirteen votes to four, and the second on the
voices. The official members again refrained from voting,
and Messrs. Shenton, Marmion, and Harper took the same
course, as they were not convinced that the time was
ripe. These resolutions were then embodied in an
address and forwarded to the Governor, by whom they
were dispatched to the Secretary of State on July 12,
with a covering letter strongly supporting them, but
advising that adequate provision be made for the pro-
tection of the aborigines in the north, and that power be
reserved, independently of the local Legislature, to erect
any portion of the territory into a separate colony should
future events render that course necessary. The separa-
tion question he discussed at some length, believing it to
be (as, indeed, it subsequently became) a very im-
portant factor in the discussion. As to the details of the
new Constitution, he suggested a Legislative Council of
not less than fifteen members, and a Legislative As-
sembly of thirty, the first Council to be nominated for a
short term but to be elective afterwards. Questions of
franchise ought, he considered, to be left to the local
authorities. Finally he asked for the earliest possible
intimation of the views of the Imperial authorities.
Some fortnight later the Governor (on July 28) for-
warded a second despatch, urging that as a second ses-
sion of the Council would be called in December to deal
with the Estimates and the question of further loans, it
was absolutely necessary that the members should know
the intentions of the Imperial Government on the ques-
tion of possible separation of the northern portion of
the colony. At the same time he stated that he was
engaged with the Attorney-General in preparing a draft
Bill for a new Constitution, which would not, however,
be submitted to the Council without the Secretary of
State’s consent. In August a cable was received from
Sir Henry Holland to the effect that he was prepared
to accept both resolutions of the Council, with the re-
servation of special provisions for the protection of
natives and the government of the north. This was fol


lowed in September by a further cable stating that legis-
lation for the next session was premature, and that
nothing should be done until the views of the Home
Government were known.
Up to the time the Council met in December these
views had not been received, but a request for a further
loan had been refused on the ground that constitutional
changes were impending. In a frame of mind almost
approaching disgust the Council regretted that the views
of the Imperial authorities had not been received, and
requested that before it passed the Estimates for 1888
it should be informed of the date upon which such views
might be definitely expected.
I he despatch replying to the Council resolutions of
July, 1887, was received in January, 1888, and was not
at all satisfactory to the colonists. Beyond merely agree-
ing to the principle of responsible government it did not
advance the question a step, all the suggestions made
with regard to detail being vague and inconclusive. Sir
Henry Holland admitted that 40,000 persons raising a
revenue of £40,000 should, if confined within reasonable
geographical limits, be deemed capable of governing
themselves, but demurred about handing over to that
number of persons, mostly congregated in one corner of
it, a vast territory capable of sustaining millions of
people. Representations had, he said, been made that
the northern districts should not be placed under the
control of a parliament elected by so small a population,
most of which was resident in the south. If some means
could be devised by which the unalienated lands of the
outlying portions could be for the benefit of
future inhabitants it might be possible to establish
responsible government in Western Australia. He then
proposed that the colony should be divided into two
portions by latitude 26°, and that the Crown lands of the
northern part should remain under the control of the
Imperial Government, and the returns from sales be in-
vested to form a fund for the benefit of any colonies that
might in the future be created out of the districts con-
cerned.
A further despatch was received in February, 1888,
suggesting that for the time being, at any rate, the Legis-
lature should consist of a single Chamber, with power to
create a second Chamber when the population reached,
say, 80,000. If two Chambers were considered necessary
at the beginning, then the first Upper Chamber ought to
consist of members nominated for a term, at the end of
which the elective principle would operate. The Upper
Chamber should not have power to deal with Money
Bills. Protection should be assured to the natives by
the establishment of an Aborigines Protection Board on
the lines laid down by the Governor.
Responsible government now became the burning
question in Western Australian political life. On March
21 Mr. Hensman moved in the Council a series of resolu-
tions setting out the principles which he thought should
be embodied in the new Constitution. Briefly they
were : That the Executive Council should consist of the
Governor and five Ministers of the Crown; that the Par-
liament should consist of a single Chamber of thirty mem-
bers, to be called the Legislative Assembly, which should
have power to create a second Chamber at a future time
if two-thirds of the members were in favour of so doing;
that the colony be divided into twenty-eight electoral dis-
tricts, each of which should return one member except
Perth and Fremantle, which should each be entitled to
two; that the Assembly should be elected for three years;
and that the members should be paid actual expenses
when sitting, but not more than <£so in any one year.
After some discussion these were adjourned so as to
allow Mr. Parker to move a further series dealing with
the same subject. These, the consideration of which was
entered upon on March 23, provided that to indicate
the possible future boundary of a northern political
subdivision was premature and open to serious objec-
tion ; that no statutory reservation of northern Crown
lands was necessary, as control of legislation over such
could be exercised by the Royal veto; that in view of
the recently revised land regulations any arrangement
for funding the proceeds of sales of northern lands was
a needless complication; that the Constitution should
provide for two Chambers from the beginning; that the
second House should be elected by the people; that the
two Houses should have equal authority in legislation :
that provision be made for deadlocks; and that there was
no necessity to place the protection of aborigines under
a body independent of the Colonial Ministry. These
proposals were debated for some days and finally agreed
to, those of Mr. Hensman being withdrawn. The whole
were thereupon embodied in an address to the Governor
praying for the introduction of a Constitution Bill during
the session.
Governor Broome then, with the assistance of the
Executive, applied himself to the task of drafting a Bill
In this he was not a little hampered by the Secretary of
State, who had been raised to the peerage as Lord Knuts-
ford. Lord Knutsford, recognizing that the colonists
were serious in their demand for autonomy, admitted
the general principle without further ado, but entered
upon a voluminous correspondence in regard to details.
One of the difficulties to be overcome was the Secretary’s
strong desire for a single chamber. This the Governor
rigorously opposed. “There is nothing,” he wrote on
May 28, 1888, “so far as 1 know, within the limits
of the British Empire that can be called a precedent for
the experiment of a single chamber in Western Aus-
tralia, and I think such an experiment full of danger.
Much irremediable harm might be done before the Con-
stitution could be changed. Further, it is well known
that there is nothing more difficult in politics than to


persuade a representative Assembly that it should sur-
render power; and, whatever right were reserved to Her
Majesty-in-Council, there might be considerable diffi-
culty in altering a Constitution once granted/’ For
these reasons the Governor adhered to his contention that
there should be two Houses, as in the other Australian
colonies, and that both should be elected by the people.
The remainder of the despatch was confined to a state-
ment of the various clauses of a Bill which he had
drafted, with the reasons which impelled him to insert
them. He suggested a £SOO qualification for members
and a Civil list reservation of £9,850; this would mean
Council, and after the opinion of members had been
obtained the Council was to be dissolved and the
constituencies given an opportunity of pronouncing
upon the measure. It was then to be considered by the
new Council, and if passed transmitted for the approval
of the Imperial Parliament.
The Bill was formally introduced into the Council
on October 19, 1888, and the debate upon the second
reading took place during the first week in November.
The Colonial Secretary, Sir Malcolm Fraser (knighted
in 1887), moved its acceptance and incidentally drew
attention to the fact that no provision was made for a
WATER LILIES IN QUEEN'S GARDENS, PERTH..
an additional charge on the revenue of <£6,910 each year,
including the pensions to those officials deprived of office
by the passing of the Bill. The provision for an Aborigines
Protection Board was inserted and £5,000 set down as
the sum to be expended annually upon the natives.
The copy of the Bill as drafted by the Governor was
forwarded with the despatch. This the Secretary of
State amended in various ways, the principal alteration
being to make the Council a nominee chamber, and to
insert a wider power to divide the colony at any time into
two or more colonies if such a course should be deemed
wise. The method of procedure agreed upon with regard
to the Bill was that it was to be introduced into the
member to vacate his seat on being appointed a Minister
of the Crown. Strong opposition to a nominated Upper
House was shown by Messrs. Parker and Hensman, and
equally strong support given to the idea by Mr. John
Forrest. Mr. Parker suggested that the first Council
should be nominated for a term of six years, but that
on the expiration of that period it should become elec-
tive. The provision for possible future separation of
the colony also evoked considerable adverse criticism,
but in the end the Bill passed its second reading by
thirteen votes to nine.
In accordance with the arrangement agreed upon,
Governor Broome prorogued the Council in the follow


ing month, and shortly afterwards it was dissolved in
order that the Bill might go before the people. In the
meantime Sir Frederick Broome had advised the Secre-
tary of State of the debate which had taken place, and
secured the Minister’s approval to an alteration in the
constitution of the Legislative Council so as to make it
a nominee body for the term of six years after the in-
auguration or until the population reached 60,000. On
the fulfilment of either of these conditions the Council
was to become elective.
The elections were held in January, 1889, and dis-
closed a decisive vote in favour of responsible govern-
ment. The principal factor in bringing about this result
was no doubt the desire of the people to govern them-
selves, but it was greatly assisted by the refusal of the
Imperial authorities to sanction loans on the ground that
constitutional changes were impending. The personnel
of the new Council differed but little from that of the
old. In addition to the official members there were Sir
J. G. Lee Steere (knighted in 1887), Sir T. C. Campbell,
G. Randell, D. K. Congdon, and J. Morrison (nominees),
and L. V. De Hamel, W. E. Marmion, W. S. Pearse,
R. F. Sholl, McKenzie Grant, W. T. Loton, A. Forrest,
S. Burt, W. Paterson, A. R. Richardson, E. Scott, E.
Keane, C. H. Rason, G. Shenton, S. IT. Parker, H. W.
Venn, and Charles Harper (elected).
The session opened on March 13, and on the 18th
the Constitution Bill was again introduced and the
second reading moved by Sir Malcolm Fraser. The de-
bate that ensued was earnest in spirit and almost
academic in character, marking the high-water level of
Western Australian politics up to that time. Many of
the clauses of the Bill which were to some degree repug-
nant to the colonists were accepted in order that as far
as possible everything calculated to jeopardize the
measure in its passage through the Imperial Parliament
might be avoided. Argument centred chiefly round
three questions —the control of the lands, the electoral
qualifications, and the Civil list, and these phases were
ably discussed in Committee. The land clauses in the
Bill were vague, and did not actually give the Legisla-
ture the control of Crown lands. It was understood that
Lord Knutsford was prepared to concede absolute con-
trol over lands in the south of latitude 26° and partial
control over the remainder. Mr. Burt proposed that
the entire control of the lands in the south-west, Eucla,
and eastern divisions should be given to the Colonial
Parliament, and Mr. Shenton moved, and eventually
carried, an amendment vesting all lands south of the
tropic of Capricorn.
The franchise was altered so as to give a vote to a
lodger who had occupied for twelve months a room or
rooms of the clear annual value of £lO, and the duration
of the Assembly was reduced from five to four years.
The Civil List and Pensions' Schedule were then con-
sidered, and reductions to the extent, in all, of £1,900
were made. The Bill was reconsidered in Committee on
April 3 and other minor alterations made, and on the
sth the third reading was carried on the voices. The
Governor immediately cabled the fact to the Secretary
of State, and on the 6th received a reply to the effect
that the only amendments he could agree to were those
making the duration of the Assembly four years and
giving lodgers the franchise. The Governor then re-
turned the Bill to the Council, which after consideration
decided to insist upon its amendments regarding the land
question and the Civil List. A deadlock seemed immi-
nent, but it was avoided by the Secretary of State, who
intimated that he was prepared to concede control over
all lands south of latitude 26°. The measure was then
returned to the Council for the third time, and on the
advice of the Governor, supported by the earnest appeal
of Mr. Parker, the land boundary was accepted and the
amendment regarding the Civil List withdrawn. The
Constitution Bill finally left the Legislative Council on
April 26. On the 29th a memorial was adopted for pre-
sentation to the Secretary of State drawing attention to
various points—more particularly in regard to the Civil
List —which seemed to press hardly upon the colony, and
asseverating that these matters had been dropped merely
in order not to imperil the safety of the Bill.
The troubles of the measure were, however, by no
means at an end. After reaching London it passed
the scrutiny of the Colonial Office successfully and was
approved without delay by the House of Lords. When
it reached the House of Commons it met with a dis-
tinctly hostile reception. Both sides of the House
showed definite antipathy to it, and the Enabling Bill
to give effect to it was shelved after the first reading,
without the slightest consideration being shown to the
colony which for two weary years had relegated almost
every other matter to the background in order that
responsible government might be secured. When Lord
Knutsford cabled to the Governor that there was little
or no prospect of the Bill becoming law during the
session of 1889 something like consternation was
evinced in the colony, as it was felt that further delay
would not only cause stagnation, but would materially
affect the future of Western Australia as a whole. The
Legislative Council during a second session passed a
resolution to the effect that the anticipated delay in
the passage of the Enabling Bill would most seriously
affect the material prospects of the colony and tend to
destroy confidence in the integrity of the House of
Commons. The Governments of the Eastern colonies
were asked to help by addresses and to instruct their
Agents-General to jointly impress upon the Imperial
Government the necessity of passing the Bill before
Parliament was prorogued. They all responded to the
call, but their united efforts failed to affect the matter.


The session of 1889 closed without the Constitution Bill
being passed into law.
During the recess Lord Knutsford informed the
Governor that in all probability the House of Com-
mons would refer the Bill to a Select Committee. It
was then suggested that a delegation should be sent
from Perth to give evidence before such a Committee
and to assist generally in forwarding the interests of
the colony in regard to it. To this Lord Knutsford
agreed, and advised that Governor Broome, whose term
State, much to the indignation of the colonists, refused
to consent to such a mission.
The delegates left for England in December, Sir
Malcolm Fraser being appointed as Administrator dur-
ing the absence of the Governor, for whose return for a
second term representations had been made which were,
however, without avail. The Colonial Office, however,
agreed not to send out a new Governor until late in
1890, so as not to deprive Sir Frederick Broome of his
official standing during the negotiations.
LAST EXECUTIVE COUNCIL UNDER REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
Standing,T EH HON. JOSCELYN AMHERST (Secretary), THE HON. ANTHONY O’ GRADY LEFROY Colonial Treasurer) THE HON .SIR JOHN
FORREST (Commissioner of Crown Lands and Surveyor-General), The J. SRTHUR WRIGHT (Director of Public Works,
Commissioner of Railways and Engineer-in-Chief), THE HON SIR J. G. LEE STEERE (Speaker of Legislative Council).
Sitting. —THE HON. SIR MALCOLM FRASER (Colonial Secretary), THE GOVERNOR (SIR FREDERICK NAPIER BROOM , K.C.M.G.), THE
HON. NICHOLAS WARTOS (Attorney-General).
of office was on the point of expiring, should be one
of the delegates, and should be accompanied by an
unofficial member of the Council. A third sesson of
the Legislative Council was then called toward the end
of 1889, and it was decided that the delegates should
be the Governor (Sir Frederick Broome), Sir T. Cock-
burn-Campbell, and Mr. S. LI. Parker. At the same
time Messrs. John Forrest and W. E. Marmion were
commissioned to visit the Eastern colonies in order to
awaken further interest there, but the Secretary of
The dispatch of the delegation was without doubt a
very wise move on the part of the colony. W ithout the
active interest and earnest advocacy of its members it
is more than likely that Western Australia would not
have received justice even during the session of 1890.
The Imperial Government had not at that time
emerged from the narrow and shortsighted view of
colonial affairs which it had always been the custom ol
British statesmen to take. In the-minds of some the
colonies seem to have been regarded as useless excres


cences, except insofar as tliey could be made the target
for fancy and utterly impracticable theories, or serve
as a dumping-ground for those types whose absence from
England would make England sweeter. Many of the
opponents of the Western Australian Constitution Bill
may with truthfulness be entered in this category, and
while it would be unfair to include Lord Knutsford, as
he seems to have been sincere in his desire to grant
autonomy, it is doubtful whether he was anxious to
grant it without further delay or without unreasonable
restrictions upon the control of the lands.
The Enabling Bill empowering the Queen to assent
to the Constitution Bill passed by the Legislative Coun-
cil of Western Australia was introduced into the House
of Commons in February, 1890. Some alterations had
been made in the Constitution by the Colonial Office;
power was given to the Crown to veto any colonial Act
aimed at the exclusion of immigrants, and the Secre-
tary of State's pet proposal to give the colony control
of the Crown lands south of the 26th parallel of lati-
tude was introduced as an integral part of the Bill.
These two points —immigration and the control of the
lands —were immediately seized upon by the opponents
of the measure, which was under the control of the
Attorney-General, Baron Henry de Worms.
The head and front of the opposition was Sir George
Campbell, who announced his intention of blocking the
second reading. To prevent this a conference between
Sir George and some of his followers on the one hand,
and Baron de Worms, Sir Frederick Broome, Sir Wil-
liam Robinson (nominated as the new Governor), Sir
T. Cockburn-Campbell, and Mr. Parker was held, but
without any success at the moment. When, however,
the second reading was moved the opponents refrained
from blocking it, and it was carried on February 27.
Had the block been persisted in the results might have
been disastrous to Western Australia, as the Govern-
ment had its hands more than full of contentious mat-
ters upon which its very existence depended, and would
not have been likely to invite further trouble over a
measure which in its view was not really pressing.
After the second reading had been agreed to the
Bill was referred to a Select Committee of nineteen
members, with Baron de Worms as chairman. Between
March 13 and May 6 twelve meetings were held, in the
course of which the Western Australian delegates were
subjected to a searching examination, which was so ably
met that much of the opposition to the Bill was dispelled.
Sir Frederick Napier Broome reiterated even more
strongly the arguments put forward in his numerous
despatches, more especially those which related to immi-
gration and the control of the lands. Mr. Parker was
even more emphatic. The people of the colony were,
he said, anxious to have the change, and at the pre-
ceding elections not one candidate had advocated the
retention of the existing method of government. That
the financial condition of the colony was not then very
strong lie admitted, but considered it was due to the
shortsighted policy of the Colonial Office in refusing to
agree to loans on the ground that changes in the Con-
stitution were impending. He was in favour of an immi-
gration policy, but considered that the colony should
have at its command the capital necessary to settle
people on the land. Unrestricted immigration would
not give good results either to the colony or the immi-
grant, especially as the south-west portion was the only
part where immigrant labour would have a chance of
success. He was particularly opposed to the idea of the
Colonial Office retaining control over any portion of the
lands of the colony, and considered that the clause in-
serted by the Secretary of State should be omitted. So
far as defence matters were concerned the policy of the
Imperial Government and of the colonial authorities was
the same, and Western Australia would welcome what-
ever fortifications in the way of protection the Home
authorities thought wise to construct. Sir Thomas Cock-
burn-CampbelTs opinion was much on the same lines.
He even thought that colonial administration of the
lands was wiser than Colonial Office administration, as
past experience had shown that in its desire to get rid
of the lands the latter had not always kept clear of the
land jobber and grabber. With regard to the abor-
igines, he thought there was little objection to an
Aborigines' Protection Board, which, after all, was
merely designed to satisfy the qualms of Exeter Flail.
The report of the Committee was even more favour-
able than the delegates expected. The objections urged
against the Bill were made light of and shown to be
opposed to fact. The report further recommended that
the complete control of the lands of the colony should
be given to the Colonial Legislature without any
restriction.
Between the date of presentation of the report and
the date of its consideration every nerve was strained,
alike by the members of the delegation, Sir William
Robinson, and the various Australian Governments, to
secure the safe passage of the measure. The Agents-
General waited upon Mr. W. FI. Smith, the First Lord
of the Treasury, and secured from him a promise that
the Bill would be pressed during the session. This
was necessary, as the opponents of the measure persisted
in their attitude, and now argued that the whole mea-
sure was so conservative in character that it could not
possibly be acceptable to the people generally in the
colony. The earnestness and ability of the delegates,
however, combined with the favourable report of the
Select Committee, proved too strong to combat, and the
Enabling Bill passed its third reading on July 25, 1890,
the Constitution having been altered in the directions
advised by the Committee. Very little time sufficed to


secure the approval of the House of Lords, and the
Royal assent was given on August 15.
To apportion individual credit for the success is
perhaps difficult, but the two who seem to stand out
as most worthy of recognition are Mr. (now Sir) S. H.
Parker and Sir Frederick Broome. Mr. Parker, with
curious farsightedness, had been earnest, in and out of
season, in his advocacy for responsible government, and
Western Australia owes not a little to the ability and
astuteness with which he guided the party which was
favourable to it. Sir Frederick Broome, trammelled by
Colonial Office regulations, started his administration as
the opponent of any change, but experience in the
colony and of its people led him firstly to admit that
as a principle autonomy had much in its favour, and
lastly to give his strong adherence to the movement for
securing it. That so favourable a Constitution was
framed and ultimately passed is due in no small mea-
sure to the masterly qualities of statesmanship that he
displayed.
The new Constitution made provision for the estab-
lishment of a Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly, the former to consist of fifteen members nom-
inated in the first instance by the Governor, and the
latter of thirty members elected by the people. Each
Chamber was to meet at least once in every year. No
member of the Council could hold any office of profit
under the Crown, except such as was liable to be vacated
on political grounds or was held under military regula-
tions. One responsible Minister at least must be a
member of the Council. The first Council was to last
for six years or until the population of the colony
reached GO,OOO. On the occurrence of either event the
Council was to become elective, for which purpose the
colony was divided into five provinces—the Metropoli-
tan, the Northern, the Central, the Eastern, and the
Southern —each returning three members, whose tenure
of office should be for six years. The members would
retire in rotation, the senior member to go before the
electors every two years. The franchise was limited to
freeholders of £2OO capital value and householders and
leaseholders of £3O annual value. The first President
was to be appointed by the Governor, but as soon as the
elective principle came into operation the Council was
to elect its own President.
Writs for the election of members of the Assembly
were to be issued by the Governor, and the Assembly
could proceed to business, provided not more than five
writs were not returned. The duration of the Assembly,
which elected its own Speaker, was set down at four
years. The qualification of membership in either House
was freehold in lands or tenements to the capital value
of £SOO, or annual value of £SO, the possession of which
had to be declared. Supreme Court judges, the Sheriff,
clergymen, undischarged bankrupts, persons whose
affairs were in liquidation, and those attainted or con-
victed of treason or felony were disqualified from mem-
bership in either House. Contractors to the Govern-
ment were also debarred, and the acceptance of a con-
tract by a member rendered his seat vacant. There
were to be five Executive Ministers, and the offices they
held were to be declared by the Governor within one
month of the coming into operation of the Act.
For the purpose of elections to the Legislative
Assembly the colony was to be divided into thirty dis-
tricts, so arranged that every part should have repre-
sentation, irrespective of its population —a provision
that at a later date gave rise to curious anomalies of
representation. The electoral districts were East Kim-
berley, AVest Kimberley, Roebourne, De Grey, Ashbur-
ton, Gascoyne, Murchison, Geraldton, Greenough,
Irwin, Moore, Swan, Perth, East Perth, West Perth,
Fremantle, North Fremantle, South Fremantle, Mur-
ray, AVellington, Bunbur}q Nelson, Sussex, Toodyay,
Northam, York, Beverley, Williams, Plantagenet, and
Albany. Every man was entitled to be registered and
to vote who was of full age and not subject to any
legal incapacity ; who was a natural born or naturalized
subject of Her Majesty or a denizen of AVestern Aus-
tralia ; who had possessed within his electoral district
for at least one year before registration a freehold of
the value of £IOO or a leasehold or licence of the annual
value of £lO, or occupied a dwelling or lodging of the
annual value of £lO. Those who had been attainted
or convicted of treason, felony, or infamous offence, and
had not served the sentence or been pardoned, were dis-
qualified.
The financial clauses provided that all Money Bills
must originate in the Assembly, by message from the
Governor. The Civil List amounted to £9,850, appor-
tioned as follows: —Governor, £4,000; Private Secre-
tary, £300; Clerk of the Council, £250 : Chief Justice,
£1,200; Puisne Judge, £900; and five Ministerial
salaries, £3,200. The pensions to those officers who lost
their positions by virtue of the Act were set down
as: —Colonial Secretary (Sir Malcolm Fraser), £700:
Attorney-General (C. N. AVarton), £333 6s. Bd. :
Colonial Treasurer (A. O’G. Lefroy), £550; and
Surveyor-General (John Forrest), £SOO. In case of re-
appointment under the Crown the pension merged in
the salary during the term of the appointment. Pro-
vision was also made for the payment of £5,000 annu-
ally to an Aborigines’ Protection Board for the
amelioration of the condition of the aborigines, the
amount to become 1 per cent, of the gross revenue when
such revenue advanced beyond half a million sterling.
The Act was to be proclaimed and come into
operation within three months of the receipt in the
colony of official information that the Royal assent had
been given.


These were the main provisions of the Act, and
though in many ways they would not be accounted
liberal to-day they were a distinct step forward at the
time, and they placed the power of liberalizing them,
when such a step was deemed necessary, in the hands
of the colonists themselves. For many years Western
Australia had struggled to throw off the shackles of
the Colonial Office, and the fact that this had at last
been accomplished gave extreme satisfaction to the
people generally, even if for the time being they were
debarred through want of population from a full
voice in their country’s affairs.
CHAPTER XVI.
1891—1900.
FIRST TEN YEARS OF RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT—CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL
OCCURRENCES—PHENOMENAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOLDFIELDS—RESOURCES,
INDUSTRIES, AND TRADE —LAND LAWS AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT-
GENERAL.
The task of bringing the new Constitution into
operation and of guiding it in the early stages was
entrusted to Sir William Robinson, who had already
served two terms as Governor of the colony, and was
an able and experienced officer in the Public Service.
He arrived amid much rejoicing, due no doubt as
much to his mission as to his personality, on October
20, and on the following day —October 21, 1890 —the
Act was proclaimed, and Western Australia witnessed
the consummation of many years of waiting.
The first matter to be settled, according to the
popular idea, was the selection of a Ministry. The rival
claimants, each of whom had active support, were Mr.
S. H. Parker and Mr. John Forrest. The one could
fairly claim that his twelve years’ tenure of member-
ship in the old Legislative Council had given him a
full grasp of the political needs of the time, and that
he, in a special sense, had been the head and front of
that long-continued agitation which had just been
brought to a successful conclusion. The other had won
his spurs as an administrator, having controlled for
many years the most important phase of colonial ex-
pansion—the land system and its development. As an
explorer, too, he was deservedly popular, especially
among that section which accounted deeds of more
importance than words. Governor Robinson wisely
decided to make no choice until the Parliament had
been chosen and he was in a better position to judge
which claimant was the more likely to form and carry
on a stable government. It was decided to hold the
elections in December, and the campaign was entered
into with great activity and enthusiasm. Most interest
centred round the speeches of the claimants to leader-
ship, whose policies in the main agreed. Mr. Parker,
on the one hand, looked for population as a preliminary
to securing loans; while Mr. Forrest advocated an ex-
tensive loan policy as a means of inducing immigration.
Both recognized that a vigorous public works policy was
necessary to the prosperity of the colony.
The elections for the Legislative Assembly were
held in December, and the following were returned for
the various electorates :
East Kimberley W. L. Baker
West Kimberley A. Forrest
Roebourne 11. W. Sholl
De Grey A. R. Richardson
Ashburton S. Burt
Gascoyne R. F. Sholl
Murchison ... E. F. Darlot
Fremantle ... W. E. Marmion
North Fremantle . . W. S. Pearse
South Fremantle D. Symon
Murray W. Patterson
Wellington ... H. W. Venn
Bunbury ... John Forrest
Nelson Sir J. G. Lee Steere
Sussex J. Cookworthy
Geraldton ... E. Keane
Greenough W. Traylen
Irwin S. J. Phillips
Moore ... G. Randell
Swan W. T. Loton
Perth E. Scott
East Perth ... M. F. A. Canning
West Perth T. F. Quinlan
Toodyay B. D. Clarkson
Northam G. Throssell
York S. H. Parker
Beverley C. Harper
Williams ... F. H. Piesse
Plantagenet A. Y. Hassell
Albany L. V. De Hamel


The Legislative Council was appointed on Decem-
ber 24 and consisted of:
J. G. H. Amherst E. R. Brockman
T. Burges R. E. Bush
Sir T. C. Campbell M. Grant
J. W. Hackett E. Hamersley
R. W. Hardey G. W. Leake
J. H. Monger W. D. Moore
J. Morrison G. Shenton
J. A. Wright
From the result of the elections it was evident that
Mr. Forrest commanded a larger following than Mr.
Parker, and he was consequently commissioned by
Governor Robinson on December 24 to form the first
Ministry under responsible government in Western Aus-
tralia. Two days later he submitted the names, which
January 20, 1891, to allow Ministers to go before
their constituents. All were returned unopposed.
One of the first matters which claimed the atten-
tion of the Government was the reorganization of
departments in order to meet the altered conditions of
administration. The permanent heads selected were:
Under-Secretary, Oct. Burt; Under-Treasurer, L. S.
Eliot; Under-Secretary for Lands, R. C. Clifton;
Collector of Customs, L. W. Clifton: Postmaster-
General, R. A. Sholl; Engineer-in-Chief, C. Y. O'Con-
nor; Under-Secretary for Railways, A. F. Thompson;
Auditor-General, E. L. Courthope; Colonial Surgeon,
A. R. Waylen; Sheriff, J. B. Roe ; Registrar-General,
W. A. Gale; Commandant, Major G. B. Phillips; and
Crown Solicitor, G. Leake. The Aborigines' Protection
Board, which was necessary under the Constitution, con-
Photo by J. J. Dwyer.
were approved by the Governor, and the Ministry was
sworn in on the 29th. The Cabinet consisted of:
John Forrest, C.M.G., Premier and Colonial
Treasurer.
George Shenton, Colonial Secretary.
S. Burt, Q.C., Attorney-General.
W. E. Marmion, Commissioner of Crown Lands.
H. W. Venn, Commissioner of Railways and
Director of Public Works.
All, with the exception of Mr. Shenton, who repre-
sented the Government in the Council, were members
of the Legislative Assembly. The Governor appointed
Sir Thomas Cockburn-Campbell President of the Legis-
lative Council, and the Assembly elected Sir James G.
Lee Steere as Speaker. Parliament then adjourned till
sisted of Dr. E. Scott and Messrs. G. W. Leake, S. H.
Parker, E. T. Hooley, and T. Little, with Colonel D.
Forbes as Secretary.
The Ministers were so much occupied in adminis-
trative organization and in an examination of the exact
financial condition of the colony that little time was
left in which to prepare an extensive political pro-
gramme for submission to Parliament. Such a pro-
gramme was also to an extent unnecessary at the time,
as it had been decided that the session should be a
short one, in order to allow the colony to be repre-
sented at a National Australian Convention to be held
in Sydney early in March to discuss a proposal for the
federation of all the Australian colonies.
Parliament met for business on January 20, as
HANNAN STREET, KALGOORLIE, 1895.


stated, and the Governor’s Speech showed that the
principal measure to be submitted was a Loan Bill of
some magnitude, by means of which a vigorous public
works policy was to be initiated. The amount asked
for, which somewhat staggered the older members, who
were accustomed to speak of public finance only in thou-
sands, was £1,336,000. With this money it was pro-
posed to build railways from Perth to Bunbury with
extensions up the Preston Valley; from Boyanup to
Minninup, and from Boyanup to Busselton ; from Nor-
tham to Southern Cross; and from Geraldton to
Mullewa. Improvements were to be made to the har-
bours at Fremantle, Geraldton, Carnarvon, Cossack, and
other ports; telegraph communication to be extended
in various directions; lighthouse at Cape Leeuwin to be
erected ; and various necessary public buildings to be
built. So varied was the list that Mr. Parker, who
had become a candid critic of Government actions,
described it as an attempt to catch votes by giving every
member something. The Bill, however, was pushed by
Mr. Forrest, whose majority turned out to be even
greater that was anticipated, and after a short debate
was carried, members generally expressing the convic-
tion that the future of the country was promising
enough to justify it. After having elected representa-
tives to the Federal Convention, which will be discussed
in the succeeding chapter of this work, the two Houses
were prorogued on February 26. Before they met again
the honour of Knighthood had been conferred upon the
Premier.
There being no Agent-General for the colony it
was necessary that someone should proceed to London
to make arrangements for floating the loan. Mr. Sep-
timus Burt was selected for the task, and combined
with it the work of making preparation for a London
agency. The appointment of an Agent-General —Sir
Malcolm Fraser, who had been for some years Colonial
Secretary under the old form of government, securing
the position —was made in 1892. Arrangements were
also made during the recess for the fortification of King
George Sound at the joint expense of all the colonies.
Sir William Robinson left the colony in September,
1891, and from that date until the following July Chief
Justice Onslow occupied the position of Administrator.
In that capacity he opened the second session of the
Parliament in December, and commented in favourable
terms upon the improved condition of the colony gener-
ally. The session, which lasted until March, 1892, was
a fairly busy one, especially in those matters necessary
to complete the administrative organization, to pro-
vide authority for railway construction, and to bring
the local legislation more into line with modern thought.
Nothing of an ambitious, far-reaching, or experimental
character was attempted. In fact, the Parliament pur-
sued the usual routine role which forms the chief por-
tion of legislative work, and which need not be specially
dilated upon. Many questions of importance did from
time to time arise, to which extended consideration
needs to be given. These, however, were generally the
outcome of some important phase of thought, activity,
or development in the colony itself, and may more
fittingly be discussed in connection with the circum-
stances which brought them into being. So far no party
policy had been enunciated; the only aim of the
Government was the development of the country. This
absence of party feeling was clearly shown when by the
death of Sir Thomas Cockburn-Campbell in September,
1892, Mr. George Shenton was made President of the
Legislative Council and the vacant portfolio of Colonial
Secretary offered to and accepted by Mr. S. H. Parker,
the most candid critic up to that time of the actions
of the Government.
In the third session of the Parliament, which occu-
pied the closing months of 1892, two measures were
brought forward which, though they did not then
become law, give a good indication of the progressive
spirit of Sir John Forrest and his colleagues. These were
an amendment of the Constitution and a Homesteads
Bill. The objects of the first were to abolish the pro-
perty qualification of members, to extend the franchise,
and to add two new members to the Legislative Council
and three to the Legislative Assembly. The Lower
House was in favour of the scheme, but the Council, in
its character of a drag upon hasty legislation, would
not agree to it. The second measure —the Homesteads
Bill —was aimed at encouraging settlement by making
free grants of restricted area to settlers who were pre-
pared to live upon and work the land in accordance
with conditions laid down. The Bill passed the second
reading by a narrow majority : that it gained a majority
at all seems to have been more out of compliment to
the Premier than belief in the measure. But so adverse
were the opinions expressed that the measure was with-
drawn at that stage. The session concluded with the
Midland Railway Loan Act, authorizing the Govern-
ment to guarantee payment of principal and interest up
to £500,000. This was rendered necessary by the fact
that the Company had found it extremely difficult to
raise the money needed for the construction of the line,
and there was every possibility of the work being in-
definitely suspended. Happily, the action of the
Government averted this possibility, and more happily
still, perhaps, it brought home to the colony the know-
ledge that land-grant railways, from whatever point
they were viewed, were not conducive to development.
The hopefulness that prevailed after the establish-
ment of responsible government, and the enterprise and
determination shown by Ministers in providing for the
needs of a great colony, are seen by the efforts made to
secure proper harbour facilities at Fremantle. This was


one of the questions that had agitated the public mind
for years, and upon which expert advice had more than
once been sought but no finality reached. Sir John
Coode, it will be remembered, had feared sand-travel
if harbourage was attempted at the mouth of the river,
and advocated a passage through Success Bank into
Owen Anchorage, and, if necessary, through Parmelia
Rock into Jervois Bay and Cockburn Sound. With this
idea the Engineer-in-Chief did not agree. There was, in
his opinion, no direct evidence of sand-travel which
would prevent the construction of a river harbour ; but
if it was found that sand did accumulate, it could
easily be removed by dredging. He advocated the con-
struction of breakwaters from Arthur and Rous Heads,
the dredging of a channel between them, and the exca-
vation of a basin within the mouth of the river, where
wharves and storehouses could be erected. The esti-
mated cost was £560,000, or £BOO,OOO if the scheme
were enlarged. At first the Government was inclined
to adopt Sir John Goode’s idea, but as Mr. O’Connor's
scheme was approved by other engineers they referred
the whole question for investigation to a Joint Com-
mittee of both Houses. This Committee reported in favour
of the Engineer-in-Chief’s scheme, and the report was
formally adopted in 1892. In November, 1892, Lady
Robinson tilted the first load of stones to form the mole
or breakwater, and the work, which has resulted in the
present admirable harbour at Fremantle, was entered
upon —a monument to the foresight of the Forrest
Government and to the ability of the Engineer-in-Chief
of the time, Mr. C. Y. O’Connor.
This and other works of magnitude show that pro-
gress had replaced stagnation and that the colony was
rapidly emerging from the slough of Crown colony days.
The abnormal development of the goldfields was no
doubt a prominent factor in the result, as it also was in
preventing the bursting of the Eastern colonies’ boom
from being appreciably felt in Western Australia. In
fact, the speeches in Parliament during 1893 expressed
a confidence in the colony such as had never before been
apparent. There still, however, remained one litle rift
within the lute in the nominated character of the Upper
House. The general feeling that a nominee Chamber
was a bar to progress prevailed, and this was accentu-
ated by the Council’s refusal to pass the amendment to
the Constitution Act brought forward in 1892. By
the end of that year the population of the State was
nearly 59,000, with every prospect of reaching in a few
months the 60,000 required to turn the Legislative
Council into an elected body. The amendment was
therefore reintroduced in 1893 and passed through the
Assembly without difficulty. In the Council it again
met with opposition, mainly through a desire, as the
newspapers put it, to give representation to 'land, sand,
sheep, and kangaroos.” Several alterations were made
Q
to which the Assembly declined to agree, and a con-
ference between the two Houses was then resorted to.
This failed to come to a decision, but the difficulty was
solved a catch vote in the Council on the same even-
ing by which the Assembly gained its way, and the Bill
was passed practically as it left the Lower House. It was
assented to on October 13, 1893, and provided for an
elected Legislative Council of twenty-one members,
three from each of the following provinces: —Metro-
politan, West, North, Central, East, South-East,
and South-West; and a Legislative Assembly of
thirty-three members, representing the original thirty
electorates and three new ones comprising the
goldfields, Pilbara, Nannine, and Yilgarn. The pro-
perty qualification for membership was abolished in
both Council and Assembly, but the qualifying age was
raised to thirty in the case of the Council. The electoral
qualification for the Council was reduced to a <£loo
freehold or £25 annual value basis, but the owner or
occupant must have been in possession for twelve months
before registration. The Assembly voter only needed
to have resided in one place in Western Australia during
the preceding twelve months. As regards Money Bills
the Council was given power to return them to the
Assembly with a request for the omission or alteration
of any items therein. No provision for the compila-
tion of electoral rolls was inserted in the Act, and a
special session of Parliament had to be summoned in
December to remedy the defect.
The Assembly elections were held in June, 1894,
and the Council elections in July. In the former Messrs.
Baker, Symon, Keane, Scott, Canning, Quinlan, Par-
ker, and De Hamel gave place to Messrs. G. Leake, E.
Solomon, G. T. Simpson, F. Connor, H. B. Lefroy, W.
James, B. C. Wood, and F. C. Monger; while for the
new goldfields electorates Messrs. H. F. Keep, F.
Illingworth, and C. J. Moran were returned. Though
altered thus as regards the personnel, there was little
or no change from a political point of view, except
that the goldfields representatives, with one or two
others, formed the nucleus of an opposition which,
however, did not become of appreciable strength so
long as Sir John Forrest held the reins of government.
The Legislative Council consisted of Sir George
Shenton (knighted in 1893), Messrs. S. H. Parker, H.
J. Saunders, D. K. Congdon, E. W. Davies, T. H.
Marshall, J. E. Richardson, F. M. Stone, E. Robinson,
E. H. Wittenoom, E. G. Henty, H. McKernan, C. E.
Dempster, R. G. Burgess, R. W. Hardey, J. W.
Hackett, E. McLarty, J. C. Foulkes, F. T. Crowder,
S. J. Haynes, and C. A. Piesse. Composed of men more
in touch with the life of the community than were those
of the nominated Council, the new Legislative Council
was still a cautious rather than a progressive body—an
advantage, perhaps, at the time, as the gold discoveries


were not altogether conducive to a sane and safe outlook.
The session of the reconstituted Parliament held in
1894 was mainly devoted to questions of public works
and railway development which the unexpected expan-
sion of the colony rendered necessary. Two further
amendments of the Constitution were brought forward.
The first, which was agreed to, reduced the penalty
recoverable from a member who sat without possessing
She necessary qualification; the second, which was also
passed by Parliament but vetoed by the Crown, referred
to the abolition of the Aborigines’ Protection Board.
Under the Constitution the Government was required to
pay over 1 per cent, of the gross revenue, when that
revenue exceeded <£500,000, to that Board for disburse-
ment in connection with the natives. The revenue had
passed the half-million mark and the clause came into
operation, but Ministers disapproved, and it seems
rightly, of paying away a large sum of money over the
expenditure of which they had no control. They
desired, and Parliament supported them, that the money
should be expended under the direction of a responsible
Minister. The Home authorities failed to agree, and
Royal assent to the amendment was refused. This led
to a lengthy correspondence with the Colonial Office,
but it was not until some years later that the request
of the colony was agreed to. There is very little doubt
that the natives, so far from losing, have gained by the
change.
In view of the growth of the mines and other
departments consequent upon the development of the
mining industry and the rapid increase in population it
became necessary toward the end of 1894 to rearrange
the Ministerial offices. The resignation by Mr. Mar-
mion of the Lands portfolio on December 4 offered the
opportunity which the Premier was not slow to seize.
The Lands Department was accepted by Mr. A. R.
Richardson, and Sir John Forrest took the Colonial
Secretaryship in addition to his post as Treasurer. To
Mr. Parker, thus dispossessed, was offered the new post
of Minister of Mines and Education, but as he differed
from the Premier on the education question he declined
it, and the portfolio was accepted by Mr. (now Sir)
E. H. Wittenoom. The desire seems to have been to
secure a Cabinet whose members would be amenable to
one strong will.
Early in the following year the colony lost the ser-
vices of Sir William Robinson, who left for England in
March. While not, perhaps, in every respect an ideal
Governor, there is no doubt that as a constitutionalist
he stood in the first rank, and the country could not
have had a wiser head to direct its first steps along the
path of responsible government. After his departure Sir
Alex. Onslow (knighted in 1893) acted as Administrator
until the following December, when the new Governor,
Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Gerard Smith, arrived.
For a full understanding of the subsequent position
of the colony it is necessary at this stage to digress
somewhat in order to chronicle the rise and development
of the goldfields. There is no doubt that the most
striking and important feature of Western Australian
history during the period 1891-1900 was the abnormal
gold discoveries —discoveries which, with the rush of
population consequent thereon, had not only wide and
far-reaching effects upon the administration, but affected
every phase of life and industry in the community.
The gold almost seems to have waited for the advent
of responsible government to declare itself, or perhaps
it was that a freer, more independent, and more enter-
prising spirit came upon the people through the change.
Whatever may have been the impelling cause, the story
of the rise of Western Australia from the position of
an almost neglected territory to the status of one of the
greatest gold-producing countries of the world possesses
all the elements of a romance. With the many inci-
dents, some humorous, some pathetic, but all intensely
interesting, which occurred on the different fields, we,
as a sober historian, have nothing to do. But putting
all those aside, even the boldest and most uncoloured
narrative almost suggests that the lamp of Aladdin had
found a resting-place under the protecting wing of the
Black Swan.
The proposal of the Government to extend the
eastern railway from Northam to Southern Cross seems
to have had the effect of establishing confidence in the
possibilities of the Yilgarn field, and as a result capital
was more freely invested and prospecting carried on
over a wider area. Southern Cross became quite an
active little mining town, and though the returns for
1891 did not altogether justify the large expenditure
necessary to build a railway, the field produced the
largest yield in the colony for the year —12,833 oz. out
of a total of 30,311, Pilbara being next with 11,875.
These returns encouraged the belief that somewhere
in Western Australia there existed gold in large quan-
tities, and attention was directed to those districts where
in former years the possibility of its occurrence had
been suggested. As far back as 1854 Mr. Robert Austin,
when exploring along the Murchison River, had
described the country as of promising mineral char-
acter, and from time to time odd specimens of gold had
been found here and there throughout the district. Mr.
TT. P. Woodward, the Government Geologist, after ex-
amining the locality in 1889, supported Mr. Austin’s
view, and reported upon the encouraging appearance of
the ground between the great bend of the Murchison
and Milly Milly. In 1890 gold was found at Yuin,
and in August, 1891, Mr. J. F. Connolly reported the
discovery of rich alluvial about 200 miles east of the
coast. This was subsequently confirmed by W. Douglas,
and the Government paid Connolly and Douglas £SOO


and £IOO respectively as discoverers of the field,
though McPherson and Peterkin, who were the pioneer
miners in the district (Nannine), claimed that the reward
should have been given to them. Before the end of
September there were between 300 and 400 men scat-
tered over the field, most of whom were making good
wages, and some of whom were securing excellent
returns. Nuggets varying from 2 to 40 oz. were picked
up, mostly on the surface ; in fact, all the gold was
found either on or within a few feet of the top of the
ground. The Murchison goldfield was proclaimed on
September 24, 1891, and Mr. W. A. G. Walter was
appointed the first Warden. Its headquarters were at
Nannine, but the centre of activity was soon moved to
Cue, a township that sprang up in a large field of
miles still farther south, excellent results were secured;
in fact, throughout the whole of the Murchison district
gold was obtained, sometimes in small, often in large
quantities, and the official returns for 1892 show that
it had wrested from Yilgarn the pride of place, export-
ing 24,356 oz. as against 21,209 oz. The Pilbara field
in the same year yielded 12,892 oz. and the Kimberley
1,088 oz. The total value was £226,238 —a large
amount for a country described by scientific men as
non-auriferous, but a mere bagatelle when compared
with the phenomenal results to be afterwards achieved.
Meanwhile prospecting was being assiduously car-
ried on over the Yilgarn field with varying success.
Two adventurous spirits, Speakman and Ryan, struck
out toward the north-east and found a good reef in
Photo by .7. J. Dwyer.
HANNANS FROM MOUNT CHARLOTTE. 1897.
exceptional richness discovered by Messrs. Cue and Fitz-
gerald, where gold could be secured by the simple pro-
cesses of “specking” and “dry-blowing.” These finds led
to extensive prospecting over the whole district, and
from time to time reports of further discoveries were
announced. Rich gold-bearing reefs were found at
various places, notably at the “Island” in Lake Austin,
where in addition to rich quartz a channel of cement
was found which for a time gave marvellous returns.
The report of gold at Yuin, in the Nancarrang Hills,
made in 1890 led to the opening up of the Yalgoo field,
where from the cap of a reef gold to the value of
£15,000 was “dollied.” From Day Dawn, a little to
the south of Cue, and from Mount Magnet, about 30
q 2
the direction of what was later to achieve an unenviable
reputation under the name of Siberia. Attention was
also directed toward the district known as Dundas,
south-east of Southern Cross, and in the vicinity of
Fraser Range. A Mr. Moir, looking for grazing areas,
had found some indications of gold in the neighbourhood
in 1890, and Mr. David Lindsay, of the Elder Exploring
Expedition, who passed over it in 1891, spoke of it as
a possible mineral area. With a companion named
Stewart, Moir prospected the district in 1892 without
success, but other parties which, encouraged by Lindsay’s
opinion, followed upon Moir’s heels met with better
fortune. Messi’s. Mawson and Kirkpatrick hit upon a
rich outcrop, which they named the May Bell; Messrs.


Bromley, Mason, and Dejarlais pegged out the Great
Dundas; and Messrs. Brodie, Kirtley, and Devine dis-
covered two rich reefs which they named the Scotia.
These discoveries led to other parties setting out, and
further indications were obtained, but the value of the
find was dwarfed by the extraordinary announcements
of a few weeks later, before which all previous dis-
coveries in Western Australia paled into insignificance.
Experienced miners after a close examination were
convinced that so far from being the centre of a gold-
field Yilgarn was only on the fringe, and that greater
discoveries would be found farther east, somewhere in
that arid, trackless desert that stretched across to the
South Australian border. Obsessed by the lust for
gold they went out into this region, prepared to brave
its dangers in the hope of finding that which would
make them rich beyond the dreams of avarice. Not all
who went out succeeded in winning through, as the
memorial in Coolgardie Cemetery, “To the men who
blazed the track,” bears eloquent and pathetic testi-
mony ; many who did reach the new El Dorado gained
little benefit from their exertions, but all have a right
to share in the credit of Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie—
names that for years were words to conjure with in the
markets of the world.
In 1891 and 1892 several parties left Southern
Cross with the intention of crossing the Hampton
Plains (discovered by Hunt in 1864), in the hope that
gold might be found there. Most of them were not only
in their search, but were reduced to sore
straits through want of water, and compelled to turn
back. Among those who set out in 1892 were Arthur
Bayley and John Ford, two miners who had become
inured through experience to the dangers of the Wes-
tern Australian bush. Bayley, who was one of the
first diggers at Nannine, is said to have raised over
1,000 oz. from one claim. Tiring of the Murchison, he
and Ford returned to Perth, where they sold their gold
and set out upon a prospecting expedition. They pro-
ceeded first to Mount Kenneth, about 250 miles north-
east of Perth; here they lost their horses and had to
walk back to Newcastle. Having purchased a new out-
fit, they next set out for the locality of Speakman’s
find, north-east of Yilgarn, but turned back on meeting
other miners returning from the place with discouraging
reports. They then headed for Southern Cross, and
having purchased provisions for about two months
started out eastward on Hunt’s old track. After a
very tedious trip, when they were nearing the now
famous field, they were compelled to turn back and rest
for a couple of days at the Gnarlbine soak. Starting
out again through boggy country they reached in July
the place well known to the natives as Coolgardie. Find-
ing it covered with good grass they let the horses out
to graze and proceeded to prospect the surrounding flats.
Here Ford picked up a |-oz. nugget, and before dinner
they had secured over 20 oz. They named the place
Fly Flat, and decided to remain there till the provisions
ran short. In the course of three or four weeks they
secured about 200 oz. Forced to go back to the
Southern Cross for supplies they said nothing about the
find, but returned to Fly Flat as quickly as possible,
and on the first Sunday after they arrived discovered
the reef which soon became famous throughout the
mining world. That evening they broke off the cap of
the reef with a tomahawk and dollied over 500 oz. The
following morning they pegged out a claim, reckoning
that there were 2,000 oz. in sight. Shortly afterwards
Messrs. Foster and Baker, who had tracked them from
Southern Cross, put in an appearance and pegged out
an adjoining area, from which in three days they
secured 200 oz. of gold. Leaving Ford to guard the
claim Bayley made his way quickly to Southern Cross
and applied to Warden Finnerty on September 17,
1892, for a lease of the area, showing at the same time
the 554 oz. of gold that he had brought back. The field
was then declared open, and the news of it telegraphed
far and wide. The Mining Registrar's offices, and even
his quarters, were besieged by a multitude of able-
bodied men all anxious to secure miners' rights. On
September 20 Bayley started back for Coolgardie, but
this time not alone. Warden Finnerty went with him,
and practically the whole of Southern Cross either
accompanied them or followed shortly after, most of the
throng being better equipped with miners’ rights than
with provisions. To enter a practically waterless terri-
tory at the beginning of summer, not in ones or twos
but in hundreds, was a course attended by no little
danger ; but in their eagerness to obtain gold the neces-
sity of eating and drinking seemed trivial.
The excitement soon spread to Perth and other
centres. The West Australian of September 21 said:
—"ln Perth and Fremantle everyone seems to be
either carrying tents, picks, shovels, and dishes, or
otherwise preparing for the road.” From York over
200 eager gold-seekers went forth by whatever mode of
conveyance they could secure, and if none were avail-
able, on foot, for the land of gold. With so ill-advised
a rush it was not long before provisions and water were
of even more account than gold in Coolgardie. On
October 8 returned to Southern Cross in com-
pany with the Warden to deposit a further 500 oz. of
gold. Mr. Finnerty reported to the Government that
there was no well-defined lode showing on the surface,
but that a line of quartz, in places nearly 20 ft. wide,
could be traced through Bayley's ground. There were
then, he said, 150 men at Coolgardie, and he met 170
going out. By the end of October the number had
increased to about 400, and something like 3,000 oz. of
gold, principally alluvial, had been secured. Alluvial


seekers were permitted to work within 20 ft. of a reef.
The water and food difficulty now became a serious one,
and many of the miners, particularly those who had
not been successful, were compelled to make their way
back to Southern Cross, proclaiming to all they met
that the field was a failure. As the hot weather pro-
ceeded practically everyone was driven away through
want of water, so that by the end of the year Coolgardie,
for the time being at all events, was almost deserted.
Anticipating that the rush would set in again with
even greater force as soon as the summer was over
W arden Finnerty urged the Government to excavate
large tanks along the track and take measures to con-
serve the rains that fell upon the large granite out-
crops, so that the water difficulty might be, at any
rate, lessened during future dry seasons. His predic-
tion of an influx was more than realized. Showers of
rain fell over the eastern districts in March, and within
a few days there were over 300 men at Coolgardie. From
all parts of the colony, as well as from outside, they
hurried to try their luck, riding or driving if
they could, walking if funds were low. The
camel became for the time the most useful beast of
burden in Western Australia. By the end of 1893 there
were 673 in the colony, and up to the opening of the
Coolgardie railway it was no uncommon sight to see trains
of eighty, ninety, or a hundred camels, loaded with pro-
visions and other requirements, wending their way slowly
through Perth on their weary tramp to the goldfield.
Coolgardie by this time began to assume the pro-
portions of a little town. Building timber being unpro-
curable on the spot and very expensive to bring from
Perth, most of the structures were frames covered with
hessian or galvanized iron, and some no more than
modest bush shelters. Stores of all kinds were opened
and, needless to say, a sufficient number of hotels.
Although unimposing from an architectural standpoint,
the little township in those days provided more excite-
ment than probably any spot in Australia. Bayley’s
claim continued to give sensational returns, and from
time to time pockets of gold of extraordinary value
were discovered by lucky miners, some of whom in a
single day would become the fortunate possessors of hun-
dreds of ounces. Messrs. Sylvester, Browne, & Co. pur-
chased for a fortune the claim of Bayley and Ford, and
also secured another rich find made by McFarlane and
Robinson some two miles south of Coolgardie. Leases
were applied for and prospecting for alluvial carried
on over a rapidly extending area. By the end of June
there were over 2,000 men on the field, with hundreds
more on the way. Food supplies failed, and for days
at a time men lived chiefly on preserved meats —collo-
quially, “tinned dog.” This dearth of fresh food, com-
bined with a poor water supply and an almost entire
absence of sanitary precautions, added that modern
scourge —typhoid fever —to ail the other tribulations,
and many of the early pioneers went down before its
virulence.
The presence of so large a body of men, all eager
in the search for gold, meant that prospecting was car-
ried on over a wide and rapidly expanding tract of
country. In May a prospector named Frost discovered
gold at a place called, from its distance from Cool-
gardie, the Ninety-mile, but now known as Goongarrie.
There was a small rush to the locality, but the finds
were not sufficient to keep the men there, and they
returned to Coolgardie. The next rush was to “Mount
Youle,” supposed to be the present Mount Gladden,
some 50 miles to the north-east. About a hundred men
hurried off to the site, but most of them returned with-
out reaching it, owing to a growing conviction that the
rush had been instigated by the storekeepers in the
interests of business. No sooner had they reached Cool-
gardie than they were off again to Lake Lefroy, some
40 miles to the south-east, where good discoveries were
said to have been made. In fact, so intense was the
excitement that within a few hours of a rumour that
gold had been found somewhere a party of diggers set
out to test it.
From the rush to Mount Youle, shrewdly suspected
to be a hoax, arose the second great rush on the Yil-
garn field, and the most important gold-bearing area
hitherto discovered in Western Australia —Hannans,
later to be known to all the world as Kalgoorlie. Its
discovery, like that of most rich goldfields, was in a
measure accidental. Messrs. Hannan and Flannigan
were two members of a small party on the way to
Mount Youle. Through want of water the party
camped at Mount Charlotte for a couple of days while
the teams returned to Coolgardie for a fresh supply.
Rain falling in the meantime the party pushed on,
leaving Flannigan and Hannan behind. Flannigan, it
appears, while looking for the horses found a couple of
nuggets, and induced Hannan to remain with him. In
a few days they had over 100 oz. Hannan then returned
to Coolgardie, and on June 17 —a Saturday —applied
for a reward claim. According to usage, the applica-
tion was posted up outside the Registrar’s office about
9 o’clock that evening, and of course was soon public
property. As Coolgardie had drawn practically all
Southern Cross, so Hannans drew all Coolgardie, until
the place was almost deserted. Saturday night and
Sunday they moved out, and before the middle of the
week over 750 men were busy fossicking round Han-
nan’s find. At first there were no sensational .reefs
discovered such as Bayley’s; all the gold was alluvial,
and there was sufficient of it to occupy attention. But
while many of the miners were successful, there were
numbers who did not make a bare existence, and in a
few weeks returned to their former occupations at Cool


gardie. Many were the instances of distress on the
goldfields in those early days. Hundreds of men arrived
with poor outfits, little provisions, and no money.
Unless they found gold —or charity, and charity was
often the more easily found -starvation stared them in
the face. Disease was rampant, and Hannans, like
Coolgardie, took its toll in human life.
The neighbourhood of the present town of Bardoc,
where two prospectors, Cashman and Lee, secured 1,000
oz. in a few weeks, was the next scene of excitement,
and then followed the unfortunate Siberian rush. In
October Messrs. Frost and Bonner applied for a reward
claim in a desolate district named Siberia, supposed to
be about 75 miles north-west of Coolgardie. They
showed about 40 oz. of gold they had secured from
there, and somehow a rumour gained ground both at
Coolgardie and Hannans that a fabulously rich find
had been made. Quickly over a thousand men were
hastening through the waterless tract toward the
place. Only those who had been through to the Ninety -
mile had any idea of its direction; the others trusted
to chance. Few carried more than a waterbag, and
there was no water on the way. Disaster naturally
followed. A few got through only to be disappointed,
many wisely turned back ; but some, attacked by thirst,
and with no knowledge of the way, wandered off into
the bush and were lost. Only the dispatch of relief
parties saved numbers of others. “At twilight one even-
ing in October a Coolgardie resident,” says Kimberley,
“observed what appeared to be a strange animal on all
fours crawling through the dust toward the town. He
approached and discovered a demented Siberian pro-
spector, repulsive in his agony, seeking to reach water/’
News that all was not well with the parties on the
way to Siberia reached Coolgardie a few days after
they had set out, and Mr. Renou, the engineer in charge
of the Government water supply, immediately Sent
teams loaded with water along the road with instruc-
tions to deposit the tanks at known stages, and then
use every means not only to let the prospectors know
where water could be secured, but to induce them
to return, as the district they were making for was
absolutely destitute of fresh water. This prompt action
saved many lives, but even as it was several deaths
occurred. At least ten were accounted for, and in all
probability the bones of others still lie bleaching in that
awful desert.
This was the last sensation for 1893. By the end
of the year w r ork was steadily progressing throughout
the various districts, the total output of gold being
valued at £421,381, of which Yilgarn and its branches
accounted for £287,829. Dundas was proclaimed a
separate goldfield in August, but its output for the
year reached only £562. Had it not been for the scarcity
of water the results from the Yilgarn area would pro-
bably have been larger, as many more men would have
been attracted to the field. The water difficulty un-
doubtedly retarded the early development of the dis-
trict, a fact which the Government was not slow to
recognize, as may be seen by the money spent in the
erection of dams and soaks to conserve whatever rain
might happen to fall.
To some extent the discovery of Coolgardie acted
adversely upon the other fields, as many of the miners
left in the hope that on the Yilgarn field they might
be able to share in some of the sensational finds. The
returns from the Murchison, Pilbara, Kimberley, and
Ashburton districts were all smaller than in the pre-
vious year, but in some places, particularly on the Mur-
chison, reef-mining was being undertaken as a serious
industry. Machinery was imported and batteries were
erected. Shafts were sunk and reefs thoroughly tested,
and at the end of the year the field showed much more
evidence of permanency than Coolgardie. To encourage
sinking, and so definitely gauge the possibilities, the
Government at the beginning of 1893 offered a bonus to
those who would sink shafts to a greater depth than
100 ft. —£2 10s. per foot between 100 and 200 ft. and
£5 per foot between 200 and 300 ft. In all eleven per-
sons claimed the reward —six at Yilgarn, one at Cool-
gardie, and four on the Murchison.
The developments during 1894 far exceeded those
t)f 1893. The returns mounted from 110,890 oz. to
207,131 oz., nearly double; and where the population
increased by 6,390 in the former year, the additions
numbered 17,008 in the latter. Railways were opened
to Southern Cross from Northam and to Mullewa from
Geraldton. Machinery was erected on many of the mines,
and not less than a hundred companies, with a nominal
capital of nearly £9,000,000, registered in London to
work them, while in the colony itself something like
seventy were formed. A separate Mines Department was
established at the end of the year, so that the whole
industry might be under proper supervision and
control.
As soon as the summer of 1893-4 was over the
stream of immigration to the goldfields again started.
Prospecting was actively carried on, and all through the
year there were constant reports of more or less sensa-
tional finds throughout the whole Eastern district gold-
fields. Hall and Speakman discovered Mount Jackson,
to the north of Southern Cross; rich alluvial was
found at the Pinnacles, north-east of Coolgardie, in
February, and in a short time over 1,000 oz. secured,
while a similar amount followed from another find at
Billy Billy. Discoveries at Bardoc, Kurnalpi, Bulong,
White Feather (Kanowna), Broad Arrow, and other
places were reported in quick succession; in fact, finds
innumerable over the whole field were reported during
the year.


The great sensations of 1894 were, however, the
discovery of the Londonderry and Wealth of Nations
mines and the district of Menzies. The Londonderry
find was made in June by a prospecting party consist-
ing of Messrs. Carter, Dawson, Mills, Gardiner, Elliot,
and Huxley, who had been out many months without
finding a colour, and were on their way back to Cool-
gardie. Quite by accident rich quartz was picked up
by two of the party, and after a brief search the out-
crop of a reef was exposed, from which during the first
three or four days they took between 4,000 and 5,000 oz.
One specimen, ‘Big Ben,” was estimated to contain
gold to the value of £3,500. After working in secret
as long as was safe, some of the party remained on
guard while the others returned to Coolgardie, and
after lodging 4,280 oz. at the Union Bank applied to
the Registrar for a lease of the Londonderry Mine.
been on prospecting tours throughout most of the
goldfields since 1890. After making several discoveries
of more or less importance, some of which he disposed
of for a substantial figure, Dunn, who was acting on
behalf of a Western Australian Syndicate, left Cool-
gardie with two Afghans on another trip. After going
about 28 miles he came upon a large outcropping reef,
from which on breaking the cap he extracted a speci-
men of quartz weighing 189 ft). and containing 800 oz.
of gold. The whole lode glistened with the precious
metal, and to it he gave the name “Wealth of Nations/ ’
In a very few days he secured over £20,000 worth, and
leaving the Afghan in charge returned to Coolgardie,
where he lodged £11,200 in the bank and applied for
a mining lease. Though he tried to keep his discovery
secret, in a few hours there were over 500 out on the
track looking for the locality. After they found it
Photo by J. J. Dwyer.
There was tremendous excitement, especially when fur-
ther work on the mine seemed to prove its fabulous
wealth. In September the discoverers sold the mine to
Lord Fingall for £IBO,OOO and a sixth interest. Unfor-
tunately the subsequent development of the mine did
not realize the expectations formed of it. Having been
floated for £700,000, the company had difficulty at the
start owing to the mine being “jumped” through fail-
ing to comply with the regulations. When this was
overcome and work actually started the rich stone cut
out very quickly and left ore of only very inferior
grade.
The Londonderry sensation was eclipsed a couple
of months later by the discovery of what the news-
papers described as a “mountain of gold.” The lucky
finder was a prospector named J. G. Dunn, who had
the whole neighbourhood was quickly pegged out, and
only police protection saved Dunn’s find from being
raided. Within six months the Wealth of Nations reef
was sold for £147,000; but, as in the case of so many
apparently rich reefs, development was far from rea-
lizing expectation.
The third remarkable discovery was made by
Messrs. Menzie and McDonald, experienced men who
left Perth after the excitement raised by the Wealth
of Nations and pushed out northerly from Coolgardie
through White Feather, Black Flag, and the Ninety-
mile to a spot several miles farther on. There they
discovered a reef of considerable promise and pegged
out two claims —the Lady Shenton and the Florence.
On applying for the leases at Coolgardie the usual rush
to the locality took place, and still another mining
HANNANS FROM MARITANA HILL, 1900.


camp, now known as the town of Menzies, sprang into
existence.
Apart from the mining discoveries, though cer-
tainly in consequence of them, the development of the
colony during 1894 was very pronounced. The
Northam-Southern Cross railway, the construction of
which was approved in 1891, was opened to traffic in
July, 1894. The wisdom of building it was doubted by
many, and if it had had to depend on the Yilgarn field
alone for revenue, their fears would probably have been
justified; but with that good fortune which often
attends bold spirits, the Premier had the satisfaction
of knowing before it was opened that the discovery of
Coolgardie practically ensured its success. In fact, no
sooner was the line finished than approval was given
for its continuation to Coolgardie, and a Loan Bill for
£1,500,000 passed to provide the money for that and
other works.
By this time Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie had not
only become the centres of promising mining districts,
but were fairly large and more or less settled towns.
The old Yilgarn field was split up into four mining
districts —Yilgarn, Dundas, Coolgardie, and East
Coolgardie (with headquarters at Kalgoorlie). Cool-
gardie was proclaimed a municipality in July, Mr. Jas.
Shaw being the first Mayor; and Kalgoorlie followed
suit in May, 1895 (Mr. John Wilson, Mayor). On the
Murchison field the Geraldton-Mullewa line was com-
pleted in November, and an extension to Cue approved
and commenced in March, 1895.
From 1894 mining in Western Australia has been
remarkable, not so much for new discoveries of a sensa-
tional character as for steady development. It has been
removed from the speculative phase and become an
industry of great proportions and permanent value to
the State. Like all countries where gold has been dis-
covered the colony had its period of “booming,” which
started in 1894 and continued with increasing force
throughout 1895 and 1896. Almost anything Western
Australian to which the name of gold mine was applied,
or which was situated in any of the mining areas, was
sure of easy flotation into a company either in London
or in the Eastern colonies. The result was that during
those years capital to the extent, it is said, of nearly
£50,000,000 was subscribed —and much of it was lost.
Mines of admittedly “wild-cat” species were as easily
floated as genuine ones if they had the name of Western
Australia attached to them and were supported by the
certificate of some self-styled mining expert. The money
subscribed rarely reached the colony; it usually drifted
into the pockets of the promoters. That good mines
existed —and still exist -has since been proved; that
Western Australia is one of the richest gold-bearing
countries in the world may be seen from the returns :
but the possibilities of a mine often did not enter into
a promoter’s calculations, except on tlie prospectus -he
looked not to the mine, but to the shareholders, for his
gold. Such a state of things inevitably brought re-
action—reaction from which the colony has since
suffered severely; but in those “wild and woolly” days,
when loan money could be had for the asking and Eng-
lish capital was simply thrown into the colony, no one
stopped to think of the evil days that must surely come.
One good result the boom did have —it advertised the
colony more widely and more effectively than anything
else could have done.
Many of the mines were not over-capitalized, and
some of those that were have risen above their difficul-
ties. These have all become good dividend-paying
concerns and have proved to the world that, notwith-
standing the machinations of unscrupulous promoters, the
gold existed in quantities more than sufficient to pay for
reasonable and safe expenditure in the way of capital.
How greatly the colony gained in population
through the advertisement of the boom may be seen
from the following table : —
Year. Population. Increase.
1894 82,014 16,977
1895 101,143 19,129
1896 137,796 36,653
1897 ... ... 161,694 23,898
These came from all parts of the world, though natur-
ally most of them were emigrants from the other colonies
of Australia. Their value could not be estimated by
numbers alone; the greater proportion was composed
of men for the most part in early manhood or the prime
of life, and possessed either of capital or of that ability
and energy which every country desires to see within
its borders. Their advent gave Western Australia an
asset greater even than gold.
Apart from the general development that was
taking place and the wild excitement to secure a piece
of mining scrip, the principal event in the mining world
of 1895 was the passing of a new Goldfields Act, intro-
duced by the new Minister of Mines (Mr. E. H. Wit-
tenoom). The old Act of 1886 had required constant
amendment to keep the law abreast of the industry,
and many of its provisions by change of circumstances
had become inoperative. The new Act, which was
based on the Mining Acts of the other colonies so far
as they could be made to apply, provided that complete
records of all dealings should be kept by each District
Registrar, and that all transfers, leases, and other deal-
ings with mines should be registered at the Mines
Department in Perth. As this meant that no trans-
action could be operative until it had been registered in
Perth it created a good deal of dissatisfaction, and was
the cause of considerable agitation during 1895 and
1896, mainly, apparently, because it meant that all
transactions must leave the goldfields to be finally dealt


with. The provisions of the Act were those usual in
large mining communities, and showed that the Govern-
ment, even though accused of animosity toward the
fields, were doing all that was possible to place the
mining industry on a satisfactory footing.
The year 1896 opened with brilliant promise. The
excitement of the boom was practically at its height,
and the effects were seen as the year progressed by the
enormous number of arrivals from other parts. Not
alone was State business congested; the same was true
in large measure of private affairs. Perth, Fremantle,
Kalgoorlie, Coolgardie, and Menzies were crowded with
people, hundreds of whom were unable to find better
accommodation that the merest shakedown. Houses and
business premises sprang up almost like magic in and
around Perth and Fremantle, and the capital which
in 1891 appeared little better than a thriving
village became a rapidly growing city, alive with every
description of business interest and the focus of ventures
of world-wide importance and magnitude. Fremantle
became the busiest of ports, and at Coolgardie and Kal-
goorlie were laid the foundations of modern towns on the
most up-to-date lines. As regard the mining develop-
ments the year was eminently satisfactory. New finds
were continually coming to light, and closer attention to
the known mineral localities was increasing the amount
of gold recovered by leaps and bounds. Two new gold-
fields —West Pilbara and North-East Coolgardie —w T ere
proclaimed, and machinery to the value of £364,706
was imported. Some excitement was caused by the
discovery of a reef at Dandalup, on the South-West
railway line, in the Darling Ranges. As this was
within 50 miles of Perth everyone was anxious for its
success, but further testing proved it to be a failure.
By the close of the year it was evident that the
boom had run its course, and that outside capital had
turned its attention elsewhere. From then mining
became in Western Australia a serious industry,
destined to yield great results, but never again to be
the scene of such wildly exciting times. The newness
had worn off and the people had become accustomed to
its presence, so that from an historical point of view its
interest, except so far as it contributed to the general
welfare of the colony, had gone. Incidents more or
less exciting occasionally arose, but they were the excep-
tion. One such occurred in 1898 over differences that
arose under the Goldfields Act, 1895, and its regula-
tions. Early in January a difference occurred between
the alluvial miners at Kalgoorlie and the Manager of
the Ivanhoe Venture Gold Mine which led to a serious
disturbance, the unrest extending to other places on the
goldfields. The Goldfields Act of 1895, under Section
36, gave the alluvial miners the right to search for
alluvial gold on leases, with certain restrictions. The
principal question in dispute was whether or not there
was a reef on the lease of the Ivanhoe Venture Syndi-
cate. The leaseholders considered it a great hardship
that the Act confirmed the existence of dual titles, those
of the leaseholders and those of the claimholders. The
alluvial miners, on the other hand, held that they had
a moral and legal right to the alluvial gold, at what-
ever depth it was found. Before a decision on the case
was given in the Warden's Court the Government passed
a regulation limiting the depth to which alluvial could
be worked to 10 ft. The diggers were much incensed at
this regulation, which they called “the 10-ft. drop,
and they applied the sobriquet of “Ten-foot Ned” to
the Minister for Mines. As regard the question of the
reef, the Government Geologist reported that there was
as yet no proof of its existence. The Warden’s decision
in the case went against the alluvial miners. The lat-
ter, however, paid no heed to this decision and con-
tinued to enter on the lease. Relations between the
Syndicate and the miners then became so strained that
several of the latter were eventually imprisoned. On
March 24 Sir John Forrest visited Kalgoorlie to meet
the delegates of the alluvial miners and hear their
grievances; but on his declining to address the crowd
which had gathered outside the hotel where the con-
ference took place some of the more excitable spirits
became unruly, and on his way to the station the Pre-
mier was somewhat roughly hustled, fortunately with-
out any serious results. After much further friction
the Ivanhoe Venture Syndicate agreed to take a test
case into the Supreme Court. The trial took place in
August, and the decision of the Court was in favour of
the alluvial miners. Petitions were then forwarded to
the Government by the various mining companies ask-
ing for the abolition of the dual title. In consequence
of this a Royal Parliamentary Commission was
appointed which came to the conclusion that the dual
title undoubtedly inflicted a great hardship on the
leaseholder. The new Mining Act (62 Viet., No. 16)
was consequently passed, Sections 10 and 11 of which
define the relations between leaseholders and claim-
holders in a manner calculated to avoid a conflict
between their respective interests.
This was the most serious case of resistance to con-
stituted authority witnessed on the goldfields. All the
elements for a conflagration were present, and only the
exhibition of common sense and the attention to wise
counsels on both sides prevented the occurrence of a
second ‘ Eureka.”
Another small sensation was provided toward the
end of the same year by the discovery on the part of
Messrs. Bourke and Hunter of alluvial gold at Donny-
brook. Mr. T. Blatchford, Assistant Geologist, said:
“Donnybrook is situated on the Bunbury to Bridgetown
railway, and is 26 miles south-east of Bunbury and
143 miles from Fremantle by rail. The scene of the


Year.
Amount.
Value.
Dividends.
Crude oz.
Fine oz.
£
£
1886
302
270
1,148
—
1887
4,873
4,359
18,517
—
1888
3,493
3,125
13,273
—
1889
15,493
13,860
58,874
—
1890
22,806
20,402
86,663
1,250
1891
30,311
27,116
115,182
5,326
1892
59,548
53,271
226,282
1,875
1893
110,891
99,203
421,386
34,350
1894
207,131
185,298
787,098
110,642
1895
231,513
207,111
879,749
82,183
1896
281,265
251,618
1,068,807
168,216
1897
674,994
603,847
2,564,977
507,732
1898
1,050,184
939,490
3,990,699
605,949
1899
1,643,877
1,470,605
6,246,733
2,066,015
1900
1,580,950
1,414,311
6,007,610
1,396,089
mining operations is some two miles to the south of the
Uonnybrook townsite, on a small branch of the Preston
River, in the Blackwood Range. Gold was first dis-
covered in the surface soil by a party searching for
alluvial gold. Further investigations carried on with
the prospecting dish eventually led to the discovery of
auriferous quartz veins, from which most of the alluvial
gold had originally been shed. The country, which is
extremely hilly and thickly timbered, is for the most
part covered with ironstone gravel deposits. Besides
these workings on reefs, several of the miners have given
their attention to the finding of alluvial gold. Dishes
of dirt taken from the surface of the hills will usually
yield a trace of gold when washed, and in some places
a fair result is obtained.” Subsequent examination,
however, proved that as a gold-bearing district Donny-
brook was scarcely worth consideration.
The outstanding feature of interest in local mining
since 1895 has been, and still is, the wonderful richness
of that small belt of country lying between Kalgoorlie
and the Boulder, known as the ' Golden Mile,” from
which gold has been taken in millions of ounces, and
which still remains as the principal gold-producing area
in the State. In it are contained the Associated, Brown
Hill, Great Boulder, Golden Horseshoe, Perseverance,
Ivanhoe, and other mines, all of which, though some
are now on the wane, have contributed handsomely to
the yearly gold returns of Western Australia.
The growth of the industry from its inception in
1886 to the close of 1900 may be seen from the following
table, the simple figures giving perhaps the best indi-
cation of what the discovery of gold has meant to the
colony :
Two of the problems which faced the Government
during these years were the provision of proper trans-
port facilities and the installation of an adequate water
supply. We have seen that no sooner was the railway
completed to Southern Cross than arrangements were
made to continue it to Coolgardie. The first section
of this line —to Boorabbin —was opened on July 1, 1896,
and before it reached Coolgardie its continuation to
Kalgoorlie was approved. By the beginning of 1897 it
was possible to reach the latter centre by rail. But
the convenience did not stop there ; less than two years
later the train steamed into Menzies, and by 1903 one
could get as far as Leonora. At the same time exten-
sions were being pushed forward on the Murchison
field, Cue was joined to the railway system in 1898,
and Nannine became a railway terminus in 1903. Since
then further extensions have been made, all with the
one aim—to join the Murchison and Eastern goldfields
systems together, and so provide a complete loop serving
all the principal mining centres.
Adequate water supply, even as it was more press-
ing was also more difficult of achievement than rail-
way communication, and in the long run involved
even greater expense. The absence of water was the
one great drawback to development. The extreme heat
of the summer and the want of a proper water supply
to mitigate both its discomforts and its dangers made
it imperative that during the worst of the season exemp-
tion from working conditions should be allowed to the
mines, in order to give the miners a chance to
recuperate. The Government was naturally blamed for
not taking sufficient steps to cope with the difficulty,
and in some measure this blame was, in the early days,
rightly placed. In 1893 less than £15,000 was spent
on water supply, and this out of loan money. The
amount seemed to the miners far too small, but they
ought to have remembered that colonial funds were not
at the time inexhaustible, and considerable expenditure
was being incurred in the construction of railways to
serve the goldfields. As it was, two tanks capable of
together holding a million gallons, as well as smaller
ones, wer§ excavated at Coolgardie. Others were built
along the Ninety-mile Road, and the soaks on Hunt’s
old track were improved. Boring also was undertaken
at Mount Burgess and Hannans in the hope of strik-
ing artesian water. By the end of 1894 there were
tanks and dams scattered over the Eastern goldfields,
with an aggregate capacity of nearly 11,000,000 gallons,
upon the construction of which nearly £30,000 had been
spent. But the supply was very far short of the demand,
and the fear of a water famine was continually present.
By this time the fields had become more stable, and
places like Coolgardie, Kalgoorlie, and other centres
had become towns with some degree of permanency and
with organized bodies and institutions to express their
needs. The question of sufficient water was one of the
most imperative of those needs, and as time passed
without any definite steps being taken by the Govern-
ment their method of asking became a demand rather
than a request. When the Premier visited the fields in


November, 1895, the matter was placed before him in
the strongest terms. In his reply Sir John Forrest,
after admitting the disabilities under which the fields
laboured, pointed out the extreme difficulty of the situa-
tion. Before the idea of bringing permanent water
to the mines could be considered the Government must
be satisfied that no artesian supply could be secured,
and that it was not possible to provide sufficient by the
use of catchment dams. If, however, both these means
failed, then the Government would be prepared to
bring ample water from the coast.
It quickly became apparent that the difficulty
could not be solved either by boring or by conservation.
Early in 1896 a water famine took place at Wool-
gangie, the camp of those engaged on the railway con-
something like 5,000,000 gallons of water daily. The
estimated cost, including the necessary pumping sta-
tions, pipe track, and receiving reservoir at Mount Bur-
gess, outside Coolgardie, was £2,500,000. The magni-
tude of this scheme, the most gigantic and daring of
its kind hitherto attempted in the world, created the
greatest astonishment, more particularly throughout the
goldfields. Doubts were expressed as to the feasibility
of the idea, but these were set at rest when it was
found that other authorities quite agreed with Mr.
O'Connor that it was entirely practicable and could be
successfully carried out. The only question was whether
the colony would be justified in incurring the enormous
expense involved —whether, in fact, the permanence of
the goldfields was certain. At this stage the advantage
HANNAN STREET, KALGOORLIE, 1900.
struction, and water had to be conveyed by train from
Northam, as in Coolgardie the condensing plants were
working at the highest pressure without being able to
meet the necessities of the town itself. The dams and
tanks were dry, and boring had been found to be with-
out result. Convinced that something of a compre-
hensive nature must be carried out the Engineer-in-
Chief, Mr. C. Y. O'Connor, to whose genius, energy,
and boldness the colony owes so much, conceived a
gigantic scheme for carrying water to the goldfields
from the coast. Shortly, his suggestion was to build
a huge reservoir on the Helena River near Mundaring,
in the Darling Ranges, and to convey from there to
Coolgardie by means of 330 miles of cast-iron pipes
to Western Australia of having a bold and optimistic
Premier was seen. When Parliament met in July the
scheme was given a prominent place in the Government
programme, and before the session closed Acts were
passed authorizing the construction and agreeing to a
loan of £2,500,000 to meet the expense. The actual
work of construction was not, however, proceeded with
until early in 1898, the intervening time being spent
in securing from English and other experts further
confirmation both of the soundness of the scheme from
an engineering point of view and of the practical results
that would be ensured. Once started, it was pushed
on with expedition, and in January, 1903, the first
water from Mundaring Weir reached Coolgardie and


Kalgoorlie. The water area within which the scheme
operates is not wholly confined to the Eastern gold-
fields, but extends from Guildford to Kanowna, serving
both the goldfields and agricultural districts through
which the pipes pass. The “Goldfields Water Supply, ”
as it is now termed, has thus completely surmounted
the water difficulty over a very large portion of the
dry area of inland Western Australia. Unfortunately,
the Engineer whose brain conceived the idea died, under
sad circumstances, just on the eve of his idea being
proved successful. The work, however, stands, a monu-
ment to his genius, and also an evidence of the wisdom
and foresight of the Premier who for so many years was
the benevolent despot of Western Australia —Sir John
Forrest.
But notwithstanding the power and influence of
Sir John Forrest, the position of the Government during
the years following 1894 was by no means an enviable
one. As a result of the discovery of the Coolgardie
and Kalgoorlie goldfields an unparalleled wave of
prosperity swept over the colony, bringing with it
greatly increased responsibilities and sometimes very
trying difficulties. The abnormal inrush of people into
a country so little prepared to receive them caused con-
gestion in nearly every branch of State work, and the
fact that many of the newcomers were from more progres-
sive places and easily irritated when matters were not
entirely to their liking made the position of the Govern-
ment even more irksome. This spirit of irritation
against and opposition to almost everything proposed
by the Government was particularly manifest on the
new goldfields, wdiere the miners seem to have thought
that they had lifted the colony from the slough of
despond, and were therefore entitled to dictate its
policy. This opposition to the established order of
things grew into a goldfields versus coast agitation,
which has prevailed with varying intensity ever since, and
on more than one occasion shown itself inimical to the
best interests of the State. It must be admitted that
this feeling was strengthened by the attitude of the
Western Australians themselves, a section of whom
regarded “t’othersiders” as rank outsiders who ought
to be sufficiently thankful for being allowed to
remain within the western paradise. While nothing but
praise can be bestowed upon those of the early days
who strove to wrest Western Australia from wildness
and make it a place fair to look upon, the colony’s real
development started only after the gold discoveries, and
the settlers ought to have welcomed with open arms the
men possessing the brain and sinew necessary to turn
those discoveries to profitable account. A better com-
mingling of the two elements in those early goldfields’
days would have saved the colony from many difficulties.
The Government met with its first check during
the session of 1895, when the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. George Leake, though with but a small following
behind him, moved a want of confidence vote in the
Ministry over the education question. It was never
put to the vote, as Sir John Forrest, after a somewhat
warm debate, agreed to deal with the question; but it
had more than a little effect, as before the end of the
year an Education Act on modern lines was passed and
the old system of ecclesiastical grants for educational
purposes abolished.
The spirit of opposition on the part of the gold-
fields became crystallized over the Budget proposals of
1895. The revenue for the year ending June 30 had
been £1,125,940, or £252,290 in excess of the estimate,
a condition of things which the miners, and perhaps
rightly, attributed to their presence in the country.
They were consequently dissatisfied when the proposals
for 1895-6 were not so liberal toward the goldfields as
they exjDected. A Goldfields League was formed for
the object of redressing their grievances, which went
farther than the question of expenditure, and embraced
the administration of some of the Government depart-
ments, as well as strong criticism of the mining laws.
Criticism of departmental administration was not
confined to the goldfields. The whole community was
suffering from the ineptitude displayed, and dissatisfac-
tion was widespread. There was not a Government
department wdiich had to do with communication,
transport, or mercantile affairs generally that was not
overwhelmed by the rush of business.
So great was the expansion, due to mining and
other transactions, that the Telegraph Department
found itself faced with an accumulation of messages far
beyond its power to cope with. As delay oftentimes
meant serious loss in mining transactions, many of which
depended for their success on quick communication with
London or the Eastern capitals, public and Press accu-
sations of incompetency on the part of the administra-
tive officers were common on the goldfields, and not
unknown in Perth and Fremantle. To add to the dis-
order the lines between Eucla and Albany, and between
Coolgardie and Perth, occasionally failed, and it some-
times happened that telegrams had to be forwarded to
the capital by rail 1 To cope with the difficulty Mr.
Wittenoom proposed and Parliament approved the ex-
penditure of £25,000 upon the construction of a new
line from Coolgardie via Dundas to Eucla. This
required time for its completion; meanwhile the con-
gestion in the telegraph office became intensified, and
the trouble spread to the post-office, delays in the deli-
very of correspondence becoming almost as irritating
as the department’s inability to handle telegrams. The
authorities did all that was possible in the way of in-
creasing the staffs in both departments, but with little
result, as the buildings became overcrowded and con-
fusion worse confounded.


To make matters worse the Railways and Customs
Departments reached the same chaotic state, so that
every department engaged in transmitting communica-
tions or handling merchandise was involved. In the
Railways Department the shortage of rolling-stock was
the principal reason; in the Customs the absence of
available space to facilitate the handling of goods. The
whole difficulty, from whatever point it is viewed,
resolves itself into the one fact —that the colony did not
possess facilities for dealing with a large and sudden
inrush of population which was totally unexpected. To
reasonable people this would have been a good excuse,
On October 8, 1895, a large indignation meeting
was held at Coolgardie, over which the Mayor of the
town, Mr. James Shaw, presided. The Government
generally was anathematized, and every ill from which
the miners suffered, from the non-delivery of a telegram
to the scarcity of water, laid to its charge. Special
prominence was given there, as also at a similar meet-
ing held at Kalgoorlie, to the inadequate representation
of the goldfields in Parliament, and for the first
time the cry was raised that the fields should agitate
for separation. Another meeting followed a week later,
apparently to emphasize what had been done at the pre-
BOULDER CITY, 1895.
especially as the Government was sparing neither energy
nor money to meet the requirements; but the new-
comers to Western Australia in those days, thirsting to
secure the riches it had been proved to possess, were
far from reasonable, and looked upon the authorities
not as the servants of the people, but as the slaves of
the goldfields. That it seemed impossible to cope with
the telegraphic, postal, railway, and Customs business
in those days must be admitted, but it is only fair to
add that the want of consideration shown to the
Government did not help to smooth away the difficulties.
vious one. Committees were appointed to enforce the
views of the miners upon the Government.
In answer to the protests the Minister of Mines
(Mr. E. H. Wittenoom) admitted that the post and
telegraph offices on the fields were far too small for the
work they had to do, but pointed out that the Public
Works Department was rapidly pushing on with the
erection of new ones. In regard to the other questions
raised it was deemed politic that Ministers should visit
the whole district, and in November Sir John Forrest
travelled over the eastern and Mr. Wittenoom the


Murchison fields. With “the soft answer that turneth
away wrath” both Ministers succeeded for the time in
considerably allaying the irritation, Sir John going so
far as to foreshadow the bringing of ample water from
the coast and an increase in the number of goldfields
representatives in Parliament. The promise of water
was, as we have seen, fully redeemed, and in the
session of 1896 the question of increasing the goldfields
representation in Parliament was also discussed.
But before that time arrived the condition of con-
gestion, particularly in the Railways Department, had
grown more acute, and loud murmurs of dissatisfaction
arose from the merchants of Perth and Fremantle, who
complained that traffic was utterly disorganized. The
Morning Herald , a new metropolitan daily, attacked the
authorities strongly, and even The West Australian
made dignified though guarded complaints. A public
meeting held in Perth in February, 1896, and addressed
by influential men, severely criticized the railway, tele-
graph, and postal administrations, and vaguely blamed
the Premier for the railway trouble, on the ground that
he had cut down the departmental estimates for rolling-
stock. Resenting the imputation, Sir John Forrest for-
cibly replied to his detractors, and pointed out that
rolling-stock was then on order to the value of £300,000
more than had been authorized by Parliament. The
Commissioner of Railways (Mr. Venn) took exception
to some of the Premier's statements, as he considered
they reflected upon his administration, and in a letter
to Sir John complained that the latter had not shown
that esprit de corps usual between members of a Govern-
ment. He contended that when assailed in the Press
he (Mr. Venn) had defended the Government at the
expense of himself as Commissioner of Railways, when
the real facts were that the whole trouble could have
been averted if the Premier had not refused to place
his request for £330,000 worth of rolling-stock on the
loan estimates for 1894, even though urged to do so
by the Engineer-in-Chief.
Unfortunately, Mr. Venn, in his haste to clear him-
self, handed a copy of this letter to the Press for publi-
cation. This action reduced the whole question to the
level of a personal quarrel between Sir John Forrest
and Mr. Venn. The Premier thanked the Commissioner
for his past services, regretted that he should have to
sever his connection with the Government, and requested
his resignation. This Mr. Venn declined to give, as he
wished to justify himself to Cabinet from the depart-
mental files. Sir John then asked a second time, point-
ing out that to refuse was unconstitutional; but Mr.
Venn held to his first decision. The Premier then tele-
graphed to the effect that the Cabinet was unanimous
in requiring the resignation, to which the Commissioner
tersely replied, “Death rather than dishonour.” The
next step was taken on March 9, when the Premier
informed his colleague that unless he received a reply-
in other words, a resignation —by 9 o'clock that night
he should feel at liberty to take whatever steps he
might deem necessary. Unfortunately, Mr. Venn did
not receive this note until after the time mentioned, but
lie immediately informed Sir John that he would make
a statement next morning. Sir John, however, when
no answer came by 9 o'clock, showed a little of Mr.
Venn's precipitation, and made certain statements to
the Press which rendered further negotiation impossible.
The same night, therefore, he transmitted a memo, to
Mr. Venn to the effect that the Governor had dismissed
him from office and from membership of the Executive
Council. His Excellency, said Sir John, regretted
that such a course was necessary, but considered
that Mr. Venn had brought it about by his refusal
to resign.
Mr. Venn, though dismissed, as he phrased it, “in
his nightshirt,” had no other course than to accept the
inevitable. He stated that it had been his intention
to resign after making a statement to Cabinet. The
point was raised and warmly debated as to whether the
Premier had acted constitutionally. Of this, however,
there can be scarcely any doubt; but his wisdom in
taking such an extreme course may be seriously
questioned.
The vacant portfolio was by no means sought after,
but eventually Mr. F. H. Piesse was induced to accept
it. For some time he was unable to effect any improve-
ment in the department, but matters improved as addi-
tional rolling-stock came to hand, and by the end of
the year the trouble was fully overcome. The same
result was achieved by the Post and Telegraph Depart-
ment through the erection of new lines, providing addi-
tional accommodation, and a better organized staff.
The increased Parliamentary representation de-
manded by the goldfields was, as mentioned above,
granted in 1896. A new province—the North-East —
was constituted, thus adding three additional members
to the Legislative Council. At the same time the num-
ber of the Assembly was increased to forty-four by the
establishment of new electorates, the majority of which
were on the goldfields. The number of Cabinet Min-
isters was also increased to six.
This amendment to the Constitution necessitated
a general election, which was held in May, 1897, the
most sensational events of which were the defeat of Mr.
S. H. Parker for Perth by Mr. Lyall Hall, and the
discovery that all the new mining electorates did not
return members opposed to the Government. The
personnel of the Ministry was slightly changed during
the year. Before the elections Mr. Richardson retired
from politics, and the control of the Lands Department
passed to Mr. G. Throssell, while the newly created
Ministerial post was conferred upon Mr. H. B. Lefroy


as Minister of Education. In October Mr. S. Burt
found himself compelled to resign, and Mr. R. W.
Pennefather was appointed Attorney-General. Mr.
Burt was the last of Sir John Forrest’s old colleagues,
and thus the Premier was left the sole survivor of the
original Ministry appointed on the introduction of
responsible government.
The year 1897 was not a year of prolific legislation.
Apart from the break caused by the elections, there
were two Federal Conventions held —one in Adelaide
and one in Sydney —at each of which the Premier and
nine other delegates were present; and Sir John was
also absent from the colony during the middle of the
year, in order to represent Western Australia at the
Diamond Jubilee celebrations of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria in London. These interruptions made a long
session impossible, consequently three short sessions
were held, two
of which did
little more
than pass sup-
plies, and the
third occu-
pied itself in
passing resolu-
tions to indi-
cate a future
course of ac-
tion. Payment
of members
was approved
as a principle,
and in face
of a no-confi-
dence motion
proposed by
Mr. Leake,
Photo by J. J. Dwyer.
the Premier promised to revise the duties so far as they
affected foodstuffs, though it must be admitted that in
doing so he had nothing to fear from a division on Mr.
Leake’s motion.
Before the Government met Parliament in 1898 a
further rearrangement of Ministerial offices had taken
place owing to Mr. Wittenoom having accepted the
Agent-Generalship. Mr. FT. B. Lefroy became Minister
of Mines and Mr. George Randell Colonial Secretary.
When Parliament opened a varied and extensive pro-
gramme was submitted in the Governor’s Speech, but
the session closed without much of it finding a place on
the Statute Book. In fact, an unkind critic might with
justice assert that the session lasted longer and produced
less result than any held since Parliament had been
constituted. The Norseman and Leonora Railway Bill
and the Perth Deep Drainage Bill were both shelved
till a more convenient season ; the Education and Min-
ing Bills were withdrawn; the Railway, Patents, Public
Works, Trades Unions, and Electoral Bills were never
even heard of. The principal measures that were passed
were the Tariff Amendment (promised the previous
session), Early Closing, Health, and Lands Acts, this
last designed to promote agricultural settlement along
those lines which had always been advocated by Sir
John Forrest. Politically the most important act was
the amendment of the very ill-advised mining regula-
tion (No. 103) which had been the cause of the Kal-
goorlie riot of 1898, already referred to. As usual in
such cases, a compromise was effected. The alluvial
miner was allowed in the first place to make his search,
and then had to give way to the reef miner.
Up to this time the introduction of foreign mining
capital, the ease with which loan money could be
secured, and an overflowing Treasury chest had lulled
the Govern-
ment into a
sense of finan-
cial security,
and there was
scarcely that
control over
e x p e n d i ture
that was
needed. With
the reaction
that followed
the boom per-
iod, however,
it became evi-
de n t that
closer super-
vision was
necessary. The
first note of
this was sounded when the accounts of the colony for
the year ending June 30, 1898, were published. The
revenue, though large (£2,754,747), was £253,253 below
the estimate, while the expenditure reached £3,256,912
—an amount so far in excess of the receipts that it not
only absorbed the accrued surplus of £315,362 but
left a debit of £186,803. This called for rigorous
retrenchment and the closest scrutiny of public expendi-
ture, unpleasant at any time, but particularly so to a
people accustomed to huge surpluses. The drift, how-
ever, continued throughout the following year, the
transactions of which showed a loss of over £60,000,
and was not stayed until 1900, when there was again
a credit on the year’s operations of £260,000. Matters
arising out of administration and the prominence given
to the question of federation absorbed the greater part
of the Parliamentary session of 1899 and filled the pages
of Tlanmrd rather than the Statute Book, the list of
BOULDER CITY, 1900


measures being small in comparison with the length of
the session. The most important was a further amend-
ment of the Constitution increasing the number of the
Legislative Council to thirty by the creation of two new
provinces—the Metropolitan-Suburban and the South-
East —and raising the membership of the Assembly to
fifty by a redistribution of seats and a rearrangement
of boundaries. At the same time the franchise was
granted to women.
Although the whole history of the federal move-
ment will be found recorded in the next chapter it is
necessary, even at the risk of repetition, to mention
that a Federal Enabling Bill to allow the proposed
Federal Constitution to go before the people was intro-
duced into the Assembly in 1899, and debated at very
considerable length. Such a course had not been neces-
sary before, as neither New South Wales nor Queens-
land had assented to the Bill. Those assents had, how-
ever, been given when the Western Australian Parlia-
ment met in 1899, and it was necessary, therefore, that
some definite course should be taken. Free discussion
in the Press and on the platform had done much
to educate public opinion as to the advantages and dis-
advantages of the proposed union, and a Joint Com-
mittee of the two Houses sought to amend the Com-
monwealth Bill in the directions which earnest con-
sideration deemed necessary. The Assembly then
decided to refer both Bills —the original and the one
as amended by the Committee —to the electors; but
the Legislative Council, after a series of contradictory
divisions, declined to agree to the Bill in any form
being referred, and also declined to request the Govern-
ment to negotiate with the Governments of the Eastern
colonies in the hope of securing all or some of the con-
cessions asked for. The Government, however, made an
attempt to secure these concessions, but without avail.
The other colonies were unanimously of opinion that
Western Australia should pronounce upon the Bill as
it stood, and therefore a special session of Parliament
was called early in May, 1900, for the purpose of once
more considering the Federal Enabling Bill. This time
the Bill was assented to by both Houses and provision
made for the poll to be taken on July 31. This, as we
shall see, was done, with a result that exceeded even the
wildest hopes of the Federal Party.
The regular session of the year did not begin until
late in August, and prior to it some changes had taken
place. Mr. Leake was no longer present either as Leader
of the Opposition or as member for Albany, having
resigned both positions earlier in the year. His place
at the head of the Opposition was taken by Mr. F.
Illingworth. Another resignation was that of Mr.
Piesse, who relinquished his portfolio as Commissioner
of Railways and Director of Public Works owing to a
difference of opinion with his colleagues in regard to
the recognition of the Railway Employes’ Association.
Mr. Piesse was succeeded by Mr. B. C. Wood. During
the session close scrutiny was exercised over the finan-
cial proposals of the Government. It was held generally
that on the eve of a general election, and in face of a
doubt as to the financial effects of federation on the
colony, it would not be politic to commit the colony to
an}’' extensive public works scheme, especially as the
Treasurer was more than likely to leave State politics
for the wider field of action of the Federal Parliament.
The rejection of the Coolgardie to Norseman Railway
Bill may be attributed in part to this feeling, but there
is no doubt that a still greater reason was the fear that
such a railway would be the first step toward making
Esperance the port of the goldfields —a step that the
vested interests in Perth and Fremantle viewed with
alarm. Still the session was not barren of results. Pay-
ment of members was authorized, a Public Service Act
of a kind was passed, the laws relating to municipali-
ties were consolidated and improved, and, most import-
ant of all, an Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration
Act, on the lines of the New Zealand measure, and
designed to effect the peaceful settlement of industrial
disputes without recourse to strikes, was placed upon
the Statute Book. A Conciliation Board consisting of
one representative each for employers and employed,
with an independent third member as umpire, was pro-
vided for, and in case the dispute could not be settled
in that way an Arbitration Court consisting of a repre-
sentative of each side, presided over by a Supreme Court
Judge, was established to settle wages and frame con-
ditions of employment. This Act was superseded by a
more comprehensive measure passed in 1902. As gener-
ally happens with experimental legislation, the career of
the Act has been somewhat chequered, but on the whole
it has proved a successful innovation.
With the close of 1900 Western Australia’s career
ended as a colony and it began a new era as one of the
six States of the Commonwealth of Australia. In order
to afford a correct appreciation of the abnormal con-
ditions existing in the colony between 1891 and
1900 the gold discoveries and the consequent min-
ing development have already been referred to at
length, but it is necessary to also point out that the
mineral discoveries of the period were not confined to
gold. Tin had been found at Greenbushes in 1888, and
during the succeeding years up to 1894 the deposits
were worked with satisfactory results, after which the
industry seemed to languish until 1898, when serious
work was again undertaken. Meantime other discoveries
of the metal had been made in widely separated locali-
ties, but from only one of them (Marble Bar) was there
any appreciable production. The copper and lead
mines, some of which had been in existence for many
years, were not worked with any degree of energy,


Year.
Tin.
Copper.
Coal.
£
£
£
1891
10,200
4,462
—
1892
13,843
8,696
—
1893
11,134
606
—
1894
15,274
—
—
1895
9,703
12,952
—
1896
4,338
100
—
1897
3,275
1,0.33
—
1898
2,760
4,266
1,761*
1899
25,270
41,461
25,951
1900
56,702
33,937
54,835
*Up to 1898 inclusive.
except in those few districts where gold was found in
conjunction with copper. In 1891 and 1892 the Whim
Well lode gave good results, and from 1899 there was
a distinct revival in copper-mining, but owing to diffi-
culties in the way of transport and expense in producing
the ore the industry has always been subject to great
variation. If those barriers could be overcome there
ought to be a good future for Western Australia in
copper-mining, as the ore is plentifully scattered over
the whole State, being found throughout the north-
west, on the eastern goldfields, and in the south-east,
in the neighbourhood of Phillips River. Several other
metals and minerals were also discovered during these
years, such as silver, iron, tantalum, mica, and asbestos ;
but none of them have so far repaid working on any
large scale. In fact, it is commonly said that some-
where in Western Australia traces may be found of
almost any mineral, metal, or precious stone that could
be mentioned.
One other certainly does exist, and has for
many years been worked as a profitable concern. As
far back as 1846, owing to certain specimens
being found, the question was raised whether coal
existed in Western Australia. Indications were found
from that time on at various localities on the Irwin,
Murray, and Fitzgerald Rivers. Expert opinion pro-
nounced those from the Murray and Fitzgerald as value-
less, but considered the Irwin River bed worth further
examination. In 1879 the Government voted <£loo to
test the coal in the north branch of this river, but the
Rev. C. G. Nicolay, who inspected the seams, pronounced
the coal of poor quality, and the field was abandoned.
Nearly ten years later Messrs. Bell and Eliot found
in another branch of the river specimens which the
Government Geologist pronounced to contain true coal
measure fossils, and likely to have a commercial value
when the colony had more use for the product. A com-
pany —the Fremantle Irwin Coal-mining Company —was
thereupon formed and a shaft sunk, but the results did
not come up to expectations, and that, too, was in turn
given up. Another locality which had from time to
time been mentioned as possibly coal-bearing was on
the Collie River, about 25 miles east of Bunbury. In
1889 Mr. David Hay, of Bunbury, set out to prospect
the district. With a party he sank shafts here and
there, and in places found what appeared to be good
seams. One of these being over 11 ft. thick, a syndi-
cate was formed in Bunbury to work it and a new
shaft put down, without, however, yielding any result.
The next attempt was made by a South Australian
syndicate in 1891 with the same want of success. Two
shafts were put down, one of which struck granite and
the other filled with water. In the same year Dr. Rob-
ertson, a coal expert from New South Wales, was en-
gaged by the Government to make an examination. He
R
found it impossible to do this owing to the shafts being
full of water, but obtained sufficient samples to justify
him in advising the Government to test the field by
boring. This advice was accepted, and in 1892 Mr.
Pendleton, an experienced colliery manager, was sent
out in charge of a party to conduct boring experiments.
The result was that coal was found in several places,
the estimated area of the field being about 100 square
miles. The Government formed the idea of having a
State mine, and in furtherance of that idea about 300
acres were reserved and operations started. About 1,000
tons were raised during the next two years and trials
of a satisfactory nature made on the Government rail-
ways. It was then decided to build a railway to the
mine, and development was stopped pending that being
constructed. Before the railway was completed the idea
of a State mine was abandoned and the property let
under contract to Mr. FT. M. Deakin. The reopening
of this mine, which took place in 1898, stimulated pri-
vate activity, with the result that various companies
started operations, and by the end of 1900 many thou-
sands of tons of coal, more or less satisfactory in nature,
had been placed upon the market.
The actual value of tin, copper, and coal produced
during the decennial period 1891-1900 may be seen from
the following table :
The gold discoveries changed the face of Western
Australia. Not alone did they prove that great wealth
lay in the country, but they brought to it an enormous
amount of foreign capital, and what was of infinitely
greater value —the bone and sinew of other lands.
Population grew apace, trade expanded, old industries
opened out and new ones arose —in fact, from being a
slow, backward, and practically unknown community in
1891 Western Australia in 1900 was known the world
over as a country of immense wealth, of progressive
ideas, and of almost boundless possibilities. The popu-
lation had risen from 53,279 to 179,708, the revenue of
the colony from £497,670 to £2,875,396 and the ex-
penditure from £435,623 to £2,615,675, the imports
from £1,280,093 to £5,962,178 and the exports from
£799,466 to £6,852,054, and the area under crop from
64,210 acres to 201,338 acres. Apart from gold the
greatest expansion of trade occurred in the timber in-


dustry, the export value rising during the ten years from
£89,176 to £458,461.
It is satisfactory to note that during all this period
of feverish activity in so many directions the Premier
never lost sight of the permanent advantages that
would accrue to the colony through a wise and pro-
gressive policy of land settlement. Gold he looked upon
as an uncertain factor at any time, but agriculture was
a permanent asset, and if undertaken with vigour a
never-failing source of prosperity for the colony. The
land regulations of 1887 offered certain inducements,
but Sir John Forrest in 1893, with the Homesteads Act,
went far beyond anything even suggested in the regu-
lations. Under that Act any person being the sole
head of a family or a male over eighteen years of age
who did not own more than 100 acres of land might
select within certain boundaries a homestead farm of
160 acres, of which, provided he observed certain con-
ditions as to improvements, he received the fee simple
at the end of seven years. In order to assist those who
settled on the land an Agricultural Bank Act was passed
in the following year. Under this Act persons improv-
ing their holdings may borrow on the value of the
improvements so as to further extend the sphere of
their operations. Convinced that even these concessions
were not sufficient to ensure agricultural development on
a large scale, the Parliament in 1898 passed a compre-
hensive Land Act by which land might be acquired
under a conditional purchase system upon terms that
were so easy as to be within the reach of anyone pre-
pared to take up selections and develop them. The
advantages of the system had not had time to give any
appreciable result before the end of 1900, but subse-
quent results have more than justified the policy of the
then Premier, and have proved that on the land question,
as on so many others, he showed a statesman's wisdom.
The discoveries of gold drew attention to the fact
that there were still large stretches of country in Wes-
tern Australia of which nothing whatever was known,
and revived that spirit of exploration which had been
so prominent a feature of the colony's early history. In
1890 Sir Thomas Elder, of Adelaide, offered to defray
the expenses of a thoroughly well-equipped expedition,
which should consist largely of scientific men, and
whose work should be to examine those portions of
South and Western Australia lying between the tracks
of Forrest, Gosse, Giles, and Warburton, and keep a
strict look out for traces of Leichhardt's party. The
leadership was conferred upon Mr. David Lindsay, with
Mr. L. A. Wells as second in command. The other
members were Dr. F. J. Elliot, F. W. Leach, V. F.
Streich, R. Helms, R. G. Ramsay, A. P. Gwynne, C. A.
Dowden, and A. Warren. The expedition left Adelaide
in April of 1891 and made for the interior. The farther
they proceeded the more evident it became that owing
to the prolonged drought it would be impossible to carry
out the original programme. Water was practically
unobtainable, and Lindsay was compelled, under cir-
cumstances of very great difficulty and no little danger,
to shape his course for the Victoria Springs, where Giles
had found good water. Even these were dry, and the
party had to push on to Fraser Range, where they at
last found ample water and good grass feed for the
camels. From there Lindsay made a trip to Esperance
and suggested to the Adelaide Geographical Society that
as the original idea could not be carried out on account
of the drought the party should proceed to the Mur-
chison. This was agreed to and a new start made.
Even then it had to strike westward to avoid the
drought-stricken area, and in the course of its jour-
neying crossed Dundas and arrived at Southern Cross.
From there Lindsay made for the Murchison, but on
arrival serious disagreement occurred with the scientific
members of the expedition, through which the latter
resigned and Lindsay was recalled to Adelaide. Wells was
left in charge for the time being, and made flying trips of
some value. As to useful results, however, the expedi-
tion, owing to these dissensions, was a comparative failure.
A further exploration was made by Mr. Wells in
1896 as leader of the Calvert Exploration Expedition,
which left Lake Way in July to examine the country
between the East Murchison and Pitzroy Rivers.
Adopting a north-easterly course, a depot was
formed in latitude 25° 54' south, longitude 122° 20'
east, excellent waterholes and fair country existing in
the neighbourhood. The period between August 10 and
September 8 was occupied in a flying trip north-east
through Mount Bates, on a dry stage of 200 miles, till
a good well was found in latitude 23° 23' south and
longitude 124° east, whence a return was made via Giles’
1876 route. Leaving the depot finally on September 14,
the party at length reached Separation Well. Thence
travelling along the meridian of Joanna Springs, and
subsequently upon reaching that point north-north-east,
it struck the Fitzroy River, a little north-west of Mount
Tuckfield, on November 6, a distance altogether from
Mount Bates of 500 miles. Most of this was the usual
spinifex and sandridge country, and the last 300 miles
were almost destitute of camel feed or water —in fact,
it was compelled to abandon five beasts, and had the
greatest difficulty in saving the others.
At Separation Well Messrs. C. F. Wells and G.
Lindsay Jones were, on October 11, sent on to examine
the country bearing west-north-west for 80 or 100 miles,
and thence north-east to cut their leader's track about
30 or 40 miles south of Joanna Springs. On his arrival
at the rendezvous six days later than had been expected,
not finding the two men, Mr. L. A. Wells naturally
concluded that they had arrived previously, and been
compelled to push on to the Fitzroy. The fate of the


unfortunate men was afterwards ascertained, their
bodies being found by Wells some months afterwards
14 miles west-south-west of the Springs. Their journal
disclosed the fact that, being unable to proceed owing to
the heavy nature of the country, they retraced their
steps, and striking the expedition's track followed it
northwards, only to perish from want of water about
November 15.
As soon as the news reached Perth that two of the
party were missing energetic efforts were put forth by
the Western Australian Government, and on Decem-
ber 19 Mr. W. F. Rudall left Braeside Station, on the
party engaged on this expedition was also driven back
owing to the insuperable difficulties encountered.
Rumours, supplied by natives, of straying camels, etc.,
having reached Rudall it was considered wise to make a
further search to the south of the Oakover River, and
accordingly, on February 7, 1897, he again set out. The
course of the river being followed for some distance,
the latitude of the tropic of Capricorn was reached, and
in longitude 120° 10' east the bodies of two men, sup-
posed to have been murdered by natives, were
discovered. Returning via Roy Hill Station to Nulla-
gine a report of the find was sent to Perth, but after
WHIM WELL COPPER MINE, WEST PILBARA,1900.
Oakover River, in charge of an expedition to follow up
the river and its branch, the Davis, thence striking
eastward to cut the tracks of the missing men.
After leaving Christmas Pool, some distance south-
east of Mount Macpherson, Rudall, guided by blacks,
came upon a camp into which footsteps, supposed to be
those of the persons sought, were traceable. Here, un-
fortunately, all tracks were lost, and he was reluctantly
obliged, through his camels failing him, to return to
his starting-point. He immediately organized a second
trip, but after strenuous though fruitless efforts the
r 2
due consideration and medical examination it was
decided that the remains were not those of the missing
explorers, and a final attempt was made to solve the
mystery surrounding the fate of the two men. Rudall,
leaving Braeside Station on April 9, visited Separation
Well, and attained a point 60 miles South of Joanna
Springs before returning to Braeside, which was finally
reached on June 23. Although these journeys proved
unsuccessful in their object, it cannot be said that the
work was fruitless, since Rudall had travelled over an
area of 23,000 square miles, and had obtained a large


amount of information not previously possessed concern-
ing the physical features of the country examined.
From June 17 to September 13 of the same year
Mr. A. Mason, a Government officer, was engaged in
examining the south-eastern district of the colony, lying
between Kurnalpi and Eucla, into portions of which
rabbits were supposed to have penetrated. He claimed
to have discovered millions of acres of some of the
finest pastoral and agricultural country in the world,
but reported a very poor supply of surface water.
The year 1896 was a notable one in Western Aus-
tralian exploration, as in July still another expedition,
equipped and led by the Hon. David W. Carnegie, left
Doyle's Well, some 50 miles to the south-east of Lake
Darlot, to strike across the continent in a north-easterly
direction in the hope of discovering either gold-bearing
or pastoral country in the area lying between latitudes
19° and 28° and longitudes 122° and 129°, an area
which up to that time had been traversed only in an
easterly or westerly direction. The expedition travelled
over some 3,000 miles of country, and from the waterless
nature of most of it proved that a direct stock route
between Kimberley and the North Coolgardie goldfield
was impracticable. Except for very isolated patches no
auriferous country was discovered. This northern
country was also traversed in various directions between
1896 and 1898 by Mr. Frank Hann, a Queensland
squatter, who added considerably to the geographical
knowledge of that portion of Western Australia.
While all these abnormal developments were taking
place in every phase of local activity and industry, wider
issues affecting the whole of the Empire rose above the
horizon and ultimately affected every colonial depen-
dency of Great Britain—the South African war of
1899-1902. The reverses suffered by British arms in
the early stages of that war and the offensive attitude
adopted by some Continental nations roused in the
colonies a spirit of intense loyalty and patriotism, and
from them all without exception came offers of assist-
ance to the Motherland. Western Australia joined with
the other Australian States in sending out, in quick suc-
cession, contingent after contingent of picked men, who
more than justified the belief that their services would
be of value. The first contingent of 125 men with five
officers —Captain Moor, Lieutenants Parker, Darling,
and Campbell, and Surgeon-Major McWilliams —left
Perth on November 4, 1899, en route, to Albany to join
the transport “Medic.” Before they arrived at the
scene of the war it became evident that if the Boers
were to be subjugated strong reinforcements of troops
must be provided by Great Britain. A second contingent
was therefore asked for, to consist of 200 mounted men—
a class of soldier at first refused by the authorities—
and these left Fremantle early in February, 1900,
having as officers Major Pilkington, Lieutenants
McMasters, De Castilla, Harris, and Inglis, and Surgeon-
Captain J. M. Y. Stewart. By this time it was generally
conceded that a force of men skilled in bushcraft would
prove of great assistance, especially against a people
much of whose success was due to an intimate knowledge
of the country, and the next step was the formation of
a Bushmen's Contingent, carefully selected for their
knowledge of the bush and their skill as horsemen. The
officers selected for this company were Major Vialls,
who possessed both Indian and colonial experience,
Captain Hurst, Lieutenants Ord, Thunder, Gledhill, and
Vernon, and Surgeon-Captain Ingoldby. They left for
the front in the following March. Then came a new
departure. All the previous contingents were purely
Australian, but it was decided that the fourth unit
should merge in the Imperial army. This consisted of
120 men, who had as officers Major Rose, Captain New-
land, Lieutenants Barnes, Vernon, Hume, and Williams,
and Surgeon-Captain Gibson. They sailed in May, 1900,
and were intended to form the colony's final contribu-
tion, but circumstances arose that made further drafts
advisable if not necessary. A fifth contingent, consist-
ing of 210 men and fourteen officers, under the command
of Captain Darling, with whom were associated Captain
Flynn (as surgeon), and Lieutenants Brown, Downes,
Scott, Davis, Ochiltree, Messer, Griffiths, Sherard,
Forbes, Forrest, and Williams, was therefore dispatched
by the “Devon” in March, 1901, and was followed in
April by a sixth, consisting of 232 in all, under the
command of Captain J. Campbell, who had with him
Captains Reid (surgeon) and Williams, and Lieutenants
Young, Hawkins, Bardwell, Maley, Bell, McCormick,
Clifton, Reid, Woodrow, and Wright. With the de-
parture of this unit further enrolment ceased. The
colony had contributed in all fifty-one officers, two
warrant officers, and 869 men —a total of 922. So far
from indulging in a picnic, as the celebrated Sudan
contingent had done, the Australian soldiers found
themselves on serious service bent, and most of them
before they returned had a practical knowledge of what
actual warfare meant. As might be expected, being of
British stock, they performed their duties faithfully and
well, and proved that notwithstanding carping criticism
Australia did not breed degenerates. Four Western
Australian officers—Major H. Moor, and Lieutenants
A. A. Forrest, G. H. Hensman, and S. Stanley Reid—
were killed in action, or so severely wounded that they
died shortly afterwards, and the roll of privates who laid
down their lives for their country numbered well into
the thirties. While the offer to send help to Britain
in South Africa was a new expression of colonial patriot-
ism, its acceptance was a fresh departure in Imperial
politics, and its result has been a lesson to foreign
nations that the Imperial unity of Britain in face of
danger is a reality to be always taken into account.


CHAPTER XVII.
FEDERAL MOVEMENT IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
For very many years the people of the various Aus-
tralian colonies had been viewing with increasing favour
the conception of a Federated or United Australia,
though the earliest proposal to bring about this result,
put forward by Earl Grey in 1847, had met with
strenuous opposition. It was thought at the time by
the colonies that the many and varying interests, very
diversified in their nature, did not make for an amalga-
mation of their respective Governments. The widely
separated colonies, extending in their geographical posi-
tion from the tropics to the temperate zone, made it
extremely difficult to put
forward any concrete ex-
ample that would act with
justice and fairness in re-
gard to legislative facilities
and equal rights. The dif-
ferences of opinion in regard
to the economic legislation
then existing, which in the
case of New South Wales
and Victoria were in mat-
ters relating to the tariff as
wide as the poles, only
accentuated this feature. In
fact, the ‘ war of the Cus-
toms" appeared to be an
almost impassable barrier
to the hopes of those to
whom the broad value of
federation appealed in its
widest Imperial sense. How-
ever, the Imperial Govern-
ment, recognizing that the
future must widen the
views of many, and that
time would probably bring
about the desired result,
incorporated the broad principle of federation in
the Australian Government Act of 1850. At the
time of the appointment of Sir Charles A Fitzroy to
the Governorship of the Mother State he received a
further commission as Governor-General of Australia,
the official rank of all other Australian Governors being
that of Lieutenant-Governor. This further commission,
granted to the holder of the Governorship of New South
Wales, was certainly not meant to be barren of power
and privileges, for the Governors of other colonies were to
be superseded in their duties by the temporary resi-
dence of the Governor-General in their territory.
Sydney was the Federal Capital, and it was only on
the strong representations of the residents of Melbourne
and Adelaide in regard to the inconvenience this would
cause which led to these powers and privileges falling
into disuse. At this stage it is idle to speculate, but
we can wonder at what might have been the result if
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide had been connected
by rail as they now are. However, the distinctive title
of Governor-General in regard to the Governor of New
South Wales was retained until 1861, but it was not at
any time more than an empty honour which carried no
real power. The incident is mainly instructive in
showing how strongly the
Colonial Office held to the
federal sentiment and how
clearly the future was out-
lined.
The keen competition be-
tween the colonies during
the years which immediately
followed the first essay of
the Imperial Government
to bring about a federation
of the Australian group
apparently widened the dif-
ferences between them, and
federation appeared as the
va2fue dream of a few vis-
o
ionaries, and certainly not
within the realm of prac-
tical politics. A section of
the British public, more
than a little dominated by
the opinions of the Royal
Colonial Institute, still clung
tenaciously to the hope of
a Federated Australia, and
the visit to England in 1882
of Sir Henry Parkes, the
New South Wales statesman, led to a recrudescence of
the previous agitation. The fault of this section of the
Royal Colonial Institute was that in its enthusiasm for
Imperialistic sentiment it failed to recognize the diffi-
culties that the fiscal question and its settlement would
place in the way of this much-to-be-desired result. Even
now ultimate federation was clearly recognized, and
thinking men throughout Australia saw that the time was
fast approaching when this hitherto visionary ideal would
become ‘ the question of the hour” in practical politics.
Previous to the visit to England of Sir Henry
Parkes he had drafted a Bill embodying a scheme for
the federation of Australia, but this proposal did not
SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL, KING'S PARK


meet the views of the other States and came to naught.
In 1883 Sir Samuel Griffith drafted the Bill which in
1885 created the first Federal Council, and this was
probably the original active step toward the federation
of the colonies of Australia into the Australian Com-
monwealth.
The members of the Council met in Hobart in 1886
for the first time, the appointment of the delegates to
the Council having been sanctioned by an imperial Act.
The plan of federation did not satisfy the wishes of Sir
Henry Parkes, who maintained that unification in the
best sense would not be the outcome of the deliberations
of this body, and he therefore promulgated a rival
scheme of a comprehensive nature. With his usual
determination Sir Henry, who was now definitely com-
mitted to the policy of federation, threw all his personal
influence into the scheme, and secured for it that popular
favour which alone could command success, thereby doom-
ing the other movement to failure. The previous atti-
tude of Sir Henry Parkes toward the Federal Council
of Australasia had been one that was not calculated to
inspire confidence in the minds of the statesmen of the
other colonies, and his efforts at this period were viewed
with some suspicion in Victoria. Only a short time
previously he had attempted to appropriate the national
title of “'Australia” for New South Wales, and per-
haps the report of General Edwards on the need of
federal action in national defence had a good deal to do
with the alteration of Sir Henry's views on the subject
of federation. Ultimately, however, all jealousies and
difficulties were overcome, and an Intercolonial Confer-
ence was held in Melbourne during February, 1890. To
what extent the success of the movement was due to the
splendid patriotism of Sir Edward Barton, afterwards
the first Prime Minister of the Commonwealth, and now
its senior Puisne Judge of the High Court, it would be
hard to say. Sinking all political differences of a local
nature Barton threw himself heart and soul into the
federal agitation in New South Wales, proving that he
possessed the large-heartedness of the statesman and the
unselfishness of the true patriot.
At the Intercolonial Conference held in 1890 the
far-reaching proposals of Sir Henry Parkes triumphed
over the more timid suggestions of the Federal Council,
and the federation ideal of Australia assumed a more
concrete and tangible form. A resolution was carried
to the effect that, in the opinion of the Conference, the
best interests and the present and future prosperity of
the Australian colonies would be promoted by an early
union under the Crown, and that the members of the
Conference should take such steps to induce their
respective Legislatures to appoint, during the year,
delegates, not exceeding seven in number from each
colony, empowered to consider and report on an adequate
scheme for a Federal Constitution. The legislative
authority of the previous Federal Council had no doubt
paved the way for this larger measure of progress, and
though the invitation of the Conference of 1890 must be
credited to the efforts of Sir Henry Parkes, the earlier
promulgation of the broad principles of federation was
due mainly to the actions of the Federal Council.
The Legislatures of the different colonies approved
of the proposals of the Conference, and the following
year witnessed the gathering together in Sydney of the
seven delegates from each of the colonies of New South
Wales, Victoria, New Zealand, Queensland, South Aus-
tralia, Tasmania, and Western Australia. The State of
Western Australia was represented by the Hon. Sir
John Forrest, the late Mr. W. E. Marmion, the late
Sir J. G. Lee Steere, who had represented the State in
the Conference of 1890, Mr. J. A. Wright, Mr. (now
Sir) J. W. Hackett, Mr. A. Forrest, and Mr.
W. T. Loton. The delegation, designated the National
Australasian Convention, met on March 2, 1891, and
terminated its labours on April 9. One result of its
deliberations was the passage of a Bill which formed
the draft for the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Australia. However, the time was not yet sufficiently
ripe for the federation of Australia, and especially in
New Zealand and Fiji was this feeling pronounced.
Neither of these colonies accepted the Constitution as
drafted, and the attitude they adopted has been preserved
by them ever since. It would almost appear as if the
labours of the Convention of 1891 had been abortive, for
in none of the colonies was the draft of the Constitution
there drawn up accepted, yet the Bill then passed formed
to some extent the basis of the Constitution which
became law nine years later, proving that the work of
the Convention had not been altogether in vain.
The condition of Western Australia, as the least
populous colony, was realized by all its politicians, and
it was recognized that any scheme of amalgamation
would need very careful consideration before the opinion
of the electors could be sought finally on this most im-
portant movement. The great expansion due to the
finding of gold in payable quantities helped to accentuate
this feature, and the expression of Sir James Lee
Steere at the Convention of 1890, that the colony could
not afford to sacrifice her existing tariff, was becoming
more strongly justified. Thus at the outset the differing
fiscal policies of the various colonies, together with the
fact that the two most populous—New South Wales and
Victoria —were diametrically opposed, only made the
position more difficult and embarrassing. During the
four years following the National Australasian Conven-
tion no active steps were taken in regard to union,
though the question of a Federated Australia occupied
a more or less prominent position in the minds of the
people, who were gradually becoming educated in this
most important development.


In 1895, however, the question, which had been
brought forward by a meeting of the Federal Council
in Hobart two years earlier, was again keenly
scrutinized, for a meeting of Premiers was held in the
same city called by the Premier of New South Wales,
Mr. G. Reid, to discuss the question. After careful
consideration of the whole subject this Conference
decided to again form a Convention, which should be a
purely elective one, chosen by the electors in each
colony, for the purpose of framing a Constitution under
which it would be possible for the various Australian
colonies to federate. The then Western Australian Pre-
mier, Sir John Forrest, objected to the proposal of an
elective Convention to frame another Bill for the pur-
formation of these measures, though if that colony
desired it was to be included in the Convention.
The provisions of the Enabling Bill were accepted
bv New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
and Tasmania, each of whom sent ten representatives,
to whom was given the onerous responsibility of
framing a Constitution to meet the varying needs of
the Australian nation. To this Convention Western
Australia also sent ten representatives, but they
were chosen by the two Houses of Parliament sitting
together, and therefore were only to a certain extent
the chosen of the people. The ten Western Australian
representatives to this Convention of 1897, which
commenced its labours in Adelaide in March of
THE SECOND CONTINGENT AT FREMANTLE
pose of union, holding that the draft Commonwealth
Bill of 1891 should be first submitted to the Parliaments
of the various colonies interested, and any amendments
made by them referred to a second Convention, to be
appointed after a general election.
Eventiially, however, Western Australia met the
wishes of the other States and accepted the draft
of the Enabling Bill prepared at the Premiers’ Con-
ference by the Premiers of Victoria and South Aus-
tralia. This Bill provided for a convention of ten
representatives from each of the conferring colonies, and
these were charged with the duty of framing a Federal
Constitution. New Zealand took no active part in the
that year, were Sir John Forrest, K.C.M.G. (Premier) ;
Sir James G. Lee Steere (Speaker); Messrs. G. Leake,
M.L.A. (Leader of the Opposition); F. H. Piesse,
M.L.A. (Commissioner of Railways); J. W. Hackett,
M.L.C.; W. T. Loton, M.L.A.; W. H. James, M.L.A.;
A. Y. Hassell, M.L.A.; R. F. Sholl, M.L.A.; and J.
H. Taylor, M.L.C. Without unnecessary delay the busi-
ness of drafting a Constitution Bill was proceeded with,
and the Convention applied itself to the important duty
of reconciling the many conflicting interests that
hitherto had prevented the ideal of federation reaching
fruition. In the first session a series of resolutions, based
mainly on those of the Convention of 1891, was moved


by Mr. Barton on March 23 and debated till the 31st
of the month. The following are the resolutions which
were agreed to :
That in order to enlarge the powers of self-government
of the people of Australasia it is desirable to create a
Federal Government which will exercise authority through-
out the federated colonies, subject to the following principal
conditions :
1. That the powers, privileges, and territory of the
several existing colonies shall remain intact, except
in respect to such voluntary surrenders as may be
agreed upon to secure uniformity of law and admin-
istration in matters of common concern.
11. That after the establishment of the Federal Govern-
ment there shall be no alteration of the territorial
possessions or boundaries without the consent of the
colony or colonies concerned.
HI. That the exclusive power to impose and collect duties
of Customs and excise and to give bounties shall be
vested in the Federal Parliament.
IV. That the exclusive control of the military and naval
defences of the federated colonies shall be vested in
the Federal Parliament.
V. That trade and intercourse between the federated
colonies, whether by land or sea, shall become and
remain absolutely free.
Subject to the carrying out of these and such other
conditions as may hereafter be deemed necessary, this Con-
vention approves of the framing of a Federal Constitution,
which shall establish:
(a) A Parliament to consist of two Houses, namely, a
States Assembly or Senate, and a National Assembly
or H ouse of Representatives; the States Assembly
to consist of representatives of each colony, to hold
office for such periods and to be chosen in such
manner as will best secure to that Chamber a per-
petual existence, combined with definite responsi-
bility to the people of the State which shall have
chosen them; the National Assembly to be elected
by districts formed on a population basis; and to
possess the sole power of originating all Bills appro-
priating revenue or imposing taxation.
(b) An Executive, consisting of a Governor-General,
appointed by the Queen, and of such persons as
from time to time may be appointed as his advisers.
(c) A Supreme Federal Court, which shall also be the
High Court of Appeal for each colony in the
federation.
In the Bill was fixed a basis for distributing the
surplus revenue of the Commonwealth during the follow-
ing three periods ; -
1. Before the imposition of uniform duties.
2. For five years after the imposition of uniform duties.
3. Subsequently.
For the periods set out above the following distri-
bution was agreed upon :
1. Whilst the existing tariffs in each State still remained
in force each State was to be credited with the
amount of revenue collected in it from the Customs
and excise duties and the performance of services
transferred to the Commonwealth. On the debit
side each State was to be responsible in respect to
the expenditure on the Customs and other services,
and also with its proportion of the total cost of the
Commonwealth on a population basis, in regard to
purely original Commonwealth expenditure. The
balance remaining to be paid monthly to each
State.
2. For a period of five years after the establishment
of Customs and excise duties on a uniform basis
the expenditure was to be charged in the same way,
and the revenue and expenditure balanced on the
basis of its income from these sources. However,
the federal tariff and intercolonial freetrade would
bring about a peculiar state in regard to the con-
sumption of dutiable goods, and an interchange was
so made that the consuming State of such dutiable
goods should be credited with the duty collected
on such goods, even if the duty had not been origin-
ally paid in such State.
3. After the period mentioned all expenditure was to
be charged and all surplus revenue disbursed on a
population basis.
The Convention had certainly done much to bring
about the desired federal issue, and when it adjourned
on April 22 the ways and means of Australian unity
had been clearly outlined. The adjournment was until
May 2, but it was further adjourned until September 2.
Meantime the local Legislature of Western Australia
had met to consider the draft of the Bill, and after
discussion it was found desirable to make a few amend-
ments. It was thought necessary that before entering
into the union a guarantee should be given for the
return of surplus revenue to each individual State, and
the sliding scale of distribution was struck out. Then,
again, the House objected to the method of the ultimate
distribution of revenue, and for the per capita system it
suggested one in favour of a return in proportion to
contribution.
The Convention again met in Sydney on Septem-
ber 2, and the personnel of the Western Australian
representatives had undergone some change, Messrs.
Piesse, Loton, Sholl, and Taylor being replaced by
Messrs. H. Briggs, F. T. Crowder, A. H. Henning, and
H. W. Venn, M.L.C., the new members being all taken
from that House, the franchise of which was still
restricted. The Bill as it then stood had come in
for some trenchant criticism during the interim between
the sessions, and it was now very apparent that the
varying interests of the States were still a long way from
settlement. The main stumbling-blocks to a clear issue
appeared to be the fiscal problem as it would affect the fin-
ancial issue in New South Wales and Western Australia,
one State having long before accepted the principle of
intercolonial freetrade, while a good deal of the revenue
of the other was collected from imposts on the inter-
colonial trade. The position at first appeared wellnigh
insurmountable, for the abnormal condition of affairs
in Western Australia, with its large unsettled mining
population, required special treatment, and to meet
these needs some fairly equitable measures would need
to be designed. After discussion a Finance Committee
of the Convention was formed to bring forward some
suggestion by which the difficulty might be overcome,
and on September 24 the Convention adjourned to meet
for its final session on January 20, 1898, in Melbourne,


by which time it was hoped the rough places would be
made smooth.
The session which opened in January, 1898, proved
of some length, and it was found that the report of the
Finance Committee practically reverted to the plan
proposed in 1891, by which each State was ensured of a
return of surplus revenue on the basis of its contributions
for five years, leaving the ultimate mode of distribution
to the Commonwealth Parliament. To meet the case of
Western Australia a special recommendation was made
providing that any deficiency in the proportional amount
in regard to that State would be made good by the
Commonwealth. As was clearly to be expected, this
view was not upheld in regard to the latter proposal, and
it was decided that for a period of five years Western
Australia would be allowed to impose gradually diminish-
ing Customs duties on intercolonial imports. The Draft
Bill as it now stood was accepted by the Convention, and
nothing remained but that it should be submitted to a
referendum of the people, and then receive the final
ratification so far as Australia was concerned. In the
first referendum Western Australia did not participate,
as there was a growing feeling that in many ways the
proposals as they then stood were inimical to the
best interests of the State. The five other colonies in
the group took a referendum, with the result that in
Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and Tasmania
the Bill was accepted with decisive majorities. In New
South Wales, however, the requisite number did not
vote. At the request of the Premier of New South
Wales a Premiers' Conference was held in Melbourne
in 1899, and some amendments were introduced into the
Draft Bill to satisfy the wishes and in some respect the
vanity of New South Wales, but the concessions to
Western Australia asked for by Sir John Forrest did not
meet with the support of the Premiers. A second
referendum was now taken in New South Wales and the
adoption of the amended Bill was secured. Western
Australia still held aloof, and the amended Bill was
placed before the Parliament of the State, which
appointed a Select Committee of the Legislative
Assembly to report upon its effect on Western Australia.
After some discussion the Committee reported to the
Parliament, and it was pointed out that several safe-
guards for the State were essential before the measure
should be accepted in Western Australia. Four amend-
ments to the Constitution Bill were stated to be
necessary, and it was proposed that these amendments
should be submitted to the people in the form of amend-
ments to the Bill, and at the same time the Bill as it
was amended at the Premiers' Conference in 1899 should
also be submitted.
The amendments were :
1. That the colony should be enabled to divide itself
into electorates for the Senate elections.
2. That the Federal Parliament should be empowered
to authorize the construction of a transcontinental
railway.
3. That for five years after the adoption of the federal
tariff Western Australia should be allowed to impose
her own Customs duties on intercolonial and other
imports.
4. That Western Australia should be exempted for five
years from the jurisdiction of the Interstate Com-
mission.
The proposal to submit the Constitution Bill in its
dual form to the electors was carried by the Legislative
Assembly, but the Legislative Council could not arrive
at an agreement, and the vote of the people was for the
time being postponed. At this stage internal dissension
arose in the State itself, the residents of the goldfields
being very much in favour of the Bill, and deciding at a
public meeting held at Kalgoorlie to present a petition
to the Queen requesting that the Crown should exercise
its prerogative and divide the colony into two separate
States. Meantime another Premiers' Conference was
held at Sydney in January, 1900, at which Sir John
Forrest was present. Sir John fought hard for the
interests of his State, but the five other Premiers, secure
in the fact that the people of their States had passed the
Constitution Bill, were averse to making any further
concessions. It was thought —and free expression was
given to the thought —that Western Australia would
sooner or later be compelled to join in the confedera-
tion, and that the agitation on the goldfields would force
the hands of the Western Australian Parliament in
regard to placing the Bill before the electors. The large
Goldfields Party in favour of the Bill was supported by
a numerous section of the metropolitan districts in their
advocacy of the Bill, and it was hardly possible to
estimate the petition to the Queen as a mere party move.
Meanwhile the Bill, which had been accepted by the five
colonies, had been placed before the Imperial Govern-
ment, and Mr. Chamberlain expressed a desire that
delegates from the colonies interested should visit
London and watch the passage of the Bill through the
Imperial Parliament. The proposal was viewed with
favour at a Premiers’ Conference, and the following
were chosen to represent their respective States in the
Homeland :
New South Wales —Mr. Edward Barton.
Victoria —Mr. Alfred Deakin.
Queensland —Mr. J. R. Dickson.
South Australia —Mr. C. C. Kingston.
In London these delegates were to be joined by Sir
P. O. Fysh, who would represent Tasmania.
At once perceiving the value of a representation in
London at this most critical period in the history of
Australia the Government of Western Australia asked
that it might be represented, and with the consent of
the Secretary of State for the Colonies the request was
granted. In fact, throughout the whole negotiations


the other colonies desired the presence of Western
Australia in the union, but were not prepared
to allow that State to dictate terms. Mr. (now
Sir) S. H. Parker, Chief Justice for the State, was
selected as delegate from Western Australia, and on
March 30 he forwarded a memorandum to the Colonial
Office embodying the amendment so tenaciously held to
by the Legislature of the colony, for up to this time
no expression of opinion by means of a referendum had
been taken, namely, that Western Australia should be
allowed for five years after the adoption of the federal
tariff to receive the same Customs duties as were in force
at the passing of the Constitution Act, such duties to
be collected by the Commonwealth. After the lapse of
a few weeks a conference took place at the Colonial
Office, when Mr. Parker continued his advocacy of the
Western Australian amendment, but on the conclusion
of his argument withdrew from the conference. Even
for the most ardent well-wishers of the federal cause the
time was a period of grave anxiety; that which they
expected to be accepted as read by the Imperial Parlia-
ment was, on the other hand, subjected to more than a
little adverse criticism. Many of the objections of the
Imperial Government to the Constitution Bill were
withdrawn, with the exception of that relating to
Clause 74. As drafted the clause was as follows:-
No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen-in-Council
in any matter involving the interpretation of this Constitu-
tion, or of the Constitution of a State, unless the public
interests of some part of Her Majesty’s dominions other
than the Commonwealth or a State are involved.
For a time it appeared as if the clause would prove a
stumbling-block of more than ordinary magnitude. In
Western Australia, where the Constitution Bill in any
form had never been placed before the electors, the
agitation for separation by the goldfields section of the
colony had become very pronounced, and the petition
drawn up, which contained 27,733 signatures, was for-
warded to the Government on March 17. To add to the
difficulties of the Government a further petition had
been received from Albany for inclusion in the proposed
new colony. Faced with these difficulties and under
most trying conditions Sir John Forrest continued to
urge the claims of Western Australia for recognition,
and fully set out the reasons of the State for indemnity
in case of anticipated loss. The question of the trans-
continental railway had also not been overlooked, but in
the light of subsequent events it is a pity that this view
had not been more openly and strenuously urged at the
Conference of Premiers. The matter had been made the
subject of correspondence between Sir John Forrest and
Mr. Holder, the Premier of South Australia, and the
result could only be said to have in a manner promised
that the railway would be constructed. Mr. Holder,
on the part of South Australia, undertook, in the event
of the establishment of federation and the inclusion of
both colonies as States in the Commonwealth, to pass a
Bill asenting to the line stage by stage, simultaneously
with the passing of a like Bill in Western Australia.
On April 27 the Secretary of State, Mr. Chamberlain,
telegraphed to Sir Alexander Onslow, who was then
administering the government of the colony, urging upon
the Government the desirability of Western Australia
at once joining the Commonwealth, and pointing out
the necessity for immediate action and value of becoming
a partner in the federation on the basis of an original
State ; unless this was done the value of the clause giving
protection for immediate financial loss would be lost.
The Government was now on the ' horns of a
dilemma.” To delay might lead to disastrous results,
more particularly when it was pointed out very strongly
that the goldfields petition would be treated with
sympathetic consideration in case the State stood out of
federation. The result of the latter alternative on the
colony was one that needed most careful consideration
on the part of the opponents to the Bill. What effect
this veiled threat had upon the immediate proposals in
regard to the referendum on the Bill taken in Western
Australia, and how far it accelerated that action, it is
hard to say. Nevertheless, had the goldfields become a
separate State and Western Australia remained outside
the federal movement disaster must have necessarily
ensued to that portion which still remained aloof. A
reply to Mr. Chamberlain’s telegram was dispatched
stating that the Legislature would meet on May 17, when
it was the intention of the Premier to at once introduce
an Enabling Bill to provide for the submission of the
Commonwealth Bill to the people. Thus after months
of strenuous endeavour the matter of federation was to
be decided by the people of Western Australia, and
the tension was to a certain degree relieved. However,
the question now brought forward some rather cynical
recriminations, and it is difficult to estimate the extent
of the pressure brought to bear upon some prominent
politicians, which, whatever it may have been, was
sufficient to make them retire from their position as
avowed opponents, and take up that of ardent supporters
of the federation they had hitherto strongly deprecated.
We must not forget the fact that so far the people of
Western Australia had never been allowed a direct voice
in the matter, but the time was fast approaching when
they were to speak with no uncertain sound. Meanwhile
the passage of the measure through the House of
Commons with amendments, including that to Clause 74,
had begun. But the clause was strongly objected to by
the Australian Parliaments, as also was the compromise
on the clause which subjected the right of appeal to the
Executive Government. The proposal to pass the Bill
without amendment was urged for reconsideration, and
eventually the Secretary of State so far gave way as to


allow Clause 74 to pass in the following amended form,
which was acceptable to all parties:
No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen-in-Council
from a decision of the High Court upon any question howso-
ever arising as to the limits, infer se , of the constitutional
power of the Commonwealth, or those of any State or States,
or as to the limits, inter se , of the constitutional powers of
any two or more States, unless the High Court shall certify
that the question is one which ought to be determined by
the Queen-in-Council. The High Court may so certify if it
is satisfied that for any special reason a certificate should be
granted, and thereupon an appeal shall be to the Queen-in-
Council on the question without further leave. Except as
provided in this section this Constitution shall not impair
any right which the Queen may be pleased to exercise by
virtue of her royal prerogative to grant special leave of
appeal from the High Court to the Queen-in-Council. The
Parliament may make laws limiting the matters in which
such leave may be asked, but the proposed laws containing
which every adult male and female who had resided in
the State for a period of twelve months should be allowed
to exercise a vote on this all-important measure. The
Bill now moved rapidly through its remaining stages,
and on June 13 received the Royal assent. The battle
now began, and the Leader of the Opposition, Mr.
George Leake, who was President of the Western Aus-
tralian Federal League, threw all his energies into the
struggle. Both sides took the field in no uncertain
manner, and the opponents of the measure used no in-
definite language in painting the evils that would fall
upon Western Australia when they should place their
destinies in the hands of the more populous States.
Agriculture was doomed, they said, and Western Aus-
tralia would become the dumping-ground for the manu-
ORANGE GROVE AT HARVEY.
any such limitation shall be reserved by the Governor-
General for Her Majesty’s pleasure.
The Bill as eventually brought before the Imperial
Parliament passed both Houses without amendment,
and Royal assent was given to the measure on July 9.
On May 17 the Parliament of Western Australia met
and the Enabling Bill was introduced. On the occasion
of the second reading the Premier, Sir John Forrest,
who had been one of its bitterest opponents in its pre-
sent form, stated that he would vote for federation, but
qualified his statement by announcing that he failed to
see the value it would have for Western Australia in
the immediate future. Originally it was intended that
the referendum should be taken on the basis of the elec-
toral rolls then in existence, but in response to pressure
the Government decided to allow the new franchise, by
factures and produce of the Eastern States. How far
this is true in regard to agriculture the present outlook
in the State is sufficient answer, but manufacturing
industry has undoubtedly suffered.
This is certainly not the place to enter into any
discussion as to the effects of an assured federation on
Western Australia, but a calm, dispassionate view of
the situation must lead us to recognize that union has
not been an unmixed blessing to this State. In many
ways the earlier views of the opponents of the measure
were without doubt correct, and when they waived
parochial differences for the purposes of forming a
United Australia, it must have been perfectly clear that
for some considerable time at least the State would reap
very little benefit. On the other hand, the sentiment
of “one land, one people, one destiny” had a very great


No. of Persons who
No. of Votes
Electoral
Voted.
Cast.
majority.
.
District.
a:
cc
o
*
1 -+^
<D
I
r—i
3
<x>
+3
O
H
o
Ph
&
'S
be
<
o
Ph
i
■3
| 1
Albany
i 569
412
981
914
67
847
Ashburton
90
6
96
60
36
24
Beverley
330
171
501
86
415
329
Bunbury
799
496
1,295
493
802
309
Canning
597
317
914
405
509
104
Coolgardie
3,312
1,191
4,503
4,337
166
4,171
Coolgardie, East
10,381
1,853
12,234
11,502
732
10,770
Coolgardie, North
2,306
489
2,795
3,715
117
3,598
Coolgardie, N-F
I)e Grey
3,298
534
3,832
2,655
140
2,515
90
5
95
80
15
65
Dundas
646
200
846
816
30
786
Fremantle
627
182
809
532
277
255
Fremantle, East
1,342
784
2,126
1,322
804
518
Fremantle, North
1,177
790
1,967
1,289
678
611
Fremantle, South
2,021
905
2,926
1,544
1,382
162
Gascoyne
105
38
143
66
77
11
Geraldton
606
327
933
254
679
425
Greenough
244
185
429
18
411
393
Irwin
214
130
344
34
310
276
Kimberley, East
57
4
61
60
1
59
Kimberley, West
115
16
131
97
34
63
M oore
328
200
528
65
463
398
Murchison
167
89
256
27
229
202
Murchison, Gen Cl
676
166
842
777
65
712
Murchison, North
638
42
680
597
83
514
Murchison, South
1,073
154
1,227
1,008
219
789
Murray
814
329
1,143
469
674
205
Nelson
688
201
889
402
487
85
Northam
994
432
1,426
593
833
240
Perth
2,718
996
3,714
2,386
1,328
1,058
Perth, East
1,162
786
1,948
1,128
820
308
Perth, North
1,380
880 |
2,260
1,416
844
572
Perth, West
2,388
1,078
3,466
2,078
1,388
690
Pilbara
313
4
317
308
9
299
Plantagenet
508
166
674
447
227
220
• • •
Roebourne
98
18
116
98
18
80
Sussex .. 1
469
251
720
246
474
228
Swan
1,163
593
1,756
852
904
52
Toodyay
402
251
653
75
578
...
503
Wellington
942
334
1,276
581
695
114
Williams
690
273
963
214
749
535
Yalgoo
218
51
269
155
114
41
Yilgarn
496
102 :
598
460
138
322
. . •
York
480
329 j
809
139
670
in
Totals ... <
17,731
6,760 64,491 |
44,800
19,691 |
25,109
influence in the minds of many of the dwellers of the
coastal districts, for by no stretch of imagination can
we consider that the goldfields were wholly influenced
by the sentiment. The movement there was, to a cer-
tain extent, part of that agitation against the coast
which, all political economists must admit, has been
to a certain degree detrimental to the best interests of
the State. On July 31, 1900, the referendum on this
important measure was taken in Western Australia,
and, as was clearly foreshadowed, the people of the
State by a large majority decided to federate and join
the Commonwealth of Australia.
The following table, abstracted from the Year-
Book of Western Australia, 1902-4, gives an analysis of
the voting throughout Western Australia :
Particulars of the Polling at the Referendum held on
July 31, 1900 , 'pursuant to the Australasian Fed-
eration Enabling Act, 1900.
Western Australia thus had become part of the
Commonwealth, and the future alone could decide the
wisdom of the step. If the matter of the transcon-
tinental railway had been made an essential feature of
Western Australia's acquiescence, then there could have
been no doubt of the result, but even the most ardent
federalist must admit that too much was allowed to rest
on the goodwill of the other States. The delay in
Western Australia had accomplished one object, for by
its means the people of the State were the better fitted
to pass an intelligent vote on this great movement.
During the twelve months of the delay they had been
educated to a far better understanding of the whole
situation and the Bill. The issues involved, with their
advantages and disadvantages, had been so thoroughly
discussed that it is scarcely possible that a vote could
have been cast in ignorance. The date for the inaugura-
tion of the Commonwealth was fixed for January 1,
1901, and the first Governor-General, Lord Hopetoun
(afterwards the Marquis of Linlithgow), arrived on
December 2, 1900, and on January 1, 1901, the first day
of the twentieth century, he took the oath of office. Thus
the question of federation being definitely settled
nothing now remained but to take the necessary steps
to carry out the provisions of the Commonwealth Bill.
The Constitution Act- allows for each State to have
six representatives in the Senate, and in March, 1900,
the following were elected to the Senate for the State
of Western Australia ;
Hugh DeLargie,
Norman Kirkwood Ewing,
Edward Augustine Harney,
Alexander Percival Matheson,
George Foster Pearce,
Miles Staniforth Smith.
Similarly at the same time were elected for the
various electoral districts in the House of Represen-
tatives ;
The Right Honourable Sir John Forrest, P.C.,
G.C.M.G., LL.D., for the District of Swan.
James Mackinnon Fowler, for the District of
Perth.
John Waters Kirwan, for the District of
Kalgoorlie.
Hugh Mahon, for the District of Coolgardie.
Elias Solomon, for the District of Fremantle.
The management of the Federal Customs was
taken over on January 1, 1901, and the Post and
Telegraph Departments on March 1 of the same year.
Sir John Forrest was asked by Mr. Barton, who had
become the first Federal Prime Minister, to accept the
portfolio of Postmaster-General, but he afterwards
relinquished it for that of the Defence Department.
The opening of the Federal Parliament was fixed
for May 9, 1901, and the present King, His Majesty


George V., then Duke of York, had been commissioned
by the late Queen Victoria to carry out this duty, and
notwithstanding her death it was thought advisable that
this most momentous occasion should be graced by the
presence of Royalty in the person of a direct represen-
tative of the Throne. Consequently f 1 is Majesty
journeyed to Australia, accompanied by the then
Duchess of York, the present Queen. With appropriate
pomp and ceremony the opening of the first federated
Parliament of Australia was accomplished, and the
Great South Land was launched upon her imperial
destiny.
CHAPTER XVIII.
1901-1912.
FEDERAL AND STATE POLITICS—CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTIONS— AGRICULTURE—MINING-
RESOURCES, INDUSTRIES, AND TRADE—FINANCES—GENERAL— CONCLUSION.
The first day of the twentieth century possesses for
Australia a peculiar significance that as the years roll
on will only become more and more one of those historical
landmarks, the importance of which will be mellowed
and increased by time. From this day we mark national
Australian existence, and with the birth of a century
there came into being a new nation. It was only fitting
that the festivities governing this great Australian
consummation should take place in the capital city of
the Mother State, and in every respect was the ceremony
befitting the momentous occasion. The first Governor-
General, Lord Hopetoun, possessed a personal love for
Australia, and an insight into the patriotism of the
South Land that has rarely been equalled, and never
excelled. Therefore, no one more acceptable for the
position could have been named by the Colonial Office.
The task of forming the first Government was
entrusted to Sir William Lyne, as Premier of New South
Wales, but a popular outburst of feeling in favour of this
honour being conferred on Mr. Barton led Sir William
to resign the commission in his favour. Associated with
Mr. Barton in his Ministry were Sir William Lyne, as
Minister of Home Affairs; Mr. Alfred Deakin, as
Attorney-General; Mr. C. C. Kingston, as Minister for
Trade and Customs; Mr. J. R. Dickson, as Minister
for Defence; Sir John Forrest, as Postmaster-General,
with Mr. Lewis (Tasmania), and Mr. R. E. O’Connor
(New South Wales) as Ministers without portfolios. A
certain gloom passed over the proceedings at this stage
on the announcement of the death of Mr. Dickson, who
was succeeded in his office, as Minister of Defence, by
Sir John Forrest. The portfolio vacated by Sir John
Forrest was taken by Mr. J. G. Drake, of Queensland,
and later on Mr. Lewis, of Tasmania, resigned as an
Honorary Minister to make way for Sir Philip Fysh, of
the same State.
The next great federal ceremonial was the opening
of the first Federal Parliament in Melbourne by the
Duke of York, now His Majesty George V. This occasion
was also graced by the presence of the present Queen.
The first session of the Federal Parliament was
noted for its heavy and continuous labours, more
especially as so much required to be done in shaping
the machinery of the new legislative departure. It was
devoted almost exclusively to the Bills necessary for the
working of this latest political machine. During the
Session several Bills of first importance were placed upon
the Statute Book, amongst the most noteworthy being
the Tariff Bill, Kanaka Bill, and Immigration Restric-
tion Bill. The lastnamed two were the first step and
expression of the Federal Parliament in regard to the
avowed principle of a White Australia, and are far-
reaching and searching in their effects. The Opposition
in the new Parliament had chosen Mr. George Reid as
Leader, and the discussion on the Tariff Bill gauged
the personal ability and strength of the House to a
considerable extent. During the debate the Government
was challenged by a straight out no-confidence motion,
but weathered the storm by a majority of thirteen votes.
The session lasted for seventeen months, and during
its lifetime thirty-two Acts were passed. The Tariff
Act, perhaps the most important from a Western Aus-
tralian point of view, became practically a fusion of
the existing and conflicting tariffs.
A measure which did not so drastically change
existing conditions in Western Australia as in many of
the other States was the adult suffrage for both Houses,
the vote taken on the Enabling Bill being carried out
on that franchise. The limitation of the expenses of
election for the Senate and the House of Representatives
again only marched with the provisions of the Western
Australian Act. The cheapening of the postal and tele-
graphic rates proved a great boon to Western Aus-
tralia, and though in many cases, through a variety ot
causes, the word ‘‘secession had been heard, still the
federalists had as yet no reason to review with regret
their action in making the Western State part and
parcel of the Commonwealth. Up to this time one great


undertaking had not been brought within the realm of
practical politics. This was all the more to be deplored
in Western Australia, as to many minds it had been the
convincing factor which claimed their votes for federa-
tion. This was the transcontinental railway, but seeing
the huge purely political work that was yet necessary to
complete the new legislative fabric, but little grumbling
was heard throughout the State.
The resignation of Lord Hopetoun as Governor-
General was viewed with widespread regret in Western
Australia, as the matter was the outcome of social
warring factions in the Eastern States, and it was felt
that the conditions in the future should be more clearly
defined. The site for the Federal Capital, though men-
tioned, was not definitely settled : but this had only a
passing interest in the Western State. On April 17,
1903, Mr. Ewing resigned his seat as a Senator for
Western Australia, and on July 29 Mr. H. J. Saunders
was elected to the vacancy.
The second General Election in the Commonwealth
was held on December 16, 1903 ; but previous to this
two prominent figures in federal politics had left the
legislative arena for the judicial bench in the persons
of Sir Edmund Barton and Senator O’Connor, the
Leader of the Senate. Mr. Alfred Deakin, who suc-
ceeded Sir Edmund Barton as Federal Prime Minister,
was again returned to power by the popular mandate of
December, 1903; but there were now three avowed
parties in the House, not one of which was prepared to
accept the onus of Government on its own responsibility.
In fact, the Liberal dependence upon the Labour vote
had become more than ever apparent. The one marked
feature of the elections had been the rise and progress
of the Labour Party. This feature at this period had
more than a passing effect upon the representation for
Western Australia, resulting as it did in an access of
strength in both Senate and House of Representatives
of two seats for the rising Labour Party. The year
1904 was unusually barren of results in regard to legis-
lation of a federal nature, though turmoil and strife
characterized the proceedings in Parliament. It would
almost appear as if the various parties in the House had
been trying their respective strengths and had wasted so
much time in the effort that but little remained for
the promulgation of practical measures. The Deakin
Ministry resigned on April 22, 1904, and was succeeded
by the first Labour Ministry under the leadership of
Mr. Watson as Premier. In this Ministry Mr. Hugh
Mahon, the member of the House of Representatives for
Coolgardie, held the portfolio of Postmaster-General.
The Labour Ministry did not last for any length of
time, for it was succeeded by that of Mr. Reid on
August 18.
The effect of the “sliding scale” in the Customs
tariff was now making itself felt in Western Australia,
though the population was steadily growing, having
increased by 18,000 during the year. The transcon-
tinental railway was still in abeyance, and, in fact,
seemed farther off than ever from the region of prac-
tical politics, so of all the States Western Australia was
suffering the most loss and inconvenience by reason of
federation. In the Reid Administration there was no
representative of the State of Western Australia, show-
ing clearly inequality and want of State balance in the
Cabinet. Mr. Reid’s Government had existed only by
virtue of the support accorded to it by the Deakin Party,
and when that support was withdrawn defeat was cer-
tain and rapid. The past few months of Federal Parlia-
mentary life had been nothing but a game of the “ins
and the outs,” and legislation in consequence suffered
severely. On July 5, 1905, Mr. Deakin again assumed
the “reins of office,” and for a period of nearly three
years maintained that position. There is no doubt
that much of the legislation which ensued was tinctured
by the views of the Labour Party, to whose assistance
the Deakin Ministry was mainly indebted for its present
position. However, the last session of the year 1905
was productive of many valuable measures, and though
hampered in many ways by the vagaries of their friends
the Ministry did excellent work for Australia at large.
The year in Western Australia was characterized by
steady progress, though the gradually diminishing
amount received from the Customs was causing some
concern, especially as the railway still appeared as far
off as ever. Even the most ardent federalist now began
to see that the antagonism of a certain section of the
public and Press in the Eastern States was both bitter
and strong against this measure, and more and more
was the fact pressed home that a tactical blunder had
been made in entering the federation without an
adequate safeguard in this respect.
The Federal Parliament during the year 1906
carried out many measures of lasting benefit to Australia
as a whole, though there were not wanting critics of the
condition of affairs in regard to parties which still
continued. The third Federal General Election was held
on December 12. Before the session closed and Parlia-
ment was prorogued the Trans-Australian Railway
Survey Bill was defeated in the Senate by one vote. The
Leader of the Opposition concentrated his energies
during the election campaign against the Labour Party,
but this Party was returned to the new Parliament as
the strongest single party in the House. October of
1906 saw the sweeping away of the sliding scale, and
the infant manufactures of Western Australia were left
at the mercy of the fully matured industries of the
Eastern States. With the termination of the interstate
duties Western Australia was faced with the problem of
an actual fall in revenue. The unsettlement of the
industries of the State, together with loss of revenue,


to which had to be added the possibility of further
interference with the best interests of the State by the
more populous partners in the Federation, made those
responsible for State government pause. The State was,
indeed, now beginning to pay the price of federation,
and the outlook was ominous to a certain extent. The
loss of revenue made taxation on other lines imperatively
necessary, and it was hard to see what gain had accrued
to Western Australia in the federal bargain. However,
the Session of the Federal Legislature, which concluded
early in June, 1908, set the seal of protection to the
expressed policy of the Commonwealth, and inaugurated
a far-reaching reform and liberal measure in the Old
Age Pensions Act. Equally with the other States the
aged poor and needy in Western Australia are benefitted
by the provisions of the measure. On September 16,
after a short recess, the Federal Legislature again met,
when it was to be seen that the slender thread which
under which the State was considered to be labouring.
But time was to prove the wisdom or otherwise of these
ideas. The administration of the Fisher Government
was carried out on sound and careful lines, but it early
became evident that its policy lacked that firmness that
would make it acceptable to the majority of the people.
In proposing to pay for everything out of revenue
it set up an ideal impossible in the then stage of Federal
and State finance, without the imposition upon the
people of burdens far and away too heavy to be borne.
Whatever may be the criticism of the combination which
followed, they certainly, in the important matter of
defence, laid the first stone of the edifice that is now
just emerging from its foundations. The visit of Lord
Kitchener was the outcome of an invitation extended
by the Deakin and Cook fusion Ministry, and the present
Inspector-General, Major-General Kirkpatrick, was
appointed by them. Though in many details the sue-
WHEAT CROP ON SAND PLAIN, KELLERBERRIN DISTRICT.
connected the Labour Party to the present Government
was being unduly strained, and on November 12 the
Deakin Government was deposed from office and the
second Labour Ministry formed under the leadership of
Mr. Fisher.
In the new Ministry two portfolios came to Western
Australia, that of Home Affairs filled by Mr. Mahon,
and that of Defence undertaken by Senator G. F. Pearce.
During the year the agricultural expansion in Western
Australia began to lend colour to the belief that the
State would eventually become perhaps the largest wheat-
producing area in Australia. The agricultural prospects
lightened somewhat the dismal outlook caused by the
conclusion of the sliding scale system at the Customs.
Many optimistic views were held when the constitution
of the new Ministry was announced, and it was thought
that the relative superiority of Western Australia in its
personnel would no doubt remove many of the disabilities
ceeding Administration has enlarged upon the original
those proposals were originated by the Deakin Ministry.
The Fisher Ministry relinquished office on June 2, 1909,
after a brief period of about nine months in office. It
was succeeded by the Fusion Ministry, which had a no
more lengthened term —in fact, the most disturbing
feature had been the balance of power, and the conse-
quent insecure tenure of the Party in office, whatever
might be its political colour. The measures passed had
only a general bearing upon the State in common with
the other States of the federation, though by reason of
the youth of her industries Western Australia still
continued to suffer severely from the want of differential
treatment in many respects. Of all the States of the
group time had amply proved that Western Australia
had parted with the most and received the least from
the federal bargain.
The General Election held on April 13, 1910, was


fraught with many grave issues. Never since the incep-
tion of the Commonwealth had the responsibilities
placed in the hands of the people been greater. Ten
years before the framers of the Constitution had given
to Australia a federal system of government, retaining
the sovereignty of the States in all subjects excepting
a specified number which called for national interpre-
tation. The Federal Convention distributed the prin-
cipal source of income between the States and Common-
wealth Government, which was to be constitutionally
7 j
compulsory for ten years. The question of who should
absolutely control the federal finances in respect of that
portion which had hitherto been made returnable in a
measure to the State was the question at this election,
and to Western Australia especially it was an extremely
vital one. This election, therefore, had for the people
of the State a more than ordinary gravity. It was
more than the expression of which political party should
be returned. It was the expression of the will of the
people as to the financial outlook of the State. Western
Australia was asked whether she was prepared to hand
over the proceeds of her own taxation to the absolute
control of the Federal Parliament, in which she had
only one-fifteenth part of the total representation in
that House which initiated all money measures. On
the other hand the acceptance of the financial agree-
ment, which had been approved by all the Governments
of the States as well as the Commonwealth Government,
was formed upon a basis that was fair. Added to this there
was a proviso, eminently just and fair, “that in considera-
tion of the larger amount paid by Western Australia per
head through the Customs and excise revemxe a special
bonus should be given to her, spread over twenty-five
years, amounting in the aggregate to £3,250,000, which
if capitalized at 4 per cent, would mean £6,500,000 —
more than one-fourth the public debt of Western
Australia.”
The result of the election in Western Australia was
a distinct Liberal majority, and on the questions of
the financial agreement and States debts the Liberals
also had a majority. On the other hand, throughout
Australia generally, the position of Western Australia
was distinctly injured by the result of the polls. On the
States debts question alone was there any cause for
congratulation. During the campaign it had been
definitely stated that whatever the result of the federal
campaign the position of Western Australia would be
securely guarded, and the question of most absorbing
interest was the position in regard to this in the new
Labour Ministry. The pronouncement of the Labour
Party on this vital issue in relation to the financial
agreement was made by the Federal Prime Minister at
Brisbane on April 22, 1910, and while gratifying in
more than one respect to the States, it certainly was
received with some misgivings in Western Australia,
for in that speech any mention of a special grant to
this State was missing. To return to this State her
per capita share of the minimum of £5,000,000 sug-
gested to be returned to the States by Mr. Fisher would
have been so unjust a proposition, in view of the great
excess of our per capita contributions to the Customs
and excise revenue, compared with the contributions of
the more settled States, as to amount to sheer robbery.
Fortunately this view was not correct, and Section 5 of
the Commonwealth Surplus Revenue Act, 1910, gives a
measure of equity to this State, but not quite as much
as was desired or could be reasonably expected. Calmly
and dispassionately viewing the whole situation between
the Commonwealth and this State up to the end of the
year 1911 it must be admitted that Western Australia
lost heavily by the federal bargain. The transcon-
tinental railway, no doubt, now seems to be within the
range of immediate possibilities, but that is but poor
comfort for the delay and neglect of this matter in the
past. Any special treatment that had been meted out
to the State had been of such a meagre description as to
resemble the doles of charity, and any success in land
development up to the present has been due to the wise
provisions of the State legislation, and not to the Federal
legislation during the past ten years.
In State politics it almost seemed as if the inaugura-
tion of federation and the commencement of a new
century brought with them a spirit of unrest. Early
in February, 1901, Sir John Forrest, who had held the
reins of government ever since the establishment of
responsible government in 1890, retired in order to
accept office as Postmaster-General in the wider sphere
of federal politics. His position through all those years
had never been seriously challenged, and he still
possessed at the time of his retirement a substantial
working majority in Parliament. The mantle of leader-
ship fell upon Mr. George Throssell, the senior member
of the Ministry, and he carried on the affairs of the
country until the General Elections in April. At those
elections two members of the Ministry, Messrs. Wood
and Moran, were defeated, and it became evident that
the long spell of Parliamentary fine weather was on the
eve of breaking. Mr. Throssell did not wait for an
adverse vote in Parliament, but tendered the resignation
of himself and his colleagues. The duty of forming a
new Ministry then fell upon Mr. Illingworth, the recog-
nized Leader of the Opposition, but he found difficulties
in the way, and would not have succeeded had he not
agreed to forego the leadership in favour of Mr. George
Leake, who had made his reappearance in political life.
The new Ministry consisted of: Mr. George Leake,
Premier and Attorney-General; Mr. F. Illingworth,
Colonial Treasurer and Colonial Secretary; Mr. W.
Kingsmill, Minister for Works; Mr. C. Sommers,
Minister for Lands; Mr. J. J. Holmes, Minister for


Railways; Mr. H. Gregory, Minister for Mines. With
the exception of Mr. Sommers, who represented tlie
Government in the Upper House, all the Ministers were
members of the Legislative Assembly. In the following
month the Cabinet was strengthened by the addition of
Dr. Adam Jameson, M.L.C., and Mr. (now Sir) Walter
James, M.L.A.
When Parliament met in June the Government was
confronted with an opposition majority, which did not,
however, evince any desire at the outset to assume
responsibility. Still the position was one that was far
from conducive to good government. Mr. Leake merely
held office on sufferance, a condition of things that
rendered anything in the way of legislation almost im-
possible. A crisis was daily expected, but it was not
F. Quinlan as Minister for Works, Mr. J. L. Nanson as
Minister for Lands, and the Hon. M. L. Moss as Colonial
Secretary. The life of the new Ministry, was, however,
extremely short. At the elections consequent upon their
acceptance of office three of the new Ministers, Messrs.
Moss, Moorhead, and Wilson, were defeated, giving con-
firmation to Mr. Leake’s statement that he possessed
the confidence of the country. Mr. Morgans, in his turn,
then asked for a dissolution, but without success, and Mr.
Leake was again called to office. The second Leake
Ministry differed somewhat from the first; Mr. Sommers
and Mr. Holmes gave place to Dr. Jameson and Mr. C.
H. Rason as salaried Ministers, Mr. J. J. Holmes and
the Hon. E. M. Clarke joining the Cabinet without
portfolios. The year closed with Ministers again seeking
FOUR HUNDRED ACRES OF WHEAT, DISTRICT.
reached until November 6, when Mr. Piesse, the Leader
of the Opposition, succeeded in defeating the Government
on a direct no-confidence motion, by a majority of two
in a PTouse of forty-six. Believing that though in a
minority in Parliament, he possessed the confidence of
the country, Mr. Leake asked for a dissolution. This,
however, was refused by the Governor, and Mr. Piesse
was commissioned to form a Ministry. Finding the task
beyond him, he returned the commission and advised
that Mr. A. E. Morgans be sent for, as that gentleman
not only commanded the support of the Opposition, but
also that of at least two prominent occupants of the
Ministerial cross benches. Mr. Morgans succeeded in
forming a Cabinet consisting of himself as Premier and
Treasurer, Mr. F. W. Moorhead as Attorney-General,
Mr. Frank Wilson as Commissioner of Railways, Mr. T.
s
election. Practically no legislative work had been per-
formed j even the estimates for the public service were
hung up, and the business of the country was being
conducted on Supply votes. Contrary to expectation,
the Ministers were all returned, but the chances of stable
government were not greatly increased thereby. Fortu-
nately, a period of recess was at hand, which enabled
some progress, at any rate, to be made with administrative
affairs.
Before Parliament met in 1902 a further change
had taken place owing to the death in June of the
Premier, Mr. George Leake. This unfortunate event
rendered a reconstruction of the Ministry necessary,
and the task was entrusted to Mr. Walter Hartwell
James, who retained all the previous Ministers with
one exception. Mr. Illingworth gave place to Mr. Jas.


Gardiner as Colonial Treasurer. The session under the
new regime was quiet and uneventful, disturbed only
by one no-confidence motion, which resulted in a deci-
sive victory for the Government. But though prepared
to give the James Ministry every opportunity, Parlia-
ment could not go all the way with it in matters of
reform. Two important measures —the Constitution
Act Amendment Bill and the Shops and Factories Act
—were rejected. The main provisions of the Constitu-
tion Bill were a redistribution of seats so as to secure a
fair equilibrium between population, interests, and
territorial rights and a dissolution of both Houses.
After a rather stormy career it was passed by the
Assembly, but rejected by the Council on the second
reading. The Shops and Factories Bill also weathered
the Assembly successfully, but in the Council the clauses
relating to factories were deleted and the Bill returned
to the Assembly, which, however, declined to recognize
the emasculated measure, and it was allowed to lapse.
The Government returned to the question of con-
stitutional reform in 1903-4, but in a slightly different
form. Three Bills instead of one were introduced —a
Constitution Act Amendment Bill, a Redistribution of
Seats Bill, and an Electoral Bill. The three again
passed the Legislative Assembly, but met with great
obstruction in the Council, which before passing them
made drastic amendments affecting the principles, par-
ticularly of the Constitution Bill. The questions in-
volved were those of plural voting for the Council, the
double dissolution, the reduction of the franchise, and
the referendum. The Assembly, in the hope of adjust-
ing the points in dispute, asked for a Conference, which
was agreed to. The Conference, however, found itself
unable to arrive at an agreement, and the Bill was
abandoned by resolution of the Assembly on January
15, 1904. The amendments made by the Council in the
other two Bills were, after some discussion, allowed by
the Lower House, and the Bills were passed. The main
result was to leave the membership of the Council at
thirty and the Assembly at fifty, but to rearrange the
boundaries in such manner as to more equally distribute
the voting power, while preserving as far as possible the
idea of community of interest.
The principal other legislative measures passed in
the session of 1903-4 were the Factories Act, a modified
form of the measure rejected in 1902 ; a Metropolitan
Water and Sewerage Act, providing for a deep drainage
and sewerage system in the metropolitan area; a Min-
ing Act, consolidating and amending the law relating
to the mining industry; and a University Endowment
Act, providing the first step towards the realization of
the growing desire that Western Australia should possess
a university of its own.
During the year there were certain changes in the
personnel of the Ministry. Toward the end of January
Dr. Jameson resigned his seat on being appointed to a
lucrative post in the new Transvaal colony, and Mr. J.
M. Hopkins received the vacant portfolio of Minister of
Lands. This appointment left the Government without
a Minister in the Council, and to meet the requirements
of the Constitution Mr. Kingsmill resigned from the
Assembly and was elected a member of the Legislative
Council in place of Dr. Jameson. Further changes took
place early in 1904. Mr. M. L. Moss, M.L.C., resigned
his position as a member of the Executive Council and
Mr. James Gardiner retired from the Colonial Trea-
surership. Mr. C. H. Rason was then appointed
Colonial Treasurer, still retaining the control of the
Railway Department, but the position of Minister of
Works was offered to and accepted by Mr. J. L. Nan-
son, who had been an honorary member of Cabinet since
the preceding January.
The General Elections which were held in June,
1904, brought about a considerable shuffling of the
political cards and introduced a new factor into the
government of the State. From the time of discovery
of the goldfields, the residents of which were more
democratic than those of the older and more settled dis-
tricts, a new party —the Labour Party —began to grow
in Parliament. So long as Sir John Forrest remained
Premier it failed to make very appreciable headway,
but in the period of political unrest that followed it
gained strength rapidly, until at the elections of 1904 it
formed a party of twenty-two. The number of Minis-
terialists returned was nineteen, the balance being made
up of nine Independents, whose chief policy seemed to
be that they were against the Government. Convinced
that under such circumstances it was impossible to carry
on the Premier, Mr. James, forced the House to declare
itself at the very commencement of the session, with the
result that the Government was defeated. Mr. H. Dag-
lish, the Leader of the Labour Party, was then called
upon to form a Government —a task in which he suc-
ceeded. The new Ministry was composed as follows:-
Premier, Colonial Treasurer, and Minister for Educa-
tion, Mr. H. Daglish ; Minister for Mines and Justice,
Mr. R. Hastie; Minister for Lands, Mr. J. M. Drew;
Minister for Works, Mr. W. D. Johnson ; Colonial Secre-
tary, Mr. G. Taylor ; Minister for Railways and Labour,
Mr. J. B. Holman; and Honorary Minister, Mr. W. C.
Angwin. Mr. Drew was the Government representative
in the Legislative Council, and although not at the time
a declared member of the Labour Party, was known to
be sympathetic.
Fear was generally expressed that the advent of a
Labour Government would lead to legislation of a
socialistic character, but this was set at rest by the
Premier's policy speech, in which he declared that the
interests of the country demanded that there should be
a respite from legislation and a more strict attention


paid to administrative questions ; in fact , the Premier
seemed to err in the opposite direction, and his speech
became known as a f mark-time” speech —an expression
that was afterwards transferred to the Government
itself. The Ministry, though in a minority so far as
direct supporters were concerned, managed to retain
power throughout the session, but little work of a pro-
gressive nature was accomplished. Scarcely anything
else could be expected when it is remembered that it
held its position by virtue of the support of a number
of Independents who had little in common with the
Labour Party beyond the fact that they were mutually
antagonistic to the direct Opposition. Such a state of
things can never conduce to stable government —a fact
that more deeply impressed itself upon Mr. Daglish as
the session proceeded. There are, however, two mea-
sures for which
the Labour Gov-
ernment may be
commended. It
passed a Public
Service Act
which, with all
its faults, has
done much to
organize the
Public Service of
the State; and,
setting aside all
political bias, it
appointed Mr
Walter James,
whom it had
deposed from the
Premiership, to
the position of
Agent - General
on the retirement
of Sir Edward
Wittenoom.
Before Parliament met in 1905 Mr. Daglish com-
mitted what must be regarded as a grave tactical
blunder. With the idea of strengthening his Cabinet
by a reconstruction, but without apparently consulting
some, at any rate, of his colleagues, he called for the
resignations of all Ministers, and in the consequent
shuffling two of them —Messrs. Taylor and Holman —
were dropped, their places being taken by Messrs. Bath
and Lynch, all the portfolios being at the same time
reallotted. These changes only served to increase the
internal dissension already existing in the party, with
the result that the position became intolerable, and in
August the Premier (Mr. IT. Daglish) announced the
resignation of the Government, and at the same time
o
practically severed his connection with the party of
s 2
which he had been the leader. No doubt a contributing
factor in the downfall of the Labour Government may
be found in the attitude taken by some members of the
party when Mr. Daglish moved for the purchase of the
Midland Railway Company —a motion that was defeated
on the voices. Judged as a whole, the first Labour
Government in Western Australia cannot be said to
have justified any fear of revolutionary measures. Its
administration scarcely reached the standard which the
important and ever-changing interests of the State
required, but its legislative enactments were far from
being socialistic. They may, perhaps, be best expressed
by the epithet which has passed into a phrase concern-
ing them —they simply carried out the idea of marking
time.” After Mr. Daglish resigned the task of forming a
Ministry fell upon Mr. Rason, who secured the following
Cabinet: Pre
mier, Colonial
Treasurer, and
Minister for Jus-
tice, Mr. C. H.
Rason; Colonial
Secretary, Min-
ister for Educa-
tion, and Leader
of the Council,
Mr. W. Kings-
mill; Minister
for Mines and
Railways, Mr. PL
Gregory; Minis-
ter for Works,
Mr. F. Wilson ;
Minister for
Lands and Agri-
culture, Mr. N.
J. Moore ; Minis
ter for Commerce
and Labour, Dr.
J. S. Hicks,
and Honorary Minister, Mr. M. L. Moss. Parliament
then adjourned till October 3 to allow the new Ministers
to be re-elected by their constituents. On resuming it
was evident that the Government was in a minority.
On October 4 Mr. Rason submitted a motion asking for
the discharge of the Legislative Council Referendum
Bill, which sought to secure a direct vote of the people
on the question of the abolition of the Council and on
the question of widening the franchise for Council
elections. On a division being taken the Government
was defeated by two. The next day, at the request of
the Premier, the Governor granted a dissolution, in the
hope that a general election would put an end to the
anomalous condition of affairs that had existed for the
previous eighteen months. This hope was justified, as
ORCHARD AT KALAMUNDA.


the Government was returned with a substantial
majority. Mr. Daglish had by this time definitely
broken with the official Labour Party, and secured
election as an independent Labour member. Parlia-
ment did not reassemble until November 23, too late to
enter upon legislation of national importance during
1905 ; but the Governor's Speech foreshadowed what
was to be the leading policy, not only of the Rason
Government but of those which followed it, and which
may be regarded as its natural successors. The gold
output had by this time steadied down, and indications
pointed rather to a stationary or diminishing return
than towards any increase. It was necessary, there-
fore, that other avenues of industry should be fostered,
and Mr. Rason and his party definitely enunciated that
policy which has been followed ever since—a compre-
hensive system of immigration combined with a pro-
gressive policy of land settlement. Mr. Rason had not
the opportunity to carry those ideas into effect, as he
resigned in May, 1906, in order to accept the position
of Agent-General, rendered vacant by the resignation on
personal grounds of Sir Walter James. The mantle of
Mr. Rason seemed to belong naturally to either Mr.
Wilson or Mr. Gregory, both prominent members of the
Administration ; but it was felt by the party that the
rival interests constituted a difficulty —a difficulty which
was admirably solved by the leadership being conferred
upon Mr. (now Sir) N. J. Moore. The Rason Govern-
ment having necessarily resigned with the resignation of
its head, Mr. Moore was called upon to form a new
Ministry. In this Mr. Gregory retained his previous
position, Mr. Wilson becoming second in command as
Colonial Treasurer. The vacant Works portfolio was
then conferred upon Mr. Jas. Price, while Mr. J. D.
Connolly took Mr. Kingsmill's place as Colonial Secre-
tary and Leader of the Council. The list was completed
by the appointments of Mr. N. Keenan as Attorney-
General and Messrs. C. A. Piesse and J. Mitchell as
Honorary Ministers. As Mr. Moore had, as a member
of Mr. Rason's Administration, identified himself even
more closely than the Premier with immigration and
land settlement, he now made those questions the prin-
cipal planks in his platform, and showed his earnestness
during the session of 1906 by a broadening of the Agri-
cultural Bank Act; an amendment of the Land Act,
requiring a more rigid enforcement of the conditions in
the case of lands held under conditional purchase ; and
determination to construct light railways at the cheapest
possible rate in order to open up the agricultural areas
and make their rapid development possible. Closely
affecting the same issues were the land tax proposals of
the Treasurer (Mr. Wilson), which were, however,
defeated for the time being in the Legislative Council.
The land tax proposals had, however, another object.
October, 1906, saw the end of the sliding-scale agreement
under which the Federal Parliament allowed Western
Australia to collect Customs duties on interstate
imports, and consequently some means had to be found
by which the deficiency in revenue, which was becoming
serious, could be overcome. This loss of revenue, com-
bined with the irritation felt at the failure of the
Federal Parliament in September to pass the Trans-
Australian Railway Survey Bill, and the fear that
serious modification would be made in the distribution
of the Federal surplus, caused a motion for secession
to be carried by both Houses during the year. Though
the resolution could scarcely have any tangible result in
the direction aimed at, it at least had the effect of
drawing attention to the disabilities under which Wes-
tern Australia was suffering.
During the year 1906 a wave of desire to suppress
gambling and restrict the sale of intoxicating liquors
seemed to spread over Australia generally, and Western
Australia, though not prepared to pass the drastic
enactments approved by some of the Eastern States,
made some attempt to grapple with these questions. A
Wine, Beer, and Spirits Bill was brought forward, but
in the presence of more important matters it failed to
get through. The same result followed in the wake of
the Police Offences Bill introduced by Mr. Keenan,
dropped chiefly on account of the unusual severity of
some of its clauses.
After the defeat of the Land Tax Bill it was at
first suggested that a special session for the purpose of
considering that only should be held in February, 1907
but as little was to be gained by that procedure it was
decided to wait for the ordinary session in July, when
it occupied the chief place in the Government’s pro-
gramme. It again, however, failed to become law. Both
the Land Tax Bill and the Land Tax Assessment Bill
passed the Lower House in substantially the same form
as before, but in the Council the Land Tax Assessment-
Bill was defeated on the second reading by twelve votes
to ten, amongst the majority being Mr. C. A. Piesse,
who had resigned from the Ministry at the end of 1906
because he disagreed with the Land Tax proposals. The
Premier felt that this second rejection of the Govern-
ment’s financial proposal was so strong a rebuff to the
Lower House that he tendered the resignation of his
Ministry to the Governor, who declined to accept it as
he considered the Government still enjoyed the confidence
of the Assembly. Neither would Sir Frederick Bedford
grant a dissolution, as it seemed to him that all consti-
tutional means of solving the difficulty had not been
exhausted ; but he felt that the Premier’s third request—
that Parliament be prorogued —was reasonable and, in
fact, necessary. This was done on September 19, and a
second session commenced on October 8, when the Land
Tax proposals were submitted for the third time,
included in them on this occasion being provisions for


an Income Tax. Convinced at last that the tax was really
necessary in order to relieve the financial strain, and
perhaps perturbed by the fear of possible future results
should further opposition be evinced, the Council passed
both Bills in December, making only the reservation
that the taxes should not be charged for the first half
of the financial year. But apart from the question of
taxation, the second session of 1907 was noteworthy
from the standpoint of legislation. A new Electoral
Act was passed which was a distinct step forward along
the path of democratic progress, as it removed most of
the restrictive clauses which had hitherto barred the
way to the Assembly franchise, and made provision for
purifying the electoral rolls, and keeping them as nearly
as possible up to date. Another democratic measure was
the State Children’s Act, which provided for the better
protection, control, maintenance, and reformation of
General Elections took place in September, and while the
Government was again returned to power, it was with
a considerably reduced majority. The first figures
showed twenty-eight Ministerialists and twenty-two
Labour members, but the ultimate result was twenty-
nine to twenty-one, brought about by the fact that the
Menzies election, in which the Minister of Mines had
been defeated by Mr. Buzacott, a Labour candidate, was
declared void, and in the subsequent contest Mr. Gregory
succeeded in regaining the seat. The Government thus
increased its majority, but it is open to doubt whether
it increased its prestige, as the incident only served to
accentuate that bitterness of feeling that was becoming
painfully apparent between the Labour Party and the
various anti-labour interests that from that time have
been collectively termed the ‘Liberal Party. 7 ’
The session of 1908-9 was not marked by any par-
T.R.H. THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF CORNWALL AND YORK AND ROYAL PARTY, GOVERNMENT HOUSE, PERTH.
neglected and destitute children, and introduced an
excellent and much required method of State super-
vision. A due appreciation of the necessities of the
future was shown by the Fremantle Graving Dock Act;
and the railways, after the retirement of the then
Commissioner, Mr. W. J. George, were by a new Rail-
way Act brought, in matters of policy, more directly
under the control of the Minister responsible. Alto-
gether the year 1907 was rich in legislative achievement,
and the results have proved that Mr. Moore was fully
seized of the requirements of the State, both present
and future.
As the sixth Parliament of Western Australia was
on the point of expiring through effluxion of time, a
short session was held in July for the purpose of passing
Supply until the new Parliament was elected. The
ticular political development. The time was devoted to
a consolidation of the growing interests of the State, and
to a readjustment of the finances necessary to meet
foreshadowed changes in the federal financial affairs. No
attempt even was made by the Government to effect
alterations in the constitution, though Mr. Moss, a
private member of the Council, made an attempt to
abolish the restrictions upon business dealings between
members of Parliament and the Government. The Bill,
however, was dropped after the second reading, as it was
generally felt that measures affecting the Constitution
should not be brought forward by private members.
Before Parliament met again in 1909, the Cabinet
had undergone certain changes. 111-health compelled
Mr. Price to resign the administration of the Public
Works Department and simply retain Executive Council


rank as an Honorary Minister. Mr. Keenan had already
resigned the Attorney-Generalship, as he was not in
full agreement with the Ministerial policy. Under the
reconstruction thus rendered necessary, Mr. Moore
became Premier and Colonial Treasurer, Mr. Wilson
going back to the Works Department, and Mr. Mitchell,
the Honorary Minister, moving up to full Cabinet rank
as Minister for Lands and Agriculture. Mr. Nanson,
who had previously joined the Cabinet as an Honorary
Minister, became Attorney-General. There were also
gubernatorial as well as Ministerial changes. Sir
Frederick Bedford, who had succeeded Sir Arthur
Lawley in 1903, on the latter’s appointment to the
Transvaal, retired from office after six years’ strenuous
work, in the course of which he had earned the respect
and esteem of the whole community. His successor —Sir
Gerald Strickland —who still occupies the position,
arrived in the following May.
The legislative work of 1909, like that of its pre-
decessor, was noteworthy for solid achievement and some
adjustment rather than for experimental or even
progressive legislation. The new Treasurer’s first budget
was characterized by genuine economy and reform of
administration, but at the same time expressed a firm
confidence in the future prosperity of the State; the
session was responsible for much valuable work in the
liberalization of land settlement, in provision for the
re-purchase of estates in order to facilitate that settle-
ment, in making arrangements for a complete
metropolitan system of sewerage, and in the authoriza-
tion of new railways for agricultural and mining
purposes. Nor was the year allowed to pass without an
attempt to widen the Constitution. A Constitution Act
Amendment Bill was introduced by the Premier, having
for its object the reduction of the property qualification
for electors to the Council from <£loo to £SO capital
value, and from £25 to £ls annual value. It passed all
stages in the Assembly, but failed to secure the necessary
statutory majority in the Council on its second reading,
and had therefore to be abandoned for the time.
After the session terminated the Premier decided
to visit London for the dual purpose of reorganizing the
office of the Agent-General, and of making satisfactory
arrangements for an extensive immigration campaign.
Though little was done in the first matter, Mr. Moore’s
success in inducing agriculturists and others in Great
Britain to make Western Australia their home was
undoubted, as the steady influx of immigrants to the
State continues to prove. During the course of his visit
Mr. Moore received the honour of knighthood. Unfortu-
nately, the strain of the work he had undertaken was too
great for his health, and he was compelled shortly after
the opening of Parliament in 1910 to withdraw from
the cares of active office. The task of carrying on the
administration fell upon Mr. Wilson, who assumed
office as Premier and Colonial Treasurer, the Works
portfolio being accepted by Mr. H. Daglish, and at the
same time Mr. R. D. McKenzie, M.L.C., and Mr. A.
Male, M.L.A., were given Honorary Cabinet rank.
Otherwise the personnel of the Ministry remained the
same as under Sir Newton Moore. As Mr. Wilson was
a more aggressive politician than Sir Newton, and was
at the same time far from being a persona grata with the
Opposition —the Labour Party —the advancement of the
session was marked by strenuous debate. The Labour
Party persistently urged —and on this point bye-
elections afforded some justification —that Mr. Wilson
did not possess the confidence of the country. Convinced
that such a statement had no foundation in fact, the
Premier steadily proceeded with the work of Parliament,
and, with a majority that could easily be counted on
the fingers of one hand, added his quota of legislative
enactment to the Statute Book, not the least of his
measures being an Act to establish a university in
Western Australia. The culminating point of bitterness
between Government and Opposition was reached when
the Redistribution of Seats Bill was introduced. This
Bill, framed to secure as far as possible electorates of
nearly equal size in point o£ population, and of com-
munity of interest so far as the electors were concerned,
was described by the Opposition as a jerrymandering
measure with but one end in view—to make the return
of the AVilson Government secure at the ensuing General
Election. It did not pass without considerable recrimina-
tion on both sides of the House, but the needed majorities
in the Assembly on the second and third readings were
just obtained, every supporter of the Government being
required to vote. In the Council it met with little
obstruction, and the Government secured the victory-
a victory, however, which was soon to prove a Pyrrhic
one. There was much more unanimity over the Consti-
tution Act Amendment Bill, on the same lines as
previously, which after experiencing troubled waters in
the Council, finally passed on the basis of a £l7 franchise.
The desire of the State generally that the Premier
should attend the Coronation of His Majesty King
George V. as the representative of Western Australia
made a Parliamentary session before the General Elec-
tions impossible. As soon as Mr. Wilson returned to
the State the election campaign was entered upon and
fought with a bitterness unparalleled in the history of
Western Australia, most of the strife ranging round
the Redistribution of Seats Act. The Liberal Party—
perhaps on the principle that whom the gods destroy
they first make mad —could see nothing but victory
before them. The Labour Party, on the other hand,
felt that success was sure. Neither party, however, was
prepared for the overwhelming defeat suffered by Mr.
Wilson and his Cabinet, two of whom—Messrs.
Gregory and Daglish —failed to secure re-election. The


Area of Grown Lands for which
Applications
have
hee/n appi
•oved by the Dan
ds 'Department.
Conditional Alienation.
Leases and Licences.
Period.
Conditional
Pur-
chases.
Free
Home-
stead
Farms.
Grazing 1
Leases.
Selections
under
Land
Purchase
Act.
Poison
Land
Leases.
Work-
men’s
Blocks,
etc.
Total.
i
Pastoral |
Leases
and
Licences. 1
Special
Leases.
Timber
Leases.
Miscel-
laneous
Leases.
Total.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Y ear 1902
249,963
97,392
182,681
11,540
8,954
100
550,630
23,679,928
196
47,360
459
23,727,943
Year 1903
520,289
233,070
264,159
15,655
12,139
59
1,045,371
30,737,486
322
14,720
296
30,752,824
Year 1904 . .
645,438
235,550
426,666
42,305
12,828
154
1,362,941
19,363,189
303
—
143
19,363,635
Year 1905
789,607
203,426
208,831
32,667
779
114
1,235,424
16,609,822
3,866
—
271
16,613,959
Year 1905-6
705,578
155,740
25,578
24,933
—
119
911,948
19,255,374
2,805
—
1,199
19,259,378
Half - year ended
Dec. 31, 1906 .
436,593
69,336
9,733
84
515,746
19,538,248
631
X 14,700
3,037
19,556,616
Year 1907
446,235
117,207
89,865
5,071
•
166
658,544
16,232,514
69,752
J 59,933
215,571
16,577,770
Y ear 1908
946,897
266,522
622,101
6,746
—
152
1,842,418
14,116,928
15,678
J 33,300
36,603
14,202,509
Year 1909
807,555
209,791
572,217
41,070
181
1,630,815
10,340,225
17,171
+105,000
184,255
10.646,651
Year 1910
1,727,720
238,267
175,641
26,504
—
74
2,168,206
7,959,766
270,288
+183,310
1,176
8,414,540
Year 1911
Four months ended
1,349,497
197,589
363,345
45,942
—
126
1,956,499
11,110,281
92,929
J 50,390
4,272
11,257,872
April 30, 1912*
312,454
62,972
182,307
2,767
—
—
560,500
2,848,660
132,125
+ 73,000
596
3,054,381
* Liable to revision.
t Timber
Permits.
declaration of the poll showed: Labour, 34; Liberal, 16.
With such a result Mr. Wilson did not wait for Parlia-
ment to meet. He at once resigned and advised that
Mr. Scaddan be sent for. The Leader of the Labour
Party accepted the commission to form a Government,
but in order to free himself from the responsibility of
selection, allowed caucus to select the new Ministers,
retaining to himself only the allotment of portfolios.
The result was the formation of the second Labour
Government in Western Australia, which is still in
office, and which consists of: —Mr. J. Scaddan, Premier
and Colonial Treasurer; Mr. T. H. Bath, Minister for
Lands and Agriculture; Mr. P. Collier, Minister for
Mines and Railways; Mr. T. Walker, Minister for Jus-
tice and Education (and since his admission to the Bar
Attorney-General) ; Mr. W. D. Johnson, Minister for
Works; Mr. J. M. Drew, Colonial Secretary; and
Messrs. W. C. Angwin and J. E. Dodd, Honorary
Ministers. With so large a majority the new Govern-
ment has had practically no opposition in the Assembly.
In the Council, however, there has been, notwithstand-
ing the non-party character of that House, a distinct
tendency to oppose the measures of the Labour Party.
During the period embraced by the above political
sketch certain changes took place on the official side of
both Houses which need to be recorded. Sir George
Shenton, who had been elected President of the Legis-
lative Council in 1892, resigned in 1906, on the ground
of failing health, and the Hon. Henry Briggs, who still
holds office, was appointed in his stead. In the Legis-
lative Assembly the position of Speaker became vacant
bv the death in 1903 of Sir J. G. Lee Steere, who in
•/
one position or another had been for many years in
the forefront of the political life of the State. The
next occupant of the Speaker’s chair was Mr. Chas.
Harper, who only served for a few months, giving place
in July, 1904, to Mr. M. H. J acoby, who was succeeded
in November, 1905, by Mr. T. F. Quinlan. No further
change took place until the advent of the Labour
Government in November, 1911, when the office was con-
ferred upon the present holder, Mr. M. F. Troy.
Turning from the political to the material side of
the State's existence the tale is one of distinct progress
and development. This is most apparent in the enor-
mous extension of agricultural settlement which has
taken place of recent years, and which is largely due
to the policy of expansion initiated by the Moore
Government. Until a very few years ago Western Aus-
tralia was considered to be a land where agriculture
must of necessity be a limited industry, as soil satis-
factory for the purpose only existed in patches of com-
paratively small area. To-day it bids fair to become
one of the great agricultural countries of the world.
Land which a decade ago was considered almost worth-
less is being rapidly cleared and cultivated, and is
proving itself capable of producing wheat of good
quality and satisfactory quantity. Under the care of
successive Governments the land laws have been
liberalized, so that it is possible for the poorest man
to secure a block, which the Agricultural Bank will then
assist him to develop. With the opening up of the
lands there has been wisely fostered an extensive system
of immigration, so that the Government not only helps a
man to come to Western Australia, but also provides
him with land to settle upon, and, if he shows any
aptitude for the work, the means of turning that virgin
land into a comfortable farm. How great has been the im-
petus given to agriculture by this enlightened policy may
best be gauged by a study of the following tables, com-
piled from figures supplied by the Registrar-General:


Cropping , Clearing, etc,, 1901-2 to 1910-11.
Area Cropped, Cleared,
ETC.
Season ended last day of
Under Crop.
Under
permanent
artificially-sown
grasses.
New ground
cleared during
season
and prepared
for next
season’s crops.
Land in fallow.
Area of other
cleared land
previously
cropped now
used for grazing
or lying idle.
Eiugbarked
or partially
cleared laud.
Total.
February, 1902
February, 1903
February, 1904
February, 1905
February, 1906
February, 1907
February, 1908
February, 1909
February, 1910
February, 1911
Acres.
217,441
229,992
283,752
327,391
364,704
460,825
493,837
585,339
722,086
855,024
Acres.
3,711
3,228
2,952
3,964
5,456
6,787
7,990
10,265
9,017
8,348
Acres.
25,908
31,159
60,780
69,034
86,620
109,731
139,430
174,442
223,487
252,537
Acres.
57,514
70,725
83,052
81,441
102,418
118,600
152,175
175,148
284,267
299,144
Acres.
111,941
127,579
141,392
155,204
219,418
222,655
287,535
310,860
332,142
454,664
Acres.
1,000,623
1,130,022
1,352,718
1.492.322
1.674.322
2,145,437
2,399,001
2,876,662
3,114,608
3,440,115
Acres.
1,417,138
1,592,705
1,924,646
2,129,356
2,452,938
3,064,035
3,479,968
4,132,716
4,685,607
5,309,832
Areas under
various kinds
of Crops in II
1901-
estern A ustralia
2 to 1911-12.
during each of the Eleven Seasons
Grain Crops.
Poor
Crops.
Total
Area
under
Crop.
Season ended last
day of
Wheat.
Maize.
Oats.
Barley.
All other
Grain
Crops.
Hay of
all kinds
Potatoes.
Onions.
All other
Root
Crops.
Other
Crops.
Vine-
yards.
Orchards.
February, 1902
Acres.
94,709
Acres.
512
Acres.
9,751
Acres.
2,669
Acres.
719
Acres.
92,654
Acres.
1,829
Acres.
164
Acres.
129
Acres
4,600
Acres.
3,629
Acres.
6,076
Acres.
217,441
February, 1903
92,398
109
10,334
3,783
868
105,791
2,084
88
130
4,007
3,528
6^872
229,992
February, 1904
137,946
163
14,568
3,609
1,038
109,002
1,823
93
144
4,104
3,324
7,938
283,752
February, 1905
182,080
86
13,864
3,251
1,126
105,247
1,906
66
173
6,423
3,413
9,756
327,391
February, 1906
195,071
43
15,713
3,665
1,438
124,906
2,145
101
146
6,909
3,541
11,026
364,704
February, 1907
250,283
101
28,363
3,590
1,580
149,830
2,264
54
120
8,598
3,525
12,517
460,825
February, 1908
279,609
87
46,667
6,019
1,547
131,056
1,854
54
169
9,644
3,231
13,900
493,837
585,339
February, 1909
285,011
181
59,461
7,308
1,336
201,874
2,026
143
196
9,665
3,122
15,016
February, 1910
448,918
153
73,342
8,022
1,807
158,629
1,741
68
121
10,759
2,917
15,609
722,086
855,024
February, 1911
581,862
46
61,918
3,369
1,646
175,432
1,791
29
123
9,275
2,795
16,738
February, 1912*
621,037
+
+
77,468
+
4-
4-
1343,746
4-
-1-
4-
4-
+
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4*
* Preliminary figures.
f Wheaton, oaten, and barley hay only.
+ Information
not yet available.
Total Yield of the
Principal Crops /
or ea ch o
f the Eleven Seasons 1901-2
to 1911-12.
Season ended last day of
Grain
Crops.
Hay of all
kinds.
Potatoes.
Root
Crops.
Wheat.
Maize.
Oats.
.
Barley.
Dry Peas
Rye. and
Beans.
Onions.
All other
Root
Crops.
Bushels.
Bushels.
Bushels.
Bushels.
Bushels. Bushels
Tons.
Tons.
Tons.
Tons
February, 1902
956,886
5,203
163,654
34,723
2,933 3,905
89,729
5,739
OrH
390
February, 1903
985,559
2,110
167,882
46,255
4,419 5,557
94,007
6,488
237
674
February, 1904
1,876,252
2,487
258,503
53,227
3,970 7,342
121,934
4,542
342
743
February, 1005
2,013,237
896
226,318
37,332
4,541 8,523
113,794
5,614
246
1,002
February, 1906
2,308,305
428
283,987
49,497
4,353 10,049
139,380
6,297
317
834
February, 1907
2,758.567
919
457,155
48,827
4,893 9,402
158,112
5,028
114
476
February, 1908
2,925,690
1,080
721,753
76,205
4,904 8,567
137,511
5,671
231
670
February, 1909
2,460,823
2,136
739,303
74,433
3,850 9,316
170,008
6,695
267
856
February, 1910
5,602,368
2,240
1.248,162
101,673
9,834 8,722
195.182
5,948
362
596
February, 1911
5,897,540
718
776,233
33,566
5,500 4,901
178,891
5,864
96
398
February, 1912* ...
4,354,170
+
+
961,157
+
4-
+ ! 4*
+ 1 +
1299,941
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
* Preliminary.
t Wheaten, oaten, and barley hay only. J Information
not yet available.
The conditions of alienation are such as to compel the following tables, which show the areas cropped and
the person acquiring possession to improve and develop cleared during 1902-11, the areas actually under crop
his holding, and the results achieved may be seen from of one kind or another, and the yield for each season:-


The most pleasing feature of all this activity has
been that wheat and flour, which disappeared from the
list of exports during the sixties, made their re-appear-
ance on that list in 1904, though in but a modest way.
In that year wheat valued at £1,580 and flour at £4l
were exported. From that time the amounts sent away
increased rapidly until in 1910 and 1911 the values were :
wheat, £406,326 and £386,932; flour, £25,427 and
£54,565. The slight shrinkage in the wheat returns for
1911 was due to an unusually dry season, which
materially affected the output.
In common with agriculture, the sister industry of
pastoralism also made considerable advance. At the end
of 1910 over 166,000,000 acres were held under pastoral
lease, in addition to 2,500,000 under homestead and
grazing leases. The number of cattle and sheep which
in 1900 stood at 338,590 and 2,434,311 respectively had
increased to 825,029 and 5,157,658 by the end of 1910,
while the output of wool, which weighed 9,094,743 lb.
in the former year, had grown to 26,197,212 lb. in the
latter. Such growth supplies ample evidence that the
future of the State, whatever may happen to the mining
industry, is practically assured.
In fact, so great has been the development of
agriculture during the past ten years that it now dis-
putes with mining for the pride of place as the chief
industry in the State. This latter industry has for some
years shown decreasing returns, and pessimists are not
wanting who predict the decadence of this important
branch of State activity. On the other hand those best
qualified to venture an opinion are firm in the belief
that Western Australia as a gold producer has a long
and prosperous career still before it. In fact, indica-
tions are said to point to the maintenance of a steady
H.R.H. DUKE OF CORNWALL AND YORK LAYING
FOUNDATION-STONE OF SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL, KING'S PARK.
output of over a million ounces yearly —a yield far
exceeding that of any other Australian State.
That an industry of such dimensions and such
far-reaching importance requires every possible encour-
agement and care has been amply recognized by the
Government. Rewards are given to the discoverers of
new fields; sums of money are annually set aside for the
purpose of inducing prospectors to continue their search;
the mining laws have been time after time revised so as
to give the best possible tenure with the fewest
restrictions; water conservation is a constant care; rail-
way communication has been established with all the
principal centres; State batteries on a scale unequalled
REVIEW OF TROOPS, KING’S PARK, BY H.R.H
DUKE OF CORNWALL AND YORK.
throughout the world have been erected to assist those
who are endeavouring to develop their mines by their
own efforts; subsidies are granted to those private
batteries which crush for the public; and under the
Mines Development Act loans are made to miners work-
ing their own properties to assist them to procure the
necessary machinery. At the same time the scientific
side of the industry has not been neglected. The
Geological Survey Office, with its Assay branch, gives
every assistance in determining the likely value of finds
in new districts, and an admirably equipped School of
Mines is maintained at Kalgoorlie for the instruction and
assistance of those engaged in actual work on the mines.
The history of mining has, with one exception, been
quiet and uneventful during the period that has elapsed
since 1901. Freed in great measure from the greed of
the speculator and mining shark, it has settled down
into an industry, and like other industries has been
subject to fluctuations of output, trade disputes, and
other drawbacks. The one exception to its quiet progress
was the discovery of the Bullfinch reef, some twenty-five
miles north of Southern Cross, during the latter half of
1910. The fortunate owners, Messrs. D. L. Doolette and
party, were believed to have discovered another Golden
Mile, and for a time the fever of speculation raged in
Western Australia and the neighbouring States. Claims
were rapidly pegged out over the whole district, and
prospecting north and south of Southern Cross received
an added impetus. Further investigation, however,
proved that in the Bullfinch alone were the prospects
satisfactory, and the mild boom died away almost as
quickly as it started. Even the Government were caught


Period.
Total.
Value.
Amount
of Dividends
from Gold won, paid
by W. A. Gold
Mining Companies.
Fine ounces.
£
£
Prior to 1902
6,997,303
29,722,650
6,076,857
1902
1,871,037
7,947,661
1,424,272
1903
2,064,801
8,770,719
2,024,152
1904
1,983,230
8,424,226
2,051,798
1905
1,955,316
8,305,654
2,167,640
1906
1,794,547
7,622,749
1,993,675
1907
1,697,554
7,210,749
1,738,123
1908
1,647,911
6,999,882
1,487,303
1909
1,595,269
6,776,274
1,359,088
1910
1,470,632
6,246,848
1,028,393
1911
1,370,867
5,823,075
826,376
Four months ended
April 30, 1912 ...
412,313
1,751,394
289,766
From 1886 to April
30, 1912
24,860,780
105,601,881
22,467,443
Year.
Imports.
Exports.
£
£
1901
6,454,171
8,515,623
1902
7,218,352
9,051 358
1903
6,769,922
10,324,732
1904
6,672,480
10,271,489
1905
6,481,874
9,871,019
1906
6,820,933
9,832,679
1907
6,522,998
9.904,860
1908
6,178,197
9,518,020
1909
6,406,960
8,860,494
1910
7,908,386
8,299,781
1911
8,645,985
10,606,863
Year. Wool.
Timber,
Pearls
and
Shell.
Minerals,
other
than
Gold.
Wheat
and
Flour.
Coal.
£
£
£
£
£
£
1901 ... 378,135
572,354
130,730
162,871
—
68,561
1902 458,078
500,533
178,689
61,492
—
86,188
1903 ... 443,743
619,705
224,322
109,101
—
69,128
1904 ... 419,895
654,949
164,505
97,044
1,621
67,174
1905 ... 594,872
689,943
270,156
186,208
8,850
55,312
1906 603,080
708,993
255,182
221,521
206
57,998
1907 ... 812,088
511,923
269,815
394,897
131,240
55,158
1908 .. 637,008
813,591
290,741
159,563
50,071
75,694
1909 ... 1,013,180
867,419
274,960
186,408
139,705
90,965
1910 ... 966,870
972,698
348,911
160,432
431,753
113,699
1911 ... 925,450
986,341
310,764
151,671
441,487
111,154
by the glamour of the field's possibilities, and rapidly
constructed a railway to the spot. The townsite of
Bullfinch was proclaimed, and the first allotments,
particularly those for hotel purposes, sold at astounding
figures to people who quickly regretted their haste.
The total output of gold for the State since the first
discoveries, with the annual output for each of the years
embraced in the period 1902-12, is given in the follow-
ing table, and affords perhaps the best indication of the
present condition of the industry :
The output of minerals other than gold was also
well maintained, though not, of course, in figures com-
parable with those of the more precious metal. The
actual figures will be found in a table dealing with
exports generally, but it may be mentioned that they all
—copper, tin, and silver —appeared to reach the highest
point during the years 1905-1907. In the latter year
copper to the value of £203,376 was exported, and in
1906 and 1907 tin stands on the list at £147,380 and
£166,139 respectively. Of minerals other than metals
coal was the only one in which appreciable development
took place. After a period of depression the outlook
began to brighten in 1908, and the Newcastle coal strike
of 1909-10 in New South Wales made the Collie coal-
mining industry still more prosperous. Most of the coal
raised is, of course, used in the State : but during the
existence of that strike considerable quantities were
sent away, and proved that under proper conditions
Collie coal was a safe and economic fuel. Lack of proper
bunkering facilities at Bunbury adversely affected the
export at the time, but arrangements have since been
made by the establishment of a Harbour Trust at Bun-
bury to obviate any similar disadvantage in the future.
In other avenues of industry—timber, pearls and
pearlshell, sandalwood, hides and skins—trade was well
maintained. In timber particularly there was marked
development, due probably to the amalgamation of the
various timber interests into a trust or combine in 1902,
under which the whole trade was reorganized, economies
effected, and better prices secured.
The general increase in trade during the period
1901-1911 may be learned from the tables appended, the
first of which gives the total imports and exports, and
the second the main articles of export apart from gold :
The principal items of export with their values
were :
In the case of timber these figures represent the
export value only; they do not take into account the
very large quantities annually used in the State itself,
and which, when combined with the export, give a true
idea of the magnitude that this important industry has
attained. So far as coal is concerned the total output is
given, as by far the greater proportion is used locally.
Though the Newcastle strike brought Collie coal into
notice as a good steaming coal, and for the time gave
an impetus to the trade, the effects of which will not
probably wholly vanish, the success of the industry will
chiefly depend upon the degree to which it is used in
the various industries throughout the State itself.
A study of these tables in conjunction with the
statistical returns of revenue and expenditure and of
population shows that beginning in 1905 an undoubted
wave of depression passed over Western Australia, lasting
until towards the end of 1909. The volume of trade shows
a shrinkage; the expenditure of each of those years was
in advance of the revenue, in spite of drastic retrench-
ment and reform, until on June 30, 1909, there was an
accumulated deficiency of £312,631 ; and the population


only increased during the four years by 15,537, there
being actually a decrease of 633 for the year 1907. With
the beginning of 1910, however, the natural elasticity
of the State reasserted itself, and the agricultural develop-
ment, urged on by the lean seasons, brought distinct
return, so that the revenue became more buoyant and
prosperity once more the keynote of affairs. By June,
1911, the deficit was wiped off, and a small credit took
its place. This, in turn, has since, owing to drought
and partial failure of the crops, again become a
deficiency; but with every hope of a bountiful harvest
for the season 1912-13, there is no reason for any loss
of confidence in the future prosperity and greatness of
Western Australia.
The population of the State, which in 1901 stood
at 194,109, has now (May, 1912), after making the
adjustments rendered necessary by the Federal Census
of 1911, reached a total of 298,457 —an increase of over
50 per cent, in the ten years. The growth during the
early years of the period may justly be ascribed to the
enormous gold output of 1901-1904, but since 1909 it
has been almost wholly due to the brisk immigration
policy of the Government and the inducements offered to
agriculturists and others to settle upon the land. What-
ever Government may be in power these two questions
must still remain as the leading features necessary to
the future development of the State, and if properly
carried out must bear Western Australia high on the
tide of national prosperity.
While all this development has been taking place
on the material side, the higher phases of national
existence have not been neglected. Free from the
incubus of a State Church, all denominations have vied
with each other in attending to the spiritual needs of
the people, and there scarcely remains a district in
Western Australia where the comforts of religion cannot
be secured. In educational matters great progress has
been made. Manual training and domestic economy
classes have been grafted on to the primary education
system, and have been productive of useful results. For
the better training of teachers a Training College was
established at Claremont in 1902, and the Technical
School system, inaugurated in 1896, has been so exten-
sively developed that technical training is now available
to the growing generation in nearly every established
centre in the State. In 1911 the coping-stone was placed
upon the whole educational fabric by the University of
Western Australia Act, under which the University was
brought into being in February, 1912, and the Senate
is at present busily engaged in organizing the institution
so as to start actual work in March, 1913.
As in previous years considerable attention was
devoted to exploratory work. In 1901 the Government
dispatched a well-equipped party, under the leadership
of Mr. F. S. Brockman, with Mr. C. Crossland as second
in command, to explore the extreme northern end of the
State north of the 17th parallel of latitude. The party
was accompanied by the Government Geologist (Mr. A.
Gibb Maitland) and a naturalist (Dr. F. M. House).
Some six months were spent in a thorough investigation
of the country. The practical results of the expedition
consisted of the discovery of a further extensive area of
pastoral country in the neighbourhood of the Charnley,
Calder, Sale, Roe, Moran, and Carson Rivers and in
finding satisfactory ports and routes to reach it. In
addition natural history specimens of much value were
secured, and a few aboriginal weapons and implements,
as well as photographs of cave paintings, were obtained.
In the same year a preliminary examination of the
country between Kalgoorlie and Eucla was undertaken
by Mr. J. Muir, on behalf of the Railway Department,
in connection with the proposed Trans-Australian Rail-
way. The object of the trip was to obtain further
information regarding that portion of the State, with a
view of determining the probable cost of a railway and
of ascertaining the nature and resources of the country
through which the suggested line would run. In the
course of the journey about 1,100 miles were traversed,
mainly through country which, though mostly waterless,
was well grassed and timbered.
During 1901 and for several years after Mr. F. H.
Hann was engaged in exploring various portions of the
State. In the first trip he started from Southern Cross
and made for Ravensthorpe through waterless country,
crossing on the way Lefroy’s track (1863) and that of
Captain Roe (1848). He next spent a considerable time
on two examinations of the desert east and north of
Laverton, as a result of which he was convinced of the
practicability of opening up a stock route from Laverton
to the South Australian border.
This desire to open up a stock route was the cause
of an expedition under Mr. A. W. Canning which left
Wiluna in 1907 and travelled in a northerly direction
to Hairs Creek. The practicability of such a route for
stock was fully proved, and in 1909-10 Mr. Canning
made a second trip over the same ground and opened up
the route, establishing wells at various places where water
was procurable and marking out a well-defined track.
Two expeditions of a scientific character —the
Swedish Scientific Expedition and the Cambridge Ethno-
logical Expedition —set out during the year with the
intention of investigating the nature of the interior of
Australia and of studying at first hand the history,
customs, and habits of the natives. The former returned
to Perth in August, 1911, after a period of twelve months
in the Kimberley district, and the latter continued
throughout the year to investigate the native question.
A further expedition went out during 1911 under
Mr. C. P. Conigrave and Mr. L. Burns. Starting from
Wyndham they examined the country eastward towards


the South Australian border, and then, returning to
their base, they went westward and northward over un-
explored territory to the mouth of the Drysdale River,
from which point they retraced their steps to Wyndham.
In addition to the various phases of historical
interest between 1901 and 1912 that have been dis-
cussed there have been many occurrences and events of
a miscellaneous character which, though of doubtful
historical value, still possess a certain degree of interest
for the people of Western Australia. These the writer
proposes, in conclusion, to mention in more or less
chronological order, leaving to the future historian, who
is not harassed by too close connection and can therefore
view them more proportionately, the task of sifting the
wheat from the chaff.
Early in July, 1901, the Government Railways
Association, dissatisfied with the terms of its employ-
ment, decided to call the whole of the railway men out,
and for nearly a week the trade of the State was
paralysed by its action. Though the grievances were
admittedly genuine, the Government wisely decided that
no consideration would be given to them unless the men
returned to work. This course was adopted, and under
the Conciliation and Arbitration Act the whole question
was inquired into and the dissatisfaction allayed.
Fortunately the trouble was over before the arrival
of Their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of
York —our present gracious King and Queen —who, in
the course of their tour, landed at Albany on July 20
and reached Perth on the 21st. From that date until
their departure on the 26th the whole of Western Aus-
tralia was en fett. Levees and receptions were held,
the King’s Park and May Drive were named, the
foundation-stones of the Art Gallery and of the Fallen
Soldiers’ Memorial were laid, visits were paid to various
public institutions, and every means taken to assure
the august visitors of the devotion and loyalty of the
people of the State.
Other interesting events of the year were an estimate
by the Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, of
£4,400,000 as the cost of the Trans-Australian Railway,
and the resignation of the Chief Justice, Sir A. C
Onslow, who was succeeded by Mr. (now Sir) E. A. Stone.
The year 1902, beyond matters already discussed,
was uneventful, except that during its course Western
Australia lost the services by death of three of its most
prominent men —Mr. C. Y. O’Connor and Justices
Moorhead and Hensman.
The year 1903 will ever remain memorable in the
history of the State as the one in which the Coolgardie
Water Scheme was completed and ample fresh water
made available for the Eastern goldfields. The official
opening by Sir John Forrest took place at Coolgardie in
January in the presence of Federal and State Ministers
and a large concourse of visitors.
In March Admiral Sir F. G. D. Bedford, the new
Governor of the State, arrived. lie succeeded Sir Arthur
Lawley, who had been appointed to the position on the
retirement of Sir Gerard Smith in 1900. In July the
State Engineers-in-Chief, after an exhaustive considera-
tion of the question in conference, recommended the
construction of the Trans-Australian Railway at a cost
of £4,559,000, the gauge to be 4 ft. in.
About the middle of 1904, the Very Rev. Frederick
Goldsmith, who for many years had been Dean of Perth,
was consecrated the first Bishop of the newly established
Diocese of Bunbury. In October the Federal House of
Representatives approved by thirty-four votes to twelve
of a Bill to make a complete survey of the Trans-
Australian Railway route. The Bill, however, to the
utter disgust of the people of Western Australia, was
"talked out” in the Senate.
Some excitement was caused in November by the
imprisonment of Mr. John Drayton for refusing to give
evidence before a State Parliamentary Committee in
connection with the Empress of Coolgardie mining leases.
Mr. Drayton was released early in December on a free
pardon. It was generally conceded that the whole
proceedings did not add to the dignity of Parliament.
Early in 1905 trouble occurred at the Collie coal
mines owing to alleged discrimination on the part of
employers in engaging workmen. After some three
weeks’ deliberations between the parties the difficulties
were adjusted. Later in the year a Royal Commission
was appointed to consider the ventilation and sanitation
of the mines, and in May Dr. Jack, who had been
appointed in 1904 to report on the whole industry, pre-
sented his views in an exhaustive report, wholly favour-
able to the development and extension of the industry.
Owing to continual assertions of ill-treatment meted
out by station-holders and others in the north towards
the natives the Government appointed Dr. Roth, of
Queensland, a very distinguished ethnologist, to make
a thorough investigation. His report, delivered in
January, more or less justified the assertions by com-
menting adversely on the general treatment accorded to
the aborigines. In reply it was urged that Dr. Roth’s
investigations were not sufficiently extensive to form an
opinion, and that, further, he was far from unbiassed.
The Public Service Act passed in 1904 came into
operation by the appointment in April of Mr. M. E.
Jull as Public Service Commissioner. In August the
Trans-Australian Railway Survey Bill was again rejected
by the Senate.
The sensation of 1906 was caused by the prevalence
of gold-stealing from the mines in the Kalgoorlie dis-
trict. The loss to the mines through this practice
became so serious that Detective Cavanagh was appointed
to investigate the circumstances under which this illicit
trade was being carried on. His investigations proved


that the practice was so rife that stringent legislation
was necessary to deal with it. As a result the law on
the subject was amended, which had the effect of wholly
stopping illegal gold-buying—at any rate in Kalgoorlie.
In the timber trade the year was one of industrial
unrest. Dissatisfied with the wages paid the men struck
work in October, and the trouble was only patched up
by a Government concession to the companies in the
matter of freight, which allowed a small margin for an
increase in wages. The settlement, however, was only
of a temporary character, as before the end of the year
it became necessary to refer the whole matter of wages
to the Arbitration Court.
Other items of interest were the appointment of
Mr. (now Sir) S. H. Parker to the position of Chief Jus-
tice, rendered vacant by the resignation of Sir Edward
Stone; the issue of the Commissioners’ classification of
the Public Service, which was received with almost unani-
mous dissent;
and the decision
of the Govern-
ment, in face of
City Council pro-
tests, to estab-
lish the septic
lank system of
sewerage for
Perth.
The year 1907
was not dis-
tinguished by
sensational pro-
gress in any
direction. As it
proceeded there
was evidence, in
fact, of retrogression; the revenue continued to fall,
the gold yield entered upon its declining period,
and emigration, for the first time for very many years,
exceeded immigration. Altogether the outlook during
this and the succeeding two years was far from com-
forting. In addition 1907 was a year of continual
industrial trouble. The timber workers again went oul
on a strike which lasted for over fourteen weeks, and
was eventually settled by a compromise; and the pos-
sibility of trouble on the Eastern goldfields was only
prevented by the successful interposition of wise counsels.
The entombment of an Italian miner named
Varischetti in the Westralia Extension Mine at Bonnie
Vale was undoubtedly the exciting incident of the year,
and his rescue after many days’ imprisonment by Diver
Hughes, with the assistance of Diver Ahearn and others,
was an event of more than State interest and importance.
Lord Kitchener’s visit to Australia, in the course
of which he visited Western Australia early in the
DEPARTURE FROM WESTERN AUSTRALIA OF T.R H THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF
CORNWALL AND YORK.
year 1910, was the cause of more than a little increase
in military ardour, and unquestionably did much to
make the question of defence a live one in Australian
politics. His Lordship’s advice, if followed, as it
appears likely to be, must prove advantageous from a
general as well as from a military point of view.
In municipal affairs the interest for the year lay in
the decision of the Perth City Council to purchase the
interests of the Perth Gas Company —a decision which
resulted in considerable litigation, which did not cheapen
the ultimate price paid for the concern.
Apart altogether from the question of politics the
year 1911 was a noteworthy one. During the whole
year the spirit of industrial unrest, partly caused by and
partly the cause of the increasing cost of living, hovered
over the State. To begin, a strike of firewood cutters
at Kalgoorlie threatened to paralyse the mines; in
February a similar disturbance occurred at Bullfinch;
in April trouble
arose amongst
the lumpers
at Bunbury, as
well as building
strikes in Perth
and one among
the slaughtermen
at Fremantle,
These were fol-
lowed by a rail-
way strike at
Geraldton,
trouble among
the miners at
Collie, a dispute
with the mine
engineers at Kal-
goorlie, and just as the year closed a lumpers’ strike
at Fremantle, happily settled by arbitration. The
same spirit of unrest has continued into 1912, the
early part of which was marred by continual indus-
trial trouble. For the past few months, however,
matters have been quieter, and the future in that
respect seems better assured. As the State had to face
a partial failure of the harvest during the season
1911-12, it is to be hoped that that appearance of quiet
may be well grounded. The revenue, owing to adverse
circumstances, is again temporarily falling, but of the
permanent prospects none can have doubt.
Founded as a free agricultural community, forced
by need for labour to accept for a time the help of
convicts, pushed to the front by sensational gold dis-
coveries, Western Australia is returning to its earliest
ideals, and bids fair to become, what the pioneers hoped
for it, one of the greatest agricultural countries on the
face of the earth.


Governors, Lieutenant Governors, and Administrators
of Western Australia.
GOVERNORS.
Captain Sir James Stirling ... ... ... ... 1828-1839
John Hutt, Esq. ... .. ... ... ... 1889-1846
Lieut.-Colonel Andrew Clarke, K.H. ... ... ... ... 1846-1847
Lieut.-Colonel Frederick Chidley Irwin ... ... ... 1847-1845
Captain Charles Fitzgerald, R.N. ... ... ... ... 1848-1858
Captain Arthur Edward Kennedy ... ... ... ... 1855-1862
John Stephen H ampton, Esq., M.l). ... ... ... ... 1862-1868
Frederick Aloysius Weld, Esq. ... ... ... ... 1869-1875
William Cleaver Francis Robinson, Esq., C.M.G. ... ... 1875-1877
Major-General Sir Harry St. George Ord, R.E., K.C.M.G., C.E. ... 1877-1880
Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson, K.C.M.G. ... ... 1880-1888
Sir Frederick Napier Broome, K.C.M.G. ... ... ... 1883-1890
Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson, G.C.M.G. ... ... 1890-1895
Sir Gerard Smith, K.C.M.G. ... ... ... ... 1895-1900
llon. Sir Arthur Lawley, K. C.M.G. ... ... ... ... 1901-1902
Admiral Sir Frederick George Denham Bedford, G.C.B. ... ... 1908-1909
Sir Gerald Strickland, K. C.M.G., Count della Catena ... ... 1909 {o®^
LIEUTENANT-GOVERNORS AND ADMINISTRATORS.
Captain Frederick Chidley Irwin ... Lieut.-Governor ... September, 1882, to Sep-
tember, 1888.
Captain Richard Daniell ... ... Lieut.-Governor ... September 14, 1888, to
May 11, 1834.
Captain Picton Beete .. ... Lieut.-Governor ... Mav 11, 1834, to May
24, 1834.
Captain Richard Daniell ... ... Lieut.-Governor ... May 24, 1834, to Sep-
tember, 1834.


Brevet Lieut.-Colonel John Bruce ... Acting-Governor ... February 20, 1862, to
February, 1862; Nov-
ember 2, 1868, to
September, 1869.
Lieut.-Colonel Edward Douglas Harvest Acting-Governor ... September 7, 1877, to
November, 1877.
Henry Thomas Wrensfordsley, Esq. ... Administrator ... February 14, 1883, to
June, 1883.
Alexander Campbell Onslow, Esq. ... Administrator ... November 13, 1884, to
June, 1885; Sept. 1,
1891, to July, 1892.
Sir Alexander Campbell Onslow, Kt. .. Administrator ... March 18, 1895, to Dec-
ember, 1895; March
23, 1900, to March,
1901.
Sir Edward Albert Stone, K.C.M.G. ... Administrator ... March 4,1901, to April,
1901; August 14,1902,
to Mar., 1903 ; Mar.,
1909, to May, 1909.
SIR JAMES STIRLING (1828-1839).
Sir James Stirling, the first Governor of Western
Australia, was born in the year 1791, and was the fifth
son of Andrew Stirling, of Drumpellier, Lanarkshire,
who had married his cousin (Anne), the daughter of Sir
Walter Stirling.
The family of Stirling was well-known and cele-
brated in the naval annals of the eighteenth century, an
uncle of Sir James (Vice-Admiral Charles Stirling)
being second in command at the memorable action
fought by Sir Robert Calder against the combined
French and Spanish fleets off Cape Finisterre in 1805.
For this action Calder was severely criticized, and he
asked for a court-martial. He was reinstated by Nelson,
but was not present at the battle of Trafalgar. The
maternal grandfather of Sir James Stirling was also dis-
tinguished in the naval annals of the period, having
been knighted for his services, eventually being pro-
moted to the position of Commodore at the Nore.
Sir James Stirling entered the Navy on August 12,
1803, as a first-class volunteer on board the “Camel,” a
store-ship, commanded by Captain John Asycough,
fitting for the West Indies, where he became midship-
man of the “Hercule” (seventy-four guns), bearing the
flag of Sir John Thomas Duckworth. Joining next the
“Glory” (ninety-eight guns), he fought in the action off
Cape Finisterre under the flag of his uncle (Rear-
Admiral Charles Stirling), whom he followed into the
“Sampson,” and afterwards into the “Diadem,” each
sixty-four gun ships. Still under the command of his
uncle, who had been promoted to the chief command of
the Rio-de-la-Plata expedition, he was present at the
fall of Monte Video. Returning to England about 1808
he was appointed to the “Warspite” (seventy-four guns)
under Captain Blackwood, and stationed at first in the
English Channel and then in the Mediterranean.
He obtained his first commission as a Lieutenant in
August, 1809, being appointed on April 1, 1810, to the
“Hibernia” and transferred in October, 1810, to the
“Armide,” both of which were employed on the Home
service. During November, 1811, he was appointed
Flag Lieutenant to his uncle, now Vice-Admiral, being
appointed Acting-Commander of the “Moselle” (eighteen
guns) in 1812; and on June 19 he was confirmed in the
rank of Commander and appointed to the “Brazen”
sloop, mounting twenty-eight guns.
During the American War of 1812 he rendered ex-
cellent service; cruising off the mouth of the Mississippi
he succeeded in damaging greatly the commerce of the
American gulf ports, besides making the coast very in-
secure for the enemy. Such was his record up to that
time, that for any duty requiring special knowledge
he was detailed. In 1813 he was sent to afford protec-
tion to the Hudson Bay settlements, which had been
menaced by the Americans. The severity of this order,
which carried him from the Tropics to the Arctic circle,
did not affect the industry and energy of the youthful
Commander, and Lieutenant Stirling carried out his
work with discretion.


At the conclusion of hostilities he was nominated
Acting-Captain of the“Cnydus” (thirty-eight guns), but
did not stay long with this ship. Returning to the
Brazen” with full Captain’s rank, he was placed on the
peace establishment, and he continued to serve in that
vessel until she was paid off in 1818. To attain the rank
of Captain, even in those days of strenuous naval
activity, within fifteen years, was not altogether a com-
mon occurrence, and Captain Stirling thus early demon-
strated the presence of that energy which was to carry
him to greater heights in his career.
On the conclusion of his service in American waters
the then Commander-in-Chief on that station wrote the
following minute to the Lords of the Admiralty : -
I cannot permit Captain Stirling
to leave this station without ex-
pressing to your Lordships my
entire satisfaction with his conduct
while under my command.
The zeal and alacrity he always
displayed in the execution of what-
ever service he was employed upon
are above praise; hut it is to his
acquaintance with foreign lan-
guages, his thorough knowledge of
the station, particularly the Spanish
Main, and his gentlemanlike and
conciliatory manners, that I am so
much indebted for the preservation
of friendly intercourse with the
foreign colonies in this command.
I conceive that it will he as gratify-
ing for your Lordships to hear, as
it is for me to make, so honourable
a report of this able and intelligent
officer, whom I detach from my
command with considerable regret;
hut I feel at the same time a very
sincere pleasure in thus recommend-
ing him to the notice of your Lord-
ships.
On such a report being made by
a commanding officer early pro-
motion was almost sure to follow, therefore there could
be no surprise when Captain Stirling was elevated to
post rank in 1818.
His next appointment was in January, 1826, after
over seven years of shore life. During this period he
had entered into bonds of another character, ha/ing
married on September 2, 1823, Ellen, third daughter of
James Mangles, Esq., of Woodbridge, Guildford, who was
High Sheriff for Surrey (1808) and M.P. for Guildford
(1832-7). It is, therefore, not difficult to ascertain the
reason for the names of Woodbridge and Guildford in
Western Australia, nor the interest displayed by the
Mangles family in its welfare.
On January 25, 1826, Captain Stirling was ap-
pointed to the “Success,” and sent to form a settlement
in Raffles Bay, Torres Strait. The successful manner in
which he carried out this duty earned for him the hearty
commendation of the Governor of New South Wales.
Photo by Bartletto. (COpyright.)
In October, 1828, nine months after he had re-
linquished the command of the “Success,” he was, owing
to a report he had made of the Swan River, whilst in
command of that vessel, sent to form a settlement in
Western Australia at that point. Here he remained,
with but one furlough, until 1839, as the first Governor
of the infant colony. Lie was induced in this year to
tender his resignation, owing to the apparent imminence
of a war with France, when it was extremely desirable
that all officers of the Royal Navy should return to the
active list.
The more detailed movements of his term of office as
Governor of Western Australia are set out fully in
another place, in that portion of this work which treats
of the history of the State. It is
sufficient to say here that in the
work of government he had
evinced a degree of zeal and
ability that had procured for him
a knighthood and ultimately the
acknowledgments of Her Majesty.
The best summing-up of this por-
tion of his career can be gathered
from the address presented to him
by the colonists on its conclusion,
from which we quote a part: -
They could testify with confidence
and gratitude that the general
tenor of His Excellency’s adminis-
tration had been highly and
deservedly popular; that they had
invariably experienced in him a
friend of warm sympathy with indi-
vidual distress, and an entire and
liberal promoter of every good and
liberal institution, an able and
zealous patron of every enterprise
suggested for the general welfare,
and in all the domestic and social
relations of private life an example
worthy of his high station.
In the light of subsequent events the early acts of
the Governor do not always seem to have been in the
best interests of the infant settlement. He was a naval
officer of great attainments, but also with the prejudices
of his class, and this interfered in a measure with a just
knowledge of the limitations of his own powers. How-
ever, there can be no doubt that he aimed only at
the best, and he deservedly bears a high character for
integrity of purpose and probity of action.
Sir James Stirling was appointed in October, 1840,
to the command of the “Indus” (seventy-eight guns),
and continued in that ship until she was paid off in 1844.
From 1847 to 1850 he commanded the “Howe” (120
guns). On July 8, 1851, he was promoted to the rank
of Rear-Admiral. He was Commander-in-Chief in
China and the East Indies from 1854-1856. He became
Vice-Admiral on August 22, 1857, and Admiral on
November 22. 1862. He died on Apidl 22, 1865.


By his acts as the first Governor of this State Sir
James Stirling is best known to us, and in attempting
a criticism of those acts it will be as well to remember
the difficulties which faced the officer who was in supreme
command during the earlier stages of this State's exist-
ence. It will be seen from a perusal of the short fore-
going synopsis of Admiral Stirling's life that he was
essentially a naval officer, whose life from the early age
of twelve years had, with one short interval, been spent
practically on active service. Thus it can be inferred
that habits of strict discipline had become part and
parcel of his daily routine. Acts that would, therefore,
appear to the colonists as arbitrary and overbearing
would be to him as mere matters of ordinary discipline.
We must remember that as a lad he had been in the
Navy at the time of Trafalgar, though not present at
the action itself, and would necessarily have all the
prejudices and opinions of his class. To accuse such an
officer of favouritism would be not only unfair but in a
measure untrue, yet we cannot but admit that the
actions of Sir James Stirling bear out this contention
to a certain extent. He was the representative of a
class, and his actions were but the outcome of the in-
In January, 1839, Sir James Stirling was succeeded
in the Governorship of the infant settlement by John
Hutt, Esq., who had been formerly
Governor of North Arcott, in the
Madras Presidency, and was a
member of a family famed for its
efforts in colonization.
Mr. Hutt was the son of Richard
Hutt, of Appley Towers, Ryde,
Isle of Wight, being named after
an uncle who was one of the most
distinguished of the naval cap-
tains serving under Lord Howe.
Captain Hutt was wounded in
the action under Lord Howe off
Ushant on June 1, 1784, where
the French fleet was signally de-
feated. Hutt had the misfortune
to lose a leg, and the wound
taking an unfavourable turn he
died on June 30, a monument to
his memory, together with that of
Captain Harvey, being erected at
public expense in Westminster
Abbey. Coming from a family
which had been largely concerned in colonization
(his brother, Sir William Hutt, afterwards being
a commissioner for the foundation of South Aus-
tralia and a member of the New Zealand Company,
T
JOHN HUTT (1839-1846).
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR HUTT.
grained teaching, not only of his own life, but of that
creed which had, considering his parentage, been born
with him. Then, again, as practically the founder of
the State, inasmuch that upon his reports it had mainly
been colonized in the first instance, he was, perhaps, a
little over-sanguine as to its immediate prosperity. No
doubt many of the earlier settlers had been led away by
his glowing reports and had embarked on the enterprise
of colonization with but little aptitude for the work.
Then when the pinch of dire necessity came, as it in-
variably does in such communities, the Governor was
blamed for a series of circumstances over which he had
no control.
Whatever may have been his faults as an adminis-
trator, he nevertheless brought to that rule an integrity
of purpose, combined with an energy and steadfastness
of action, that forever outlines the purity of his motives.
Noble-hearted, kind and liberal, and as true as steel, he
was an excellent type of the British naval officer at his
best, and the colony founded by him amid so much diffi-
culty and discouragement in 1829 now ranks in point
of political development and independence with the
oldest and proudest possessions of the Crown.
to which was mainly due the annexation of those
islands to Great Britain) it was early seen that the
new Governor held strong views
on this subject. That these views
should more or less bring him into
conflict, sometimes of a strenuous
nature, with the settlers of the
colony was to be expected. How-
ever, though many differed from
Mr. Hutt, not only in the expres-
sion of his theories but also more
strongly at his attempt to put
them into practice, still he held a
very high place in the colony in
which he wielded the supreme
authority.
Gifted with the truest spirit
of liberality and tolerance the
Governor welcomed all fair critic-
ism of his policy, and the un-
deviating candour of his opponents
gave him no offence. With zeal,
industry, and integrity he per-
formed the functions of his
onerous and difficult office, and
his honesty, sincerity, and thorough consistency of
purpose, even when his views appeared mistaken,
earned for him the gratitude and affection of the
colonists.


A Liberal in politics, he sought by every means to
liberalize the system then in vogue in Western Aus-
tralia, and in all his acts the great first principles of
the Liberal Party were predominant.
On making known his decision to resign before the
conclusion of his commission as Governor, his determina-
tion was received with exceeding regret by the great
bulk of the colonists. Speaking at this time and on this
subject a writer in The Sivan Hirer News says : -
Good Governors are rare at all times, and few have dis-
played such a combination of judicious firmness and candour
as Mr. Hutt, and we trust that his intention to retire from
the position of Governor does not extend to a wish to retire
from the Public Service. He has always been open to con-
viction—he has never abandoned principle to obtain an
ephemeral popularity- he has never given personal offence
even when resisting popular claims. We sincerely wish to see
the talent, developed and matured on so limited a stage, made
available in a wider and more important sphere of action.
Mr. 11 utt succeeded to the Government just previ-
ously to the violent reaction which took place in
regard to colonization in general, a reaction of which
Western Australia, never a very popular place, received
more than its fair share. It is not too much to say
that the acts of the Governor at this time helped
materially to save the infant settlement from utter
disaster, even though eventually he may have erred on
the side of over-caution. Still, if the evidences of in-
creased prosperity were absent, there was, nevertheless,
no sign of the decay that had afflicted similar com-
munities.
The further materials for a biography of Mr. TTutt
are scanty and withal somewhat unreliable, and it is
impossible to follow his career with any certitude ; suffice
it to say that upon relinquishing his position as
Governor in 1846 he carried with him the best wishes
of his fellow colonists.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL ANDREW CLARKE, K.H. (1846-1847)
On January 27, 1846, John Hutt, Esq., handed
over the office of Governor to Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew
Clarke, K.H., a distinguished soldier and administrator.
Born at Belmont, County Done-
gal, Ireland, in 1793, the new
Governor was fifty-three years of
age when he assumed the supreme
authority under the Crown in
Western Australia. The greater
part of his life had been spent in
the military service of the country,
in which in the 46th Regiment of
Infantry he had risen to rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel. At the early
age of eighteen years he was for
a time in command of the whole
of the troops in Van Diemen
Land, and from that time on-
ward he had been continuously
on duty.
Lieutenant-Colonel Clarke, how-
ever, did not come to the diffi-
cult position of Governor of a
Crown colony direct from the mili-
tary service, as he had previously
been Governor of St. Lucia, one of the West Indian
dependencies of the British Crown. In fact, before the
appointment of Governor LTutt to Western Australia
seven years previously he had been freely mentioned in
official circles as the likely Governor of this colony.
Unfortunately a strenuous life in the Public Ser-
vice, mostly in tropical and sub-tropical climes, at a
period when the measures now used to combat the on-
Photo by "Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR CLARKE.
slaught of their insidious diseases were but little known,
had undermined the constitution of Colonel Clarke, and
he was throughout the whole of his career in Western
Australia almost a confirmed
invalid.
Unlike the previous Governor,
Colonel Clarke was married, and
the colonists looked forward to the
fact that the social side, which had
been somewhat in abeyance dur-
ing Governor Hutt’s term of office,
would be revived. Colonel Clarke
was accompanied to the colony by
his wife and her daughter by a
former marriage, Miss Jackson.
Governor Clarke’s ability for
governing a colony wisely and
beneficially had already been
thoroughly tested in his previous
Governorship of St. Lucia, and the
colonists of Western Australia were
at the outset highly delighted with
the choice of the Home Office. It
was said that the problems
facing Colonel Clarke in the
position of Governor of a Crown colony like Western
Australia were not likely to find a counterpart in those
of a West Indian dependency, yet the wisdom that
helped him to avoid offence in the petty jealousies of St.
Lucia would well serve him in his new sphere of action.
The opening acts of the new Governor were viewed
by the settlers with feelings of the liveliest approbation,
and the only cloud was the uncertain health of Colonel


Clarke, for his condition was steadily growing worse.
Though afflicted with a painful disease Colonel Clarke
displayed the greatest energy in his new charge, and for
the first time in the history of the colony educational
facilities were brought within the reach of the humblest
citizens. Then, again, the treatment and moral uplift-
ing of the aborigines engaged his attention, and death
found him in harness on February 11, 1847, after but
one short year in Western Australia.
It is impossible to say much as to the effect of
Lieutenant-Colonel Clarke’s administration of affairs in
Western Australia, as the Highest of all Authorities had
so soon removed him from the scene ; but even for the
short period he held the reins of office we must accord
to him the clearest judgment and most benevolent
intentions.
As to his personal character Colonel Clarke was
truly hospitable, but his most endearing quality was the
true and humble piety of his soul, which he carried into
every action of life. Perhaps the best epitome of his
moral worth is to be found in the last paragraph of
the proclamation announcing his death, and in con-
clusion we will quote it:
The high moral and religious principles of the deceased,
and his anxious zeal for the best interests of the people
committed to his charge, united to his great experience
during a period of forty-two years as a military officer, and
latterly both as a Governor in West Indies and in this colony,
gave promise of the fullest blessings of a just and paternal
administration.
LIEUT.-COLONEL FREDERICK CHIDLEY IRWIN, K.H. (1847-1848).
Six days after the arrival of the “Parmelia,”
H.M.S. “Sulphur” arrived at the then “settlement in
embryo” of the Swan River, carrying a detachment of
the 63rd Regiment, under the command of Captain F. C.
Irwin, for the protection of this
latest venture in the history of
colonization on the part of the
British Crown.
Captain Irwin, the officer in
charge of this small military post,
was destined to play no incon-
spicuous part in the new settle-
ment, and his own interest in the
venture can be seen when we con-
sider that in the first allotment of
townsites in the infant city of
Perth his name appears first on
the list.
By virtue of his position as
officer commanding the troops
Captain Irwin became senior
member and Vice-Chairman of
the Legislative Council appointed
by Governor Stirling in January,
1831. Judging by the careful
and successful administration of
the troops under his command
the appointment to the Council
of Captain Irwin was a wise one, and in later years he
was to demonstrate his ability to govern in a wider
sphere.
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR IRWIN.
Early in the history of the State he was called upon
to exercise the functions of chief ruler, and from Sep-
tember, 1832, until September, 1833, he acted as
administrator during the absence of Governor Stirling.
Identified in all the movements
that had for their object the
moral and spiritual welfare of the
colony, Major Irwin, who had
been promoted early in the his-
tory of the colony, did much
for the well-being of the infant
State.
Being transferred he again re-
turned to this State in command
of the troops, and on the death
of Lieutenant - Colonel Andrew
Clarke he assumed the Governor-
ship of the colony, acting in that
capacity from February, 1847,
until August, 1848, when he was
relieved by Captain Charles Fitz-
gerald.
His actions at this time were
somewhat adversely criticized, but
throughout the whole of his
career Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin
had greatly at heart the welfare
of the colony. Stern and un-
compromising in regard to all matters of morality
he was, however, merciful and just in all his pro-
nouncements.
CAPTAIN CHARLES FITZGERALD, R.N. (1848-1855),
The next occupant of the vice-regal office in Wes-
tern Australia was Captain Charles Fitzgerald, a captain
in the Royal Navy. Captain Fitzgerald succeeded
t 2
Lieutenant-Colonel F. C. Irwin, or more strictly speak-
ing, Lieutenant-Colonel A. Clarke, as Colonel Irwin,
though he assumed the title and dignity of the office on


the death of Colonel Clarke, had never been confirmed
in the position.
Captain Fitzgerald was born at Kilkee, County
Clare, Ireland, in 1791, his father being a country gentle-
man of the old Irish school. He entered the Navy on
March 17, 1809, passing his examination in 1815, and
obtaining his first commission on March 27, 1826. He
served as a Lieutenant in the Coast Guard from April
17, 1832, to September, 1833, when he was transferred
to the “Cruizer." In 1836 he was transferred to the
“Belvidera," being afterwards appointed to the com-
mand of the “Buzzard" on July 26, 1838.
Captain Fitzgerald was invalided home from the
West African station in February, 1840, acquiring his
present rank very shortly after-
wards, and being placed on half-
pay. Captain Fitzgerald, however,
before assuming the reins of
government in Western Australia
had had some experience in ad-
ministrative affairs with regard to
Crown colonies, having been for
some time Governor of the Gambia
Settlements in West Africa.
The newly-appointed Governor
was a typical sailor, bluff, kind-
hearted, and generous; but
though his ability in nautical
matters was undoubted, still in
the peculiar circumstances of the
colony at that time the presence of
a business man of proved ability
at the head of affairs was of press-
ing necessity. In 1848 a profound
depression reigned in the colony,
and there were not wanting
expressions of the opinion that
perhaps it would be better
to abandon the attempts at colonization in what ap-
peared to be a desolate land. The despatches of the
Governor to the Secretary of State accentuated this view,
and only the indomitable energy of the early settlers
combined with the suggestions of the Governor for relief
saved the situation. To this condition of affairs we owe
the fact that Western Australia became a penal settle-
ment, and whatever may be the opinions as to the wisdom
of the measure, it certainly solved the question for
the time being.
Nothing but the desperate condition of the country
in 1848-9 can be pleaded in extenuation of the establish-
ment of the penal system, but stern remedies were
needed to save the infant settlement from ruin, and
Governor Fitzgerald was scarcely to blame for the action
that he took. With wise forethought Governor Fitz-
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR FITZGERALD.
gerald, assisted by the foresight displayed by Captain
Henderson, the Comptroller of Convicts, utilized the
system to develop the country by opening communication
throughout the colony and encouraging the settlement
of the interior.
However, the Governor came in for more than the
usual amount of criticism, not so much on matters of
policy, but more particularly for his method of
administration. A man of matured judgment, with
an autocratic temperament which had been nurtured
and fostered by his previous nautical training,
Captain Fitzgerald's demeanour was many times that
of the quarter-deck, and he more than once gave
expression to the annoyance he felt at many of the
caustic comments levelled at his
methods.
The advance of the colony
during his administration can be
traced by its progress in political
matters and the establishment of
institutions for the welfare and
education of the people. On March
13, 1851, the Imperial Act to
establish a Legislative Council was
proclaimed in Western Australia,
though no advantage was taken
of its provisions until twenty
years later, and in the same
vear a Mechanics' Institute was
J
founded at Fremantle, while in
1852 Governor Fitzgerald laid
the foundation - stone of the
Swan River Mechanics' Institute.
During 1851 the first smelting
furnace was erected in Western
Australia, so that taking into
consideration the state of the
settlement on the arrival of
Captain Fitzgerald as Governor much certainly had
been accomplished. Then, again, the exploration of
the country engaged the energies of the Governor, and
as the leader of an exploring expedition he had the
misfortune to be speared by a native at Northampton
in 1848.
Certainly, before he relinquished the position.
Governor Fitzgerald had the pleasure of seeing the ful-
filment of many of his wise measures in the increased
prosperity of the country, but it had been a period of
persistent anxiety, and it was with thankfulness he re-
tired from the Governor's seat.
He was created a C.B. in 1857, and died on Decem-
ber 29, 1887, in his ninety-sixth year, having evinced
until his death the liveliest interest in Western Aus-
tralian affairs.


SIR ARTHUR EDWARD KENNEDY, G.C.M.G., C.B. (1855-1862).
Captain Fitzgerald was succeeded in the position
of Governor of Western Australia by Captain Arthur
Edward Kennedy, afterwards Sir Arthur Edward
Kennedy, a retired infantry officer, and the third Irish-
man in succession to hold the position of supreme
authority in Western Australia.
Governor Kennedy was the fourth son of Hugh
Kennedy, of Cultra, County Down, and was born in
1809. Educated at Trinity College, Dublin, he decided
on a military career, and entered the army as an ensign
in 1827. Promoted Lieutenant in 1832 and Captain in
1840, he retired from the Army in 1848 with Captain's
rank. In 1846 he became County Inspector of the Board
of Works, and served under Sir John Burgoyne, in the
Irish famine, as a Relief Inspector, and'subsequently as
Poor Law Inspector until the
office was abolished in 1857.
Curiously enough, his first ap-
pointment in the Colonial Service
was the office of Governor of the
Gambia Settlements, which had
previously been held by his pre-
decessor in the government of
Western Australia, Captain Fitz-
gerald. However, Captain Ken-
nedy was very soon transferred
to a more important charge, that
of Sierra Leone, in 1854 he
was appointed Consul-General of
Sherborough County, and was
promoted to Western Australia
as Governor in 1855.
Physically the new Governor
was a remarkable man, of com-
manding presence; his soldierly
training had only accentuated his
strong personality. No man in the
position of Governor of Western Australia ever had as
large a sense of the dignity of the position; and this,
together with his autocratic demeanour, did much to
render an otherwise fine character unpopular amongst
the settlers. A man of large originality, the narrow
outlook of departmental affairs in a struggling Crown
colony barely gave sufficient scope for his strong per-
sonality, and many of his acts bore the impress of auto-
cracy that in a larger sphere of action would have
passed unnoticed.
The Governor was a man of more than ordinary
oratorical ability, and his charming manners and perfect
ease made him deservedly popular in this respect, and
yet, with all that goes to make for success in the position
of a leader, he somehow failed to gain the unqualified
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GO VERNOR KENNEDY.
praise of those with whom he was brought into contact.
Overwhelmed, as it seemed, with what he considered to be
his position as the representative of the Crown, his ex-
cess of dignity did much to militate against his perfect
success. Intellectual, extremely cultured, and of perfect
address, still his arbitrary nature has left its autocratic
impress on all the legislative measures that were enacted
during his term of office.
In another place detailed mention has been made of
the Governor’s legislative work, and it is hardly neces-
sary to make further comment here, sufficient to say
that his interest in the u ticket-of-leave” men and the
liquor traffic was in neither case reciprocated. That
many of his legislative measures were the outcome of a
most enlightened mind it is true, and had he been
allowed to follow out his own
views a most substantial land tax
would have been very early
adopted in Western Australia.
The Governor viewed with alarm
the alienation of large blocks of
land so early in the history of the
colony, and much future trouble
might have been saved if his pro-
positions had been given effect. A
great admirer of the educational
system known as the Irish National
very soon brought him into con-
flict with the Roman Catholic
priesthood, led to some amusing
situations, and brought some loss
of dignity to the Governor.
Much of the success of the
colony at this time was due to the
large expenditure of Imperial
funds under the “convict system,"
and with this in view Captain
Kennedy looked upon the government of the colony in
many respects as a purely personal one. To such an
extent did his despotism grow, that on August 6, 1856,
the citizens held a public meeting in Perth to protest
against the arbitrary methods of His Excellency.
In 1862 Governor Kennedy relinquished the reins
of office in Western Australia, and in his farewell ad-
dress he appropriated most of the undoubted prosperity
of the colony as the direct outcome of his legislative
efforts. Whatever may have been his faults as Governor
of Western Australia, his abilities were highly appre-
ciated by the Home authorities, and in 1863 he was
appointed Governor of Vancouver Island.
In 1867 he was made a K.C.M.G. and transferred
to the position of Governor of the West African Settle


ments. Concurrently with the position of Governor he
acted at Sierra Leone as the Commissioner for the
abolition of the slave trade, being endowed with large
and plenary powers in this respect. In 1872 he became
Governor of Hong-Kong, relinquishing that office in
1877 to become Governor of Queensland, which position
he resigned in 1883, and died at Aden while returning
to England on June 3, 1883.
Sir Arthur married in 1835 Georgina, daughter of
Mr. J. Macartney, who died in 1874, leaving one son,
who entered the Army, and two daughters. He
was created C.B. in 1862 and G.C.M.G. in 1871.
JOHN STEPHEN HAMPTON, M.D. (1802-1868),
The next occupant of the Governor's seat in Wes-
tern Australia, John Stephen Hampton, Esq., was one
whose knowledge of Colonial administration had been
restricted almost entirely to the convict system. Mr.
Hampton had formerly been connected with the Medical
Department of the Royal Navy, and his first appoint-
ment in Australia had been that of Surgeon-
Superintendent of the convict
ship “Constant,” which arrived
in Van Diemen Land in 1843.
He signalized his arrival in that
colony by joining the opponents
of the then Governor, Sir John
Eardley Wilmot. He was ap-
pointed Comptroller-General of
Convicts in Van Diemen Land in
succession to Captain Forster,
subsequently being censured by
the local Legislature, in conjunc-
tion with some other officials, for
having derived profit from the
labours of the prisoners. In 1855
the Legislative Council of the
colony appointed a Select Com-
mittee to inquire into the ad-
ministration of the Convict
Department, and Mr. Hampton
on being ordered to appear
before it declined to do so,
and the Governor of the
time, Sir Henry Young, refused
to compel his attendance on the ground that the
convicts were under Imperial control. This led to
his being ordered to appear before the bar of the
Council on a charge of “contempt,” and a warrant
was issued to compel him to be present. Mr.
Hampton threatened to resist the warrant, but even-
tually wiser counsels prevailed and the warrant was
served. As the Council still insisted that Mr. Hampton
should appear before the bar, the Governor prorogued
the Council and the warrant lapsed. Obtaining leave of
absence, Mr. Hampton visited Sydney, going thence to
England, where the Court of Appeals upheld a decision
of the Tasmanian Courts in his favour. Mr. Hampton’s
action had evidently met with the approbation of the
Colonial Office, it being so favourably received that he
was appointed Governor of Western Australia in 1862.
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR GAMPTON.
A great deal of speculation was abroad in Western
Australia in regard to the next holder of the vice-regal
dignity, and when the knowledge that Mr. Hampton
was to be the new Governor reached the colony it was
anticipated that the opening up of the settlement by
means of convict labour would soon be an accomplished
fact. In this hope the anticipations of the residents
were soon realized, for Governor
Hampton utilized the convict
labour to its fullest extent.
However, a new era in convict
administration had dawned in
Western Australia, which if it
had been continued would soon
have brought the settlement in
this respect to the level of the
Tasmanian administration.
Governor Kennedy had indeed
been autocratic, but it was an
autocracy that was dictated by a
sense of kindness and nobility.
Not so that of Governor Hamp-
ton, which was somewhat tyran-
nical and harsh, and partook
more of the methods of the
“white overseer” of the slave
plantations than of the wise
and benign rule of the first
Comptroller-General. Public in-
dignation not a moment too
soon compelled better treatment
than that which had hitherto been meted by the
Governor and his son, who had been appointed to
the position of Comptroller - General. The records
of father and son suffer through the harsh treat-
ment accorded to the convicts, and only the more
humane treatment the convicts received after public
opinion had forced a reversal of the previous policy
can be offered in condonation of the methods of these
two officials.
It must be said, however, to the credit of the
Governor that his public works policy had resulted in
marked benefit to the settlement, and throughout the
whole of the general administration a most energetic
tone prevailed.
The colonization of the North-West received special
attention, which, though not unattended with disaster,


steadily progressed, and the extension of the pearl
fisheries added further material wealth to the colony.
This general progression and advancement in pros-
perity fostered the desire on the part of the colonists
for more extended political rights, and the agitation
which years later ended in responsible government now
took definite form.
Throughout the whole of his career as Governor of
the colony, Mr. Hampton displayed a genius for prac-
tical progression, which despite his earlier acts in refer-
ence to the convicts, made his administration deservedly
popular. It is regrettable that an otherwise fine career
should have been spoilt by his harsh tyranny toward
this unfortunate class, for the Governor’s eminently
practical and businesslike methods had done much for
the material prosperity of the country.
In 1868 Mr. Hampton relinquished the Govern-
ment of the colony, and transportation was entirely
suspended during the same year. He died on December
1, 1869.
SIR FREDERICK ALOYSIUS WELD, G.C.M.G. (1869-1873).
The next Governor in order of succession was Mr.
Frederick Aloysius Weld, who took the reins of office
from Mr. Hampton in September, 1869. Mr. Weld was
the third son of Humphrey Weld,
Esq., of Chideock Manor, Dorset,
and his wife, Maria, daughter
of Charles, seventh Lord Clifford
of Chudleigh, and nephew of
Cardinal Weld, of Lulworth
Castle. Born on May 9, 1823,
Mr. Weld was educated at that
distinguished Roman Catholic
seat of learning, Stoneyhurst
College, afterwards completing
his studies at Freiburg, in Swit-
zerland. Having decided to
embrace a colonial career, he
emigrated to New Zealand in
1844, and following the general
trend of young immigrants of
good family he embarked on a
pastoral career. Of an energetic
and determined nature, the purely
pastoral life of the young settler
was interspersed with episodes of
difficult and dangerous exploring
work, and in his new sphere his
abilities were rapidly bringing him into prominent notice.
In 1848 Mr. Weld was offered, but declined, a seat
in the nominee Legislative Council by Sir George Grey,
the great Pro-Consul having marked the high capacity
of the new settler. Imbued, however, with the spirit of
freedom, a force which was eventually to carry him to a
pinnacle he had but little thought of, Mr. Weld took a
very active part in the agitation to secure representative
government for the land of his adoption. The first
elective Parliament found Mr. Weld as a member of the
House of Representatives, and in 1854 he was made a
member of the Executive Council of New Zealand. In
1860 he was Minister for Native Affairs in the Stafford
Ministry, eventually becoming Premier in 1864.
When Mr. Weld came into office the disastrous
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR WELD.
native war was raging in New Zealand. The General of
the Imperial troops and the then Governor of the colony
were at loggerheads, and the position of the colony was
most precarious. The Maoris had
menaced the capital from a for-
tified position, and the colony
was in the throes of financial
embarrassment, and ruin threat-
ened the State. Colonial stocks
were unmarketable, and the
state of affairs was the worst
that could be imagined. Under
these conditions, the previous
Government having resigned with-
out meeting Parliament, Mr.
Weld undertook the superhuman
task of bringing order out of
chaos. Prior to the formation
of his Ministry he put forward,
as the basis of his policy, the
necessity for the immediate with-
drawal of the Imperial troops
and the acceptance by the colony
of the sole responsibility of the
war. He proposed to carry on
the war by the colonial militia,
forming them into small bodies
of bushmen, and gradually, by these means, supple-
mented by wise construction of roads, he pushed the
Maoris back into the interior of the island. . On the
defeat of the Waikato tribe, as a mark of his dis-
pleasure he confiscated their lands, breaking at one blow
their power and pride. With his wise use of colonial
troops Mr. Weld quelled the war, but side by side with
these militant measures he brought forward the Native
Rights Bill, with which was incorporated the principle of
native representation, and he formed Native Land Courts.
The credit of the colony was now restored, the fin-
ances of the country placed upon a sound basis, and many
wise administrative measures were brought into being.
This eminently satisfactory condition of affairs was due
entirely to the untiring energy and ability of Mr. Weld.


In 1865 the Weld Ministry was defeated on the
defence proposals and, having resigned his onerous
charge, Mr. Weld decided to return to England to re-
cuperate his health. On arrival in England he found
that his fame had preceded him, and the then Secretary
of State for the Colonies openly stated his intention of
offering to Mr. Weld a colonial Governorship. Notwith-
standing that a change of government took place at this
period in England, Mr. Weld was offered and accepted
the position of Governor of Western Australia in 1869.
Arriving in Western Australia with a close know-
ledge of responsible institutions the new Governor very
soon demonstrated that the system of government that
then obtained in Western Australia did not meet with
his approval. However, his first attempt to form a
Government of proper Ministerial responsibility had to
be abandoned owing to the peculiar circumstances pre-
vailing in Western Australia at this period, it being
judged impossible and unwise to give a full measure of
democratic rule. During his term of office as Premier
of New Zealand Mr. Weld had been greatly instrumental
in bringing all portions of the island into communication
by means of the electric telegraph; this he also followed
out in Western Australia. The isolation of the colony
from the others of the Australian hinterland also occa-
sioned him grave concern, but the larger undertakings
were then outside the realm of practical politics.
Another matter that caused His Excellency grave
concern was the meagre information available on the
character of the interior lands of the State, and he deter-
mined to have this somewhat unknown territory explored.
His choice of a leader fell upon Mr. (now Sir) John
Forrest, a most happy choice, for in the character of an
explorer Sir John now holds a deservedly high place in
the annals of Australian adventure. It was during the
term of office of Governor Weld that the Education Act
was passed, which gave general satisfaction. A system
was adopted which placed all religious denominations
upon an equality, grants of land being made to all of
them by the Governor in proportion to their number.
Steam communication was opened up along the coasts,
and two of Mr. Weld's last acts were to cut the first sod
of the first railway in Western Australia and plant the
first post of that telegraph line which was to connect
Western Australia with South Australia.
Relinquishing office in December, 1874, he was
appointed Governor of Tasmania, where he remained
until 1880. On the conclusion of his term of Governor
in Tasmania he was knighted and appointed Governor of
the Straits Settlements, which position he held until 1887,
when he retired on a pension. In 1885 he was created
G.C.M.G. Sir Frederick married in 1858 Filomena Mary,
eldest daughter of the late Ambrose de Lisee, of Grace
Dieu Manor, and Garenden Park, Leicester. He died on
July 20, 1891, at Chideock Manor, Bridport, leaving six
sons and seven daughters.
Sir Frederick Weld was a man of ability and culture,
%/ *
straightforward and chivalrous both as a Minister and
a Governor, but sometimes autocratic and wanting in
tact. His life was spent in the colonial empire of Great
Britain at a period of great expansion, and his wise and
statesmanlike rule certainly proves him to be one of the
best administrators that sat in the vice-regal chair in
Western Australia.
SIR WILLIAM CLEAVER FRANCIS ROBINSON, G.C.M.G.
(1875-1877, 1880-1885, 1890-1895).
Sir Frederick Weld was succeeded in the office of
Governor of Western Australia by another powerful per-
sonality, Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson, who had
not yet attained the dignities which eventually were con-
ferred upon him. The fifth son of Admiral Hercules
Robinson, William Cleaver Francis Robinson, who was
to follow in the footsteps of his still more illustrious
brother, was born in January, 1834. He entered the
colonial service as Private Secretary to his brother, Sir
Hercules Robinson, afterwards Baron Rosmead, who was
then Lieutenant-Governor of St. Kitts. In 1859 Sir Her-
cules Robinson was appointed Governor of Hong-Kong,
and the subject of our sketch accompanied him, still in
the capacity of Private Secretary.
In 1862 Mr. Robinson was appointed President of
Montserrat, and was now definitely launched on his
career as a builder of that Greater Britain which was to
be the outcome of the colonial expansion of the Home
Land. From January to October, 1865, Mr. Robinson
administered the government of Dominica, and in May,
1866, became Governor of the Falkland Islands.
It was, however, in his next position that he was to
be called upon to display that marvellous ability and tact
which were eventually to place him in the front rank of
colonial administrators. On July 5, 1870, he assumed
the Governorship of King Edward Island, now a part of
the Dominion of Canada, and during his administration
the vital question of Canadian Union was debated and
discussed. It is not too much to say that his patience
and judicious counsels assisted greatly to bring about the
union in 1873.
On November 14, 1874, he was appointed Governor
of Western Australia, assuming the position on January
11, 1875. The new Governor was an able administrator,
with a large and intimate knowledge of colonial affairs,
and considering the part he had played in Canadian
Union it came rather as a surprise to find that acting
under the instructions of the Secretary of State he set


his face strongly against the agitation for responsible
government in Western Australia. During this his first
term of office of Governor of the colony the political
aspirations of tlie people were restrained, and as a con-
sequence the administration of Mr. Robinson was of a
merely routine nature. He relinquished the position in
1877, on his appointment to the
Governorship of the Straits Settle-
ments, following in the footsteps
of his distinguished predecessor
in the Western Australian Gover-
norship, Sir Frederick Aloysius
Weld.
In 1877 he was created
K.C.M.G., having been made
C.M.G. in 1873, and in 1878 he
proceeded to Bangkok on a special
visit to invest the King of Siam
with the G.C.M.G. insignia, on
which occasion he was invested
with the Grand Cross of Siam,
which he received permission to
wear.
On April 10, 1880, he again
assumed the office of Governor of
Western Australia. During his
second administration he left his
mark on the colony, for he was
successful in wiping out the huge debt of £BO,OOO and
leaving a balance of <£32,000 in the Treasury. It was
now that the colonists found in him a sympathetic helper
in all their political aims, and when in 1883 he left to
assume the office of Governor of South Australia it was
with feelings of regret that his departure was heralded.
In 1889 he left South Australia to act as Governor of
Victoria, during the absence on leave of Sir Henry Loch.
His administration, which extended from March 9 to
October 18, 1889, was a most pronounced success. On
the return of Sir Henry Loch and his subsequent removal
to the Cape as Governor of Cape Colony, Sir William
administered the government from November 12 to 18,
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR ROBINSON.
pending the arrival of the Earl of i 1 opetoun, who had been
appointed to succeed Sir Henry. His administration had
been so acceptable in Victoria that at the conclusion of
Sir Henry Loch's Governorship the Premier and Leader
of the Opposition were about to send a joint request to the
Colonial Office, that he might be nominated his successor.
Sir William, who had been
created G.C.M.G. in 1887, subse-
quently proceeded to England,
having been nominated for the
third time to the office of Gov-
ernor of Western Australia.
Having in view his remarkable
administrative ability and tact,
the Home authorities desired to
avail themselves of his services
and knowledge of Western Aus-
tralian affairs to preside over the
inauguration of responsible gov-
ernment in the colony.
While in London he rendered
valuable assistance to the Col-
onial Office and to the delegates
from Western Australia in regard
to the passing of the Constitu-
tion Bill through the Imperial
Parliament. Sir William Rob-
inson, during his various terms
in the office of Governor, had the satisfaction of
seeing the colony rise to a position of importance in
the Australian group, and in the promotion of all that
made for commercial success and prosperity he earned
the unquestioned thanks of the bulk of the inhabitants.
He retired from active service in 1895, after a strenuous
forty years spent almost wholly in the service of the
colonial empire.
Sir William married on April 7, 1862, Olivia Edith
Dean, daughter of Thomas Stewart Townsend, Bishop of
Neath, and by her he had three sons and two daughters.
He died at South Kensington on May 2, 1897, in his
sixty-third year.
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR HARRY ST. GEORGE ORD, R.E.,
K.C.M.G., C.B. (1877-1880).
The subject of this sketch, who was appointed
Governor of Western Australia in 1877, succeeding Sir
William Robinson after his first term, was born at North
Cray, Kent, on June 17, 1819. The son of a Captain in
the Royal Artillery, he was early destined for the mili-
tary profession, being educated privately at Woolwich
and afterwards entering the Royal Military Academy in
1835. He received a commission as Second Lieutenant
in the Royal Engineers on December 14, 1837. He was
promoted Lieutenant on May 27, 1839, and stationed at
Woolwich and in Ireland. He was transferred to the
West Indies in 1840, remaining there for six years. In
1846 he was promoted Captain.
From 1849 Captain (3rd devoted himself to the duties
of his profession, and so highly were his services esteemed
by his superiors that he was sent on special duty to the
West Coast of Africa. On his return he received the
thanks of the Admiralty for his report in regard to the
naval works at the Isle of Ascension.
Captain Ord was appointed adjutant to the Royal
Engineers at Chatham in 1852, becoming Brigade-Major
of the Royal Engineers in the combined French and Eng


lisli expedition to the Baltic in 1854. Ord was present
at the siege and capture of Bomarsund, and was men-
tioned in despatches. He was promoted Brevet-Major
on September 8, 1854.
The year 1855 saw the beginning of Ord’s colonial
work, for at that period his services were placed at the
disposal of the Colonial Office, and he was sent as Special
Commissioner to the Gold Coast, returning to military
duty in May, 1856. However, his military duties were
very much broken by periods of
special service, and it was not
until September, 1857, that he
definitely set out on his career as
a colonial administrator.
On September 2, 1857, he was
appointed Lieutenant-Governor of
the Island of Dominica in the
West Indies, and he assumed the
office on November 4 of the same
year. He was promoted Lieu-
tenant-Colonel in 1859, and in
1860, while in England, was
offered and accepted the position
of Governor of the Bermudas,
being gazetted to the position on
February 16, 1861, assuming the
government the following month.
In January, 1864, he again re-
turned Home on leave, during
which time he received promotion
to the rank of Colonel, and his
peculiar qualifications led to his
being sent to the West Coast of
Africa as Special Commissioner in connection with the
disturbances of the Ashantis. He returned to England
in October of the same year, having been created C. 8.,
resuming the government of the Bermudas without delay.
On February 5, 1867, he was appointed first
Colonial Governor of the Straits Settlements, which up
to this time had been administered by the Government of
India. On assuming the position in 1867 he was elevated
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR ORD.
to the dignity of Knighthood, and two years later was
promoted Major-General. So successful were his efforts,
especially in regard to the diverse Eastern races, over
which he was called upon to exercise authority, that his
tenure of office was extended and he remained at Singa-
pore until 1873.
On relinquishing this position Sir Harry went on
sick leave, his health having suffered severely by pro-
longed residence in tropical climates, and for four years
he remained unemployed. In
1877 he was created K.C.M.G.
and appointed in April of the
same year Governor of Western
Australia. He assumed office in
November, 1877, and simply
marked time” to allow of his
concluding the full period of
service as a colonial Governor,
and so retire with the maxi-
mum pension, which he did in
April, 1880.
As an administrator during
this period in the history of the
colony he might have done good
work, but his admittedly high
talents were not conspicuous dur-
ing this period. Having lived
for many years in Asiatic lands
he displayed a great desire to
introduce Asiatics into the
colony, a tendency which was
smartly checked. His administra-
tion closed on April 6, 1880,
having had not the slightest effect on the destinies of
Western Australia.
On May 24, 1881, he was made a G.C.M.G., employ-
ing his leisure in cultivating and disseminating his un-
doubted knowledge of zoological science. He died at
Homburg on August 20, 1885.
Sir Harry married on May 28, 1846, Julia, daughter
of Admiral James Carpenter, by whom he had three sons.
SIR FREDERICK NAPIER BROOME, K.C.M.G. (1883-1889).
Sir Frederick Broome was the eldest son of the
Rev. Frederick Broome, Rector of Renley, Salop, by his
wife Catherine Eleanor, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel
Napier. The future Governor of Western Australia was
born in Canada on November 18, 1842, and was educated
at Whitechurch Grammar School, Salop, Early imbued
with the possibilities of the colonial empire, Broome
emigrated to New Zealand at the age of fifteen years, and
until the year 1864 was continuously engaged in pastoral
pursuits in that colony. Visiting England in 1864 he
met Mary Anne, widow of General Barker, whom he
married on June 21, 1865.
Returning to his sheep station after his marriage he
continued his occupation as a sheepfarmer, but severed
his connection with pastoral pursuits and incidentally
with the colony of New Zealand in 1869. Becoming again
domiciled in England, he contributed largely to the
columns of The Times, eventually entering wholly upon
the stall of that journal. He acted as special corres-
pondent for the paper on many notable occasions. In the
later portion of his connection with the newspaper he
acted as general reviewer, in which capacity his clearness
of thought brought him into more than usual prominence.
Not altogether satisfied with his literary efforts from a


journalistic point of view Mr. Broome essayed authorship
upon his own account, publishing two volumes of verse,
and was a general contributor to the pages of the con-
temporary magazines. He was appointed in 1870 Secre-
tary to St. Paul’s Cathedral Completion Committee, and
in 1873 Secretary to the Royal Commission on unsea-
worthy ships.
In 1875 he first found employment in the Colonial
Office, being appointed by the Earl of Carnarvon, the
Secretary of State, to proceed with Sir Garnet Wolseley
to Natal as Colonial Secretary. From this post he was
transferred on promotion to the Colonial Secretaryship
of Mauritius, where he had several opportunities of
displaying his capacity as an ad-
ministrator during the absence
on leave of the Lieutenant-
Governor. Eventually he was
appointed Lieutenant - Governor
of the Mauritius in 1880, and on
the disasters to the British arms
at Bandula he dispatched at once
nearly the whole of the garrison
of Mauritius as reinforcements.
This promptitude, which helped
materially to save the situation,
at once marked him as an admin-
istrator and man of affairs of
undoubted capacity, and his fur-
ther advancement in the colonial
service was only a matter of time.
On December 14, 1882, he was
appointed Governor of Western
Australia, and assumed office in
June, 1883. In 1884 he was
created K.C.M.G. The position
of the colony during Governor
Broome’s early administration
was far from satisfactory, and in 1885 he visited England
with a view of extending a knowledge of the resources of
the colony. A resort to a system of borrowing resulted
in some expansion, and the extension of railways and
telegraphs led to some general progress. Despite all
efforts to place things on a better footing, it was seen that
the future depended upon a more enlarged system of
government, and eventually Sir Frederick became con-
verted to the popular view and did much to facilitate the
granting of responsible government.
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR BROOME.
It now became Sir Frederick’s duty to act as inter-
mediary between the Legislative Council of Western Aus-
tralia and the Secretary of State. After considerable
discussion the details of the new Constitution were
settled and a Bill approved by the Imperial Parliament
was passed. To correct the extraordinary misapprehen-
sions which arose in regard to the transfer of the immense
tracts of Crown lands, the Governor published a lengthy
letter in The Times which had a good effect. But the mat-
ter was not yet settled, and only on the evidence of the
Governor and two leading members of the Western Aus-
tralian Legislature who journeyed to London to appear
before a Select Committee were the numerous and galling
restrictions of the original measure
abrogated. In this matter Sir
Frederick Broome had the best
interests of the colony at heart,
and it is due to his untiring
energy that this State has reaped
such a large measure of success.
Sir Frederick Broome’s tenure
of the government of Western
Australia came to an end with his
mission to England, and finally
ceased in September, 1890. The
Governor had certainly many
faults, want of tact and over-
bearing temperament being among
the number, and his quarrels with
his subordinates will ever be re-
membered as regrettable episodes
marring an otherwise great career.
He was undoubtedly an able ad-
ministrator, as the earlier portion
of his colonial service will bear
ample testimony, but if he failed
in Western Australia he failed
as an administrator. Several of his actions in regard to
his subordinates amounted almost to a public scandal.
Nevertheless, he worked hard and well in the interests of
the colony, and while condoning his faults let us extol
his virtues. Sufficient to say he left the colony amid
popular demonstrations of gratitude.
He proceeded to the West Indies, where he was
appointed Acting-Governor of the Barbadoes, and after-
wards Governor of Trinidad. He died in London on
November 26, 1896.
SIR GERARD SMITH, K.C.M.G. (1895-1900).
Sir Gerard Smith, who succeeded Sir William Robin-
son as Governor of Western Australia, was born in
London in 1839, being the son of T. Smith, Esq., M.P.
Destined for the military profession he joined the Scotch
Fusiliers as an ensign at the age of eighteen. He saw
active service in Canada, being a member of the expedi


tion sent out in consequence of the
embroglio due to seizure of Mason
and Sidell by the American Gov-
ernment. After a somewhat un-
eventful military career he retired
from the army in 1874, with the
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel, and
joined his father’s business, of
Smith & Wilberforce, bankers, of
Hull.
On entering this business Sir
Gerard took a large and active
interest in the commercial life of
the county, at the same time pav-
ing the way for an entrance into
political life. In 1879 he sug-
gested the building of the Hull to
Barnsley railway, to break down
the monopoly of the North-
Eastern Company, and on the
formation of the Company he
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR SMITH.
became its first Chairman. He
contested in 1883 the High Wy-
combe seat and was returned as a
Liberal supporter, but on the
Home Rule question he was at
variance with Mr. Gladstone, and
he left the Liberal ranks and
became a Unionist.
Sir Gerard, who had been a
Groom-in-Waiting to Queen Vic-
toria, was knighted in 1895, and
appointed Governor of Western
Australia, assuming the govern-
ment on December 23 of that year.
He relinquished the position in
June, 1900, and returned to Eng-
land to his former commercial
pursuits.
In 1871 he married Chatelaine,
daughter of Canon Hamilton, and
has two sons and three daughters.
HON. SIR ARTHUR LAWLEY, G.C.I.E., K.C.M.G. (1901-1902).
Sir Arthur Lawley, who assumed
the position of Governor of Wes-
tern Australia on May 1, 1901,
was born on November 12, 1860,
being the fourth son of the second
Baron Wenlock. Like the scions
of many aristocratic families in
England he was intended for the
military profession, eventually
attaining the rank of Captain in
the 10th Hussars. In 1885 Sir
Arthur married Annie Allen,
daughter of Sir Edward Cunard,
Bart., of fame. Relin-
quishing his military career for
the wider outlook of politics, Sir
Arthur became Private Secretary
to the late Duke of Westminster,
acting in that capacity from 1892
to 1896.
In 1896 he was appointed Secre-
tary to Earl Grey, and in Novem-
ber of the same year he assumed
the office of Deputy-Administrator
of Matabeleland, the duties of
which office he carried out with
conspicuous tact and ability
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR LAW LEY.
at a most critical period. In
1897 he was appointed Adminis-
trator of Matabeleland, which
office he relinquished to assume
that of Governor of Western
Australia.
Arriving in this State on April
30, 1901, the unvarying tact and
courtesy he displayed soon en-
deared him to all shades and
classes of public opinion in
Western Australia, being ably
seconded in all his work by Lady
Lawley. On the Declaration of
Peace in 1902 he relinquished the
office of Governor in Western
Australia, being transferred to
the important post of Lieutenant-
Governor of the Transvaal. He
was created K.C.M.G. in 1901 on
assuming the Governorship of
Western Australia.
In 1906 Sir Arthur was ap-
pointed Governor of Madras,
which position he at present occu-
pies, being created G.C.I.E. in
the same year.


ADMIRAL SIR FREDERICK GEORGE DENHAM BEDFORD,
G.C.B., G.C.M.G. (1908-1909).
The next holder of the office of Governor of Western
Australia was a naval officer with a most distinguished
career, in the person of Admiral Sir F. G. D. Bedford,
G.C.8., G.C.M.G. The son of an eminent naval officer,
Sir Frederick, who was born in 1838, entered the Navy
in 1852. He served as midshipman in H.M.S. “Sampson”
during 1854, and had the unique distinction of being
present at the bombardment of Odessa, the taking of the
redoubt of Kaleh, and also the bombardment of Sebas-
topol. For these services he received the Crimean and
Turkish medals. In 1855 he joined
H.M.S. “Vulture” and took part
in the Baltic expedition, subse-
quently receiving the Swedish
medal. In 1859 he was promoted
Lieutenant, Commander in 1871,
attaining the rank of Captain in
1876. In 1877 he was in com-
mand of H.M.S. “Shah” in her
engagement with the Peruvian
ironclad “Huascar,” off Ylo, in
May, 1877.
He was actively engaged during
the Gordon Relief Expedition in
1884, receiving the special thanks
of the Admiralty for his organi-
zation of the Nile flotilla of the
expedition. Sir Frederick was
promoted C.B. in 1886, and two
years later appointed A.D.C. to
Queen Victoria.
His exceptionally high talents
were responsible for his appoint-
ment as a Lord Commissioner of
the Admiralty from 1889-92, being also a member of the
Committee formed to report upon the manning of the
Navy. In 1891 Captain Bedford was promoted to the
rank of Rear-Admiral, and hoisted his flag on H.M.S.
“St. George,” as Commander-in-Chief at the Cape, in
1892. During the period of this commission Admiral Bed-
Photo by Bartletto. (Copyright.)
GOVERNOR BEDFORD.
ford was engaged in strenuous active naval work, which
he carried to a brilliant and successful conclusion. In
1894 he conducted the operations at Bathurst, on the
River Gambia, for the punishment of Fodi Silah, a rebel-
lious slave-raiding chief. .Later it was found necessary
to land a punitive expedition against the Chief Namra of
Brohemic in the Benin River, and in recognition of his
great services Admiral Bedford was created K.C.B. In
February, 1895, he landed a Naval Brigade for the
punishment of King Koko, of Nimby, on the Niger River,
and brought the operations to a
successful conclusion.
On resigning the command of
the Cape Station Admiral Bedford
was presented with an apprecia-
tive address by the residents of
the Naval Station. In 1895 he
was appointed Lord of the
Admiralty, relinquishing the office
in 1899 to become Commander-
in-Chief of the North American
and West Indies Station, which
position he held until 1903. Sir
Frederick was created G.C.B. in
1902, and in 1903 accepted the
position of Governor of Western
Australia, which he held until
1909. The expressed wish of the
people of this State, that he
should allow himself to be nomin-
ated for a further term, was
declined by Sir Frederick, who
pointed out that for fifty-seven
years he had been continually
at work in the service of the Crown. A most enviable
record.
In 1909 he relinquished the Governorship of Western
Australia and returned to England, where he now resides.
In 1880 Sir Frederick married Ethel, daughter of
E. R. Turner, Ipswich, and has two sons and a daughter.
SIR GERALD STRICKLAND, K.C.M.G. (1909—Still in Office).
His Excellency the Governor of Western Australia,
Sir Gerald Strickland, K.C.M.G., of Sizergh Castle,
Westmoreland (where the family has been settled for
800 years past), sixth Count della Catena, in the island
of Malta, is the eldest son of Captain Walter Strickland,
R.N., by his wife Louisa, only child of Peter Paul
Bonici Montpalas, LL.D., Hereditary Knight of the
Holy Roman Empire, and heiress of her uncle, Sir
Nicholas Sceberras-Bologna, K.C.M.G., fifth Count della
Catena, of Malta. Born on May 24, 1861, lie was
educated at Oscatt College, Birmingham. In 1879, by
judgment of the Privy Council, he succeeded to the title
and estates of his maternal great-uncle as sixth Count
della Catena.
Entering Trinity College, Cambridge, he obtained
honours in the Law Tripos of 1887 (8.A., LL.B.).
During his sojourn at that ancient seat of learn-
ing he had the honour of being elected President


of the Union Society. He served in 1886 as Lieutenant
in the Cambridge University Rifles, Volunteer Battalion,
Suffolk Regiment, and at a later date he raised a regi-
ment of Royal Malta Militia, in which he continues to
hold a commission as Major. Leaving Cambridge he
was called to the Bar of the Inner Temple, and practised
before the Privy Council.
In the meantime, however, his native land
was calling for his services and, on behalf of Malta,
he was chosen to attend the Colonial Conference
of 1887, h aving also a further honour paid to him
in that, whilst still at the University, he was
elected a member of the Council of the Government of
Malta. During that year an outbreak of cholera in the
island assumed serious pro-
portions, and Sir Gerald
organized a cholera com-
mittee, of which he acted as
chairman. In that capacity
he worked strenuously and
with such benefit to the com-
munity that in return for
his efforts he was created a
Companion of the Order of
St. Michael and St. George.
In 1888 he was appointed
Assistant Secretary to the
Government of Malta, and
in the following year was
promoted to be Chief Secre-
tary, a position which he
held until 1902, while the
nobility of the island selected
him as President of their
Committee of Privileges. In
1889 he was entrusted with
the conduct of negotiations
as to the Papal veto on
appointments to the See of
Malta, and received the offi-
cial thanks of the Imperial
Government for his services.
His thirteen years’ occupancy of the position of Chief
Secretary was marked by the initiation and consummation
of many important reforms, including a new system of
education and the planning of a new breakwater, by
means of which the harbour accommodation of Valetta
might be doubled. To him, also, are credited the im-
provement in the sanitary condition of the island, the
increased efficiency of the water supply and of the police
force as well as the establishment of the militia. Some of
his reforms, particularly those dealing with the trial in
English instead of in Italian of British subiects not born
in Malta, and an attempt to abolish Italian altogether
from the Courts, were the subject of prolonged agitation.
In these and other affairs the newspapers were by no
means favourably inclined to him at the time, but in
1904, when congratulating Sir Gerald on a well-deserved
promotion, the Malta Chronicle generously admitted
that, although at the time unable to see it, the credit for
much of the advancement of the island must be ascribed
to him.
His various services earned for him the rank of
K.C.M.G. in 1897, and in 1902 he was promoted to be
Governor of the Leeward Islands. On relinquishing the
position of Chief Secretary the Governor of Malta, Sir
Francis (now Lord) Grenfell 9 in a despatch to the Right
Honourable the Secretary of State placed upon record
his very high appreciation of the valuable services ren-
dered to the island by Sir
Gerald during his tenure of
office. He remained in the
West Indies but two years,
during which he accom-
plished much in the way of
developing the trade of the
islands, especially in the
way of cotton-growing, and
was the means of inducing
the sugar-growers to enter
into a combination which
led to the erection of two
central factories containing
the most modern appliances.
The report of the Royal
Commissioners on Canada
and the West Indies inci-
dentally refers to this
matter in the following-
terms :
We urge that every possible
means be taken to introduce
into the islands named im-
proved methods of manufac-
ture. The Central Sugar Fac-
tory in Antigua furnishes a
striking argument in favour of
this recommendation. It would
be difficult to use exaggerated terms respecting the benefits
conferred b} 7 this factory on the present cultivators of cane
and the sugar industry generally of Antigua ; we could not
fail to observe that recognition of these benefits was
universal throughout the Leeward Islands.
His Excellency in 1904 was appointed Governor
of Tasmania, a post which he held with great satis-
faction to the people of that State, proving himself
eminently suited to the position of a constitutional
governor. In May, 1909, he received further promotion
to the position he now occupies, that of Governor of this
State, in which he possesses the unbounded respect and
goodwill of the whole community.
GOVERNOR S TRIC KLAND.


I On August 26, 1890, Sir Gerald was married
in London to the Lady Edeline Sackville, daugh-
ter of the seventh Laid De La Warr, second Baron
Buckhurst, and twenty-second Baron West, by the
Honourable Mary Constance Cochrane Baillie, daughter
of the first Lord Lamington. They have had
seven children: Reginald, who died in infancy; Mary
Christina ; Cecilia Victoria, born at Sizergh, July, 1897;
Mabel ; Walter, born in 1901 at Sizergh, where he died
in the following year ; Margaret, who died in infancy;
and Henrietta, born at Antigua in 1904.
Lady Edeline has been of great assistance to
her husband in his work, more particularly in the
direction of encouraging charitable effort. In Hobart
she was instrumental in founding a maternity hos-
pital for those not in a position to afford private
nursing and yet able to bear some part of the
expense —an institution which has served a valuable
purpose in those directions; while in this State, besides
giving all possible help to every charity, she is actively
connected with the Home of Peace as a member of the
Committee, and has held the position of Patroness of
the Children's Hospital ever since the institution was
opened. Lady Edeline has also taken a great interest
in the formation in this State of a branch of the National
Council of Women, an institution formed for the pur-
pose of affording a means of communication between
women workers throughout the world.
His Excellency is the author of a work entitled
Correspondence, and Remarks on the Constitution of
Malta," and is also a contributor to the pages of the
‘‘Encyclopaedia Britannica.”


The Federal Legislature.
The Federal Parliament consists of two Chambers,
both elected by adult suffrage, and therefore both the
reflex of the absolute opinion of the people throughout
the Commonwealth, of pure European descent, and
untainted by crime.
The Senate consists of six representatives from each
State, who are elected by the entire State voting as one
constituency. The House of Representatives is elected
upon a population basis, but a certain amount of pro-
portional representation is incorporated, as no State has
a representation of less than five members. The members
of the Senate chosen by Western Australia to sit in the
first Federal Parliament were as follow :
Hugh DeLargie.
Norman Kirkwood Ewing.
Edward Augustine Harney.
Alexander Percival Matheson.
George Foster Pearce.
Miles Staniforth Smith.
To the House of Representatives five members were
returned for Western Australia, and for the purpose of
the first federal election the State was formed into five
electoral districts, each comprising certain of the then
existing State electoral districts as defined in the Con-
stitution Act Amendment Act of 1899. The first
Representatives elected for the State were : -
Right Hon. Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G.,
Swan.
James MacKinnon Fowler, Perth.
John Waters Kirwan, Kalgoorlie.
Hugh Mahon, Coolgardie.
Elias Solomon, Fremantle.
On April 17, 1903, Senator Ewing resigned his seat,
and on July 29 Mr. Henry John Saunders was elected
to fill the vacant position. Sir John Forrest, who had
held the portfolio of Minister of State for Defence in
the first Federal Ministry, accepted the position of
Minister of State for Home Affairs in the second.
The second General Election of members of the
Commonwealth Parliament took place on December 16,
1903. For the Senate Messrs. DeLargie, Harvey, and
Saunders had to retire. Mr. DeLargie was re-elected,
the other two members being Messrs. John William
Croft and George Henderson. For the House of Repre-
sentatives Sir John Forrest and Messrs. Mahon and
Fowler were re-elected, the two new members being
Messrs. William Henry Carpenter (Fremantle) and
Charles Edward Frazer (Kalgoorlie).
On the resignation of Mr. Deakin’s Ministry in
1904 Mr. Hugh Mahon, the member for Coolgardie,
accepted office in the Watson Ministry as Post-
master-General. The Watson Administration was
followed by the Reid-McLean Coalition, in which
Ministry no Western Australian representative held any
portfolio. The second Deakin Administration, in
which Sir John Forrest held the position of Treasurer,
accepted office on July 5, 1905.
On December 12, 1906, the third General Election
for the Federal Parliament took place. For the Senate
Mr. G. F. Pearce was re-elected, and Messrs. Needham
and Lynch chosen for the other two seats. For the House
of Representatives, Sir John Forrest, and Messrs.
Fowler, Frazer, and Mahon retained their seats, but Mr.
Carpenter was displaced at Fremantle by Mr. Hedges.
Mr. Deakin’s Administration, which had hitherto held
office under the three-party system, by support of
the Labour section, again returned to office, when
some slight changes were made in the personnel of the
Ministry, Sir John Forrest still retaining office as
Treasurer. However, on July 29 of the succeeding year
Sir John resigned, giving as his reason the election
pledges he had made. During the General Election Sir
John had been a determined opponent of the Labour
Party, and though not personally antagonistic he con-
sidered he could not continue to further form one of a
Ministry which was kept in office by support of the
Labour Party.
On November 13, 1908, Mr. Deakin’s Administra-
tion was succeeded by a Labour Ministry, in which the
respective portfolios of LTome Affairs and Defence were
held by Messrs. H. Mahon and G. F. Pearce, both
Western Australian representatives. This Administra-
tion was again replaced by the Deakin-Cook Coalition,
in which Sir John Forrest again held the portfolio of
Treasurer.
On April 13, 1910, the fourth General Election was
held, and resulted in the re-election of Senators DeLargie
and Henderson, while Mr. Buzacott, a Labour nominee,
secured the third seat. No change took place in the
representation in the Lower House.
Mr. Fisher, whose party had returned to power with
a large majority, accepted office as Prime Minister, and
in the Ministry were included Senator Pearce as Minister
for Defence and Mr. Frazer as Honorary Minister. Some
time late Mr. Frazer accepted the portfolio of Post-
master-General, so that the present Government con-
tains two Western Australian representatives among its
personnel.


Senator RICHARD BUZACOTT
was born at Clare, South Australia,
in the year 1870, and educated at
the Stanley Public School, in the
same district. His schooldays ended,
he found employment in agricultural
work at Clare and Blyth, and at the
age of twenty-one years proceeded to
Broken Hill, New South Wales,
where he worked on the mines for
eight years. In 1899 he proceeded
to Queensland and spent twelve
months in the copper and tin mining
industries, going thence to the Coon-
garrie fields (then known as the
Ninety-Mile) in Western Australia,
where he arrived in 1900. Here Mr.
Buzacott turned his attention to pro-
specting the surrounding country,
with fluctuating results. In 1904 he
became an aspirant for Parliamen-
tary honours and entered the lists
for the Menzies electorate, unsuccess-
fully opposing the present Minister
for Mines, the Honourable H. Gre-
gory, M.L.A. Two years later he
suffered his second defeat for the
same constituency, but, nothing
daunted, Mr. Buzacott was again to
Bartletto, Perth.
SENATOR RICHARD BUZACOTT.
the fore at the elections of 1908,
when he won a hard-fought battle
from his doughty opponent by the
barest margin of seven votes, only to
be unseated on appeal. Going before
the electors of the district for the
fourth time, Mr. Buzacott received
v
The Senate.
his coup de grace in favour of the
sitting member. At the Federal elec-
tions of 1910 he stood for the Senate,
gaining a well-merited success. In
1908 Mr. Buzacott espoused Lucy,
daughter of the late Mr. Douglas
Marshall, of Bendigo, Victoria, the
issue being a son.
Senator HUGH DE LARGIE,
Representative for Western Aus-
tralia in the Federal Parliament, is
a son of Mr. Archibald Hamilton de
Largie, of Airdrie, Scotland, where
the gentleman under review was
born on March 26, 1859. He
attended St. Margaret’s School in
his native town, and from boyhood
days was engaged in the iron and
mining industries. In 1887 he came
to Australia and followed mining
pursuits in Queensland for about a
year, at the end of which period he
proceeded to various mining fields
in New South Wales. His initial
entry into public life was made
through the agency of trade-unions
in that State, where during the
great maritime strike he acted as
delegate for the Mount Kembla
miners. He filled a similar position
in West Wallsend, and at Wallsend,
in the Newcastle district, held the
appointment of Secretary to the
Labour League for a number of
years. In 1895 Mr. de Largie
sailed for Western Australia and
assisted in establishing the first
Miners’ Union at Kalgoorlie and
Boulder. He took a prominent
part in all public questions affecting
the goldfields, and was a member of
the Executive of the Separation
League which was responsible for a
gigantic petition to the Imperial
Government. When the anti-
Federalists abandoned their hostility
to Australian nationality this
League was turned into a Federa-
tion Movement. He was President
of the Amalgamated Workers’ Asso-
ciation for three years, during which
period the Association developed
into by far the most powerful
Labour organization in Western
Australia, with branches at Perth,
Fremantle, the timber districts, and
all the goldfields in the State. In
1899 the first Labour Congress in
Western Australia was held at
Coolgardie, and Mr. de Largie was
unanimously elected to preside over
the gathering; and in the same year
he was selected by the goldfields
unions to contest a seat in the first
Bartletto, Perth,
SENATOR HUGH DE LARGIE.
Australian Senate, to which he was
duly elected. In 1904 he again suc-
cessfully contested the seat and
established the unique record of
securing the largest number of votes
in every electoral division of the
State. When the third Federal
elections were held he was again
elected, and in 1909 secured the
largest vote recorded in a selection
ballot, i.e.y 7,000. During the
period of his service as a Senator he
has filled the appointment of Com-
missioner to inquire into navigation
and shipping questions, and has
also been a member of the Royal
Commission which dealt with
matters affecting the Postal Depart-
ment, and materially assisted to
elaborate a system for the better
working of the department, the
report in connection with which
called forth unstinted praise from
those best fitted to express an
opinion. Since 1906 Senator de
Largie has discharged the duties of
Whip for his party. In 1884 he
married Mary McGregor, of Town-
head, Glasgow, and has three
daughters and a son.


Senator GEORGE HENDER-
SON is a son of the late Mr. George
Henderson, of Rothesay, Bute, Scot-
land, and was born on August 19,
1861. His early educational ad-
vantages were limited, and though
he was aided by his father in mak-
ing the most of those that lay with-
in his reach, the necessity of turning
SENATOR GEORGE GENDERSON.
out at an early age to earn his
bread interfered with the progress
of his studies very seriously. When
only eight or nine years old he be-
gan life as pony-boy in a Northum-
berland coal mine, and continued
there until his fifteenth year, when
he engaged in coal-mining in the
Newcastle district until 1885. Dur-
ing this period he availed himself
to the full of the opportunities
offered to the studiously inclined by
classes held in connection with the
Miners’ Hall, and eventually de-
cided to try his fortune in Aus-
tralia, the Land of Golden Promise.
Arriving in Sydney on October 5,
1885, he proceeded to the Illawarra
district, New South Wales, where
the coal-mining industry was in full
swing. Here he manifested so ac-
tive an interest in the industrial
affairs of the mining community
that he was appointed General Sec-
retary to the Miners’ Union of the
Illawarra district, which position he
held from 1891 until 1899. Re-
signing his post he came to the
western State and landed at Collie,
where he continued in coal-mining
pursuits, and ultimately was made
Manager of the Wallsend Coal
Mine, in that district. Twelve
months later be retired from this ap-
pointment to take up the duties of
General Secretary to the Miners’
Union of Western Australia, and
continued to hold this position un-
til his election to the Senate in 1904,
in the interests of the Labour Party.
As a Senator he has distinguished
himself by his sturdy fight for the
establishment of an all-Australian
line of mail steamers under subsidy
of the Government, and in the im-
mediate future hopes to witness the
materialization of his earnest en-
deavours in this direction. He is an
enthusiastic advocate of Home Rule
for Ireland, and his fine speech in
support of the resolution brought be-
fore the Federal Parliament will long
be remembered, and went far towards
securing the successful issue which
attended this important debate.
Senator Henderson’s jovial person-
ality and stanch attitude on all
questions affecting the workers of
Australia have brought him the es-
teem of his fellow-men, as was
strongly evidenced at the elections
of 1910, when he was returned at the
head of the poll. He has always
actively exerted himself on behalf
of the workers of the community,
and to him is due the credit of es-
tablishing the co-operative principle
of trading both in the Illawarra
district of New South Wales and
at Collie, where, mainly through his
efforts, and after a course of lec-
tures, a Co-operative Society was
founded which is now in a most
flourishing condition, having a mem-
bership of 600 and owning its own
bakery, grocery, and general stores.
The premises, stock, and rolling-
stock of this important organization
are now valued at about £6,000,
and it speaks well for the manage-
ment that the lowest dividends ever
paid have been at the rate 10 per
cent, per annum. Senator Hender-
son was a member of the Municipal
Council of Collie for four years, re-
signing office upon his elevation to
the Senate, and was one of the
founders of the Progress Committee
of the same town. He is connected
with the 1.0.0. F , and has passed
through all the chairs of that body.
A player of Rugby football in his
youth, nor loath to follow any manly
sport, at the present time he is
chiefly devoted to the game of
draughts (in which as a player he
excels) and to billiards. He married
Ann, daughter of the late Mr. Ed-
ward Grey, of Stella, County Dur-
ham, England, and has a son and a
daughter. The latter displays special
aptitude for music, and although
still quite a child plays both the
piano and the violin with marked
ability. The son follows the pro-
fession of an electrician in Sydney.
Senator PATRICK JOSEPH
LYNCH, Representative for Wes-
tern Australia in the Federal Par-
liament, is a son of the late Mr.
Michael Lynch, of Skearke, New
castle, County Meath, Ireland, and
received his education at the Cor-
meen National School, and later at
the Ballieborough Model School,
County Cavan. He continued his
studies in the intervals allowed by
the farm duties which he took up
at the age of fifteen, on his father’s
property, and three years later emi-
grated to Southern Queensland.
He proceeded from Charleville to the
Croydon gold rush, a distance of
900 miles overland, and continued
on that field for about three years.
His fortunes beginning to ebb he
set out for the scene of the first dis-
covery of gold in Western Australia
inland from Cossack Gulf, but at
Port Darwin the reported failure of
the find caused him to change his
plans for the future and he decided
to look to the sea for a livelihood.
For seven years he was employed in
Bartletto, Perth.
SENATOR PATRICK JOSEPH LYNCH.
that most arduous of physical occu-
pations, firing in the stokehold,
whence he graduated to the charge
of the engineering department of
the ship, and it was during that
period that he made a study of the
various branches of his calling and


secured his certificate as marine
engineer. He had many trying
experiences in his seafaring life,
suffering shipwreck and other peril-
ous adventures of the sea. For
the attempted rescue of a fellow-
seaman by jumping overboard on
a dark night in the shark-infested
waters of Fiji he had conferred
upon him the certificate of the
Royal Humane Society. Having
visited all quarters of the globe he
relinquished marine pursuits and
obtained work as an engineer on
a sugar plantation in the South
Sea Islands. Here reports reached
him of the steady prosperity of the
gold-mining industry in Western
Australia, and following the allur-
ing gleam eventually he arrived at
Hannan’s Field, where the real
work of his life may be said to
have begun. Before the days of
the Arbitration Court he was a
strong advocate for the union of
workers in the different depart-
ments of industrial life, and won
highly favourable opinions for the
clear and forceful way in which he
voiced the sentiments of the people
with whom he was so closely associ-
ated. Outside his own Association
he was selected by several other
Labour organizations to represent
them before the Arbitration Court
after this institution came into
being. He was one of the founders
of the Enginedrivers’ Association
and held the post of General
Secretary to that body for nearly
five years. His intelligent inter-
est in the welfare of the general
public won for him election to the
Boulder Municipal Council in 1902,
and he also occupied a seat on the
Board of Health, the Roads Board,
and, indeed, held membership in
every existing society for the ad-
vancement of the district. In 1904
a redistribution of seats took place
in the State Parliament, and a
new constituency having been cre-
ated at Leonora Mr. Lynch was
nominated in the Labour interests
and returned unopposed. One year
later, the Labour Party having
come into power at the general
elections, upon the subsequent re-
construction of the Ministry he
accepted the portfolio of Minister
for Works and held that office
until the resignation of the
Labour Cabinet. At the approach
of the Federal elections of
1906 he was selected in conjunc-
tion with the Honourable G. F.
Pearce, present Minister of Defence,
and Senator Needham to stand for
u 2
the Senate in the Commonwealth
Parliament, and was returned with
the other two members of the trio.
He took a most prominent part in
the famous Tariff debate of 1907,
during which his utterances elic-
ited the most highly commendatory
notices from the Press and others
who, though opposed to his party,
could not forbear their full meed of
praise for the worthy service ren-
dered to his State and country by
Senator Lynch on that occasion.
Outside of politics he devotes the
greater part of his time to farming
pursuits on the property comprising
2,500 acres, owned by him in part-
nership with his brother at Three
Springs, Western Australia. Sen-
ator Lynch is still a member of the
Enginedrivers’ Association, of the
Hibernian Society, the Irish Na-
tional Foresters, and of the Celtic
Club. A great reader, he gives his
attention chiefly to the perusal of
historical and standard works. In
1901 he married Annie, daughter
of the late Mr. Michael Cleary, of
County Clare, Ireland, and has a
son and two daughters.
Senator EDWARD NEEDHAM
is a son of the late Mr. Patrick
Needham, of Newport, County
Mayo, Ireland, and was born on
September 30, 1874, at Ormskirk,
Lancashire, England. He was edu-
cated at St. Mary’s Roman Catholic
School in Sunderland and at Sea-
ham Harbour, England, and at the
age of twelve years found employ-
ment as a trapper-boy in a coal mine
at the latter place, where he con-
tinued for two years. At this junc-
ture the Needham family migrated
to Scotland, and in this new sphere
young Needham turned his atten-
tion to the weaving industry, enter-
ing the Paisley Mills. Subsequently
he found employment in various
shipyards, at which trade he worked
for several years, but in 1901 he threw
down tools and took passage to Aus-
tralia. In the land of his adoption
he found work in the Rocky Bay
quarries, but soon after relinquished
this strenuous employment to take a
position in the Government Railway
Workshops at Fremantle as boiler-
maker assistant. From the time of
his arrival in the State Mr. Need-
ham had evinced a keen interest in
local politics, and as early as Feb-
ruary, 1904, was selected to contest
the Fremantle constituency in the
interests of the Labour Party. In
the following June the electors
solidly endorsed the selection and he
was returned to the State Parlia-
ment as representative for the Fre-
mantle seat in the Legislative Assem-
bly. In October, 1905, a dissolution
of Parliament took place, and at the
ensuing elections Mr. Needham suf-
fered defeat at the hands of the late
Bartletto, Perth .
SENATOR EDWARD NEEDHAM.
Hon. J. Price, and he again un-
successfully contested the seat upon
the elevation of Mr. Price to be
Minister for Works in the Moore
Administration. This lack of appre-
ciation on the part of his former
constituents directed Mr. Needham’s
attention to the arena of Federal
politics, and being chosen by the
Labour selection ballot as one of
their candidates at the elections in
December, 1906, he was returned to
the Senate of the Federal Parlia-
ment in company with Senators
Pearce and Lynch. It is a remark-
able coincidence that Senator Need-
ham’s maiden speech in the Federal
Parliament was made on the exact
anniversary of the day of his arrival
in Australia six years previously, and
his meteoric rise to political power
is but one instance of the wonderful
opportunities presented to all alike
by the Commonwealth of Australia.
Senator Needham has been con-
nected with the Labour movement
since his teens, and in his sixteenth
year he was President of the Ren-
frew branch of the Amalgamated
Shipyard Helpers’ Society of Scot-
land. In Australia he has been an
indefatigable worker in the Labour


interests, and prior to his election to
the Senate held various offices in
connection with the industrial and
political organizations of the Party.
What little leisure he has apart from
his political duties is devoted to
amateur photography. Fie also de-
rives pleasure from the game of bil-
liards and is a worthy exponent of
this fascinating pastime. Senator
Needham married in 1908 Lilian
Helen, daughter of Mr. Charles
Gosden, of Chobhum, Surrey, Eng-
land, and has issue one son.
The Honourable GEORGE FOS-
TER PEARCE, a Labour Senator
for Western Australia, Minister of
State for Defence, and a dis-
tinguished personality in Federal
politics, was born at Mount Barker
in South Australia, being the son
of James and Jane Pearce. The
education of Mr. Pearce was car-
ried out at the Government School
at Redhill, South Australia. After
leaving school he was apprenticed to
the trade of carpenter and joiner,
and eventually came to Western
Australia in 1892, where he lab-
oured at his trade. In 1894 Mr
Pearce went to the goldfields, shortly
after their discoverv. During his
%j o
residence in Western Australia Mr.
Pearce has been closely identified
with the organization of labour,
rapidly attaining a commanding
position in the councils of the party.
He was Secretary of the United
Trades Council in 1896 and Presi-
dent in 1899, and the confidence so
early made manifest by his fellow-
workmen has always been retained.
His first essay in public life was
made when he entered the Subiaco
Council in 1899, of which body he
remained a member until 1901. In
1901 Mr. Pearce was returned as a
Senator in the Labour interest for
the State of Western Australia, being
re-elected in 1906 and appointed
Chairman of Committees. In 1909
Mr. Pearce was appointed Minister
Bartletto, Perth.
SENATOR GEORGE FOSTER PEARCE.
of State for Defence in the first
Federal Labour Administration, and
his conduct of the affairs of that
department for the short period of
the Government earned the heartiest
commendation even from his poli-
tical opponents. However, his great-
est effort, no doubt, has been
achieved in the present Labour
Administration, in which he was
appointed Minister of Defence on
the assumption of office by the party
in 1910. Though the germ of the
compulsory training scheme had cer-
tainly been outlined by the previous
Administration, under whose aus-
pices the visit of Lord Kitchener to
Australia had taken place, Mr.
Pearce, whilst accepting much that
was good in the previous scheme,
removed many of the anomalies, and
with the slightest possible delay
brought the whole into practical
effect. With the wisdom which has
been part of his administration, Mr.
Pearce ratified the engagement
entered into by the previous
Administration with Colonel Kirk-
patrick, who had assisted Lord Kit-
chener to frame the scheme of Aus-
tralian defence. The freedom given
to this officer and the support of his
actions by the wise administration
of the department have done much
to put the military defence of Aus-
tralia on a sound basis. In naval
affairs the same wisdom that has
characterized Mr. Pearce’s actions
on the military side of defence is
strongly in evidence, and by careful
and thoughtful attention and wise
administration the present Minister
of Defence has gained not only the
hearty co-operation of all those in-
terested in defence, but also earned
a place in Australian contemporary
history that it will be hard to rival.
The House of Representatives.
The Right Honourable Sir JOHN
FORREST, P.C., G.C.M.G., LL.D.,
M.H.R. Shakespeare says that
some are born great, some achieve
greatness, and some have greatness
thrust upon them.” Foremost of the
sons of Western Australia, it is un-
doubtedly true that John Forrest
has achieved greatness by the whole-
hearted and indefatigable service he
has rendered to his native State. The
son of the late William Forrest,
he was born near Bunbury on August
22, 1847, and was educated at the
Bishop’s School, Perth, the fore-
runner of the present High School.
At the age of eighteen he entered the
Survey Department of the State,
where his manly qualities and capa-
city for leadership became so marked
that in 1869 he was commissioned to
lead an expedition into the interior
of Western Australia in search of the
missing explorer Leichhardt, whose
fate still remains a mystery. The
experience gained on that trip led to
his employment on other expeditions
for exploring and opening up the
vast territory of Western Australia,
the most important being from Perth
to Adelaide along the shores of the
Great Australian Bight in 1870, and
in 1874 from Geraldton across the
centre of the continent to the tele-
graph line which had just then been
erected from Adelaide to Port Dar-
win, and thence to Adelaide, a dis-
tance of over 2,700 miles, accom-
plished wholly on foot and horse-
back and without the aid of
camels. These journeys, two of the
most important and interesting of
Australian explorations, are treated
fully in another portion of this
work. They gained for him the gold
medal of the Royal Geographical
Society of London as well as the
title of Chevalier of the Order


of the Crown of Italy and hon-
orary fellowship of the St. Peters-
burg, Vienna, and Italian Geo-
graphical Societies. He also received
the thanks of the colonial Govern-
ment, coupled with a grant of 5,000
acres, and in 1882 was made a
C.M.G. by Her Majesty Queen Vic-
toria for valuable services rendered
in exploring the interior. In 1876
he was appointed Deputy Surveyor-
General of Western Australia, dur-
ing 1878-9 Acting Commissioner
of Crown Lands and Surveyor-
General, 1880-1 Acting Comptroller
of Imperial Expenditure, and
1883-90 Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Surveyor-General with a
seat in the Executive and Legisla-
tive Councils. With the introduc-
tion of responsible government, in
securing which he took a very
prominent part, he became the first
Premier of the colony, and for
nearly eleven years without inter-
ruption, as Premier and Colonial
Treasurer, he guided the destinies of
this vast State and controlled its
interests to a degree almost ap-
proaching benevolent autocracy, re-
linquishing office only to undertake
wider duties in the first Parliament
of the Commonwealth of Australia.
The gold discoveries which occurred
in 1892 brought Western Australia
into general prominence, and the
great expansion that followed made
it imperative that a man both strong
of purpose and wide of outlook
Greenham & Evans , Perth.
RIGHT HON. SIR JOHN FORREST.
should be at the helm of state. That
Sir John fulfilled these requirements
may be seen from a survey of the
work accomplished by him, which is
fully discussed in the historical sec-
tion of this work. The Coolgardie
Water Scheme, the greatest of its
kind in the world, and the Fremantle
Harbour Works, together with his
policy of railway development and
liberal land legislation, are mat-
ters for which his name will ever
be honoured in his native State.
But perhaps his greatest achievement
lies in the fact that he took com-
mand of a State small and insignifi-
cant in importance, and after eleven
years left office, having raised Wes-
tern Australia to a position of pro-
minence in the councils of Australia.
In regard to Federal matters, Sir
John was President of the Federal
Council of Australia in 1897 and was
a member of the Federal Convention
of 1891, as well as that of 1897-8
which framed the Federal Constitu-
tion, and on the inauguration of the
Commonwealth in 1901 was elected
a member of the House of Repre-
sentatives, and was Postmaster-Gen-
eral and afterwards Minister of
Defence in the first Federal Ministry
formed by Mr. (afterwards Sir)
Edmund Barton. Since then he has
held office in every Liberal Admin-
istration, and in the last two has
filled the important post of Trea-
surer of the Commonwealth. During
Mr. Deakin's absence at the Im-
perial Conference of 1907 he acted
as Prime Minister of the Common-
wealth. In Perth almost every
public institution is indebted to
Sir John for assistance given to deve-
lopment and extension, and some of
them, notably King's Park, are
wholly the result of his foresight. In
1882 he was created a C.M.G. and
in 1891 raised to the dignity of
K.C.M.G. tie attended officially
the Jubilee of 1887 and the Diamond
Jubilee of 1897, and in the lat-
ter year was made a Privy Councillor
and received the degree of LL.D.
from Cambridge University, and in
1902 received the ad eundtm degree
of LL.D. of Adelaide University. In
1901 he was further honoured by
being created a G.C.M.G., being one
of the very few Australians who have
achieved that distinction, and in
1911 had the honour of hanging his
banner in the chapel of the Order.
His “Explorations in Australia"
(1876) and “Notes on Western Aus-
tralia" (1884-87) are both publica-
tions of great value to the student of
Australian history. In 1876 Sir
John was married to Margaret
Elvire, eldest daughter of the late
Edward Uamersley, 8.A., of Pyrton,
near Guildford, W.A., and niece of
the late Hugh Uamersley, J.P., High
Sheriff (1840), Chairman of Quarter
Sessions, and D.L., of Pyrton Manor,
Oxfordshire. Residence —The Bun-
galow, Hay Street, Perth, W.A.
The Honourable JAMES MAC
KINNON FOWLER, M.H.R. for
HON. JAMES MACKINNON FOWLER.
Perth, Western Australia, is a son
of Mr. James Fowler, of Strathaven,
Scotland. He was born at Strath-
aven on June 20, 1863, and was edu-
cated locally and at Glasgow, where
he attended the Athenaeum Col-
lege. At the age of nineteen he em-
barked on a commercial career, enter-
ing the counting-house of a large
commercial firm at Glasgow, which
he left seven years later to take a
more responsible post in a similar
establishment. In 1891 he came to
Australia, and after a short sojourn
in Melbourne decided to settle in the
Western State. Proceeding to the
Murchison goldfields he spent several
years in the rough life incidental to
prospecting and mining pursuits
generally, and eventually became
connected with the firm of Sands
and McDougall at Perth. Mr. Fow-
ler took a leading part in the long
campaign to bring about the federa-
tion of the Australian States, and
was Hon. Organizing Secretary and
subsequently Hon. General Secretary
to the Executive of the Federal
League in Western Australia. When
the movement was brought to a sue


cessful issue he was nominated for
the Perth seat in the House of
Representatives, and has held this
seat ever since his election in March,
1901. Formerly a member of the
Labour Party, since the last election
as a federalist he has felt himself
obliged to detach himself from that
organization owing to what he con-
siders the gradual development by
that Party of a policy of unification.
During his career in Parliament he
has fathered a Bill to prevent the
expatriation of children and
aboriginals from Australia, and has
also been instrumental in securing an
Act giving additional power to the
Commonwealth to deport alien
criminals. He was a member of the
Tariff Commission which visited all
parts of Australia, taking evidence
in connection with the Customs de-
partments, and submitted exhaustive
reports thereon to Parliament. He
also fought hard for the construction
o
of the Trans-Australian Railway.
Apart from his Parliamentary in-
terests, he owns a farm at Kojonup,
comprising some 1,800 acres, which
at the present time is partly im-
proved, and where mixed farming
operations are carried on. At his
residence in the suburbs of Mel-
bourne Mr. Fowler has a very excep-
tional private library, consisting of
over 4,000 volumes of rare and
standard works. In 1900 he married
Daisy Winifred, daughter of Mr.
Richard Bastow, late of the Victorian
Public Service, and a well-known
scientist, and has three sons and a
daughter.
The Honourable CHARLES ED-
WARD FRAZER, M.P. The
career of the Honourable C. E.
Frazer, the present Postmaster-Gen-
eral of the Commonwealth, supplies
a striking example of what can be
achieved by youth when aided by
distinct ability and impelled by
indomitable perseverance and energy.
The son of James and Susan Frazer,
the subject of our sketch was born
at Yarrawonga, Victoria, in Janu-
ary, 1880, and was educated in the
State school of that town. At the
age of fifteen he removed to Wes-
tern Australia and entered upon the
trade of enginedriving, spending
four years on locomotive engines,
succeeded by a further three as an
enginedriver on the Boulder mines.
An earnest student of political pro-
blems, Mr. Frazer even as a youth
threw himself into the cause of the
workers, and when he was barely
twenty-one achieved the distinc-
tion of being elected President of
the Boulder Enginedrivers’ Associa-
tion. In the same year (1900) he
also became President of the Boul-
der Branch of the A.N.A. He
resigned the presidency of the
Enginedrivers’ Association to take
up the wider sphere of duty as
Secretary of the Goldfields Trades
and Labour Council, a position
which he held until 1903. He also
entered municipal life at this time
and served for over two years as a
member of the Kalgoorlie Town
Council. Having secured the selec-
tion ballot for the Labour interests
of Kalgoorlie, he was elected to the
Commonwealth Parliament as the
member for that district at the
general election of 1903, and has
held the seat ever since. Though a
young man he made his opinions felt
in the councils of the party, and in
1908 was appointed Assistant Whip.
On the accession to power of the
Labour Government under Mr.
Fisher in 1910 Mr. Frazer was
deemed worthy of a position as Hon-
HON. CHARLES EDWARD FRAZER.
or ary Minister. In 1911, during the
absence of Mr. Fisher at the Coron-
ation, he acted as Federal Treasurer
with considerable success. When by
the lamented death of Mr. E. L.
Batchelor late in the same year a
rearrangement of portfolios became
necessary, Mr. Frazer was made
Postmaster - General a position
which he still continues to hold and
in which he is doing excellent ser-
vice for the nation, notwithstanding
the many difficulties in the way and
the abundant criticism levelled at
him from time to time.
WILLIAM NOAH HEDGES,
member of the House of Representa-
tives for Fremantle, Western Aus-
tralia, is a son of Mr. W. N. Hedges,
of Downend, near Bristol, England.
He was born in County Hertford-
shire on July 16, 1854, and received
his education at Keston College,
Keston. His first commercial train-
ing was obtained in the firm of Kin-
ninmont & Son, well-known con-
tractors in the Old Country, with
whom he obtained a sound know-
ledge of engineering and general
constructive experience. He sailed
for Australia in 1878, and after a
short stay in Adelaide proceeded to
the sister States, and was engaged
on several important works in
Queensland. The year 1881 wit-
nessed his return to Adelaide, and
in the different parts of the Central
State he completed a number of
large contracts, principally for the
Engineer-in-Chief's Department, and
in addition carried out a number of
works over the railway system of
the State. He built the Govern-
ment Wharf at Port Pirie, the large
engine and carriage sheds and other
works at Petersburg, and completed
several big undertakings at Port
Pirie in connection with the Broken
Hill mining companies. His next
venture was to open lime and iron-
stone quarries, after which he was
engaged in cutting, milling, and
stacking timber for the Barrier
Mines. Mr. Hedges was a resident
of Mount Barker, South Australia,
for several years, and while there
served as member of the District
Council and on the Roads Board.
His lively interest in local affairs led
to his being elected a life member
of the Mount Barker Agricultural
Society. He came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1893 and shortly afterwards
was successful in securing a number
of important contracts, among which
may be mentioned the construction
of the Mahogany Creek deviation
eastern railway, the Karr alee Water
Supply, the Donnybrook to Bridge-
town railway, and many other large
public works in Western Australia.
Subsequently Mr. Hedges purchased
a controlling interest in the Wes-
tern Australian Goldfields Firewood
Supply Company, of which concern
he is now Managing Director. In


the nineties Mr. Hedges turned his
attention to politics, and in 1904
contested the seat for the Yilgarn
district in the State Legislative As-
sembly, but without success. Two
years later he became a candidate
for the Federal House of Repre-
sentatives, and at the elections held
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM NOAH HEDGES.
in December, 1906, was returned as
member for Fremantle and still re-
tains that seat. He is interested in
the agricultural industry, and has
land at Koolberrin on the route of
the proposed railway from Wickepin
to Merriden. Mr. Hedges is a fami-
liar figure in the world of sport, and
is a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Turf Club and the Kalgoorlie
Racing Club, besides which he is
associated with many other sporting
institutions. He married a daugh-
ter of Mr. John Paterson, of “Green
Hills,” Mount Barker, South Aus-
tralia, and has two sons and three
daughters.
The Honourable HUGH MAHON,
representative of Coolgardie in the
Federal Parliament, was born in Ire-
land in January, 1858, his father,
the late Mr. James Mahon, being an
extensive farmer near Tullamore, in
King’s County. Mr. Mahon’s edu-
cation began in a National School
and was continued under the Chris-
tian Brothers and private tutors.
Engaging at an early aye in the
printing trade, he quickly became a
reporter on the Press, and subse-
quently, at the age of twenty-one,
was appointed editor and manager
of an Irish provincial journal. The
agitation for Home Rule and land
law reform, initiated by Mr. Parnell
in the late seventies, naturally at-
tracted Mr. Mahon, whose ancestors
had suffered through the unchecked
rapacity and exactions of Irish land-
lordism. He accordingly enlisted in
the movement, which had for some
years his enthusiastic advocacy both
as a journalist and as an individual.
One of his earliest public acts was as
a supporter of the present Irish
leader, Mr. J. E. Redmond, M.P.,
when in 1879 the constituency of
New Ross first introduced Mr. Red-
mond to the House of Commons. In
the conduct of his newspaper Mr.
Mahon incurred the hostility of the
British Government, at that time
clothed with extraordinary powers
for the punishment of its political
antagonists. A special statute en-
titled the Government to arrest and
imprison indefinitely any person ob-
noxious to it. No offence was named
in the warrant of arrest, nor was
there any preliminary hearing be-
fore a magistrate. Under the powers
conferred by this law Mr. Mahon
was thrown into Kilmainham Gaol,
where he was detained with nearly
100 others (including Messrs. Parn-
ell, Dillon, Wm. O’Brien, and J. J.
O’Kelly, then Members of the House
of Commons) from October, 1881 to
January, 1882. Released, owing to
the breakdown of his health, he
yielded to medical advice and left
for Australia, where he arrived a
few months later. On his recovery
Mr. Mahon accepted an appointment
on the Sydney Press, and from that
time onward until 1895, when he ar-
rived in Coolgardie, he maintained
his connection with journalism in
Eastern Australia. Toward the end
of 1895 he established the first news-
paper north of Coolgardie on the
then new Menzies goldfield, and two
years later, on the division of the
old Yilgarn electorate into several
new constituencies, he contested
North Coolgardie seat in the State
Parliament. The contest was an ex-
ceptionally vigorous one, and the
victor, Mr. H. Gregory, late Min-
ister for Mines and Railways, won
by the narrow majority of 60 votes.
Later Mr. Mahon took part in the
movement for the federation of the
Australian States, and in 1901 was
returned to the National Parlia-
ment for Coolgardie the largest
electorate in Australia, the area
being greater than that of the whole
State of Queensland. He was re-
elected without opposition in 1903,
and in the contested elections of
1906 and 1910 his majority (which
was only 350 in 1901) increased to
nearly 5,000 and 7,000 respectively.
In the first Labour Government of
the Commonwealth —that formed by
Mr. J. C. Watson, M.H.R., in 1904-
Mr. Mahon held the portfolio of Post-
master-General. As this Government
survived only a few months Mr.
Mahon was unable to give effect to
his project for the fuller extension
of postal and telegraphic facilities
to the remote interior, or to realize
an ambitious scheme to place a tele-
phone in the home of every settler
throughout the continent. Minis-
terial responsibility again came to
Mr. Mahon in the second Labour
Government of the Commonwealth,
which attained office in 1908, when
he received the portfolio of Minister
for Home Affairs. In this depart-
ment he effected several reforms and
initiated others, notably in respect
of payments for lands resumed for
public purposes, by which large sums
have been saved to the Treasury. To
the second Administration of which
J. J. Dwyer , Kalgoorlie.
HON. HUGH MAHON.
Mr. Mahon was a member fell the
duty of-finally determining the fu-
ture seat of government of the Com-
monwealth at Yass-Camberra : and he
piloted through the House of Repre-
sentatives the measiire which pre-
cisely defined the boundaries of the
new Federal Territory. The selec-
tion of the site of the national
capital had aroused much contro-
versy, and Mr. Mahon received many


congratulations on the passing of the
Bill into law. In 1911 Mr. Mahon
made one of the small Parliamentary
Party which visited Papua, quali-
fying themselves by personal in-
quiry into its affairs to shape legis-
lation necessary for the effective
occupation of that territory. Later
he spent some months in Western
Australia assisting the State Labour
Party, as honorary editor of The
Labour Vanguard and by platform
addresses, to the pronounced victory
which it obtained at the polls. His
services were publicly recognized
by the Premier of the State (Hon.
J. Scaddan), and presentations
were made to him on behalf of the
Ministry, as well as by the Com-
mittee of the Labour Federation con-
trolling the Party’s affairs at the
general election. Mr. Mahon was
married in 1888 to Mary Alice,
daughter of the late Mr. Joseph
L’Estrange, a Melbourne solicitor,
and his family consists of a daughter
and three sons.
The State Legislature.
As in the other colonies, there have been several
well-marked stages in the development of the legislative
function in Western Australia. Starting from the
inception of the Swan River Colony, when the sole
authority was vested in the Governor, the next stage was
reached by the establishment of an Executive Council,
followed shortly afterwards by a Legislative Council
consisting of the same personnel as the Executive, and
being consequently wholly nominated by the Crown.
The functions of the two bodies were totally distinct,
but the real power of government vested in the Execu-
tive, the Legislative Council being merely an advisory
body. With certain changes of constitution by the addi-
tion from time to time of unofficial nominees to the
Legislative Council, this form of government existed
until 1870, when a Legislative Council consisting of
one-third nominee and two-thirds elected representatives
was established. This body, which was given a wider
range of legislative power than its predecessor, but
which was still really at the mercy of the Executive,
which in turn took its opinions from the Governor, con-
tinued until the inauguration of responsible government
in 1890, when Parliament became supreme under the
Crown, and the Executive Council was remodelled so
as to consist of the Governor and the responsible Minis-
ters of the day. Having thus outlined the progressive
steps it may be of advantage to trace shortly the history
of government in the State.
I.—THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
At the time of the establishment of the colony the
powers of government were placed wholly in the hands
of the Lieutenant-Governor, Captain Stirling, whose
method of procedure was laid down in his letter of
a23pointment from the Colonial Office, no regular com-
mission being issued until some two years later. Some
little time after the first officials sailed for the Swan
River an Act of Parliament (10 Geo. IV., c. 22) was
passed, providing temporarily for the government of the
new colonv.
J
On March 5, 1831, a commission was issued to Cap-
tain Stirling appointing him to be Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of Western Australia, and at the
same time Instructions under the King’s Sign Manual
were framed to accompany the commission. In the
second clause of these instructions it was stated : -
Whereas we have thought that there should be an
Executive Council for assisting you, our Governor, or the
person administering the Government of our said territory
for the time being, we do by these presents nominate and
appoint the undermentioned persons to be of the Executive
Council of our said territory—that is to say, the Senior
Officer of our Land Forces for the time being next in com-
mand, the Colonial Secretary of Western Australia for the
time being, and the Surveyor-General of the said territory
for the time being, and the Advocate-General of the said
territory for the time being.
The first Executive Council appointed under these
Instructions, which were published in the colony on
December 24, 1831, consisted of:
Captain Stirling ... Governor
Captain F. C. Irwin ... Commandant
Peter Brown ... ... Colonial Secretary
Lieutenant J. S. Roe Surveyor-General
W. IT. Mackie ... Advocate-General
No change was made in the constitution of the
Council until June, 1847, when the Collector of Revenue
—in other words, the Treasurer —was added. In 1852,
after the colony had become a convict settlement, the
number was still further increased by the appointment
of the Comptroller-General of Convicts to be a member
of the Executive. No other changes were made until
1871, except that by an inadvertent omission from the
Instructions issued to Governor Kennedy in 1855 the
Commandant was debarred from sitting until the
omission had been rectified. By Order of the Queen in
Council, dated April 3, 1871, the Executive Council was


remodelled. The Governor remained President, the
Colonial Secretary, the Attorney-General, the Senior
Officer in Command of the Land Forces, and the
Surveyor-General retained their seats, while those of the
Comptroller-General and Collector of Revenue were
abolished. Under the Royal Instructions of July 4,
1878, the Governor was further authorized and em-
powered ‘To appoint, in addition to the ex-officio mem-
bers, such persons as he may think fit to be unofficial
members of our said Executive Council, but so that the
number of such unofficial members shall never exceed
the number of two." Every such appointment was,
however, to be provisional only until the same was
approved by the Queen, and could be revoked at any
time by Royal Warrant, and such unofficial members
were to take rank after the official members of
the Executive Council, and, as between themselves,
according to the
order of their ap-
pointment. The
Governor was
also directed and
enjoined to at-
tend and preside
at the meetings
of the Council
unless prevented
by some neces-
sary or reasonable
cause, when, un-
less he specially
appointed some
particular mem-
ber, the senior
member present
was to preside.
Under the provi-
sion allowing the
Photo by C. P. Farr.
inclusion of two unofficial members to the Executive
Council Mr. J. H. Thomas, the then Director of
Public Works, was appointed —an appointment which,
though it fulfilled the letter, scarcely carried out the
spirit of the Order-in-Council. By the additional Royal
Instructions of April 8, 1879, it was laid down that the
Executive Council was to comprise ‘so many persons in
our service (not exceeding six in number at any one
time) as the Governor shall from time to time appoint
to be members of the said Council by instruments under
By the Act 10 Geo. IV., c. 22, power was given
to the King-in-Council to establish in Western Aus-
tralia a Legislative Council which should have power to
legislate, within certain limits, upon local matters. This
PARLIAMENT HOUSE.
II. — THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
the public seal of the colony. All such persons shall
be styled official members, and the persons discharging
the functions of the offices hereunder mentioned shall,
if so appointed, rake precedence and seniority in the
order in which the said officers are named —that is to
say, Colonial Secretary, Attorney-General, Senior Mili-
tary Officer in Command of our Troops within the
Colony not being below the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel,
Treasurer and Collector of Internal Revenue. Official
members discharging the functions of any other offices
shall take precedence and seniority after the foregoing
officers, and among themselves according to the date of
their respective appointments/'
The first Executive appointed under these Instruc-
tions consisted, in addition to the Governor as President,
of the following : —The Colonial Secretary, the Attorney-
General, the Commandant, the Surveyor-General, the
Director of Pub-
lic Works. The
sixth position
allowed under
the Instructions
was filled in No-
vember by the ap-
pointment of the
Colonial Trea-
surer. The Com-
mandant (Lieu-
tenant-Colonel E.
D. Harvest ) left
the colony in
1880, and after
his retirement
the Commandant
ceased to be
appointed as a
member of the
Executive.
No advantage was taken of the permission given in
1878 to add two unofficial members to the Executive
until August, 1884, when Mr. James G. Lee Steere was
provisionally appointed, and the appointment was con-
firmed by the Colonial Office in the following November.
The Council remained as then constituted until
October 21, 1890, when on the introduction of respon-
sible government it ceased to exist, and its place was
taken by a new Executive Council consisting of the
responsible Ministers of the day.
power was exercised by an Order-in-Council dated
November 1, 1830, which set forth "that the Governor
for the time being of the said settlements of Western
Australia, or the officer administering the government


thereof, the Senior Officer of iiis Majesty’s Land Forces
next in command, the Colonial Secretary of the said
territory for the time being, the Surveyor-General
thereof for the time being, and the Advocate-General
thereof for the time being, so long as they shall respec-
tively be resident in the said settlements, or any three
of them, of whom the Acting-Governor shall be one,
shall have authority and power to make, ordain, and
establish all such laws and ordinances, and to constitute
such courts and officers as may be necessary for the
peace, order, and good government of His Majesty's
subjects, and others within the settlements," subject,
however, to the Royal prerogative of disallowance; and
the Order went on to state “that no sucli law or ordin-
ance shall be made unless the same shall have been first
proposed by the said Governor or officer administering
the Government"; and, further, that no court of jus-
tice was to be constitifted except by a law or ordinance
which had received the Royal assent.
The Order-in-Council reached the colony on Decem-
ber 24, 1831, and was published some days later. The
first meeting of the Council was held in January, 1832,
when it proceeded to make proper arrangements for the
administration of justice. A Civil Court and Court of
General Sessions were established, Mr. G. F. Moore
being appointed as Commissioner of the one and Mr.
W. H. Mackie as Chairman of the other. This arrange-
ment held until August, 1834, when Mr. Mackie became
the sole Judge and Mr. G. F. Moore Advocate-General.
The personnel of the Legislative Council was the
same as that of the Executive. Both were composed
wholly of officials, and there was more than a suspicion
that the Legislature was really subservient to the Execu-
tive and did not represent the opinions of the colonists.
Almost at once an agitation for an elective Council was
commenced. Finding that distance, and possibly lack
of interest on the part of the Colonial Office, prevented
their complaints having any force, the settlers requested
the Governor to proceed to London and personally urge
their wishes upon the Secretary of State. As there
were several other matters requiring attention the Gov-
ernor decided to go. After laying the request before
the Home authorities Captain Stirling felt justified by
its reception in writing to the colony in hopeful terms.
When he returned to Western Australia, however, it was
found that the only concession was an authority to the
Governor to suggest to the Colonial Office four names
of satisfactory persons who might be added to the Legis-
lative Council as unofficial members. As this did not
satisfy the settlers in any way, and as the Governor saw
no reason for urgency in making the selections, nothing
was done in the matter until the arrival of Stirling's
successor, Governor John Hutt, who on January 3,
1839, selected W. L. Brockman, George Leake, Thomas
Peel, and William Tanner.
Although the names of members changed from time
to time no further change was made in the constitution
of the Council until 18G8 (except that in June, 1847,
the Collector of Revenue was added to the list of ex-
officio members); but the colonists were not to blame
for this want of progression. It may safely be said that
at no period during those early years did the constitu-
tion of the Legislative Council meet with the approval
of the people. Repeated applications for some voice in
the election of representatives met with little or no
response, though just previous to 1850 the Secretary
of State went so far as to indicate that some measure
of representation might be given when the colony was
able to do without the assistance of a Parliamentary
grant. In 1850 an Imperial Act (13-14 Viet., c. 59)
was passed for the better government of the Australian
colonies which provided that as soon as a colony reached
the stage of being able to pay its own way the existing
Legislative Council could, on receipt of a petition signed
by one-third of the householders of the colony, establish
a new Council, two-thirds of whose members should be
elected. This seemed to bring the realization of the
colonists' hopes nearer, but another obstacle cropped up,
which for the time was insurmountable. Almost
simultaneously with the passing of the Act Western
Australia was made a penal colony. This, as the Secre-
tary of State pointed out, rendered any form of repre-
sentation out of the question, as the bulk of colonial
expenses would of necessity fall upon the Home
Government.
When it became known in 1865 that transportation
was to cease within three years the agitation for repre-
sentation started afresh. Public meetings were held and
petitions circulated as directed by the Act of 1850.
Outside the existing Legislative Council there was a
general desire for election, but within it there was a
strong feeling against drastic alteration. When the
petition was presented there was an amendment moved
and carried which to all intent defeated the object
aimed at. This was to the effect that the nominated
unofficial members should be increased to six in number
and their term of office limited to three years.
With that disregard for public opinion in the
colonies which characterized the Colonial Office in
those days, the Secretary of State in 1867 assented
to the Council proposal, without even mentioning
the wider request, all particulars of which were
before him.
Determined to have some voice in the matter, a
public meeting was called, which decided to ask the
Governor to allow the colony to be split up into six
districts, each district to select by a poll one man to
act as a member of the Council. The Governor (Dr.
Hampton) who was only too glad to avoid the respon-
sibility of nominating, approved of the proposal and


agreed to nominate the persons selected. A poll was
then taken and five names were chosen, one district —
Champion Bay—refusing to take advantage of the conces-
sion. The Governor then nominated Mr. J. W. Hardey,
an opponent of representative government in the old
Council, and submitted the six names to the Secretary of
State for approval. By a notice dated July 7, 1868,
it was notified
for general in-
formation i n
Th e Govern-
ment Gazette
that “by an
Order - i n -
Council made
at the Court
at Windsor
May 14, 1868,
Her Most Gra-
cious Majesty
the Queen,
with the ad-
vice of Her
Privy Council,
did order that
the Orders-in-
Council re-
spectively
bearing date
March 20,
1857 ; March
3, 1859; and
October 11,
1861, under
which the late
Legisl ati ve
Council was
c o n s t i t u ted
should be, and
the same are,
thereby re-
voked; and
that the Gov-
ernor for time
being of the
colony of Wes-
tern Australia
or the officer
Photos by Bartletto.
administering the government thereof, the Senior
Officer for the time being Commanding Her Majesty’s
Land Forces in the said colony, the Colonial Secretary
of the said colony for the time being, the Surveyor-
General of the said colony for the time being, the
Attorney-General of the said colony for the time being,
and the Treasurer and Collector of Internal Revenue of
the said colony for the time being; and John Wall
Hardey, Julian George Charles Carr, Walter Bateman,
James George Lee Steere, William Locke Brockman,
and Samuel Pole Phillips, Esquires, should be, and the
same are, thereby constituted a Legislative Council
within the said colony, with the powers and subject to
the conditions and restrictions therein contained; and
that the ap-
pointment of
the above non-
official mem-
bers of such
Council should
be for a period
not exceeding
three years.
The above ap-
pointments to
take effect
from the
date of this
notice.”
The advo-
cates for repre-
sentative gov-
ernment did
not allow pub-
lic feeling to
grow cold,
more especi-
ally as they
had in the
new Council a
larger number
o f partisans
than ever be-
fore, and were
assisted by a
Governor (Mr.
Weld) who
had had con-
siderable ex-
perience of
Parliamentary
institutions.
In 1869 a fur-
ther petition
under 13-14
Viet., c. 59, was presented to the Council, and a
resolution passed in favour of giving effect to its request.
Following upon this a Bill was introduced into the
Council in 1870, and was finally agreed to on June 1
of that year. Arrangements for the change were quickly
made. In August, 1870, the nominee Legislative
Council was dissolved by the issue of writs under 33
PREMIERS OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


Viet., No. 13. for the election of a Legislative Council,
to consist of twelve elected and six nominated members,
the latter to consist of three official nominee and three
unofficial nominee members; the Council to be presided
over by a Speaker. The elections took place in the
month of October, and resulted in the Council eventually
consisting of the following members:
Official Nominees—
Colonial Secretary Fred. P. Bailee
Attorney-General R. J. Walcott
Surveyor-General M. Fraser
Unofficial Nominees—
S. P. Phillips W. E. Marmion
M. Brown
Elected Members —
Albany John McKail
Fremantle E. Newman
~ W. D. Moore
Geraldton Major Logue
Greenough George Shenton
Perth J.G.C. Carr (Chairman
of Committees)
„ Luke S. Leake (Speaker)
Swan Thos. C. Gull
Toodyay Jas. Drummond
Vasse J. G. Bussell
Wellington Jas. G. Lee Steere
York J. H. Monger
Representative government having been secured,
the more progressive spirits in the community, amongst
whom may be mentioned Mr. (now Sir) S. H. Parker,
began to turn their attention to the full measure of
control —responsible government. At first there was
little public expression of opinion on the matter, and
this, especially when combined with passive resistance,
if not active opposition, on the part of successive
Governors did much to retard any general agitation.
In spite of obstacles, however, the movement grew, and
that it had some effect in official circles was seen in 1874,
when the total number of members was increased to
twenty-one by the creation of two new districts —the
Murray and Williams and the Northern —and again in
1882 by a further increase to twenty-four by the
erection of Gascoyne district, the total being finally
raised to twenty-six in 1886 by the establishment of the
Kimberley district. No other alteration was made in
the constitution of the representative Council, which,
when the old form of government expired in October,
1890, was composed as follows:
Official Nominees —
Colonial Secretary Sir M. Fraser, K.C.M.G.
Attorney-General C. N. Warton
Director of Works, Engineer-
in-Chief, and Commissioner
of Railways J. A. Wright
Surveyor-General and Com-
missioner of Crown Lands John Forrest, C.M.G.
Unofficial Nominees
Sir James G. Lee Steere, G. Randcll
Kt. (Speaker) D. K. Congdon
Sir Thomas Cockburn- J. Morrison
Campbell, Bart. (Chair-
man of Committees)
Elected Members
Albany L. V. Dellamel
Fremantle W. E. Marmion
~ W. S. Pearse
Gascoyne R. F. Sholl
Geraldton McK. Grant
Greenough W. T. Loton
Kimberley A. Forrest
Murray and Williams W. Paterson
North District A. R. Richardson
~ S. Burt, Q.C.
Perth E. Scott
~ E. Keane
Swan C. H. Rason
Toodyay G. Shenton
Vasse S. H. Parker
Wellington H. W. Venn
York C. Harper
The Legislative Council then consisted of a single
Legislative Chamber, and was composed of twenty-six
members, presided over by a Speaker, of whom four
were official members, five were nominees of the Crown,
and seventeen were elected for five years by the different
constituencies. The qualification of elected members
was the possession of £I,OOO freehold property. The
qualification of an elector was £SO freehold or £lO
household, or the lease of Crown lands to the same
amount of annual rental.
III. —RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT.
The struggle for responsible government has already
been dealt with at considerable length in the historical
portion of this work, but may perhaps be shortly
referred to here, even at the risk of apparent
repetition. The question was first mooted almost
immediately after the inception of representative gov-
ernment, but was viewed coldly by the Home authori-
ties and by successive Governors until at last it became
so pressing that in 1887 Governor Sir Frederick Broome
felt compelled to give his adherence to the movement.


The progress made from that time has been concisely
but clearly set forth in the Western Australian Year-
Book, to which we are partly indebted for the following
summary.
“By an almost unanimous vote of the Legislature
in July, 1887, a resolution was agreed to affirming the
principle of self-government, and the Governor was
requested to take the necessary steps to carry out the
wishes of the Legislature. In December, 1888, the
Legislative Council was dissolved, and a general election
took place in January, 1889, in order that the con-
stituencies might have an opportunity of expressing
their views upon the question of the new Constitution.
When the Council reassembled the resolution in favour
of responsible government for the colony was again car-
ried, this time without a single dissentient voice. The
Legislative Council met in April, 1889, and a Consti-
tution Bill, drafted by the Government, was at once
brought forward, after amendment passed, and for-
warded to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the
Governor (Sir Frederick Napier Broome), Mr. S. H.
Parker, and Sir Thomas Cockburn-Campbell being
appointed by the Legislature to proceed to England to
act as delegates on behalf of the colony when it came
before the Imperial Parliament. Much difficulty was
experienced in carrying the measure through its various
stages, strong opposition having arisen at Home to the
granting of Western Australia’s demands. This was
chiefly, if not entirely, due to a misunderstanding of
questions relating to the control of the Crown lands.
The latter, it was held, by a not inconsiderable and
decidedly demonstrative party in England, were the
'heritage of the British people,’ and should be available
and retained for settlement by the surplus population of
the Mother Country. To hand over a million, or even
half a million, square miles of country, favoured with
a temperate clime, to the 45,000 persons thinly scattered
over it, was regarded as a piece of folly verging on
political crime. The Bill was, however, referred to a
Select Committee —of which Baron de Worms was
chairman —for the taking of evidence; and so impressed
were the members of this body—after hearing what the
representatives of the colony had to communicate to
them —with the advantages likely to result from giving
Western Australians a free hand in the management of
their great national estate, and so convinced were they
of the errors underlying the popular opposition to the
measure, that they returned it to the House shorn of
nearly all the clauses to which the colony had pre-
viously objected, recommending that full and complete
control of the Crown lands should be vested in the local
Parliament which it was proposed to establish. Thus,
by the exertions of the colonial delegates, aided by the
influence of Sir William Robinson, who had in the
meanwhile succeeded Sir Frederick Broome as Governor
of the colony, and, opportunely, happened to be in
England, combined with the intelligence and liberal-
mindedness of a majority of the members of the Select
Committee, was Western Australia 'one and undivided ’
obtained for Western Australians. Mention should also
here be made of the assistance rendered by the Agents-
General for the other Australasian colonies, at a time
when, owing to delays due to the Imperial Cabinet, the
Bill appeared to be in jeopardy. In a body the Agents-
General waited upon the Leader of the Government in
the House of Commons and made representations of a
character which swept away final obstacles. The Bill,
enabling Her Majesty to grant a Constitution to Wes-
tern Australia, passed its third reading in the Imperial
House of Commons in July, and meeting with no oppo-
sition in the Lords, received the Royal assent on
August 15, 1890. The announcement of the latter was
made by a proclamation, which was dated October 21,
1890, being publicly read by the Governor in Perth on
that date, and included in The Government Gazette of
the 23rd of the same month.”
Though in many ways excellent at the time, par-
ticularly as it gave the colonists what they had been
striving for more or less actively almost since the found-
ation of the colony —a Parliament in the election of
which they possessed the determining voice—it was not
long before the necessity for broadening the Constitu-
tion became apparent. The first change —that of mak-
ing the Legislative Council an elective body —took place
automatically in 1893 when the population of the colony
reached 60,000.
A further alteration was made in 1896, when the
Legislative Council was increased to twenty-four and
the Assembly to forty-four in order to provide repre-
sentation for the new goldfields communities. In 1899
the great increase of population—it was then 170,000 —
and the advanced ideas of the bulk of the newcomers,
directed attention once more to the Constitution, and
it was generally admitted that something must be done
to bring it more into line with those of Eastern Aus-
tralia. The result was the Constitution Act Amend-
ment Act of that year, by the provisions of which the
Council was raised to thirty and the Assembly to fifty
in number, as at present constituted. More important
alterations than mere numbers were, however, made by
the limitation of the duration of the Assembly to three
years and the adoption of adult suffrage as the franchise
for Assembly elections. Owing to the fact that in those
days the population was practically a moving one —a
feature common to mining communities—the Premier
(Honourable Walter James) endeavoured in 1902 to
pass an Amending Bill providing for a redistribution of
seats, for a reduction of the number of members, for a
reduction in the number of Ministers, and for a double
dissolution. Suggestions such as these were could not


Ministry.
Assumed office.
Retired.
1.
Forrest ....
December 29, 1890
February 14, 1901
2.
Throssell
February 14, 1901
May 27, 1901
3.
Leake
May 27, 1901
November 21, 1901
4.
Morgans . . .
November 21, 1901
December 23, 1901
5.
Leake .. . .
December 23, 1901
July 1, 1902
6.
James
July 1, 1902
August 10, 1904
7.
Daglish ....
August 10, 1904
August 25, 1905
8.
Rason
August 25, 1905
May 7, 1906
9.
Moore . . .
May 7, 1906
September 16, 1910
10.
Wilson
September 16, 1910
October 7, 1911
11.
Scaddan . . . .
October 7, 1911
Still in office
fail to rouse the opposition of the Upper Chamber,
where the Bill was rejected on the second reading. Mr.
James returned to the charge in 1903 in a somewhat
different manner. Instead of one Bill three were intro-
duced—a Constitution Act Amendment Bill, an Elec-
toral Bill, and a Redistribution of Seats Bill. The first
suffered the same fate as its predecessor of 1902, but
the others were with amendments agreed to. Apart
from purifying and machinery clauses the Electoral Act
amended the Constitution Act, 1899, by giving an elector
the right to vote as soon as he was registered and by
abolishing plural voting for the Assembly. The Redistri-
bution of Seats Act was simply as its name implied, and
did not, as before, attempt to cut down the number of
electorates. The Electoral Act of 1904 was repealed in
1907 on the passing of a new Act of wider scope and
more up-to-date provisions, and the Redistribution of
Seats Act was replaced by another one in 1911.
The present Constitution of Western Australia is,
therefore, contained in the following Acts of Parlia-
ment :
Constitution Act, 1889 (52 Viet., No. 23);
Constitution Act Amendment Act, 1893 (57 Viet.,
No. 14);
Constitution Act Amendment Act, 1899 (63 Viet.,
No. 19);
Electoral Act, 1807 (7 Edw. VII., No. 27); and
Redistribution of Seats Act, 1911 (1 Geo. V.,
No. 6).
The Honourable JOHN SCAD-
DAN, M.L.A. There is a trite say-
ing attributed to the great Napo-
leon, “that every member of his
Grand Army carried a Field Mar-
shaTs baton in his haversack,” or, in
other words, “Merit would always
compel recognition.” The underlying
principle of this maxim is nowhere
more dominant than in political cir-
cles in Australia, where, under
democratic institutions, the highest
and most responsible offices in the
State are open to all. At the pre-
sent time in Western Australia an
excellent exemplification of the nrin-
ciple is to be found in the person of
the present Premier, the Honour-
able John Scaddan. Together with
this is the demonstration of another
fact, the excellence of the education
The Ministry.
imparted at the free, secular, and
compulsory schools throughout Aus-
tralia. To what extent public men
of the present day are indebted to
the splendid educational systems
which are such a prominent feature
in the Commonwealth it is hard to
estimate. Mr. Scaddan was born at
Moonta, in South Australia, on
August 4, 1876. He is therefore
now in his thirty-sixth year, and it
speaks volumes for his industry and
determination that at such an early
age he has risen to such a command-
ing position in the affairs of his
country. Early in his life his
parents removed to Eaglehawk, near
Bendigo, Victoria, thereby only ex-
changing one centre of democratic
thought for another, for the Cornish
instinct of freedom is strongly pre-
Speakers of Legislative Council under
Representative Government.
Sir Luke Samuel Leake, 1870-1886.
Sir James George Lee Steere, 1886-1890.
Presidents of Legislative Council under
Responsible Government.
Sir Thomas Cockburn-Campbell, Bart, 1890-1892.
Sir George Shenton, Kt., 1892-1906.
lion. Henry Briggs, 1906 (still in office).
Speakers of Legislative Assembly under
Responsible Government.
Sir James George Lee Steere, K.C.M.G., 1890-1903.
Hon. Charles Harper, 1903-1904.
Hon. Mathieson Henry Jacoby, 1904-1905.
Hon. Timothy Francis Quinlan, 1905-1911.
Hon. Michael Francis Troy, 1911 (still in office).
Ministries since the Establishment of
Responsible Government.
dominant in both. Mr. Scaddan re-
ceived his education at the State
school at Eaglehawk, an education
which has proved to have been car-
ried out on systematic and thorough
lines. After leaving school he
adopted the occupation of a miner
and worked in the mines of the dis-
trict until 1896, when he migrated
to Western Australia, attracted no
doubt by the marvellous gold dis-
coveries at Kalgoorlie. While
working as a miner at this centre
Mr. Scaddan, who had always been
keenly interested in every avenue
for improvement, took advantage of
his opportunities and qualified as an
enginedriver, deserting underground
work for the less hazardous calling,
Eventually he became a member of
the Enginedrivers , Union, and his


entry into political life was made
through this channel. In 1904 he
was selected as the Labour candi-
date for the constituency of Ivan-
hoe, and secured a very easy victory,
the dominance of his personality
being at this stage clearly outlined,
a feature that in the future was to
carry him to the highest office in the
HON. JOHN SCADDAN.
State of his adoption. At every
succeeding election he was returned
unopposed, receiving the same ex-
pression of confidence in 1911, when
under the Redistribution of Seats
Act his old electorate was combined
with Brownhill to form the
Brownhill - Ivanhoe constituency.
The retirement of Mr. Bath from
the leadership of the Labour Party
in 1910 brought Mr. Scaddan im-
mediately to the front, for he was
appointed to the vacant position, in
which office his tact and ability have
been pre-eminently demonstrated.
The elections in 1911 returned the
Labour Party to power with an over-
whelming majority, and to Mr.
Scaddan was assigned the task of
forming a Ministry. In this he was
successful, and in it he now holds
office as Premier and Colonial
Treasurer. Since Mr. Scaddan’s
elevation to Cabinet rank he has at-
tended a conference of Premiers in
Melbourne, where his utterances on
political matters involving wider
issues than those of his own State
have received the greatest attention
and respect. Mr. Scaddan is a tactful
but forceful orator, and the wisdom
of his actions during the past few
years is an excellent augury for the
broader outlook of the future.
The Honourable T H O M A S
HENRY BATH, M.L.A., Minister
of Lands and Agriculture, was born
at Hill End, New South Wales, in
1875 and was educated in the
Government school in that town.
Just on the eve of attaining his ma-
jority he turned his steps, like so
many others have done, toward Wes-
tern Australia, and took up work in
the then new town of Kalgoorlie.
Here he was faced with a new set
of circumstances, and a much more
restricted franchise than obtained in
the East. A closer acquaintance les-
sened the attractions which had ap-
peared so full of glamour in the dis-
tance, and he returned to New
South Wales with the declared in-
tention of not returning. A few
months, however, found him back
again in 1897. At that time the
Australian Workers’ Association had
been established and he became a
member, later on joining the "John
Ballance Assembly of the Knights
of Labour,” which that enthusiastic
New Zealander, Frank Kelsall,
sought to establish in Western Aus-
tralia. Mr. Bath was actively identi-
fied with the erection of the Wor-
kers’ Hall in Boulder and the initia-
tion of the Sunday night after-
church lectures which were then
established. At that time the ques-
tion of securing a more liberal fran-
chise and the wiping out of the in-
equalities which marked the then
distribution of electorates was one of
the great political questions agitat-
ing the public mind, and Mr. Bath
threw himself energetically into the
movement in the Labour interest.
He was actively associated with the
movement for establishing the first
Labour paper The W estralian
Worker in Western Australia, and
was selected as its first editor, devot-
ing all his time in an honorary capa-
city for the first three months of its
existence. A difference of opinion
as to the policy of the paper led to
the appointment of Wallace Nelson
as editor, and Mr. Bath was elected
to the office of secretary of the Gold-
fields Trades and Labour Council,
then the active head of the Labour
movement on the eastern goldfields
and the forerunner of the present
Eastern District Council of the
A.L.F. While occupying this posi-
tion the representation of Hannans
in the State Assembly became vacant-
owing to the death of Mr. J. Reside,
then Labour member for the dis-
trict, and Mr. Bath being selected
as the Labour candidate for the
vacancy secured an unopposed re-
turn. When Hannans electorate
disanneared through redistribution
Mr. Bath sought election for Brown-
Hill constituency and was again re-
turned unopposed. He continued to
hold that seat until it, too, disap-
peared through the Redistribution
Act of 1911, when he contested the
new electorate of Avon and was re-
turned after a strenuous contest. In
August, 1904, Mr. Bath was elected
Chairman of Committees of the
Legislative Assembly, a position
which he relinquished to take up the
portfolio of Minister of Lands and
Education for a very brief term in
1905. After the general elections of
1905 he was chosen leader of the
Parliamentary Labour Party, and
retained the position, enjoying the
undivided confidence of the Party
until 1910, when, owing to continued
ill-health, he was compelled to resign
from the office. On the formation
of the Labour Government in 1911
Mr. Bath accepted a portfolio as
Minister of Lands and Agriculture.
During his career in Parliament Mr.
Bath has been essentially a member
who looked to the general interests
of the people. He availed himself
of every opportunity of becoming ac-
quainted with the resources of the
State, and as one of the active or-
MON. THOMAS HENRY BATH.
ganizers of the Labour Party pos-
sessed a wide acquaintance in various
districts. From his first entry into
Parliament he has been a prominent
advocate of educational progress,
urging its extension not only in the
primary schools but in the establish-
ment of technical schools and in
urging the establishment of institu


tions in which the bent for agricul-
tural pursuits would be encouraged.
When the University Endowment
Act was passed he was chosen as one
of the trustees, and consistently
urged the extension of this endow-
ment principle for general educa-
tional purposes. He was appointed
a member of the first Senate of the
University of Western Australia in
February, 1912. Mr. Bath was a
member of the Honorary Royal Com-
mission appointed to report on the
proposal to establish a University in
Western Australia. He is also a
member of the Committee of the
Public Library and Museum of Wes-
tern Australia. Mr. Bath was mar-
ried in 1904 to Elizabeth, daughter
of Mr. W. T. Fensome, of Kal-
goorlie, and has a son and daughter.
The Honourable PHILIP COL-
LIER, M.L.A., Minister of Mines
and Railways in the second Labour
Government of Western Australia,
is a native of Victoria, having been
born on April 21, 1874, at Wood-
stock, some 20 miles from Mel-
bourne, where his father, the late
Mr. Philip Collier, carried on agri-
cultural pursuits. He was educated
at local private and public schools,
and concluding his scholastic career
at the age of sixteen turned his
attention to the mining industry.
After a short period spent at the
North Birmingham Mine at Steig-
leitz, a score of miles from Ballarat,
he went farther afield, and for sev-
eral years pursued this calling at
different localities in Victoria and
New South Wales. Subsequently he
was engaged as foreman on the con-
struction work in connection with
the Melbourne sewerage scheme,
which position he relinquished in
order to come to Western Australia
in 1904. Proceeding straight to the
eastern goldfields, Mr. Collier was
associated with the Perseverance
Gold-mining Company at Boulder
for about fifteen months, when he
received a distinguishing mark of
public appreciation by being elected
in 1905 to represent the famous
mining constituency of Boulder City
in the Legislative Assembly, and has
held this seat ever since, being un-
opposed at the recent elections.
Even as a youth of sixteen Mr. Col-
lier took an active interest in poli-
tics and was strongly attached to the
Labour cause. He held various pro-
minent positions in the Labour
organizations in Victoria, among
wliich was that of honorary secretary
of different branches of the P.L.P.,
while on several occasions he dis-
charged the secretarial duties for
Labour candidates in Victoria.
Upon arrival in this State he joined
the Boulder branch of the Australian
Workers’ Association, and almost
immediately was elected an officer,
subsequently representing that
branch at the Labour Congress held
at Perth in July, 1905. He also
accepted the position of Vice-Presi-
dent of the Goldfields Trades and
Labour Council, which he held at
the time of his election to Parlia-
ment. The interests of the miners
lay especially near to his heart, and
he gave much time and thought to
the Mines Regulation Act of 1906,
brought in by the Moore Govern-
ment. W hile acting as delegate on
behalf of the Australian Workers’
Ford , Bunbury.
HON. PHILIP COLLIER.
Association to the Kalgoorlie Trades
and Labour Council Mr. Collier pro-
posed that one of the planks of the
Federal Labour platform should pro-
vide for a Commonwealth land tax,
and consistently advocated this idea,
which at the time was strenuously
opposed as being unconstitutional.
It was, however, eventually carried
and sent forward to the Common-
wealth Labour Congress in Mel-
bourne, held in the latter part of
1905, which passed it after an
equally exciting debate, no other
similar proposal having been sub-
mitted by any other Labour body in
Australasia. This measure, which
ultimately became law, at the pre-
sent time returns nearly £2,000,000
annually to the Federal Treasury.
Upon the accession to office of the
Labour Party in Western Australia
in 1911 Mr. Collier accepted a port-
folio as Minister of Mines and Rail-
ways, a position for which his pre-
vious experience should eminently
fit him. He was Acting-Premier
during the absence of Mr. Scaddan
on a visit to the Eastern States to
attend the conference of Premiers
in the early part of 1912. He was
married in 1900 to Ellen, daughter
of the late Mr. Edward Heagney,
of Bulla, Victoria, and has two sons
and two daughters.
The Honourable THOMAS
WALKER, M.L.A., Attorney-
General and Minister of Education
in the Scaddan Administration of
1911, is a son of Mr. Thomas Walker,
corn miller and merchant, of Preston
and Leyland, England, and was born
at Preston on February 5, 1858. He
pursued his scholastic studies at the
Leyland Grammar School, and
after a subsequent course at a simi-
lar institution at Preston entered
the St. Thomas School in the latter
town as junior teacher. After fol-
lowing the teaching profession for
nearly three years he emigrated to
Canada, where he engaged in agri-
cultural pursuits, also serving for a
short period in a chemist’s establish-
ment. Returning to England he
joined the staff of the Preston
Herald , writing at the same time for
The Guardian and Chronicle of that
town. Returning to Canada at a
later period, after working as a farm
labourer, he went to the United
States, where he continued his jour-
nalistic efforts as a member of the
staff of the Toledo Review , but re-
linquished this connection in favour
of The Democrat some time later.
After about a year’s journalistic
work in Ohio Mr. Walker began a
lecturing tour through the States
of North America, during the course
of which he dealt with such subjects
as the occult sciences, the doctrine
of evolution—in which he is an en-
thusiastic believer —and many others
of equal interest. From San Fran-
cisco he took steamer to Sydney, ar-
riving by the "Zealandia” in 1877,
and continued his lectures through-
out the Australian States, his first
lecture in Melbourne, delivered when
he was under twenty years of age,
being presided over by Mr. Alfred
Deakin. After a highly successful
O J
Australian tour he sailed for Great


Britain and commanded audiences
all over England and Scotland, and
receiving a cable invitation to visit
South Africa made himself favour-
ably known in the larger cities of
that continent. While there he mar-
ried, and shortly afterwards returned
to Melbourne and directed his atten-
tion to politics. Being defeated in
his first contest (for the Richmond
electorate) he left Victoria and set-
tled in Sydney. In due course he
stood for the electorate of Northum-
berland, and was returned to that
seat for three successive Parliaments.
In addition to his political duties he
pursued a journalistic career and
wrote several dramas, among which,
deserving of special mention, was his
dramatization of “His Natural
Life,” the first attempt by any writer
to dramatize Marcus Clarke’s famous
novel. “Marmondelle the Moor”
was also from his pen, and for a
short time he took the boards with
Alfred Dampler, who produced the
piece in Sydney, Mr. Walker receiv-
ing high praise both for the literary
worth of his production and for his
histrionic abilities as its interpreter.
In course of time a Redistribution
of Seats Bill was passed through
Parliament, and by this measure the
electorate which he represented was
abolished. Relieved thus of public
responsibilities Mr. Walker devoted
himself to the teaching of elocution,
lecturing, and journalism, and found
congenial scope for his abilities as a
lecturer on temperance questions in
New Zealand. Shortly afterwards
he came to Western Australia and
for some time continued in these
various avocations, in pursuit of
which he assisted the late Mr. Ves-
per in the conduct of The Sunday
Times. This period was followed by
a few months on the eastern gold-
fields, where he was associated with
the production of the Kalgoorlie
Sun and subsequently with The
Miner , but the death of Mr. Vosper
led to his return to Perth to take
charge of The Sunday Times , and at
a later date he edited The Sunday
Press , of which he was part-pro-
prietor. The Sunday Times and
The Sun were brought under one
management, and Mr. Walker in
due course took control of the latter
journal, taking up his residence at
Kalgoorlie. At the same time he
embraced the opportunity to contest
the election for the Kanowna dis-
trict and was successful in winning
the seat. After his return to Par-
liament he gave up journalism, re-
v
solving to enhance his political quali-
fications by the study of law, which,
he clearly realized, would prove of
invaluable service to him in the for-
mulation and interpretation of legis-
lative measures and constitutional
procedure. In the fulfilment of this
purpose he passed the preliminary
examination in general knowledge,
and was afterwards articled for five
years to Mr. Richard S. Haynes,
K.C., an old friend, with whom he
had been on terms of intimacy dur-
ing his Parliamentary career in the
Mother State. The long sittings of
the House were preceded by concen-
tration on law books of no light
quality, and the development of a
farming property at about this
period provided more anxiety than
recreation. The charm of literary
work reasserted its power at unap-
HON. THOMAS WALKER.
propriated moments, claiming the
leisure that otherwise might have
been spent in rest or diversion.
While preparing for the final law
examination he experienced an ex-
ceedingly heavy strain, the close of
the last session of the late Parlia-
ment involving many successive all-
night sittings, when such exciting
measures as the Redistribution of
Seats Bill were the subjects of keen
debate, and party feeling ran high.
More than an ordinary part in these
fights fell to Mr. Walker, whose
health finally gave way, necessitating
a trip to the Eastern States, by
which, fortunately, he was able to
recuperate. This was early in 1911,
and toward the end of the year a re-
markable culmination of events
would seem to signify that his star
was in the ascendant. Within a few
weeks he was returned unopposed to
the House, his party was successful
at the polls, and he was chosen for
the high office of His Majesty's
Minister, a memorable circumstance
eventuating when he was admitted
to the Bar and sworn in as Attorney-
General on the same day. In
February, 1912, he was chosen as
a member of the first Senate of the
University of Western Australia. Mr.
Walker was married at Graaff Reinet,
South Africa, to Maria Andriette,
daughter of the late Mr. William
John Somers and niece of Sir An-
dries Stockemstroom, Bart., then
Lieutenant-Governor of Cape Colony,
and first cousin to Sir Andries Meas-
dorp, now Chief Justice of Orange
River Colony.
The Honourable WILLIAM
HARTNELL JOHNSON, M.L.A.
The present Minister for Public
Works, Mr. W. D. Johnson, is a
New Zealander by birth, having
been born at Wanganui in 1872, and
is therefore in his fortieth year.
Attracted by the early gold dis-
coveries in Western Australia,
which in the early nineties caused
such an upheaval throughout Aus-
tralia, Mr. Johnson arrived in the
State in 1894 in very early man-
hood. After spending a short
period in Perth and Coolgardie he
settled in Kalgoorlie. The Labour
movement very soon called Mr.
Johnson into prominence, and his
period of residence in Kalgoorlie is
punctuated with the earnest and
active interest he took in all matters
that pertained to the betterment of
the industrial classes. He was
mainly instrumental in forming the
Amalgamated Society of Carpenters
and Joiners, achieving the honour
of becoming its first President. He
was also Secretary for two years of
the Goldfields Trades and Labour
Council. While holding these posi-
tions his status in the Labour world
as a leader and organizer of more
than passing ability was so noted
that it was hardly a matter of sur-
prise when he was returned to Par-
liament as member for Kalgoorlie
in the Labour interest in 1901. The
reputation he had gained at Kal-
goorlie became more consolidated
until on the formation of the first
Labour Government, with Mr. Hasr-
o
lish as leader, Mr. Johnson was
offered and accepted the portfolio of
the Public Works. In this position
his administrative and organizing
abilities were proved of such high


order that he has left a record in
that department as a controlling
force. On the reconstruction of the
Ministry he became Minister of
Mines and Railways, and in this
position his capacity as an adminis-
trator gained the highest commenda-
Bartletto , Perth.
HOM. WILLIAM DARTNELL JOHNSON.
tion. At the general election of
October, 1905, Mr. Johnson failed
to secure the confidence of the Kal-
goorlie electors, being defeated by
Mr. Norbert Keenan. Soon after-
wards he left the goldfields and be-
came a resident of Midland Junc-
tion. On a vacancy occurring in
the representation of Guildford in
1906 he was returned for that
centre, and has held the seat by
overwhelming majorities at each
succeeding election. On the return
of the Labour Party to power in
1911 Mr. Johnson was again given
the portfolio of the Public Works,
where no doubt by wise and careful
control of this most important de-
partment he will enhance his pre-
vious excellent reputation. Since
taking up his residence on the coast
the subject of our memoir has been
a most indefatigable worker in the
cause of Labour, a task in which he
has been greatly assisted by his wife.
Tie married in 1901 Jessie, daughter
of Alexander McCallum, and has
three children.
The Honourable JOHN
MICHAEL DREW, M.L.C., the
Colonial Secretary of the Ministry,
is, comparatively speaking, a young
man, having been born at North-
ampton, near Geraldton, in 1865.
Not alone is Mr. Drew a native of
the State in which he now holds one
of its highest positions, but the
whole of his early education and
training was completed in Western
Australia. Early in life he showed
a marked predilection for a jour-
nalistic career, which, perhaps, more
than any other professional walk of
life stands for progress and advance-
ment of its votaries. On leaving
school Mr. Drew joined the staff of
The Western Australian Record ,
which was then published at Fre-
mantle, eventually rising by sterling
merit and earnest work to the
position of sub-editor on its staff.
Resigning this position he was
entrusted with the secretarial and
managerial duties of The Victorian
Express Company, proprietors of
The Geraldton Express . From the
business position he passed to the
editorial chair of The Express , and
is now the owner of the paper and a
strong force in the politics of his
native State, especially in the north-
western portion. In 1900 Mr. Drew
succeeded Mr. W. T. Loton as a
member of the Central province in
the Legislative Council of the State.
Upon Mr. Daglish assuming office as
Premier of the first Labour Minis-
try in Western Australia Mr. Drew,
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. JOHN MICHAEL DREW.
though not a pledged member of the
Party, accepted office as Minister
for Lands and with it the leader-
ship of the Legislative Council.
When it is remembered that he was
not a member of the popular House
it speaks volumes for the high im-
pression prevailing in democratic
circles as to Mr. Drew’s integrity
and ability that he was selected for
this honour by a party of which he
was not, strictly speaking, an
adherent. On the reconstruction of
the Cabinet by Mr. Daglish, Mr.
Drew still retained office, with the
portfolio of Colonial Secretary in
place of that of the Lands, but still
retaining the leadership of the Coun-
cil. The reversal of public opinion
in favour of the Labour Party in
1911, when it gained a signal vic-
tory and substantial majority in the
Legislative Assembly, led to the for-
mation of the second Labour Minis-
try. In this Cabinet Mr. Drew
again accepted office as Colonial
Secretary and with it the leadership
of the Council.
The Honourable JABEZ ED-
WARD DODD, M.L.C. A striking
personality in the present Ministry
is to be found in Mr. Dodd, one of
the Honorary Ministers. Born at
Callington, South Australia, in 1867
he is a worthy scion of the Central
State. Shortly after his birth his
parents removed to Kadina, in the
same State. Here the subject of the
present memoir was educated, and
on what sound lines his future career
has already made fully manifest. In
1889, at the age of twenty-two, Mr.
Dodd left Kadina and proceeded to
Broken Hill, where he spent seven
strenuous years, during which period
the famous strikes of 1890 and 1892
had taken place. Being enamoured
of the possibilities opening up in the
“Cinderella” State of Western Aus-
tralia Mr. Dodd, attracted by its
wonderful development, like many
other hardy spirits, left more
settled districts to try his luck
on the Western Australian goldfields,
making his home at Coolgardie in
1896, three years later proceeding
to Kalgoorlie. During his residence
in this State Mr. Dodd has been
closely identified with Labour and
Labour ideals, and every movement
for the amelioration of the condition
of the workers has found in him an
earnest advocate and an enthusiastic
supporter. He is known far and
wide as a mediator in trade dis-
putes, and many conflicts betwixt
labour and capital have been stayed
by the power of his personality. The
decisions he has from time to time
given as arbitrator in industrial con


flicts have been loyally accepted by
the opposing forces. Early in his
residence in Coolgardie Mr. Dodd
became identified with unionist
proposals, assisting to found the
Australian Workers' Association
and later the Amalgamated Miners'
Association, now the Western Aus-
tralian Federated Miners' Union, of
which until recently he was Secre-
tary. In this position he has done
much to relieve the many disabili-
ties under which the miner works.
Under the deep sense of responsi-
bility that has been such a marked
feature of his career Mr. Dodd has
worked so whole-heartedly in the
cause of the miners that his efforts
to alleviate the conditions of their
labour will be remembered with
gratitude wherever his name may be
mentioned. The high appreciation
his fellow-unionists have of his
integrity and ability can be found
in the fact that from its inception he
has been the Treasurer of the Wes-
tern Australian Federated Miners'
Union and until recently was its
Secretary. His wide experience as
a practical miner in Broken Hill,
Coolgardie, and Kalgoorlie has made
him an authority on all questions in
HON. JABEZ EDWARD DODD.
regard to that industry, while his
tact and judgment have earned for
him a place in the Legislature and
Cabinet of the State of his adoption.
With wisdom and with confidence he
has guided the affairs of his fellow-
unionists, and it is with confidence
we can regard his advent on a wider
sphere of action. Like many of his
contemporaries in the political world
Mr. Dodd made consistent essays in
the world of journalist literature,
for despite his strenuous efforts on
behalf of his Union he found time to
become a regular contributor to the
columns of The Worker. In 1910 he
was returned for the Legislative
Council in the interests of Labour
for the South Province, being elected
by a substantial majority. With
such a short period of legislative life
to be elevated to a position in the
Cabinet is a marked compliment to
the purity and integrity of Mr.
Dodd's motives and his ability to
deal with the grave questions of
policy that will meet him in his
present sphere.
The Honourable W I L L I A M
CHARLES ANGWIN, M.L.A.
Mr. W. C. Angwin, an Honorary
Minister in the Cabinet, is not an
Australian born, but comes from
that home of sturdy pioneers and
still sturdier democracy, Cornwall.
Born in St. Just in 1863 Mr. Ang-
win is in his forty-ninth year,
twenty-six of which have been spent
in Australia, for he arrived in the
Commonwealth in 1886. He served
his apprenticeship as a carpenter,
and at the age of nineteen left Corn-
wall for Cumberland, where he
immediately became identified with
movements of social reform. Early
in life Mr. Angwin took a very
active interest in the cause of tem-
perance, and his democratic prin-
ciples were just as clearly outlined,
for he was a member of the Liberal
Association, which met at the Moor
Road, near Whitehaven. In 1892
Mr. Angwin arrived in Western
Australia and at once began to make
his influence felt in Labour circles
in the State. He was employed by
Messrs. Sandover & Co. until
elected to the Legislative Assembly
for East Fremantle in June, 1904,
and has been closely identified with
public affairs in East Fremantle
since 1897. Of calm, thoughtful
temperament Mr. Angwin makes an
ideal leader in many ways, his prin-
ciples of temperance being displayed
in more avenues than that of the
liquor question. After several
terms as a councillor in the East
Fremantle municipality Mr. Angwin
was eventually chosen as Mayor, and
continued in that position for some
years, gaining by his careful and
HON. WILLIAM CHARLES ANGWIN
temperate administration the ad-
miration and respect of all shades of
political opinion. The Redistribu-
tion of Seats Act of last year com-
bined several portions of Mr. Ang
win’s electorate with portions of
North Fremantle electorate, and
for the combination he was returned
to the present Assembly. This is
not the first time Mr. Angwin has
been a member of the Ministry, as
in the Labour Government of 1904-5
he was a Minister without portfolio,
and was again selected for a similar
position on the accession of the
Labour Party to office in 1911. As
Honorary Minister Mr. Angwin has
been closely identified with the
administration of public health, and
his efforts to obtain a pure milk
supply have earned for him general
commendation. His wide knowledge
of municipal affairs renders him
peculiarly fitted for this task, and
one of the most important features
of successful administration on a
subject that is essentially in the best
interests of the people will find in
Mr. Angwin a wise, controlling
force.
v 2


The Legislative Council.
The Honourable HENRY
BRIGGS, J.P., M.L.C., President
of the Legislative Council, was born
at Kettering, Northamptonshire,
in 1844. He was educated at the
Kettering National School by Mr.
William Sturgess and afterwards at
Leicester by Canon Fry, and at the
age of nineteen gained a Queen's
scholarship at St. Mark's College,
Chelsea. On the completion of his
training he was appointed Master
of the College Model Schools. After
occupying this position for three
years he was appointed Head Master
of the Mottram Grammar School.
In 1882, on the nomination of the
Board of Governors, he came to
Western Australia to establish the
Fremantle Grammar School, which
institution he successfully conducted
till he retired in 1897. In 1895 he
was appointed a Justice of the Peace.
After the Western Australian Cham-
ber of Commerce was resuscitated in
1883 he was Secretary of that body
for twelve years. On the resignation
of Mr. E. W. Davies as a member
for the West province in the Legis-
lative Council he was elected on
June 30, 1896, and opened his Par-
liamentary career in the session of
that year by moving the Address-
in-Reply to the Governor's Speech.
His entry into political life has,
however, not interfered with the in-
terest he still takes in educational
and literary matters. He was a
member of an early Commission on
technical education, and has been
one of the Trustees of the Public
Library, Museum, and Art Gallery
since 1903. He was a member of
the Royal Commission on the estab-
lishment of a University in the
State, the labours of which led to
the passing of the University Act in
1911. Since taking his seat in the
Legislative Council Mr. Briggs has
been a continuous member of that
Chamber. From June, 1900, to
June, 1906, he was Chairman of
Committees, and in the latter year
succeeded Sir George Shenton as
President of the Council. As an
Australian by adoption he took an
active part and keen interest in the
genesis and formation of the Federal
Constitution of the Commonwealth.
He was a representative at the Aus-
tralian Convention which framed the
Constitution at the Sydney and Mel-
bourne Sessions in 1897-8, and also
President of the Fremantle branch
of the Western Australian Federal
League. In connection with the
Masonic craft Mr. Briggs has occu-
pied a prominent part. He is a
Past Master as well as Past Z., and
about 1885, as a member of the Fre-
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. HENRY BRIGGS.
mantle Lodge, 1,033, E.C. (now No.
2, W.A.C.), took the preliminary
steps in the establishment of the
Royal Arch Chapter of Freemasonry
in Western Australia.
The Honourable R. S. ARDAGH,
who represents North-East province
in the Legislative Council, was born
in Gippsland, Victoria, in 1871.
From an early period of his history
he was connected with the mining
industry, and when about twenty-
one years of age accepted the position
of union steward on the Long Tunnel
Mine at Walhalla, his long term of
service in the cause of unionism be-
ginning with this appointment. In
1895 he arrived in Western Aus-
tralia, and proceeding to Kalgoorlie
found employment on the mines in
the capacity of enginedriver and in
other departments of work. Later
he was elected to the post of Secre
tary of the Trades and Labour
Council, which he filled for seven
years, and for a time occupied the
position of managing editor of The
Westralian Worker. Mr. Ardagh
is still connected with this journal as
manager, at the present time devot-
ing his attention solely to the busi-
ness side of the enterprise. He is a
councillor of the Kalgoorlie muni-
cipal chamber, and in 1903 was
gazetted a Justice of the Peace. In
1912 he was the successful candidate
for the suffrages of the North-East
province in the Legislative Council
as a supporter of the Labour Party.
The Honourable EPHRAIM
MAYO CLARKE, representing the
South-Western province in the Legis-
lative Council, is a son of the late
Mr. Ephraim Clarke, of Bucks,
England, and was born at Park-
field, near Australind, in August,
1846. Until he was thirty years of
age he was identified with farming
pursuits on his father's property and
on his own holding in the Harvey
district, adjacent to the south-wes-
tern railway line. In 1874 he came
to Bunbury and established his pre-
sent business, in conjunction with
which he cultivates an orchard and
farm at Roelands. He also has a
vineyard in the vicinity of the port,
where he was the first to replant
vines after the attack of fungus dis-
ease which destroyed the vineyards
in the south-western district about
1865. Mr. Clarke began his public
career as a member of the Bunbury
Municipal Council, his connection
with which body extended over
twenty-seven years. For six years
he occupied the mayoral chair, and
during his term of office used his
influence to secure an improvement
in the sanitary conditions of the
town. In 1900 he was returned to
the Legislative Council as one of the
representatives for the South-Wes-
tern district, and has since held the
seat. Mr. Clarke was one of the first
members of the original Bunbury
Chamber of Commerce. He was a


member of the Mounted Rifle Corps
of Bunbury at its inception, and at
the present time is a member of the
Bunbury Rifle Club.
The Honourable HAL PATE-
SHALL COLEBATCH was born at
Wolf er low, Kingsland, Hereford-
shire, on March 29, 1872. As a child
of seven he accompanied his parents
to South Australia and received his
education at Goolwa, at the mouth of
the Murray River. From a very
early age he was attracted to jour-
nalism, and after spending a year or
two in the northern agricultural
areas of South Australia, in 1889
proceeded to Broken Hill, where he
obtained a position on the staff of
The Silver Age , which he retained for
about six years. In 1895 he came
to Western Australia and was en-
gaged in journalistic work in connec-
tion with The Golden Age news-
paper, Coolgardie, and The Kalgoor-
lie Miner , until the end of that year;
in the beginning of 1896 accepting
the appointment of mining editor of
the newly - established Morning
Herald in Perth. Mr. Colebatch
continued his association with this
paper until 1905, in which year he
entered into partnership with Mr. J.
S. Nicholls, a former Press associate
of his Broken Hill days, in the pur-
chase of The Nor thorn Advertiser ,
founded by Mr. J. T. Riley, which
has since been carried on by these
gentlemen. Mr. Colebatch has always
been distinguished for the active in-
terest he displayed in matters of
public moment, especially in the Eas-
tern districts of this State, and is
now in his third year of office as
Mayor of Northam. In 1912 he
turned his attention to the political
arena, and successfully contested
East province in the elections held in
May of that year.
The Honourable JAMES DAN-
IEL CONNOLLY, M.L.C., is the
second son of the late Mr. D. Con-
nolly, of Clifton, Queensland. Born
at Allora, on the rich Darling
Downs, in 1869, and educated at
Warwick, he early in life engaged
in business as a contractor in his
own State. He was attracted to
Western Australia by the gold dis-
coveries, and arrived in 1893, in time
to see the foundation of the eastern
goldfields and catching the boom at
the flood he found great opportuni-
ties for the profitable employment
of his enterprise and business acu-
men. Kalgoorlie was then practic-
ally unborn, and a city had to be
built in the remote desert within
five years. In the raising of that
mushroom city Mr. Connolly found
plenty to do, and the strenuously
busy character of his early years in
Western Australia may be best
gauged by the number of public
buildings and commercial edifices at
Kalgoorlie and throughout the
eastern goldfields, for the building
of which he was responsible. As
Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie rose from
humble mining camps to large, up-
to-date, and prosperous settlements
his fortunes rose with them. In
addition to his business enterprises
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. JAMES DANIEL CONNOLLY.
he interested himself largely in
mining development, and while he
had his successes as an investor, he
nevertheless paid a fair quota to the
cost of establishing the great mining
industry. In the course of a few
years he was able to devote some
time to public affairs and in 1901
entered the Kalgoorlie Municipal
Council. This civic honour proved
but a stepping-stone to the greater
dignity and responsibilities of public
life. When Mr. A. P. Matheson
was returned as one of the members
of the Federal Senate for Western
Australia Mr. Connolly contested
the vacancy in the representation of
the North-East province in the
Legislative Council of the State, and
was elected by a substantial major-
ity in 1903. That seat he has con-
tinued to hold ever since. Three
years later, on the formation of the
Moore Ministry, he accepted the
important portfolio of Colonial
Secretary, which carried with it
the responsibility of leading ■ the
Legislative Council and piloting
all Government business through
that Chamber. Mr. Connolly has
always taken a sympathetic in-
terest in public charities, particu-
larly those relating to children, and
in the State Children’s Act which he
carried through Parliament in 1907
the State is recognized to possess one
of the most humane and advanced
measures of the kind in the Com-
monwealth. As Minister in charge
of public health he strove to
place the hospitals of the State on
an efficient basis, and in the consoli-
dating Health Act of 1910-11 he suc-
ceeded in embodying provisions
which give this State the most up-to-
date health and pure foods legisla-
tion on the Statute Books of Aus-
tralia, a meritorious feature of the
measure being the sections dealing
with the protection of infant life.
Another matter to which Mr. Con-
nolly gave earnest attention was
that of immigration. By a judicious
policy of advertising the resources
of the State and giving proper
attention to the immigrants on their
arrival he brought about an in-
flux of desirable settlers at the rate
of 12,000 per annum, and having
regard to the fact that Wes-
tern Australia has never encour-
aged indiscriminate immigration,
this result is one of the most
gratifying in the record of Mr. Con-
nolly’s administration. While swell-
ing the white population he was
not unmindful of the claims of the
original owners of the soil, and dur-
ing his regime the laws dealing
with the aborigines were remodelled
on most benevolent lines. Every-
thing possible was done by him
to improve the conditions of the
native race, and in this respect Wes-
tern Australia is not eclipsed by any
other State in the Commonwealth.
In 1898 Mr. Connolly married a
daughter of Mr. Edwards, of St.
Arnaud, Victoria, the issue being
five daughters.
The Honourable FRANCIS CON-
NOR, representing North province
in the Legislative Council, was born
at Newrv, Ireland, in 1857. Sub-
sequent to his arrival in Western
Australia in the year 1885 he pro-
ceeded to Wyndham, where, in con-
junction with Mr. D. J. Doherty,
he opened a storekeeping business.
At a later date the firm took up a


late area of country on the Orel
River, where cattle-breeding was
carried on with considerable suc-
cess, and at the time of the gold
rush to Coolgardie offices were
opened both at Perth and Fre-
mantle. Upon the establishment of
responsible government in 1891 Mr.
Connor was elected to represent
East Kimberley, and continued to
sit for that constituency until 1905,
when he was defeated by Mr. A.
Male. In the year following he stood
for North province in the Legisla-
tive Council and was returned, being
re-elected unopposed in 1912.
The Honourable J. CORNELL,
representative for South province in
the Legislative Council, was born at
Merrijig, Victoria, in December,
1873. In 1897 he came to Western
Australia, and proceeding to the
Ashburton, became identified with
station pursuits for three years, later
finding his way to Kalgoorlie. Mr.
Cornell here turned his attention to
mining on the Great Boulder claim,
and during seven years played a
leading part in matters concerning
the Labour Union. He was elected
the first President of the Eastern
Goldfields District Council of the
Australian Labour Federation, hav-
ing previously filled the post of Sec-
retary to this body for two years. He
also served the ratepayers as a mem-
ber of the Boulder Municipal Council
for some considerable time. In 1912
he contested the seat for South pro-
vince in the Legislative Council
against Mr. C. R. Davies, and was
returned by a substantial majority.
The Honourable JOSEPH FRAN-
CIS CULLEN, M.L.C., journalist
and proprietor of The Great Southern
Herald (Katanning), was born at
Hunter River, New South Wales,
and educated at State schools and at
Camden College, Sydney. In Jan-
uary, 1889, he was elected member
of the New South Wales Legislative
Assembly for the electorate of St.
Leonard, and was twice re-elected.
Mr. Cullen came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1904, and after spending
about two years on the eastern gold-
fields he bought The Great Southern
Herald newspaper and settled in Ka-
tanning in 1906. A vacancy having
occurred in the representation of the
South-East province in the Legisla-
tive Council, Mr. Cullen contested
and won the seat. He takes an ac-
tive part in the work of the Legis-
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. JOSEPH FRANCIS CULLEN.
lature and continues the editorship
and general management of his news-
paper.
The Honourable FREDERICK
DAVIS was born at Coventry, Eng-
land, and came to Australia while
still quite a youth. He was identi-
fied with the brick-laying trade in
the various States of the Common-
wealth, and in 1893 came to Wes-
tern Australia, in the following
year receiving election to the office
of Secretary of the Perth Trades
and Labour Council, which post he
held from 1894 to 1899. He also
acted as Secretary of the Eight-
hours Demonstration Committee,
and for a time was second in com-
mand of the Trades and Labour
organ of that day, viz., The Sunday
Chronicle. In 1900 he established
The Swan Express at Midland Junc-
tion, and conducted that journal
until 1909, when he took up land at
Greenmount, and has since been en-
gaged in orchard operations on this
property. Mr. Davis was at one time
connected with municipal life as a
member of the Leederville Council.
The Honourable DOUGLAS
GEORGE GAWLER, representing
the Metropolitan-Suburban province
in the Legislative Council, was born
in South Australia on November 9,
1860. He is a son of Mr. Henry
Gawler, of England, and a grandson
of Lieutenant-Colonel George Gaw-
ler, K.H., Governor of South Aus-
tralia from October, 1838, to May,
1841. He received his education at
St. Peter's College, Adelaide, and
subsequently became a student in the
University of that city. He was
admitted to the South Australian
Bar in 1886, and coming to Western
Australia in August of that year
commenced practice as a barrister
and solicitor in Perth and Fre-
mantle. Mr. Gawler was first in
partnership with the present Mr.
Justice Burnside, and subsequently
with Mr. A. B. Kidson, at the pre-
sent time being associated with
Messrs. A. S. Hardwick and J. C.
Forman, the firm, known as Gawler,
Hardwick, & Forman, having offices
at Perth and Fremantle. Mr. Gaw-
ler was President of the National
Political League, Fremantle, for five
years, and in March, 1910, stood for
the Metropolitan-Suburban province
against Messrs. Larrad and F.
Davis, being elected by a majority
of over 500 votes. He accorded his
support to the Divorce Amendment
Bill, to the Compulsory Preferential
Voting Act, and to the Local Court
Act Amendment Bill, which latter
measure he assisted to draft. On two
occasions Mr. Gawler has visited
HON. DOUGLAS GEORGE GAWLER.
England, and lie was an eyewitness
at the Coronation celebrations of
both His late Majesty King Edward
VII. and the present King, George
V. During the latter visit he was
present at the House of Lords when
the famous debate on the Veto Bill,


introduced by the Asquith Govern-
ment, took place. He is a member
of the Liberal Club and of the Royal
Agricultural Society, and has been
Chairman on several occasions of the
Peppermint Grove Roads Board, of
which he is a member. In the world
of sport he is known as a member of
the Western Australian Turf Club
and of the Cottesloe Bowling Club.
He was formerly connected with the
old Fremantle Hunt Club, and was
a playing member of the now
defunct Perth Polo Club. He is
also fond of rowing, and for twelve
years was captain of the Fremantle
Rowing Club. In 1893 Mr. Gawler
married Eva Mary, daughter of Mr.
R. N. Waldeck, of Fremantle, and
has two sons and two daughters.
Sir JOHN WINTHROP
HACKETT, M.A., LL.D., M.L.C.,
has represented South-West pro-
vince in the Legislative Council for
the past twenty-two years, having
been first elected to the House in 1890.
Since that time he has easily retained
the seat, as recently as May, 1912,
being returned unopposed. An ex-
tended reference to the great work
performed by Sir Winthrop in the
interests of his adopted country,
particularly along those lines which
tend to the intellectual improve-
ment and physical recreation of the
people, will be found in the section
of this work devoted to the Press of
Western Australia.
The Honourable VERNON
HAMERSLEY, J.P., who repre-
sents the East province in the Legis-
lative Council, was born at Guild
ford, Western Australia, on March
18, 1871, and is a son of the late Mr
Samuel Richard Hamersley, of
“Lockridge,” in that district. He
was educated at the Guildford State
School, under the late Mr. Stephen
Gardiner, and also by private tuition
under the Rev. Canon Sweeting,
subsequently spending two years at
Magdalen College School, Oxford.
With the object of receiving instruc-
tion in the latest ideas and methods
in agriculture, Mr. Hamersley en-
tered the Downton Agricultural Col-
lege, near Salisbury, England, where
he specially applied himself to study
the scientific management of land.
In 1889 he returned to Western
Australia and proceeded to the York
district to commence farming opera-
tions under his father, who owned
a property in that neighbourhood.
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. VERNON HAMERSLEY.
Many obstacles, however, intervened
to prevent rapid progress in the
industry. The work was very
laborious and assistance was difficult
to obtain, while the lack of local
markets hampered the producer.
Accordingly, when the rich gold dis-
coveries created a furore which
spread all over the States Mr.
Hamersley temporarily abandoned
his farming enterprise, and proceed-
ing to the eastern goldfields spent
a short time in prospecting. Per-
ceiving at this juncture that the
opportunity had arrived which pro-
mised prosperity to the agriculturist
by the creation of fresh markets for
his produce he returned to the scene
of his former labours and steadily
continued the development of the
property. Upon the death of the
late Mr. S. R. Hamersley the gentle-
man under review inherited the pro-
perty at Toodyay, where he now re-
sides, which was one of several taken
up by his grandfather over half a
century ago. It consists of 6,700
acres, of which over 3,000 acres have
been cleared and are cropped on a
three years’ rotation. Mixed farm-
ing is successfully carried on, and
the stock includes some 4,000 sheep,
besides cattle and a few horses. Mr.
Hamersley has concerned himself in
the welfare of the district, having
filled the post of Chairman in the
local Roads Board and President of
the Agricultural Society. He is con-
nected with various agricultural
bodies, including the Royal Agricul-
tural Society, and is an exhibitor at
the annual shows held by these or-
ganizations. For some years he was
a member of the Honorary Agricul-
tural Advisory Board, until the re-
signation of that body upon the ap-
pointment of a Director to take
charge of the Agricultural Depart-
ment. He is Vice-President of the
Pastoralists’ Association, also acting-
Chairman of Directors of the Wes-
tern Australian Producers’ Union
and a Director of the Producers’
Markets, Limited. Mr. Hamersley
received his commission of Justice of
the Peace by the Forrest Adminis-
tration in 1900. His entry into
political life took place in 1904, when
he was returned for East province
to the Legislative Council and has
since retained this seat. A member
of the Western Australian Turf
Club, he is also President of the
Newcastle Race Club and a member
of the Weld, Toodyay, and Northam
Clubs. In 1896 he married Clara,
daughter of Mr. Joseph Hicks, of
Gwambygine, York district, and has
a son and two daughters.
The Honourable ARTHUR
GEORGE JENKINS, representative
for the Metropolitan province in the
HON. ARTHUR GEORGE JENKINS.
. . .
Legislative Council is a Victorian,
having been born at South Yana,
Melbourne, on February K, 1868.
He is a son of the late hir Cr. 11.
Jenkins, C.M.G., of Victoria and
received his education at the Church
of England Grammar School,- Mel


bourne, afterwards becoming a
student at the University in that
city. He studied for the legal pro-
fession and was admitted to the Vic-
torian Bar in 1889, subsequently
practising as a solicitor in that State
for several years. In 1893 Mr. Jen-
kins came to Western Australia and
proceeded to the goldfields, where he
spent eight years in the practice of
his profession. In 1897 he was
elected to the mayoral chair of Cool-
gardie, holding office for a term, and
in May, 1898, entered the Legis-
lative Council as representative of
the North-East province, in which
Coolgardie was then included. Mr.
Jenkins continued to occupy this seat
for six years, but was defeated at
the 1904 elections by the Honourable
R. D. McKenzie, M.L.C. In 1908
he was returned to the Legislative
Council by the electors of the Metro-
politan province, and has since held
the seat.
The Honourable WALTER
KINGSMILL, 8.A., member of the
Legislative Council representing the
Metropolitan province, was born at
Glenelg, South Australia, on April
10, 1864. He is a son of Walter
Davies Kingsmill, pastoralist, of
Adelaide, and received his education
at St. Peter’s College and the Uni-
versity of Adelaide, in 1883 gaining
the degree of B.A. at the last-
mentioned institution. Subsequently
he entered the Geological Depart-
ment of the South Australian Gov-
ernment, where he remained three
years, at the expiration of which
time he engaged in mining pursuits
both in South Australia and New
South Wales. Tiring of the Eastern
States he set sail for Wesrern Aus-
tralia, where he arrived in 1888, and
immediately proceeded to the North-
West goldfields, where mining and
prospecting again claimed his atten-
tion for nine years, part of which
time, however, he performed the
duties jDertaining to the position of
Mining Registrar on the Pilbara
fields. Resigning his post he held
consecutively the management of the
Stray Shot and Excelsior Mines and
the Augusta and Talga-Talga Mines
over a period of two years. During
his residence in the goldfields Mr.
Kingsmill devoted considerable time
to the study of the requirements of
the district, and in May, 1897, en-
tered the lists as candidate for the
Pilbara district in the House of
Assembly. Being successful in the
contest he took up his residence in
Perth. Four years from the time of
his entry into the House Mr. Kings-
mill was offered, and he accepted,
the portfolio of Minister of Works in
the first Leake Administration
(1901), and in the second Ministry
under the same leader he filled the
office of Commissioner for Railways.
On the death of Mr. George Leake
the reins of government were
assumed by Mr. (now Sir) Walter
James, and Mr. Kingsmill took his
place in the new team as Colonial
Secretary and Minister for Educa-
tion, and he has been Acting-Pre-
mier on three occasions. In 1903,
at the request of his colleagues, he
resigned his seat in the Lower House
in order to take over the leadership
of the Upper Chamber, and success-
fully contested the seat for the
Metropolitan-Suburban province in
Bartletto Perth.
HON. WALTER KINGSMILL.
the Legislative Council rendered
vacant by the departure for the
Transvaal of Dr. Jameson. Subse-
quently he was Colonial Secretary
in the Rason Government, and con-
tinued to hold office until the depar-
ture for England of Mr. Rason,
whereupon he accepted his present
post of Chairman of Committees in
the Legislative Council. In April,
1910, Mr. Kingsmill resigned his
seat in the Council, and at the en-
suing Federal elections unsuccess-
fully contested a seat in the Senate
on behalf of the Liberal Party. In
the following month he was re-
elected to the Legislative Council as
representative for the Metropolitan
province. He is a member of the
University Extension Committee and
of the King's Park Board, President
of the Lawn Tennis Association of
Western Australia, Vice-President
of the Western Australian Cricket
Association, and Patron of numerous
athletic bodies. During the absence
in 1911 of Dr. Hackett he acted as
President of the Zoological and
Acclimatization Society, of which he
is a Trustee. Mr. Kingsmill, who
resides at Hay Street, East Perth,
married in 1899 Mary Agatha,
daughter of the late Mr. P. H. Fan-
ning, of “Balclutha," Alphington,
Victoria.
The Honourable JOHN WATERS
KIRWAN, J.P., M.L.C., is a
member of a well - known AVest
of Ireland family. He is the
second son of the late Nicholas
John Kirwan, of Sandymount
House, County Galway, and was
born on December 2, 1869. In early
life he did some literary work for
the London and Dublin Press and
in the early nineties came to Aus-
tralia. He spent a couple of years
in the Eastern States, where he was
engaged in writing for Brisbane,
Melbourne, and South Australian
papers, and also visited New
Zealand on a journalistic mission.
In 1895, attracted by reports
of the Coolgardie gold dis-
coveries, he came to AVestern Aus-
tralia, where he entered into part-
nership at Kalgoorlie with Messrs.
Hocking Brothers, proprietors of
The II estern Argus weekly and the
then newly-launched Kalgoorlie
Miner daily. Lie took editorial con-
trol of both joapers, which were then
in their infancy and had but a very
small circulation. Mr. Kirwan
piloted these journals through the
strenuous years that followed, dur-
ing which they were subjected to the
keen competition of several rival
papers. Finally, The. Kalgoorlie
Miner became the only morning
daily published on the goldfields,
and as such wielded a vast political
power. When federation was accom-
plished a very largely signed and in-
fluential requisition was presented to
Mr. Kirwan in February, 1901, ask-
ing him to become a candidate for
the Kalgoorlie seat in the House of
Representatives at the first Federal
elections. He complied with the re-
quest, and was returned by a ma-
jority of over 2,300 votes.' In the
Commonwealth Parliament he was a
member of the Opposition which was


led by Mr. (now Sir) George Reid,
the present High Commissioner of
the Commonwealth. Mr. Kirwan
participated in the hard fight
against high protective duties, a fight
that was the most striking feature
of the prolonged first session. He
was Deputy-Chairman of Commit-
tees and a member of the Royal
Commission on Iron Bonuses. Kal-
goorlie being an exceedingly strong
Labour constituency, Mr. Kirwan
at the second Federal elections was
defeated by the Labour nominee,
Mr. C. E. Frazer, the present Post-
master-General. Shortly afterwards
Mr. Kirwan paid a prolonged visit
to Europe. He travelled extensively
in the British Isles and also in Ger-
many, France, and Norway. Re-
turning to Kalgoorlie about the end
of 1905, Mr. Kirwan resumed, as
managing editor, complete literary
control of The Kalgoorlie Miner and
II extern Argus. Though on several
occasions invited to stand for the
Federal and State Parliaments it
was not until May, 1908, that in
response to a requisition he became a
candidate for the South province in
the Legislative Council. He was re-
turned by a substantial majority, de-
feating the Labour candidate, Mr.
J. E. Dodd, who is now Plonorary
Minister in the present Cabinet. In
the State Parliament Mr. Kirwan
has always favoured decentralization
and the peopling of the vacant spaces
of the south, east, and northern dis-
tricts. In consequence of the Redis-
tribution of Seats Act and for other
reasons he opposed the return to
power of the Wilson Government,
and during the general elections of
October, 1911, he urged the electors,
through The Kalgoorlie Miner , to
vote against the Ministerial candi-
dates. In 1909, with Dr. (now Sir)
J. W. Plackett, Mr. Kirwan repre-
sented the Western Australian daily
Press at the Imperial Press Con-
ference in London. Mr. Kirwan,
in the company of seven Aus-
tralian and four New Zealand
delegates, travelled through Can-
ada en route to the Conference.
The party met with a most hospit-
able reception in the Dominion. At
Ottowa they were the guests of the
Dominion Government and the
Governor-General, Earl Grey. Dur-
ing the trip across Canada Mr. Kir-
wan was Hon. Secretary to the party
and the late Mr. (afterwards Sir)
Robert Kyffin Thomas was Chair-
man. In London, subsequently,
both these gentlemen were requested
to fill the same relative positions for
the whole overseas Press contingent,
which included representatives from
India, South Africa, Canada, and
all parts of the Empire. The meet-
ings of the Conference in London
and the series of lavish entertain-
ments provided for the delegates
throughout England and Scotland
are fully dealt with in the book en-
titled “A Parliament of the Press,”
to which Mr. Kirwan contributed
the chapter describing the Canadian
tour. From time to time signed
articles from the pen of Mr. Kir-
wan have appeared in The Nine-
teenth Century , Empire Review ,
Review of Reviews for Australasia,
etc., dealing chiefly with Imperial
and Australasian subjects. He takes
a very deep interest in Federal and
State politics. In Parliament and
through the papers which he controls
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. JOHN WATERS KIRWAN.
he assumes a definite stand on most
public questions. This is more
especially the case during Federal
and State elections, and when
alterations of the Federal constitu-
tion have been submitted to the votes
of the people. He always takes the
broad rather than the parochial
view, and is ever ready to encourage
naval and military defence, the con-
struction of east-and-west and north-
and-south transcontinental railways,
also a vigorous policy of immigration
and the development of Australia’s
great natural resources. In Feb-
ruary, 1912, Mr. Kirwan was
appointed one of the members of
the first Senate of the University
of Western Australia.
The Honourable ROBERT JOHN
LYNN, J.P., Fremantle, is a son of
the late Mr. Richard Lynn, of Stock-
ton, New South Wales, where he was
born on March 14, 1873. He received
his education in his native place and
in the neighbouring town of New-
castle, where he attended the
Superior School, leaving at the age
of sixteen to begin his commercial
career. He was first identified with
the firm of Hall & Sons, wholesale
merchants, of Newcastle and
Sydney, and after occupying various
positions rose to the post of chief
salesman, from which he retired
after spending eight years in the
service. In 1896 he came to Western
Australia and followed the gold
rush to Coolgardie, but after a
year’s unsuccessful prospecting
returned to the coast and settled
at Fremantle. Here he opened in
a modest way in the shipping trade
and has gradually extended his
business operations until in 1906 he
floated the company of R. J. Lynn
Limited, which is well known in
commercial circles as a prosperous
and reliable concern. Mr. Lynn
retains the position of Chairman of
Directors of the firm, which is
largely interested in the Collie
coalfields. Among the various public
positions occupied by the gentleman
under review is that of Chairman
of the Fremantle Municipal Tram-
ways Board, and he enjoys the dis-
tinction of being the only member
who has sat continuously since the
inception of the Board, which
changes its personnel every two
years. For seven years he was a
councillor of the Fremantle muni-
cipality, and retired upon effluxion
of time, not seeking re-election
owing to the multifarious duties
which made their pressure felt on
every side. Upon the death of the
late Hon. James Price, Minister
for Works, he was the selected
Ministerial candidate for the Legis-
lative Assembly, but withdrew from
the contest for a similar reason. In
May, 1912, Mr. Lynn was a candi-
date for the West Province seat in
the Legislative Council, to which he
was returned in the Liberal interest
after a spirited battle with his two
opponents. He married in 1902 Ada,
daughter of the late Mr. William
Turton, of Rotherham, England,
and has a son and a daughter.
The Honourable CUTH BERT
McKENZIE, J. P., representative
for the South-East province in the


Legislative Council, is a native of
this State, having been born at
Albany on April 12, 1851. His
father was the late Mr. Hugh
McKenzie, master mariner, who
came to the above port in 1840, and
at the close of his education young
McKenzie elected to follow in his
parent’s footsteps. For nearly twenty
years he was engaged in seafaring
pursuits, being concerned in the
coastal trade and in various whaling
enterprises, but in 1881 he aban-
doned this means of livelihood and
settled down in his old home at
Albany. During the thirty years
that he carried on business at the
southern port Mr. McKenzie was
distinguished for his public spirit,
and served for nine years as a
member of the local Municipal Coun-
cil, for seven years occupying the
mayoral chair. He has been a mem-
ber of the Albany School Board for
the past six years, and was appointed
by the Forrest Government to a
Commission of the Peace for the
whole of the State during Sir Gerald
Smith’s term as Governor. In 1910
he came before the electors as a can-
didate for the suffrages of the South-
East province and was returned as a
member of the Legislative Council
by a satisfactory majority. As a
supporter of charitable movements
HON. CUTHNERT MCK ENZIE .
Mr. McKenzie is well known in his
district, and he also advocates a
hearty enthusiasm in all manly out-
door sports. In 1881 he married
Grace Cheyne, daughter of Mr.
Andrew Moir, of Cape Riche, Wes-
tern Australia, and has three sons
and three daughters.
The Honourable ROBERT DON-
ALD McKENZIE, M.L.C., was
born at Maldon, Victoria, in
1865, his father, the late Mr. Hugh
McKenzie, J.P., being a prominent
merchant and mining investor. Mr.
McKenzie was educated at St.
Paul’s Grammar School, Melbourne,
which then stood on the site of the
present Anglican Cathedral. The
old school is now known as St.
James’, being attached to the church
of that name in William Street. In
1882 Mr. McKenzie was appren-
ticed to the firm of Briscoe & Co.,
hardware merchants, where he
received a thorough grounding in all
commercial pursuits. After five
vears’ service he undertook the
k/
management of a firm in Goulburn
Valley, a position he occupied
for the next four years. At that
time the rich gold discoveries in this
State were attracting universal
attention, and in 1892 Mr.
McKenzie decided to try his for-
tunes in the Golden West. Upon
arrival at Fremantle he joined the
firm of Symon, Hubble, & Ham-
mond, general merchants, and re-
mained in their service for a year
till he accepted the position of
travelling representative for Mr. J.
M. Ferguson, now J. M. Ferguson
Limited. In this connection it is
interesting to note that he was the
first commercial traveller to visit
Hannans (now Kalgoorlie). On the
occasion of his first visit there were
4,000 men under canvas working on
“the alluvials,” and there was not a
sheet of iron on the field. There
were no police, yet the community
was orderly in every respect. Mr.
McKenzie was so much impressed
with the future possibilities of Kal-
goorlie that he decided to start
business on his own account, and in
1894 founded the firm that is now
a limited liability company, and of
which he is Managing Director. At
the first Kalgoorlie municipal elec-
tions in 1895 he was returned at the
head of the poll, and in 1897 was
elected third Mayor of the muni-
cipality. In the same year he was
appointed a member of a Royal
Commission to inquire into the min-
ing industry. This body consisted of
twelve members, Sir Edward Wit-
tenoom being the first chairman.
Their labours continued for over a
year, during which period Mr.
McKenzie visited all the State’s
principal mining centres. He also
acted on the Royal Commission ap
pointed to inquire into the Boulder
Deep Levels and what was known as
the Boulder Perseverance scandal.
In 1898 he was elected first Pre-
sident of the Kalgoorlie Chamber of
Commerce, a position he still occu-
pies. Deciding to enter the Parlia-
mentary arena Mr. McKenzie con-
tested the seat for the North - East
HON. ROBERT DONALD MCKENZIE.
province of the Legislative Council
in 1904, defeating the sitting mem-
ber, Mr. Jenkins, by a substantial
majority. Six years later he was re-
elected for the same seat, his
opponent losing his deposit. In
September, 1910, he joined the Wil-
son Government as Honorary Min-
ister. In addition to his own
firm Mr. McKenzie is largely inter-
ested in other commercial pursuits,
including mining. He is Chairman
of Directors for the Kalgoorlie Brew-
ing and Ice Company and has
recently taken up 4,000 acres of
land on the Upper Blackwood
River, which he is stocking with
sheep, besides devoting a portion of
his estate to fruit culture. In 1898
he received a commission of Justice
of the Peace. Three years pre-
viously he married Emma Mary,
daughter of the late Mr. James
Widgery, of Sydney, and has issue
three sons and a daughter.
The Honourable E D W A R D
M c L A R T Y, who represents the
South-Western province in the Legis-
lative Council, was born in 1848 at
Pinjarra, in that portion of the
State where his constituency lies.
His name is well known in the dis


trict, his father, the late John
McLarty, of Campbelltown, Scot-
land, who arrived in Western Aus
tralia in the year 1839, being one
of the earliest settlers there, and
here the gentleman under review
received his education. At the close
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. EDWARD MCLARTY.
of his schooldays he became closely
associated with pastoral and agri-
cultural pursuits on his father’s pro-
perty, ' Blythewood,” at Pinjarra,
and continued in this connection
until eighteen years of age. He
then accepted the management of a
pastoral run at Mandurah, which he
retained for about eight years. In
1882 he took advantage of the open-
ing presented to graziers by the
rise of the Kimberley district, and
was one of the leading promoters of
the first company formed to carry
on pastoral operations in the pro-
mising Derby country. A million
acres were leased from the Crown
and the development begun cf one
of the largest cattle stations in the
State, which, under the control of
Mr. William G. McLarty, proved a
thoroughly payable proposition.
Meanwhile the subject of this notice
had acquired his present property
at Pinjarra, consisting of about
16,000 acres of freehold and Crown
land, and at the same time person-
ally entered upon its development,
to which he has directed his atten-
tion ever since. The chief industry
carried on is the breeding of cattle,
sheep, and horses, and Mr. McLarty
has been a very successful exhibitor
at the local shows, in connection
with which he holds many premier
awards for crossbred Leicester and
merino sheep, Shorthorn cattle bred
from pedigreed bulls, and draught
horses of a useful type for farm use.
One of the keenest judges of fat
cattle in the State, for fifteen years
consecutively he acted as adjudicator
at these and similar functions
throughout the metropolitan and
country districts. He is Vice-Pre-
sident of the Pastoralists' Associa-
tion of Western Australia and is a
member of the Royal and various
other Agricultural Societies. lie
also fills the position of President of
the local Agricultural Society, and
for many years was President of the
Farmers' Progress Association. For
a lengthy period he has been a mem-
ber of the Advisory Board of Agri-
culture, and in the deliberations of
this body his opinions always carried
great weight. Mr. McLarty is a Jus-
tice of the Peace for the whole of
the State, and for the past thirty-
seven years has occupied a seat on
the Murray Roads Board, frequently
being elected Chairman of that body.
In 1894 he was returned to the first
elective Legislative Council as repre-
sentative for the South-Western pro-
vince, and on every occasion ensuing
has been re-elected either unopposed
or by a very large majority. He was
a keen supporter of Sir John For-
rest's Goldfields Water Scheme,
which has proved of so great a benefit
to the mining districts, and has
always been an active promoter of
railway extension. He married Mary
Jane, daughter of the late Sub-
Inspector Campbell, of Perth, and
has six sons and a daughter.
The Honourable MATTHEW
LOUIS MOSS, K.C., who repre-
sents the West province in the
Legislative Council, is a son of the
late Mr. Joseph Moss, of Dunedin,
New Zealand, and was born at that
city on December 1, 1863. He
was educated at various public
schools and when fifteen years ot
age entered the office of the late
Mr. J. B. Lewis, solicitor, of Dun-
edin, under whom he served his
articles to the legal profession, and
was admitted to the Bar on Decem-
ber 20, 1886. He came to Western
Australia in September, 1891, and
entered into practice at Fremantle,
at a later date opening offices at
Perth. He first entered Parliament
in 1895 as member for North Fre-
mantle in the Legislative Assembly,
but when the constituency was di-
vided in 1897 suffered defeat by six
votes at the hands of Mr. J. J.
Holmes. In 1900 he opposed Mr.
D. K. Congdon for the West province
in the Upper House and was re-
turned. He was an active promoter
of many measures which are now
on the Statute Book of the State.
He has held office in three Govern-
ments, viz., Colonial Secretary in
the Morgans Ministry, Honorary
Minister in the James Government,
and Attornev-General in the Rason
Administration. He has devoted
a portion of his time to municipal
affairs, and occupied the post of
Mayor of East Fremantle for a
term of three years. His recreation
consists chiefly of golf and yachting.
In 1895 he married Miss Katherine
Lyons Moss, 8.A., of New Zealand
University, and has two sons.
The Honourable BARTHOLO-
MEW CORNELIUS O’BRIEN,
member of the Legislative Council
for the Central province, was
born at Ballarat, Victoria, in
1868, and educated at the Chris-
tian Brothers’ College in that
town. At the close of his schooldays
he turned his attention to stock-
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. BARTHOLOMEW CORNELIUS O'BRIEN.
droving, and was engaged in this
capacity in various parts of the Com-
monwealth until 1893, in which year
he came to Western Australia. Pro-
ceeding to the Kimberley district, he
found employment with Messrs.
Emanuel Brothers for twelve months,


at the end of which time he visited
the Murchison goldfields and was en-
gaged in the mining industry at Cue
and in prospecting work with vary-
ing success during the latter part of
1894. In February of the following
year he entered into business as the
proprietor of the Great Britain
Hotel, Cue, and continued as boni-
face of that hotel until 1903, when
he disposed of his interest, and com-
ing to Perth three years later
secured the freehold of the Court
Hotel, Beaufort Street, where he is
still to be found. While at Cue he
evinced a keen interest in municipal
affairs, and in 1896 received election
to the Municipal Council. Next
year he was elevated to the mayoral
chair, which he continued to occupy
for the ensuing three years. In the
performance of the many official
functions of his office he laid the
foundation-stone in connection with
the construction of the Cue Water
Supply scheme and planted the first
tree in the township, the beauty of
which has been considerably added
to by the introduction of a number
of plantations. Lie took an active
part in furthering the mining
interests of the district, and his name
is intimately connected with the de-
velopment of this important industry.
Sporting affairs did not escape his
attention, and he was on the Com-
mittee of the Racing Club which or-
ganized the first meeting held at
Cue in March, 1894. Mr. O’Brien’s
Parliamentary career opened in
June, 1901, when he was returned
to the Legislative Council as repre-
sentative for the Central province,
and to him has fallen the unique dis-
tinction of having been the first
Labour member elected to the Wes-
tern Australian Parliament. Lie re-
tained his seat for three and a half
years, but was afterwards defeated
by Mr. William Patrick, from whom
he won back his constituency three
years later and has held it ever since.
His opponent on the last ococasion
was Mr. Carson, and the polling re-
sulted in an equal number of votes
being cast for each candidate, but
Mr. O’Brien was returned on the
casting vote of the Chairman, Mr.
Raymond Gee, Chief Electoral
Officer for the Province. A petition
was immediately lodged by Mr. Car-
son and ultimately brought before
Sir Henry Parker, Chief Justice,
who ordered a recount, at
which sixteen additional votes
were recorded, but as these
were equally divided between the
candidates a deadheat still remained.
The Chief Justice then had no alter-
native but to endorse the verdict of
the Returning-Officer and declare
Mr. O’Brien as the elected of the
people. Local sporting clubs find in
Mr. O’Brien a warm supporter, and
he has acted as Steward and
Stipendiary Steward to the Pro-
prietary Clubs for some considerable
time. He is a prominent figure in
football circles and a member of the
Appeal Board in connection with the
pastime, is an active member of the
Licensed Victuallers’ Association, of
which body he is now President,
Chief Ranger in the Irish National
Foresters, and a member of the
Hibernian Society, in the Cue
Branch of which he took a prominent
part. Mr. O’Brien married in 1894
Eliza Blanche, only daughter of the
late Mr. John Dawson, of Sheffield,
England, and has two sons and a
daughter.
The Honourable WILLIAM PAT-
RICK, who represents the Central
Province in the Legislative Council,
was born at Renfrewshire on Feb-
ruary 10, 1845. He received his
education at Lochwinnoch and Glas-
gow, and was destined for the legal
profession, but after pursuing his
law studies for some considerable
time abandoned this career and
entered upon commercial life in
Glasgow. In 1881 he emigrated to
South Australia and opened as a
merchant and auctioneer at
Kapunda, where he continued until
1897, when he came to Western
Australia and was associated in busi-
ness for seven years with his brother,
Mr. David Patrick, at Cue and Day
Dawn. Before leaving the Central
State Mr. Patrick unsuccessfully
contested the North-Eastern district
for the Legislative Council, and after
his arrival in Western Australia was
defeated by the late Mr. Illingworth
in the contest for the Cue district.
He was first elected as member for
the Central province in 1904, and in
1910 was again returned to the seat,
which he still holds. Mr. Patrick
was formerly associated with the Cue
Municipal Council, from which he
resigned in 1902. He married in
1873, and has three sons and three
daughters.
The Honourable RICHARD WIL-
LIAM PENNEFATHER, 8.A.,
LL.B., representing North province
in the Legislative Council, is a son
of the late Mr. Frederick Pcnne-
father, of Holy Cross Abbey, and
was born at Tipperary, Ireland, on
July 16, 1851. When quite young
he was brought to Australia and
placed under private tuition at Mel-
bourne, where he afterwards attended
the scholastic academy known as St.
Patrick’s. He took the degrees of
B.A. and LL.B. at the University
of Melbourne in 1876, and having
completed his legal course was called
to the Bar and practised in Victoria
for about ten years. After spending
two years in practice at Sydney he
resumed his old legal connection in
Melbourne, having also been ad-
mitted to the Bar in Queensland,
where, however, he did not practise.
While resident in Victoria he was
appointed Commissioner to take
evidence in the great patent case
which determined the rights of
the McArthur-Forrest Company to
the extraction of ore by means of
cyanide of potassium, this action hav-
ing been brought in the Transvaal
in the days of the Dutch Republic.
In all Mr. Pennefather practised for
fifteen years in his profession in Vic-
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. RICHARD WILLIAM PRNNEFATHER.
toria, and whether as an advocate
in the Criminal Court, as counsel in
the Civil Courts, as a cross-examiner
in involved Equity suits, or in re-
ducing complicated issues he was apt
in turning his knowledge of legal
lore to the benefit of his clients. In
1896 he came to Western Australia
and spent the enforced six months
of residence before he could be
qualified for admission to the Bar in


travelling over the country to make
himself the better acquainted with
its resources, devoting special atten-
tion to the auriferous areas. Re-
turning to Perth he established him-
self in professional practice in part-
nership with Mr. John Horgan, a
well-known member of the legal
fraternity in Perth. In the follow-
ing year Mr. Pennefather turned his
attention to Parliamentary matters,
and at the general elections for the
House of Assembly in 1897 was re-
turned as representative for the
Greenough constituency. Upon the
retirement of Mr. S. Burt, Q.C.,
from the Forrest Administration in
October of the same year he received
the portfolio of Attorney-General,
which he continued to hold until
1901. In that year he was appointed
Q.C., and having resigned his seat
assumed the office of Acting-Judge
of the Supreme Court during the ab-
sence on leave of the Chief Justice.
In 1902 he resumed practice at the
Bar and continued for three years,
at the end of which period he again
entered the arena of public life, be-
ing returned by the electors of North
province to represent their interests
in the Legislative Council. In 1909
he was elected Chairman of the Royal
Commission appointed to inquire into
the meat question. Mr. Pennefather
married a daughter of the late Mr.
William Fullager, Parramatta, New
South Wales, and has a daughter.
The Honourable CHARLES
AUSTIN PIESSE is the second
son of the late William Roper Piesse,
of Toodyay, and was born at Nor-
tham on November 11, 1855. He
received his education at the public
schools of Guildford and Northam
and was engaged in the pearling in-
dustry at Shark Bay during 1872-3.
He afterwards settled down to agri-
cultural pursuits until 1880, when,
in conjunction with his brother, the
Hon. F. H. Piesse, C.M.G., he estab-
lished at Williams the mercantile
firm of F. & C. Piesse, which was
successfully carried on for twenty-
four years, during which time
branches were opened at Perth,
Katanning, and Wagin. Mr. Piesse
severed his connection with the firm
in 1903, but continued in business at
Wagin as C. A. Piesse & Sons, com-
bining with his mercantile enterprise
the work of agricultural develop-
ment, and was successful in founding
the fine agricultural and pastoral
estates of Arthur River (now owned
and managed by his three sons) and
Till ell an. Mr. Piesse has been pro-
minent in public matters in the
neighbourhood, and for many years
occupied the office of Chairman of
the Arthur Roads Board, subse-
quently acting in a similar capacity
at Wagin, of which town he was first
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. CHARLES AUSTIN PIESSE.
Mayor. In June, 1894, at the first
elections held in connection with the
Legislative Council, he was returned
to represent South-East province,
and has since been re-elected un-
opposed (1896-1902-8). He was
Honorary Minister in the Moore
Government (1906-7). With his
brother, the Hon. F. H. Piesse, he
was largely instrumental during the
Forrest regime in bringing about
the purchase by the Government of
the Great Southern Railway, to-
gether with the 3,000,000 acres of
land held by the Company, the
settlement of which has since been
successfully consummated. Mr.
Piesse has been twice married, his
first wife being a daughter of the
late Mr. Thomas Chipper, of
Kojonup, Western Australia, the
issue being three sons and six
daughters. He married for the
second time a daughter of the late
Mr. John Hickson, of Port Pirie,
South Australia, by whom he has a
daughter.
The Honourable ARCHIBALD
SANDERSON, barrister of the
Inner Temple, London, who repre-
sents the Metropolitan-Suburban
province in the Legislative Council,
was born at Brie Brie, Glen
Thompson, Victoria, in 1870. He
was educated at Haileybury and
Oxford University, where he
graduated with honours in modern
history in 1892. From 1892
to 1894 he was associated with jour-
nalistic work in New Zealand, and
during two sessions occupied the post
of Parliamentary reporter for The
Christchurch Press, afterwards tak-
ing over the editorial duties on
behalf of a Wellington paper. In
1894 Mr. Sanderson came to Western
Australia, and with camera and note-
book cycled through the Coolgardie
goldfields in the capacity of special
correspondent of The Christchurch
Press and The New Zealand Times.
In the following year Mr. Sander-
son was assistant-master at the
Perth High School for a few months,
and on the foundation of the Perth
Morning Herald he joined the staff of
this paper as leader-writer and assist-
ant-editor, and remained here until
1899. He then paid a visit to Eng-
land and France, and upon his re-
turn to Western Australia was ap-
pointed editor of The Daily Nears.
Three years later he returned to
London, and in 1906 was called to
the Bar, coming out to Western Aus-
tralia during the course of that year.
In 1912 he was the successful candi-
date for the Metropolitan-Suburban
province in the Legislative Council
in the interests of the Liberal Party.
Mr. Sanderson has been President of
the Liberal Club since its inception
in 1911.
The Honourable CHARLES
SOMMERS, who represents the
Metropolitan province in the Legis-
lative Council, was born at Geelong,
Victoria, in 1862. He received his
education at the Church of England
Grammar School, Geelong, and at
its close turned his attention to
farming and pastoral pursuits for
several years. Mr. Sommers came to
Western Australia early in 1894, and
was concerned in certain mining ven-
tures, being particularly successful
in developing the New Victoria
Mine, near Coolgardie. In 1896 he
took up his residence at Coolgardie,
and later acquired a large farming
property in the south-west portion
of the State. When only twenty-one
Mr. Sommers became a member of
the Traralgon Shire Council, Vic-
toria, and in 1887 he was elected to
a seat on the Geelong Town Council.
He held the office of Mayor of Cool-
gardie for a couple of terms, on the
second occasion being returned nn


opposed, and during his period of
office was elected by a very large
majority to represent the interests
of the North-East province in the
Legislative Council. Upon the re-
signation of the Throssell Adminis-
tration in 1901 Mr. Sommers was ap-
pointed Minister for Lands in the
Leake Government, and representa-
tive of the Government in the Legis-
lative Council. In 1906 he was re-
turned by a large majority to repre-
sent the Metropolitan province, suc-
ceeding the late Sir George Shenton.
The Honourable T. H. WILDING,
member of the Legislative Council,
representing East province, is a
native of Western Australia, having
been born at Northam in 1868. His
father was one of the first licensed
victuallers in the eastern districts of
the State, and opened the Avon
Bridge Hotel in the late fifties The
subject of this notice is a well-known
pastoralist, and is owner of the
Mokine Estate near Northam, re-
ferred to elsewhere in this work. He
takes a live interest in the affairs of
the district, and was elected to the
Legislative Council in May, 1908,
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. T. H. WILDING.
defeating his opponent by a sound
majority. Mr. Wilding is a promi-
nent member of the Northam Agri-
cultural Society, in which he has
THOMAS FREDERICK OUT-
RIDGE BRIMAGE, J.P., is a son
of the late Captain Thomas Primage,
filled the office of President, and is
also a member of the Royal Agri-
cultural Society and the Northam
Race Club.
The Honourable Sir EDWARD
HORNE WITTENOOM, K.C.M.G.,
was born at Fremantle in 1854 and
at the age of fifteen entered upon
pastoral pursuits on the Bowes
Station, the property of the late
Mr. T. Burges. Five years later, in
conjunction with his brother, Mr.
F. Wittenoom, he secured the lease
of a large station in the outlying
parts of the Murchison district,
known as Yuin, and upon this run,
which comprised 300,000 acres, they
commenced operations on their own
behalf. After conducting this suc-
cessfully for three years, they
acquired a lease of the Bowes
Station, Northampton, and, jointly
with the latter, opened up the
Murgoo, Boolardy, and Nookawarra
runs. Bowes Station, which was
managed by Mr. E. H. Wittenoom
while his brother supervised the
northern properties, carried 25,000
sheep, besides cattle and horses. In
1881 Mr. E. H. Wittenoom pur-
chased White Peak Station and here
he established a stud sheep farm,
founded with merinos of the noted
strain owned by Mr. A. B. Murray,
of South Australia. In 1886 the
Messrs. Wittenoom opened a stock
and station agency in Geraldton,
and six years later large business
premises were erected on Marine
Terrace in that town. Eventually
V
the business was sold and the
gentleman under review retired from
active pastoral pursuits and severed
his connection with the commercial
world. Before attaining the age of
thirty, Mr. Wittenoom began his
long political career, being elected
member for the Geraldton district in
1883. He resigned his seat in
the same year, but was re-elected
in 1884. In 1886 the pressure of
private business caused him again to
retire, and it was not until 1894 that
he once more assumed Parliamentary
duties. In July of that year he was
elected by the Central province to a
seat in the Legislative Council under
responsible government, and in the
following December accepted a port-
PAST MEMBERS.
who in his lifetime was widely known
as harbourmaster at Port Pirie, an
important shipping centre of the Cen-
folio in the Forrest Ministry, assum-
ing control of the Mines, Post and
Telegraphs, and Education Depart-
ments. He was Acting-Premier in
1897 during the absence in England
of Sir John Forrest, and in 1898 was
appointed Agent-General in London
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. SIR EDWARD HORNE WITTENONM .
for Western Australia. During his
three-years' term of office in this
capacity he was distinguished by
being the last of his order to be
personally invested with the honour
of knighthood by Her late Majesty
Queen Victoria, the ceremony taking
place at Osborne. In 1901 Sir
Edward returned to Western Aus-
tralia and entered upon the duties of
Managing Director for the local
branch of Dalgety & Co., Limited.
Two years later he was returned by
the electors of North province to the
Legislative Council, but resigned in
1906 in order to contest a seat in the
Federal Senate, in which he was
unsuccessful. In 1909 Sir Edward
was again chosen by North province
to represent its interests in the local
Council, and this seat he has
retained ever since. Sir Edward is
Chairman of the local Board of
Directors of Millars' Karri and
Jarrah Company, Limited, Dal-
gety’s, the Bovril Australian
Estates, and is a Director of the
Western Australia Bank.
tral State. He was born in London
on July 23, 1866, and was a resident
of the ‘‘big smoke” until 1875, in


which year he came to Australia
with his parents, the family settling-
down in South Australia. Here
young Brimage entered the engi-
neering branch of the South Aus-
tralian railways as apprentice, and
having completed his course at the
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. THOMAS F. O. BRIM AGE.
Islington Workshops he was retained
as a mechanical draughtsman, the
duties of which office he continued
to fulfil until 1894, in which year he
retired from the service and came to
Western Australia, where it was
destined that he should play a lead-
ing role in opening up the vast
resources of the State which pre-
viously had been lying dormant from
lack of commercial enterprise. Turn-
ing his attention to the mining in
dustry, then attracting universal
notice, he accepted a position on
Bayley's Mine at Coolgardie, but
soon after launched out in business
for himself as a consulting engineer,
and in the early days of the opening
up of this rich auriferous area pur-
chased many valuable leases as repre-
sentative of a wealthy London syndi-
cate. He became General Manager
of the Hannan’s Great Northern
Mine and acted as consulting
engineer to a number of important
companies operating on the Kal-
goorlie fields. Among the many
valuable claims which he pegged
out and purchased were the Boulder
North Extended, Boulder Nor'-West,
Hannan's East, and Pirie Gold
Mine, and two leases of the Hes-
perus Gold Mine. In the heyday of
the eastern mining fields Mr.
Brimage was chairman of the East
Coolgardie Roads Board, Vice-
President of the Mine Managers'
Institute of Western Australia, and
one of the Directors of the Kalgoorlie
Prospecting Gold-mining Company.
It is perhaps as a member of the
Stock Exchange that Mr. Brimage is
best known, for he is the oldest
established stockbroker in Western
Australia and holds a seat on the
Perth Stock Exchange. It was in
1895 that he began business in Kal-
goorlie as a land agent and share-
broker, and five years later Mr.
Brimage extended the scope of his
operations to Perth, where he soon
took a foremost place among the big
dealers of the day, and by his un-
failing courtesy, genial disposition,
and unwavering business integrity
gathered round him a large circle of
influential friends and acquaintances.
His great popularity was evidenced
in a striking manner when he
aspired to political honours, as on
the first occasion on which he con-
tested a seat in the Legislative Coun-
cil he was returned at the head of
the poll. For six years Mr. Brimage
continued to represent the South
province in the Legislative Council,
but in 1906 he successfully contested
the North-Eastern province, where
most of his large and varied com-
mercial interests are centred. At
the elections held in May, 1912,
he was a candidate for the East
province, but was defeated by
the present member. He received
a commission of Justice of the
Peace for Western Australia in
1900. Mr. Brimage is a warm sup-
porter of all forms of outdoor recrea-
tion, and his name is associated with
innumerable athletic bodies through-
out the State. His marriage was
celebrated in 1896, when he espoused
Marie Louise, daughter of Mr.
Lawrence Reynolds, a retired Im-
perial officer now resident in Tas-
mania. He has issue two sons and
two daughters.
JAMES ALFRED DOLAND,
who for a brief period represented
the Metropolitan-Suburban district
in the Legislative Council, was born
at Albury, New South Wales, on
April 26, 1880. In 1899 he
came to Western Australia and
settled at Bunbury for about two
years. Later he established himself
as a tailor in Perth, and now carries
on business in partnership with
Mr. M. Key at Baird's Arcade.
His connection with the Labour
movement began in New South
Wales, and in 1900 he became a
member of the Tailors' Society in
this State, since which date he has
filled the position of President and
all other important offices of the
Society. Tie was appointed by this
organization to appear on its behalf
before the Arbitration Court in
1907 and was very successful in his
presentation of the Society's case
before the tribunal. In 1907 he was
elected to the honorary post of Sec-
retary of the Political Labour Coun-
cil in Perth, and held that position
for two years, being also President
of the Council for some considerable
time and Treasurer of the same body.
In 1911 he was selected to contest
the Metropolitan-Suburban Province
in the Legislative Council, and was
returned, holding the seat until
May, 1912, when he was defeated
by Mr. A. Sanderson. Mr. Doland
is a live member of the Australian
Natives' Association, and in the pasr
has occupied the position of Presi-
dent of the Perth Branch of that As-
sociation, of which he is now, by
election, senior Vice-President of the
Board of Directors.
The Honourable SAMUEL
JOHNSON HAYNES, barrister
and solicitor and notary public,
HON. SAMUEL JOHNSON HAYNES.
Albany, was born at Leek, Stafford-
shire, England, on March 22, 1852,
being a son of Mr. George Haynes,
merchant, who arrived in Victoria in
the year 1854 and subsequently be-
came the first Mayor of Port Fairy
in that State, where he now lives in
retirement. The gentleman under


review received elementary instruc-
tion in Victoria, supplemented by
advanced tuition at the grammar
school in his native town. He
turned his attention to the study of
law for a time, but after passing
some of the preliminary examina-
tions in England relinquished this
aim on his return to Australia and
entered into commercial pursuits in
the Western district of Victoria. At
a later period he went to South Aus-
tralia and was articled to Mr. W. IT.
Wadey, solicitor, of Adelaide, with
whom he completed his legal studies
and was admitted to the Bar in 1886.
After practising for a short period
in the Central State, in 1887 Mr.
Haynes came to Western Australia,
and having spent the prescribed six
months of probation in the office of
Messrs. Stone & Burt, of Perth, was
called to the Western Australian
Bar. Prior to this event he pur-
chased the practice of Mr. Hare in
Albany, and upon attaining his
right to practise in the State, took
up his residence at the southern sea-
port, and has continued in the active
exercise of his profession there for a
quarter of a century. After a time
Mr. Haynes was joined in partner-
ship by Mr. R. T. Robinson, now of
Perth, who is still associated with
the Albany business, and at a subse-
quent period, upon the opening of a
branch in Perth, Mr. C. B. Cox was
admitted as a partner, the firm now
carrying on under the style of
Haynes, Robinson, & Cox. Mr.
Haynes has given a portion of his
time and attention to public life, and
in 1894 was elected a member of the
Legislative Council, in the first elec-
tive chamber, as representative for
South-East province, and on two
subsequent occasions was returned
unopposed. In 1910, after sixteen
years of service, in spite of pressure
brought to bear to induce him to re-
consider his decision, he retired from
Parliamentary life, and upon this
occasion was the recipient of a very
flattering illustrated address, signed
by the Premier, the President of the
Legislative Council, members of the
Upper House, and representatives of
the leading public bodies and electors
of South-East province. For some
years Mr. Haynes occupied the office
of Vice-Consul for Sweden and
Norway, and upon the political
separation of these countries was ap-
pointed, and st'll continues, Vice-
Consul for Sweden. He is Chancellor
of the Diocese of Bunbury, having
been appointed to that office on the
formation of the See, and is a Fellow
of the Institute of Incorporated Ac-
countants of Australia. He is a sup-
porter of all forms of clean manly
sport, and has been President of the
local Golf Club since its foundation
in 1901, occupying the same office for
three years in connection with the
Albany Bowling Club. He has
also been President of the Albany
Turf Club, and has held office
in many other organizations, in-
cluding the Albany Club, of which
he was one of the founders, and is
now Vice-President. He is a mem-
ber of the Weld Club, Perth. Mr.
Haynes married in 1897 Isabella,
daughter of the late Mr. Francis
Cole, one of the pastoral pioneers of
the Western district of Victoria, who
resided at Woodlands, near Camper-
down, and has one surviving son.
JOSEPH WOOD LANGSFORD,
who represented the Metropolitan-
Suburban district in the Legislative
Council, was born at Norwood,
South Australia, in 1865. He re-
ceived his education under Mr.
Frederic Chappie, 8.A., B.Sc., at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, and
at the conclusion of his scholastic
career in 1878 joined the Australian
Mutual Provident Society, in the
service of which he remained for six
years. In 1884 the Western Aus-
tralian Branch of the Society was
opened, and Mr. Langsford was ap-
pointed to the post of Accountant at
Perth. In 1896 he resigned from
the Society and entered into business
for himself as accountant and mort-
gage and investment broker at New
Zealand Chambers, St. George’s Ter-
race, Perth, where he still continues.
Mr. Langsford was first returned as
a member of the Legislative Council
in 1904, when he was elected to fill
the seat formerly held by the late
W. G. Brookman. In the ensuing
elections (1906) he was again re-
turned for the same constituency,
which he continued to represent
until the latter half of the year
1911, when he resigned the seat to
become a candidate for the Clare-
mont district in the House of
Assembly, but without success. In
educational matters he has always
evinced a deep interest, and for some
time he was Chairman of the Perth
Board of Education. He was for
two years (1900-1) Mayor of Clare-
mont, and was also a member of the
old Roads Board of that township.
Mr. Langsford has always been a
strong supporter of all legislation
concerning local governing bodies,
and took an active part in further-
ing the interests of the district he so
ably represented. Tie was appointed
a Justice of the Peace in 1899, is a
Trustee of the Karrakatta Cemetery,
and Treasurer of the Methodist
Ladies’ College (an office which en-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOSEPH WOOD LANGSFORD.
titles him to a seat on all the Com-
mittees of the Church), and Super-
intendent of the Sunday-school at
Claremont. Mr. Langsford is a
staunch supporter of the Methodist
Church, and was chosen to repre-
sent that body at the Conference
held in Auckland, New Zealand, in
1897. Married in 1889 to Agnes,
daughter of the late Mr. Mark Read,
of Perth, his family consists of four
sons and one daughter.
WARREN MARWICK, who
represented the East province in
the Legislative Council from 1910
to May, 1912, is a native of
Western Australia, he having been
born at York in August, 1869.
His father, Mr. William Mar-
wick, of Wisbech, Cambridgeshire,
England, emigrated to Western Aus-
tralia in his eighteenth year and en-
gaged in agricultural pursuits at
York. Young Marwick at the age of
fourteen began his active career on
his father’s estate and continued
there for a number of years, gaining
valuable experience of the agricul-
tural industry and the raising of
stock. Upon the discovery of the
Yilgarn mining fields he went with
his father and others and opened up


the track to the new find, and with
his party also engaged in well-sink-
ing on the route for about four
months. He next employed himself
in sandalwood-cutting for a time
with some success, and in the winter
that followed this enterprise com-
menced farming at Yorkrakine, 40
miles distant from Southern Cross,
where he was the first to grow hay
in this district. At a later date he
returned to York, and about the
time of the discovery of the Cool-
gardie fields became engaged in a
large way in the carrying and coach-
ing business with his father and
brothers, the firm being known as
Marwick Brothers, but with the com-
pletion of the railway to Kalgoorlie
the firm relinquished operations
and turned the whole of its atten-
tion to farming and grazing.
Mr. W. Marwick, prior to his
election to Parliament, had long
evinced a keen interest in all
matters affecting the welfare of
his district, and in 1910 offered
himself as a candidate for the seat
in the Legislatve Council rendered
vacant by the death of Mr. George
Throssell. He was a welcome addi-
tion to the personnel of the
Legislative Council, and his ripe
experience as an agriculturist was
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WARREN MARWICK.
directed to the advancement of
this important industry, which in
the future will play a prominent
part in the prosperity of the State.
He was President of the York Agri-
cultural Society for three years, re-
tiring in 1911, and is an enthusiastic
member of this the oldest institution
w
of the kind in Western Australia.
He is a member of the York Roads
Board, has been President of the
York Athletic Association for the
past five years, and was one of the
promoters of the York Milling Com-
pany, of which important concern he
is Chairman of Directors. For six
years he was a member of the York
Municipal Council, and takes a lead-
ing part in all matters of public in-
terest, being Patron and President
of innumerable bodies.
The Llonourable GEORGE RAN-
DELL, J.P., Ex-M.L.C., was born
at Milton, Hampshire, England, on
October 5, 1830, and received his
education at the National School
in that town. Subsequently he
learned both blacksmithing and en-
gineering, and in 1850 came to Wes-
tern Australia, where he spent some
time in various occupations at Fre-
mantle and later at Perth. In
1860 he inaugurated an enterprise to
run light craft up the Swan River
from Fremantle to Perth and lighter
boats from Perth to Guildford,
proving not only a great boon, but
considerably cheapening the cost of
production in the districts beyond
the latter place. The “Pioneer” was
the first steamer employed, and in
the course of a few years seven
steamers and lighters plied on the
river between the Port and the
metropolis, besides the smaller boats
used for the Guildford trade. In
1876 Mr. Randell retired from
active business life for a time, the
boats being taken over by Messrs.
Randell, Knight, & Co., in which
firm he still retained an interest.
In 1878 he took a trip to England
and was absent for a couple of years.
In 1887 he once more assumed con-
trol of the business of Messrs. Ran-
dell, Knight, & Co., and retained
the direction of affairs until the
concern was sold to the Swan River
Shipping Company, in which he be-
came a shareholder. Mr. Randell has
always been a man of considerable
public spirit, and early in the
seventies was returned as a member
of the Perth City Council, of which
he was elected Chairman in 1874.
Three years later he stood for the
Perth electorate in the old Legis-
lative Council, upon which occa-
sion he defeated Mr. (now Sir) E.
A. Stone, his fellow-candidate. His
career in the House was broken by
a tour abroad, but shortly after
his return he was nominated a mem-
ber of the Legislative Council, and
he was soon deeply immersed in
political life. In 1890 he was re-
turned as representative for the
Moore constituency at the first elec-
tions for the House of Assembly
under responsible government, and
occupied the post of Chairman of
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. GEORGE RANDELL.
Committees. In 1892 he resigned
and in the year following secured a
seat in the Legislative Council, only
to return to the Legislative As-
sembly in 1894 as the member for
Perth. In 1897 he again entered
the Legislative Council in the in-
terests of the Metropolitan division
and was returned at each ensuing
election until 1910, when he retired
from public life. Mr. Randell
strenuously opposed State-aid to
educational institutions of a denom-
inational character, and was also
a supporter of the withdrawal
of Government subsidies to the
churches. He introduced and
piloted through Parliament the Life
Assurance Companies Act of 1889
and the Associations Incorporation
Act of 1895, and served on several
important commissions, the principal
being the Railway Commission of
1893, of which he was Chairman,
and which was responsible for the
removal of the "workshops from Fre-
mantle to Midland Junction. His
speech on the Fremantle Harbour
scheme influenced the selection of
the mouth of the river for the
erection of the Harbour, the wisdom
of which decision has been abun-
dantly justified. He hold the port


folio of Colonial Secretary from
1898 to 1901, and during his term
of office in the Ministry controlled
the Education Department and the
Post Office. Mr. Randell originated
the movement for the establishment
of the present Pligh School, Perth,
securing the co-operation of Governor
Robinson and Sir Malcolm Fraser,
and is a Trustee under the Uni-
versity Endowment Act of 1904. He
was a member for many years of the
City Board of Education and upon
the abolition of this body was
elected to a seat on the District
Board for Perth. He was President
of the Perth Chamber of Commerce
in 1895, and is Chairman of the
local Board of Directors of the
A.M.P. Society and a Director of
the Western Australian Bank. In
1884 he was elected Mayor of Perth
and held this office until the fol-
lowing year. For twenty-six years
he has been Treasurer for the local
branch of the British and Foreign
Bible Society, and has seen a long
period of service in Trinity Congre-
gational Church, which he first
joined in 1856, was elected to the
diaconate in 1862, and has occupied
this position ever since, being now
a life deacon.
The House of Assembly.
The Honourable MICHAEL
FRANCIS TROY, M.L.A. The
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,
Mr. M. F. Troy, was born on the
Richmond River, New South Wales,
in 1880, and is a son of the late Mr.
Patrick Troy, who came to that
State from Ireland about the middle
of the nineteenth century. After
completing his studies he entered the
Department of Public Instruction in
that State, relinquishing his position
to come to Western Australia in
1897. Taking up his residence on the
Murchison, he became familiar with
all portions of the district as a
prospector and in general mining
pursuits. A stanch supporter of
the Labour cause, he acted for two
years as Secretary of the Murchison
District Council of the Australian
Workers’ Association, succeeding Mr.
Holman in that office upon the elec-
tion of the latter to the House of
Assembly. He was appointed by the
miners of the district as their repre-
sentative before the Conciliation and
Arbitration Court upon the first oc-
casion that a dispute, arising on the
Murchison field, was referred to a
tribunal under the Arbitration Act.
His efforts on behalf of the miners
were attended with success both at
this time and since he entered Par-
liament, when he has frequently ap-
peared before the Arbitration Court
to uphold the interests of the miners
in cases of trouble. In 1904, before
the advent of the general elections,
he was asked to allow himself to be
nominated as a candidate for the
seat of Cue. A similar request
reached him from the Mount Magnet
District, and in deference to the
wishes of the Labour organization he
decided to contest the latter consti-
tuency. A strenuous conflict en-
sued, the outcome of which eventu-
ated in his election against a strong
local opponent by a satisfactory
majority. At the dissolution of the
House upon the resignation of the
Daglish Government Mr. Troy was
again elected with an increased
majority of votes. When first elected
HON. MICHAEL FRANCIS TROY.
he was the youngest member of the
House, and at the last two elections
he has been returned unopposed.
From 1905 for six years he filled the
position of Secretary and Whip to
the Labour Party in Parliament,
and upon the accession to office of
that Party in 1911 was elevated to
the position of Speaker. He is the
youngest member ever elected to
that position in the Parliament of
Western Australia, and, indeed, in
any Parliament of the Common-
wealth. Mr. Troy is associated with
numerous Labour organizations, and
is a most active organizer and plat-
form fighter for his Party.
The Honourable FRANK WIL-
SON, C.M.G., M.L.A., was born
at Sunderland, England, in 1859.
He was first educated in his
birthplace and afterwards at Neu-
wied, Germany, and at Wesley
College, Sheffield. On the termina-
tion of his scholastic career he
was apprenticed to a firm of ship-
brokers and timber merchants in
Sunderland, but his indentures were
subsequently cancelled by consent,
and at the age of nineteen he joined
his brother in the management of
engineering works, which they con-
ducted until the termination of the
disastrous three years’ strike of 1886.
In the same year Mr. Wilson decided
to try his fortunes abroad, and soon
after his arrival in Queensland re-
ceived the appointment as Manager
of A. Overend & Co., railway
contractors, flour-millers, and ma-
chinery merchants. Here he re-
mained till 1891, when he accepted
the position of Managing Director
of the Canning J arrah Timber
Company, Perth. The old Com-
pany eventually sold out to a new
firm, Mr. Wilson still continuing
as Managing Director, but in


1899 he finally severed his con-
nection with the Company. Mr.
Wilson’s first public appearance was
in 1896, from which year till 1899
he represented East Ward in the
Perth City Council. In April, 1897,
he entered the Legislative Assembly
as member for Canning, which had
just been created an electoral dis-
trict, for which he was returned by
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. FRANK WILSON.
a large majority. At the general
elections of 1901 he stood for Perth,
his old constituency of Canning hav-
ing been subdivided into South
Perth and several other electorates.
Since this period Mr. Wilson has
won the Sussex seat five times —
May, 1904; September and October,
1905 ; September, 1908 ; and October,
1911. His first portfolio was that of
Minister for Railways and Mines in
the brief-lived Morgan Government
of November 21, 1901, to December
23 of the same year. Again in the
Rason Cabinet of August, 1905, to
May, 1906, he acted as Minister for
Works. The various portfolios which
Mr. Wil son occupied in the late
Moore Ministry eminently qualified
him for the position which he was
afterwards to hold —that of Pre-
mier of the State. These were
Minister for Agriculture, Minister
for Education, and Colonial Trea-
surer, May, 1906, to January, 1907;
Minister for Education and Colonial
Treasurer, May, 1906, to June,
1909; Minister for Works, June,
1909, till the resignation of the Hon-
ourable Sir Newton Moore, when
Mr. Wilson took his place as Pre-
w2
mier and Colonial Treasurer. Dur-
ing a course of five and a half years
(1906-11) Mr. Wilson attended four
Premiers’ Conferences in the Eastern
States as one of the State’s repre-
sentatives. In August, 1909, a satis-
factory financial agreement between
the various States and the Common-
wealth was arrived at during the
last of these Conferences. Mr. Wil-
son’s varied commercial experience
and sound financial acumen were of
great assistance in upholding and
protecting the State rights of Wes-
tern Australia, and his occupancy
of the portfolio of Treasurer during
the several years of financial depres-
sion, coincident with the changes in
financial administration necessitated
by the establishment of Federation,
was signalized by the extinction of
the accumulated deficit. Whilst
holding office as Premier he was
mainly responsible for the passing
of the Redistribution of Seats Bill
and the Act for the establishment
of a University in Western Aus-
tralia, subsequently being chosen as
a member of the first Senate of the
University. Apart from political
affairs, Mr. Wilson has had con-
siderable personal experience in fin-
ancial, commercial, and industrial
matters. He was for four consecu-
tive years President of the Perth
Chamber of Commerce. For many
years he was also President of the
Timber Merchants and Saw-millers’
Association, and also established and
presided over the Coalowners’ Asso-
ciation of Western Australia. He
was for some time a member of the
Arbitration Court, and later repre-
sented the employers before the
Court, successfully conducting many
cases on behalf of the Chamber of
Mines and other public bodies. On
the occasion of the Coronation of
Their Majesties King George Y. and
Queen Mary, Mr. and Mrs. Wilson
were invited to be present, and with
the sanction of Parliament repre-
sented the State at that memorable
ceremony, when the distinction of a
C.M.G.-ship was conferred upon
him. His native town of Sunder-
land also conferred the freedom of
the borough upon him when visiting
his birthplace. Mr. Wilson, during
his brief stay in the Old Country,
was well received, and several times
publicly banqueted by the mining,
banking, and commerical communi-
ties interested in Western Australian
affairs. In 1880 he married Annie,
daughter of Mr. Robert Hall Phil-
lips, of Sunderland, and has a family
of six daughters and three sons.
EBEN ALLEN, J.P., representa-
tive for West Perth in the Legis-
lative Assembly, is a son of the
late Mr. Joseph Allen, Government
contractor, of South Australia, and
was born at North Adelaide on
November 15, 1868. He received
his education at the Glenelg Gram-
mar School under the late Mr.
Frederick Caterer, and at the con-
clusion of his scholastic career
entered the warehouse of Messrs.
McLean Brothers & Bigg, a well-
known Adelaide firm. Five years
later he relinquished this employ and
became connected with Messrs. Wil-
liam Gilbert & Co., produce mer-
chants, of the same city, with whom
he remained for ten years. In 1899
he' came to Western Australia and
joined Mr. J. Fairfax Conigrave,
Secretary of the Perth Chamber of
Commerce, but left him in 1901 and
entered into partnership with an
established firm of auctioneers and
estate and shipping agents. This
connection after a short time was
dissolved, and the business has since
been carried on by Mr. Allen on his
own behalf. lie entered the Perth
City Council as representative for
South Ward in 1904, since which
date he has twice been returned
for the same seat unopposed.
He has served a term of mem-
bership on the Fire Brigade Board,
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. EBEN ALLEN.
and is a Past Master in the Masonic
craft, with which he is associated.
Church work claims his attention,
and for years he has been a member
of the Anglican Synod. Mr. Allen
has always taken a keen interest in


public affairs, and in 1911 was a
candidate for the West Perth seat
rendered vacant bv the retirement
%/
of Mr. T. P. Draper, and after a
spirited contest he was returned
with a substantial majority over
his two opponents. For recrea-
tion he resorts to the bowling green
and is a foundation member of
King's Park Bowling Club. In 1897
Mr. Allen married Effie Marion,
eldest daughter of Mr. John Fair-
fax Conigrave, and has a son and a
daughter.
HARRY EDWARD BOLTON,
representing South Fremantle consti-
tuency in the Legislative Assembly,
was born at Ryo House, Peckham,
London, on December 24, 1870. He
was educated at Maidstone, Kent,
and while still in his teens came to
Australia with his parents, settling
in North Fremantle, where he
resided for many years. In 1904
Mr. Bolton stood in the Labour
interest for North Fremantle, and
being returned continued to repre-
sent the constituency until October,
1911, when on the redistribution of
seats that electorate was cut out,
and he became a successful candidate
for South Fremantle. During his
political career he has been respon
sible for the amendment of the Vac-
cination Act, which provided for the
abolition of compulsory vaccination.
Mr. Bolton has been twice President
of the Enginedrivers, Firemen, and
Cleaners' Union, having been a
foundation-member of that organ-
ization. He has taken a keen
interest in municipal affairs and
represents South Ward in the Fre-
mantle Council. Lie is a member of
the Masonic craft and Past Master
of the Loyal Westralia Lodge,
W.A.C., and is a member of Prince
Lodge in the United Ancient
Order of Druids.
FRANK TYNDALL BROUN,
J.P., who represents Beverley con-
stituency in the Legislative Assem-
bly, is a son of the late Mr. James
William Broun, of Avondale, Bev-
erley. He is descended from one of
the oldest families in Western Aus-
tralia, his grandfather, the late Mr.
Peter Broun, having come to the
State with Captain Stirling, first
Governor of Western Australia, by
the transport steamer ‘Tarmelia" in
1829 to fill the position of Colonial
Secretary at the new settlement. The
gentleman under review was born at
Beverley on May 31, 1876, and re-
ceived his education at the local
State school and at the York Gram-
mar School under the late Mr. Ben-
nett. When eighteen years of age
he entered upon farming pursuits on
his father's property, three years
later launching out on his own
account on the Waterbatch Estate,
comprising 5,000 acres, and situated
about five and a half miles west of
Beverley. Lie devotes his attention
chiefly to agriculture and sheep-
raising, and has met with success in
his operations, the development of
the property having proceeded
steadily during the period of his
occupation. In 1906 Mr. Broun re-
ceived his commission of Justice of
the Peace, and in other ways he has
held office in the interests of the
public, being Chairman of the Bev-
erley Roads Board, of which he has
been a member for many years. In
1911 he stood for the Beverley seat
in the Legislative Assembly of the
State and was elected, defeating
three other candidates. Golf and
shooting are his special forms of
diversion, and he has his own links
on the property, where he passes
many a leisure hour. A member of
the fraternity of Freemasons, he
holds honours as Past Master of the
Beverley Lodge, No. 73, W.A.C.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANK TYNDALL BROUN.
He is a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Club, Perth. Mr. Broun
married in 1903 May Constance,
daughter of the late Mr. James
Sewell, of Beverley, and has two
sons and two daughters.
WILLIAM HENRY CARPEN-
TER, J.P., who represents Fre-
mantle constituency in the Legisla-
tive Assembly, was born at Swindon,
Wilts, England, on April 5, 1863.
He came to Victoria in 1886, and
C. M. Nixon, Fremantle.
MR. WILLIAM HENRY CARPENTER.
was engaged in the Phoenix Foundry
on locomotive construction. After
seven years in Victoria he went to
South Australia and accepted a
post as working foreman on similar
work at Gawler. In 1896 he be-
came a candidate in the Labour
interest for Encounter Bay district,
and was returned, three years
later being re-elected for the same
district. Upon the conclusion of his
second term this electoral district
was abolished owing to a reduction of
members, and Mr. Carpenter came to
Western Australia, where he was
employed in the railway workshops
at Fremantle. In December,
1903, he was returned as
Labour representative for Fremantle
division in the Federal Parliament,
but suffered defeat in 1906 at the
hands of the present member, Mr.
Hedges, and again at the general
elections of 1909. In 1911 he again
came before the public as a candi-
date for their suffrages and scored a
record in the majority of votes given
in his favour. He has been a life-
long unionist, and at the present
time is an active member of the
Fremantle Trades Hall Association.
During his political career in South
Australia he did much toward popu-
larizing the question of old-age pen-
sions, and was Chairman of the
Royal Commission on that question.


BRONTERRE WASHINGTON
DOOLEY, representative for Gerald-
ton in the Legislative Assembly, was
born in Sydney on July 4, 1868, and
received his education in that city.
At sixteen years of age he was ap-
prenticed to the coachbuilding
trade, and having served his inden-
tures for five years, he spent a
similar period in gaining bush ex-
perience. He identified himself with
the early movements of the Labour
Party in New South Wales and
joined the Sydney Coachbuilders'
Society at the conclusion of his ap-
prenticeship in 1888. During the
time of Henry George's visit to Aus-
tralia he was connected with the
Sydney Socialist League, and assisted
at the first organized Labour elec-
tions in Australia, which took place
in Sydney in 1891, being at that
time a member of the Paddington
Political Labour League. After
roughing it in different parts of the
Commonwealth and New Zealand
he came to Western Australia in
1897 and resumed his trade as a
coachbuilder, entering the service of
the Railways Department. He joined
the Amalgamated Society of Rail-
way Employes shortly after its
formation in 1898 and took a lead-
ing part in obtaining official recog-
nition for that body. In 1903 he
came to reside in the Geraldton dis-
trict and has since taken an active
interest in all matters affecting the
public welfare. He organized the
Geraldton Branch of the P.L.P.
Eight - hours Demonstration, the
Geraldton Co-operative Society, the
local Branch of the Railway Am-
bulance Corps, and successfully con-
tested a seat for East Ward in the
Geraldton Municipal Council.
WALTER DWYER, LL.B.
(Lond.), representative for the
Metropolitan district in the Legisla-
tive Assembly, is a son of the late
Mr. Walter Dwyer, of Carrick-on-
Suir, County Tipperary, Ireland,
and was born at that place on
August 27, 1875. He pursued his
scholastic studies at the Christian
Brothers' Seminary at 'Mount
Sion," in his native town, and at
sixteen years of age left school to
accompany other members of his
family to Australia. Settling in
Victoria he forthwith became identi-
fied with the Christian Brothers'
College, Melbourne, in the capacity
of assistant master, and continued
to hold this post for three years. At
the end of 1894, obeying the Zeit-
geist which prompted the departure
of SO' many promising young and
enterprising spirits to carve out a
career for themselves in the Golden
West, he resigned his position and
came to Western Australia with the
intention of throwing in his lot with
the gold-seekers. Upon arrival, how-
ever, he was prevailed upon to alter
this decision by the State authori-
ties, who offered him an appoint-
ment in the Government Education
Department. Joining the adminis-
trative staff in Perth Mr. Dwyer
spent ten years in the service of the
department, during which period he
utilized his spare hours in reading
for the London University examina-
tions. Having matriculated and
passed the intermediate law examina-
tion, in 1904 he left the Education
Department to enter into articles
under the late Dr. Lyhane, then
practising at Kalgoorlie and
Boulder, and about a year later re-
turned to the capital to complete
his indentures with the well-known
firm of Smith & Lavan, of Perth.
He gained his LL.B. degree in 1907
and was admitted to practise as a
barrister and solicitor in December
of that year. He practised for two
years at Boulder and Kalgoorlie and
in January, 1910, commenced prac-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WALTER DWYER.
tice in Perth, which he still con-
tinues. Always a keen student of
political economy, Mr. Dwyer even
in earlier days bore the stamp of one
destined to make his mark should he
decide to attach himself to a party
and enter the arena of political de-
bate. From the time of his associa-
tion with Dr. Lyhane he formed
strong sympathies with the Labour
movement, but did not become a
member of the Party until 1910. In
1911 he submitted his name as a
candidate for Parliamentary honours
and was chosen to contest in the
Labour interest the Perth seat,
hitherto considered to be a Liberal
stronghold. In the early stages
of the political fight his pros-
pects of success did not appear par-
ticularly bright, even the most san-
guine of his supporters entertaining
little hope of his immediate success,
but the power of his personality sup-
ported by the splendid organization
of the Labour Party led to the un-
doing of his opponent, the day being
won by a handsome majority. Mr.
Dwyer is an honorary member of the
H.A.C.B.S. and is associated with
the Celtic and Midland Junction
Clubs. In earlier days he was very
fond of rowing and yachting, but at
the present time devotes the greater
part of the time spared from his pro-
fessional and political duties to the
perusal of works of an historical and
political character.
GEORGE JAMES FOLEY, repre-
sentative for Mount Leonora in the
House of Assembly, was born at
Walhalla, Victoria, in 1871 and re-
ceived his education in his native
State. He first found employment
as junior reporter on a Richmond
journalistic venture, but pave up this
work in order to join his father, who
was engaged in the mining industry
in the Gippsland district of Victoria.
In 1895 he came to Western Aus-
tralia and was prospecting on the
eastern and northern goldfields for
some time. He next was employed
in the principal mines at Leonora,
and continued in this way until
1911, in which year he contested the
Leonora seat in the Labour interest
and was returned to the House. Mr.
Foley has been a member of the
Federated Miners’ Union for a
lengthy period, and for three years
was President of the Gwalia Branch
of the Federated Miners’ Union, and
also of the northern goldfields coun-
cil of the Australian Labour Feder-
ation. He was one of the foundation-
members of the Australian Natives’
Association on the eastern goldfields,
and has always taken a keen interest
and prominent part in that Asso-
ciation .


JOSEPH PETER GARDINER,
representative for Roebourne dis-
trict in the Legislative Assembly, is
a son of Mr. J. Gardiner, of Gerald-
ton, and was born at Adelaide,
South Australia, on July 4, 1886.
He received his primary education
at one of the Adelaide model schools,
and subsequently concluded his
scholastic career at the Christian
Brothers’ College, in Wakefield
Street. Leaving school before the
age of fifteen he was apprenticed to
the bootmaking trade under his
father, but upon the completion of
his indentures relinquished this call-
ing and eventually proceeded to the
Nor’-West of Western Australia.
Here he filled various positions,
gaining considerable experience of
bush life, and also spent some time
trading on the coast between Cos-
sack and Broome in his schooner
“Annie Agnes,” which unfor-
tunately was afterwards lost in a
gale. While in this district Mr.
Gardiner took a prominent interest
in the Miners’ Union of Whim
Creek, acting as Secretary during the
whole time of his residence in that
locality. He has always been dis-
tinguished for his interest in public
affairs, and previously, while con-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOSEPH PETER GARDINER.
ducting a bootmaking business in
conjunction with his father at
Leederville, had undertaken the
secretarial duties for the Perth Boot-
makers’ Union. In 1911 he was
selected by the Australian Labour
Federation to contest the Roebourne
seat in the State House of Assembly,
and recorded a handsome victory at
the polls, coming out with a two-to-
one majority over his two opponents’
united vote. Mr. Gardiner, who
holds the distinction of being the
youngest member of the House, is an
able speaker and is very popular
with his party.
WILLIAM JAMES GEORGE,
who represents the Murray-Welling-
ton district in the Legislative
Assembly, was born at West Bronx-
ich, Staffordshire, England, on
January 26, 1853. He completed his
studies at the Midland Institute,
Birmingham, and subsequently was
engaged in mechanical engineering.
He was next identified with the iron
trade for seven years, and four years
later, for health reasons, set out on
a tour of the world. In 1885 he
joined the staff of Messrs. McNeil
and Po., public works contractors,
and was engaged in the construction
of the Fingal Railway, Tasmania,
and various public works and rail-
ways in Victoria. In December, 1890,
he was transferred to Western Aus-
tralia, where he undertook the man-
agement of the Jarrahdale timber
station and other enterprises on
behalf of the same firm. In 1894 he
severed his connection with Messrs.
McNeil & Co., and in conjunction
with Mr. William Smith established
the Black Swan Foundry, Perth. He
took considerable interest in public
affairs at that early date and became
a councillor for Perth City in the
above-mentioned year, being ap-
pointed a member of the Works and
Sanitary Committees. In June of
the same year he contested the Mur-
ray constituency against Mr. W.
Paterson, without success, but seven
months later was returned as repre-
sentative for the district, being re-
elected in May, 1897, and again in
April, 1901. He was a member of
the Royal Commission appointed to
deal with matters connected with
Government railways in 1895 and
1899. In April, 1902, Mr. George
was offered and accepted the position
of Commissioner of Railways for
Western Australia. This post he held
for five years, during which time
large additions and improvements
were made in connection with the
railways. After his retirement Mr.
George turned his attention to
mixed farming pursuits on a large
estate, which he had taken up in the
South-West district. In September,
1908, he contested the Murray elec-
tor ate, but was defeated by six votes.
In February, 1909, Mr. George
again contested the seat and was
returned by a large majority.
Owing to the Redistribution of Seats
Bill introduced by the Wilson Gov*
eminent the Murray and Wellington
electorates were merged, and Mr.
George was successful in winning
MR. WILLIAM JAMES GEORGE.
the seat by a large majority over two
opponents in October, 1911. In
June, 1910, he was appointed
Organizer and Secretary for the
Liberal League of Western Aus-
tralia, which position he resigned at
the close of the year. Mr. George,
who was the first President of the
Chamber of Manufactures, received
his commission as Justice of the
Peace for the Perth and Murray dis-
tricts in 1895, and in 1902 was ap-
pointed a Justice of the Peace for
the whole of the State.
FREDERICK GILL, who repre-
sents the Leederville electorate in
the Legislative Assembly, is a son of
the late Mr. Joseph Gill, of Chase-
water, Cornwall, England, and was
born at Burra, South Australia, on
March 15, 1862. He received his
education chiefly in his native place,
and at a very early age went to work
in the Moonta copper mines, where
he continued for about eight years.
Leaving that part of the country he
went to Port Augusta, where he be-
came apprenticed to the blacksmith-
ing trade, and having mastered the
details of this calling in five years’
time, was identified with this branch


of work for a further three years.
Ho then joined the South Australian
Railways Department, and having
risen to the position of guard re-
signed from the Service to come to
Western Australia. Arriving at
Perth in 1894 he immediately be-
came connected with the Railways
Service in this State, serving for ten
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. F REDERICK GILL.
years, when he retired upon election
to the Balkatta seat in the Legisla-
tive Assembly. At the extra-
ordinary general elections in 1905
Mr. Gill lost his constituency and
went into business as a purveyor of
dairy produce. In September, 1908,
he scored a victory over his previous
opponent, and was re-elected to his
former seat, and in 1911 was again
successful at the polls, the name of
the electorate having been altered to
Leederville. In his public career he
has been a prominent advocate of
the rights of railway emnloyes of all
grades, and is a member of the
W.A.A.S.R.E., the official organiza-
tion of the railway employes, of
which he was one of the founders.
Mr. Gill married in 1892 Elizabeth,
daughter of Mr. T. Prisk, of Ascot
Vale, Victoria, and has two sons.
ALBERT ERNEST GREEN,
representative for Kalgoorlie con-
stituency in the State Legislative As-
sembly, was born on December 21,
1869. At the conclusion of his edu-
cation he entered the telephone
department at Ballarat, which de-
partment at that period was owned
by a company, before the days of
State control. Subsequently he
learned the bricklaying trade and at
the age of twenty-one, left for
America, and, spent five years in
that country, becoming an active
member of the Brickmasons' Society
at San Francisco. He met with var-
ious adventures in Central America,
and took part on the side of the in-
surgents in one of the numerous re-
volutions in Guatemala, a Central
American republic. From America
Mr. Green came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1895, and was the initial
spirit in the movement to form a
Western Australian Branch of the
Australian Natives' Association.
Proceeding to Coolgardie in Novem-
ber of the same year, he was ap-
pointed to a clerical position in the
local postal service, and was con-
cerned in the post and telegraph
strike of that period. Although for-
bidden by the regulations he assisted
to form a Post and Telegraphs' Union
in Coolgardie, and also one at Kal-
goorlie, whither he was shortly after-
wards transferred. About 1900, Mr.
Green became a member of the Aus-
tralian Workers' Association, and he
was a foundation-member of the
Social Democratic Federation at
Kalgoorlie. He was active in the
formation of a branch of the Aus-
tralian Natives' Association in Kal-
goorlie in 1896, and has filled the
post of Secretary to this organization
for a lengthy period. In 1911 he
stood for the Kalgoorlie electorate
in the Legislative Assembly, and was
returned in the Labour interest.
NATHANIEL WHITE HAR-
PER, member for Beverley in the
Legislative Assembly, is a native of
County Antrim, Ireland, where he
was born in 1865. His education
completed, at the age of eighteen he
sailed for New Zealand, reaching the
Dominion in 1883. For four years
he engaged in mining and hydraulic-
sluicing, and in 1887 set out for
Broken Hill, New South Wales,
where subsequent to his arrival he
found employment on the Pro-
prietary Mine for two years. He
next proceeded to Zoehan, Tas-
mania, and filled the position of
Mine Manager to the Queen Extend-
ed and South Balstrups Silver-Lead
Mines. Mr. Harper came to Western
Australia in 1892, and for three years
was Manager of Fraser’s Gold Mine
at Southern Cross. At the expira-
tion of that time he proceeded to
Kanowna and was engaged on the
Robinson and White Feather Gold
Mines for nine years, leaving the dis-
trict in 1894. He met with con-
siderable success during his career as
a Mine Manager, and four mines—
Fraser's, White Feather Main Reef,
Golden Pole (Daveyhurst), and Rob-
inson's—paid dividends while under
his control. In 1896 Mr. Harper
entered the political arena for the
first time as candidate for the North-
East Coolgardie district, but his first
essay ended unfavourably, his oppo-
nent, the late Mr. Vosper, winning
by 53 votes. Twelve years had
elapsed before he again placed his
services at the disposal of the
electors, this time as candidate for
the Senate in the Federal House,
and although a big vote was recorded
he met with no better success. But
once more he turned his attention
to the politics of his adopted State,
and in 1910 offered himself for the
Beverley seat, where he met with
strong opposition from his opponents,
Sir Walter James and Mr. Naylor,
of Pingelly, but succeeded in carry-
ing the election by a sound majority.
Mr. Harper holds large interests in
the mining and farming industries,
and has unwavering faith as to the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. NATHANIEL WHITE HARPER.
future of the agricultural areas, the
prospects of which he considers to
be of the brightest. He is associated
as Director with several Mining
Companies and financial institutions,
and has added considerably to the
architecture of the city of Perth,
having erected the handsome edifices


known as the Esplanade Hotel and
Harper’s Buildings. In 1891 Mr.
Harper married Margaret, daughter
of Mr. Thomas, of Dunedin, New
Zealand, and has three children—•
two sons and a daughter. He resides
at Colin Street, West Perth.
EDWARD ERNEST HEIT-
MANN, M.L.A., Government Whip
in the Scaddan Administration, was
born at Californian Gully, Bendigo,
Victoria, on June 3, 1878. Lie is
a son of the late Mr. Llermann Heit-
mann, of that place, a pioneer in
the early days of the Victorian gold
discoveries, who came from Germany
and settled in the Bendigo district.
The subject of this memoir was
educated at the local State school,
and at the age of thirteen went to
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. EDWARD ERNEST HEITMANN.
work in the mines as winch-boy,
subsequently passing through all the
various of the mining
industry, during which period he also
made a study of machinery, particu-
larly of engines. In 1895 he came
to Western Australia, and following
the rush to Coolgardie became identi-
fied with mining pursuits on the new
field. Two years later he returned
to Victoria and took a course at the
Bendigo School of Mines, finally
securing a first-class certificate for
enginedriving. In 1899, again set-
ting his face toward the West, he
proceeded to the Murchison district
via Coolgardie, whence he travelled
overland to his destination, and after
“trying his luck" in different finds
two years later was engaged as
enginedriver on the Great Fingal
Mine, Day Dawn. In 1903 he was
actively engaged in the organiza-
tion of the Enginedrivers’ Union, of
which body he was elected President,
and also acted as President of the
A.C.E.D.A. Executive. In the fol-
lowing year he was selected to
combat the Cue seat in the Legisla-
tive Assembly and was returned,
again being successful at the extra-
ordinary general elections of 1905.
Three years later he was re-elected,
and in 1911 won the suffrages of his
constituency once more, on this
occasion being unopposed. Upon the
coming into power of the Labour
Ministry Mr. Heitmann was ap-
pointed Government Whip. He
represents the Murchison district on
the Executive of the Australian
Labour Federation, and is also a
member of the management com-
mittee of the Western Australian
Timber Workers’ Association. For
many years Mr. Heitmann has taken
a deep interest in public health
matters, giving special attention to
the ravages of tuberculosis among
miners.
JOHN BARKELL HOLMAN,
Chairman of Committees in the
Legislative Assembly, is a son of the
late Mr. Edward Holman, who came
to Australia from Cornwall in the
early sixties. He was born at Clunes,
Victoria, on February 26, 1872, and
received his education at Bendigo,
where he was taken by his parents
while still quite a child. Early in
life he went to work on the mines,
and followed that industry at Ben-
digo and Broken Hill until his de-
parture for Western Australia in
1893. Upon arrival in this State he
proceeded to Nannine, on the Mur-
chison goldfields, where he was en-
gaged chiefly in prospecting, but also
filled various positions, among others
that of mine manager. Mr. Holman
took an active part in the Australian
Labour movement from its earliest
days, and during his career has suc-
cessfully organized many unions. In
1886 he was a member of the Ben-
digo Miners’ Association, at a later
date joining a similar organization
at Broken Hill, where he passed
through several Labour troubles. He
was appointed special officer for the
Defence Committee during the Bro-
ken Hill strike of 1892, which lasted
five months, and in the following
year successfully represented the
miners in the first Murchison
trouble at Nannine, Western Aus-
tralia. In 1894 he secured a reduc-
tion of working hours to forty-four
per week for the men concerned in
the Star of the East trouble, and
acted as Chairman of the Defence
Committee at the big Day Dawn
strike against the reduction of wages
in 1899, the men under his leader-
ship being entirely successful in their
protest. He was the first Labour or-
ganizer on the Murchison for the
Australian Workers' Association of
Western Australia in 1899, and
was Secretary of the Cue Branch
and Murchison District, Australian
Workers’ Association of Western
Australia, which latter position he
held for two years, retiring upon
his election to Parliament in 1901.
He represented the workers in the
Abbotts' strike, which successfully
prevented the reduction of wages in
1900. In his first Parliamentary con-
test for Mount Magnet he was de-
feated, but subsequently being
selected to contest North Murchison
as the Labour candidate against the
Attorney-General in the Morgans
Government he obtained a majority
at the by-election of 1901, and has
since held the seat. Upon the sole oc-
casion that he was opposed he was re-
turned by a 10 to 1 majority, though
at the time he was engaged in as-
sisting other candidates in their
campaign and did not visit his elec-
torate. Mr. Holman was Workers’
Advocate before the State
tion Court for Cue A.W.A., Nan-
nine A.W.A., Abbotts' A.W.A.,
Peak Hill A.W.A., the Norseman
Miners' Union, Feysville Miners'
Union, Higginsville Miners' Union,
Wiluna Miners' Union, Meeka-
tharra Miners' Union, and several
other organizations. He was elected
General President of the A.W.A. of
Western Australia in 1902, and
while holding that position brought
about the settlement of the big dis-
pute that threatened the timber in-
dustry in 1903, retiring from his
office on his appointment to the
Ministry. From the position of Sec-
retary and Whip to the Parliamen-
tary Labour Party in 1904 he suc-
ceeded to the portfolio of Labour
and Railways in the Labour Min-
istry of 1904. He organized the
General Workers' Union, which he
represented at the Conference with
the employers, securing increased
wages and better conditions; was
Chairman of the Timber Workers'
Defence Committee in 1907 during
the greatest industrial trouble in
Western Australia, from which the


workers under his leadership emerged
triumphant after fourteen weeks’
struggle; and as organizer and Sec-
retary of the Timber Workers’
Union at a time when it was com-
pletely disorganized, without funds
and with very few members, was so
successful that the membership now
numbers over 3,000. Prior to his
connection with the Union in 1907
the employes in that industry were
working under the worst of condi-
tions for a low rate of wage, but since
he took control conditions have
considerably improved, increases
amounting to over <£50,000 per year
in wages having been secured. At
the present time the Timber Workers’
Union is one of the strongest in the
State, and during the past five years
under Mr. Holman’s management no
serious industrial trouble has taken
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN HARKELL HOLMAN.
place. In 1908, for services rendered,
he was elected a life member of the
Timber Workers’ Union of Western
Australia, and represented the Wes-
tern Australia Branch of the Timber
Federation before the Federal Ar-
bitration Court of 1909. He has
represented various unions at trade
congresses, and has been a delegate
to the Trades and Labour Council.
On many occasions his services have
been requisitioned to bring about
settlements in Labour disputes, and
while he has been actively associated
in many of the labour troubles in
Western Australia, he has never
been responsible for the commence-
ment of any industrial dispute.
Owing to his active interest in the
cause of the workers, however, he
had more than once to resign
positions, and eventually started
business on his own account, subse-
quently disposing of his interests in
order to devote the whole of his time
to public duties. Mr. Holman’s
name is closely interlinked with the
history of The Labour Vanguard ,
the official organ of the Labour
Party in Western Australia. He first
proposed the launching of the paper
and afterwards undertook the com-
plete business management. This
paper played an important part in
the electoral campaign of 1911, and
was practically responsible for the
complete rout of the Liberal Party
and the return to power of the
Labour Administration with a sub-
stantial majority. In addition to
taking an active interest in Labour
matters Mr. Holman has excelled in
sport, notably in connection with
athletic games and on the football
field. He has been one of the leading
men in bringing the Volunteer Fire
Brigade movement to its present
position in Western Australia, being
one of the oldest members and a
champion competitor of the Cue
Volunteer Fire Brigade, the
champion Fire Brigade in the
State, of which he was elected
a life honorary member, and
for his efforts in the advance-
ment of the firemen of the
State has been elected a life mem-
ber of the Western Australian Fire
Brigades’ Association, being the only
one to receive that distinction. He
has occupied the post of President
of this Association, and still takes
an active interest in the welfare of
the Volunteer Fire Brigade move-
ment. He married in 1892 Cather-
ine, daughter of the late Mr.
Richard Row, of Bowden, South
Australia, and has three sons and
four daughters.
CHARLES ARTHUR HUD-
SON, member for Yilgarn in the
Legislative Assembly, is a Victorian
by birth, and received his education
in his native State. He was articled
to the law with a prominent firm of
solicitors in Melbourne, and was
admitted to the Bar, afterwards
practising for some time in the
country of his nativity. He came to
Western Australia in the early part
of the present century, and in
July, 1904, was called to the Wes-
tern Australian Bar. In 1908 Mr.
Hudson successfully contested the
seat for the Dundas district in the
House of Assembly, and on the ex-
cision of that electorate by the
Redistribution of Seats Act of 1911
secured the Yilgarn seat, formerly
held by Mr. A. A. Horan. Mr.
Hudson is a supporter of the Labour
Party, and since his arrival in this
State has been prominently associ-
ated with the Labour movement
throughout the country.
EDWARD BERTRAM JOHN-
STON, who represents the Williams-
Narrogin district in the Legislative
Assembly, is a son of Mr. H. F.
Johnston, Surveyor-General of Wes-
tern Australia, and was born at
Geraldton on January 11, 1880. He
pursued his scholastic studies at the
High School, Perth, and having at-
tained his seventeenth year entered
upon a Civil Service career by join-
ing the Lands Department. Five
years later he had risen to the posi-
tion of Chief Clerk in the Katanning
Lands Office, and in 1903 was ap-
pointed Government Land Agent at
Wagin, whence he was transferred
to Narrogin in the following year.
He was closely associated with the
settlement of the land along the
Collie-Narrogin railway and in the
Dorakin and other areas east of Nar-
rogin and Wickepin, and upon his
resignation from the service in 1909,
when leaving the district, he was the
recipient of an illuminated address
bearing the signatures of representa-
tives of all the Roads Boards, Agri-
cultural Societies, and other public
bodies in the Narrogin land district,
which at that time included Pingelly.
Entering upon business pursuits at
Kalgoorlie, Mr. Johnston played a
prominent part as Hon. Secretary of
the Esperance Land and Railway
League, and during his term of office
did much to bring its aims and ob-
jects under consideration throughout
the whole of the eastern goldfields.
In April, 1911, he was invited by
the Narrogin Branch of the Austra-
lian Labour Federation to contest
his present seat in the Assembly, and
this request being endorsed by the
settlers of the district he allowed
himself to be nominated and was re-
turned, being the first Labour mem-
ber to represent any part of the
Great Southern district. Mr. John-
ston held the position at Narrogin
of Vice-President of the Australian
Natives’ Association during the first
year of its formation, in which he
took an active interest, and in the
following year he was elected to the
presidential chair.


TITUS LANDER, representative
for East Perth in the House of As-
sembly, is a son of Mr. James B.
Lander, of Harrow Hill, near Lon-
don. At the close of his schooldays
he worked as a stonemason for
twenty-two years in England, and in
1883 sailed for Australia, landing in
the Central State. Nine years later
he came to Western Australia, where
he followed his calling for some con-
siderable time. In 1894 he was
appointed Inspector in connection
with the Society for the Preven-
tion of Cruelty to Animals, resign-
ing the office in 1911. He was
elected to the Perth City Council
as councillor for North Ward in
November, 1908, but did not contest
the seat at the election of 1911, in
the interim having been returned to
the House of Assembly in October,
1911, as a supporter of the Labour
Party.
CHARLES HENRY LAYMAN,
representing Nelson district in the
Legislative Assembly, is the third
son of Mr. George Layman, of Won-
nerup, who was a member of the
Legislative Council before the days
of responsible government. The Lay-
mans are a very old family in the
district, Mr. C. IT. Layman’s grand-
father having formed one of a small
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. CHARLES HENRY LAYMAN.
band of settlers under Colonel
Molloy which landed at Augusta,
Flinders Bay, in 1830, prior to
which he had resided in Tasmania.
Mr. Layman, sen., was several
times attacked by natives, and
eventually was treacherously mur-
dered at Wonnerup by blacks when
in his twenty-ninth year. The
gentleman under review was born
at Wonnerup on June 4, 1865,
and received his education at
the High School, Perth. At seven-
teen years of age he entered the
office of the Western Australian
Timber Company, near Busselton,
and continued in this connection for
nearly two years. He then turned
his attention to agricultural and
pastoral pursuits, which engaged his
energies for a considerable period,
but were abandoned in favour of
mercantile operations at Green-
bushes, where he remained for about
twelve years. At the end of this
time Mr. Layman again acquired
landed property, and has since car-
ried on business as a grazier and
pastoralist in the south-western por-
tion of the State. He takes a deep
interest in the progress of the Agri-
cultural Societies of Western Aus-
tralia, being a member of the Royal,
the Nelson, the Balingup, and the
Southern Districts Societies, on the
governing committees of which he
has served at different periods. He
was one of the pioneers of the Green-
bushes tinfields, and for six years
was a member of the local Roads
Board, filling the chair for the
major portion of that time. He
next turned his attention to politics,
and in 1905 was returned to the
House of Assembly for the Nelson
district. He was re-elected in 1906
and has continued to represent the
constituency ever since. In the
present Parliament he discharges
the office of Opposition Whip, and
held a similar position under the
Wilson and Moore Administra-
tions for over five years. He
is a patron of nearly a dozen
amateur athletic clubs, representing
almost all forms of sport, and cor-
dially sympathizes with healthy out-
door diversion. His own recreation
he takes chiefly in the saddle, and
is a great lover of horses. Mr. Lay-
man married Florence Edith, daugh-
ter of Mr. J. G. Reynolds, J.P.,
grazier, of Menbernup, Busselton,
and has three sons and three
daughters.
The Honourable HENRY
BRUCE LEFROY, C.M.G., repre-
sentative for Moore constituency in
the Legislative Assembly, was born
at Perth on March 24, i 854. He is
a son of the late Honourable A.
O’Grady Lefroy, C.M.G., who for
thirty-six years was connected with
the Public Service of Western Aus-
tralia and occupied the important
post of Colonial Treasurer, an office
from which he retired upon the in-
troduction of responsible govern-
HON. HENRY BRUCE LEFROY.
ment in 1890. In recognition of his
valuable services to the Crown the
late gentleman had conferred upon
him the distinction of C.M.G., and
subsequently, by royal consentj the
right to retain the prefix Honour-
able during his lifetime. Similar
honours were also granted to Mr.
H. B. Lefroy in the years 1901 and
1903. Mr. Lefroy’s mother, who is
still living (1912), is a daughter
of the late Colonel Bruce, for many
years Commandant of the military
forces of the State. The subject
under review was sent to England to
be educated, and after attending a
preparatory school at Exmouth
under the Rev. John Penrose, spent
four years at Rugby, returning to
Australia in 1873. During his
scholastic career he distinguished
himself both in the classes and on
the field, and was well known at
Rugby as a winner of long-distance
races and a player in the Rugby
football fifteen. He also displayed
considerable ability as a cricketer,
and continued his interest in this
sport after his return to his native
land, being a prominent batsman in
the early days of the State. Imme-
diately following his arrival from
the Motherland he took over the
management of his father’s station,
“Walebing,” on Victoria Plains,
which, under his superintendence,
has become one of the best pastoral
properties in Western Australia.


When only twenty-one years of age
he was appointed to a commission of
Justice of the Peace, and for twenty
years was Chairman of the Victoria
Plains Roads Board and of the local
Board of Education, besides occupy-
ing many other public offices. He
first entered political life in 1892
upon the retirement of the Hon.
George Randell, being returned for
Moore district in the House of As-
sembly, which seat he retained until
1901, when he was appointed Agent-
General for Western Australia in
London. In 1895 and 1897 he repre-
sented this State at the Federal
Council which met at Hobart, and in
the latter year was offered a port-
folio in the Forrest Cabinet, in
which he became Minister of Educa-
tion and Post and Telegraphs. The
Mines portfolio falling vacant upon
the acceptance by Mr. (Sir) Edward
H. Wittenoom of the position of
Agent-General in London in 1898,
Mr. Lefroy became Minister for
Mines, which office he filled until his
departure for London as Agent-
General upon the expiration of Sir
Edward’s term of office in 1901. In
1905 he returned to Western Aus-
tralia, and has since devoted himself
to the development of his pastoral
interests at “Walebing,” a property
acquired from the Midland Railway
Company and comprising lands pre-
viously held under lease from the
Crown. During his absence in Eng-
land the old Irwin and Moore elec-
torates were merged into one, but by
the Redistribution of Seats Bill in
1910 Mr. Lefroy’s former con-
stituency of Moore was re-estab-
lished, and in 1911 he once again be-
came a candidattTfnr the suffrages of
the electors, and was returned to the
Assembly by a large majority. Mr.
Lefroy has been twice married. His
first wife, Rose, by whom he had
issue three sons, was a sister of Sir
Edward H. Wittenoom and died in
1902. In 1905 he married Made-
leine, daughter of the Rev. Stewart
Walford, Rector of Dallinhoo, Suf-
folk, by whom he has two sons and
a daughter.
CHARLES JOSEPH LEWIS,
representative for the Canning dis-
trict in the Legislative Assembly of
Western Australia, was born at
Geelong, Victoria, on August 7,
1870, and is a son of the late Mr.
Alfred James Lewis of that place
and latterly of Bendigo. Lie was
educated at a State school at Kan-
garoo Flat, with a subsequent
course of private tuition at Carlton,
Melbourne. Having concluded his
studies, for three years he assisted
his father, who carried on a grocery
and produce store near Bendigo, and
relinquished this connection to take
up work with a local farrier. At a
later period he enlarged his indus-
trial knowledge by serving for about
three years in the coach-building
trade, and eventually joined the
Melbourne Tramway Company,
where he held the position of con-
ductor for nearly six years. In 1896
Mr. Lewis came to Western Aus-
tralia, and after a short period of
work in a foundry became con-
nected with the Traffic Department
of the State Railways, rising in the
service until he attained the post of
acting-stationmaster. He resigned
from the service in order to contest
the Canning electorate in the Labour
interest, and in the ensuing struggle
defeated the sitting member, who
had held the seat for twelve years.
Mr. Lewis has always been promin-
ently associated with the Labour
movement, and as far back as 1891
made an effort to form a Tramway
Employes Union in Melbourne. He
was one of the founders of the
Amalgamated Society of Railway
Employes and was the second Chair-
B artletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES JOSEPH LEWIS.
man of the Perth Branch. He held
the position of Secretary to the
Branch for two years, and in 1909
was elected general treasurer by a
ballot of the whole of the members,
to which position he has recently
again been returned unopposed. He
represented Perth, Collie, and Pin-
jarra on the General Committee for
eight years, and acted as delegate
from the Amalgamated Society to
five different Conferences. While
absent in Tasmania at the Inter-
state Railway Conference held at
Launceston in May, 1911, Mr.
Lewis received a wire from Western
Australia asking permission to nom-
inate him for selection for the Can-
ning seat, the ultimate result being
his election by the constituency in
October of the same year. Mr.
Lewis was a member of the pro-
visional committee which inaugu-
rated the Railway Provident Fund,
and was appointed organizer at its
inception, in addition to occupying a
seat on the management committee
for three years, on which he repre-
sented the traffic section. He has
also been a member of the manage-
ment committee of the Railway
Hospital Fund for over four years
and general treasurer of the fund
for the past three years. Mr. Lewis
married in 1902 Clara, daughter of
the late Mr. Charles Hillier, of
Whittlesea, Victoria, and has four
daughters.
john james McDonald,
member of the Legislative Assembly,
representing Gascoyne district, is a
son of Mr. Michael McDonald, of
Carlton, Victoria, and was born at
Ballarat, in that State, on July 21,
1869. He received his education at
the Christian Brothers' College, East
Melbourne, and upon its completion
went into the stock-raising business
as manager for his father, which
position he filled for three years. In
1895 he came to Western Australia
and was engaged in the mining in-
dustry, chiefly as prospector, for
about twelve years, during which
time he has travelled over nearly all
the mineral areas of the State. In
1908 he proceeded to the
where he was connected with the pas-
toral industry in the Carnarvon dis-
trict, and almost immediately on his
arrival became associated with the
Australian Workers’ Union, in which
body he took a live and active in-
terest. Having made a careful
study of the political situation Mr.
McDonald in 1911 offered himself for
selection by his Party as a candidate
for Parliamentary honours in the
Labour interest and was returned,
defeating Mr. W. J. Butcher, who
previously had held the Gascoyne
seat for ten years.


CHA R 1 jES McDOWA LL, repre-
sentative for Coolgardie district in
the State Legislative Assembly, was
born at Ballarat, Victoria. He
received his education in New
Zealand, and in 1884 established
himself as an estate agent at Mel-
bourne and Surrey Hills. For about
twelve years he carried on business
here, but on account of the general
commercial depression in Victoria
Mr. McDowall left for Western
Australia in 1896. Proceeding
direct to Coolgardie, he opened his
present auctioneering business, which
iie has conducted ever since. In 1904
he was elected Mayor of Coolgardie,
and for four years served the rate-
payers as a member of the local
Municipal Council. His Par-
liamentary career began in
1908, when he was returned
to represent the old Cool-
gardie constituency in the Legisla-
tive Assembly, and in 1911 this
honour was repeated when the
Labour Party came into power, his
connection with this movement hav-
ing begun in 1904. Mr. McDowall
has always taken a keen interest in
the Australian Natives’ Association,
and in 1893 was elected a member of
the Victorian Board of Directors,
which position he held up to the
time of his leaving the State. Upon
arrival in Western Australia he was
elected General President of the
A.N.A. in this State, in 1898, and
again in 1909, and is still a member
of the Board of Directors of that
Association.
ARTHUR MALE, J.P., who re-
presents the Kimberley district in
the State Legislative Assembly, was
born at Bridport, Dorsetshire, Eng-
land, on March 2, 1870, being a son
of Mr. Thomas Male, of that town.
He was educated at the local Gram-
mar School, and having reached his
twentieth year came to Western Aus-
tralia and engaged in farming and
pastoral pursuits for nearly two
years. At the end of that period he
proceeded to Broome and joined Mr.
George S. Streeter, a son of the
famous London Bond Street jewel-
ler, in the pearling industry, with
which they combined pastoral in-
terests in the same neighbourhood.
Shortly afterwards he was admitted
into partnership by this gentleman,
who subsequently went to reside in
England, leaving the management
of the enterprise to Mr. Male. For
twenty years the subject of this
memoir lias continued in the Nor’-
West, and during this period has
watched the development of the town
of Broome and the surrounding dis-
trict, and has taken a deep interest
and given practical assistance in its
advancement, almost the whole of his
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR MALE.
own large interests being centred
there. He first entered upon public
duties in 1897, when the Forrest
Government appointed him a Justice
of the Peace. When the Roads
Board was first formed he became
one of the original members, and
when Broome was converted into a
municipality at a later date his title
to a seat in the newly-formed Coun-
cil was readily recognized. In 1905
he was nominated and elected as
member of the Legislative Assembly
for the district, and was Honorary
Minister in the Wilson Government.
When the Labour Party came into
power at the general elections of
1911 his constituents displayed their
continued confidence in him by re-
turning him once more as their
representative. Mr. Male is a promi-
nent figure in all public movements
of whatever nature, charitable and
sporting circles alike finding in him
a ready sympathizer. He represents
the London Committee of Lloyd’s at
Broome, his duties in connection
with this agency extending from
Port Hedland to the Northern Terri-
tory border. He is a member of the
Weld Club. In 1900 Mr. Male mar-
ried Constance, daughter of the late
Mr. James Cox, of London, and has
three sons and two daughters.
The Honourable JAMES MIT-
CHELL, M.L.A., is a son of the
late Mr. W. B. Mitchell, a
well-known settler in the Bunbury
district. His natural inclination
toward agricultural anl pastoral
pursuits may be attributed to the
fact that in his youth he took
an active jjart in farming and stock-
raising on his father's property.
After finishing his education he was
appointed to a junior clerkship in
the Bunbury Branch of the Western
Australian Bank in 1885. His pro-
motion in the Bank was rapid, and
after being transferred to the
Geraldton office he was subsequently
appointed Manager of the Northam
Branch. In October, 1905, Mr.
Mitchell was elected as the repre-
sentative of Northam in the Legisla-
tive Assembly, this step necessitating
his resigning the position of Man-
ager of the Bank after a service of
twenty years in that institution.
During his residence in Northam
Mr. Mitchell took a keen and prac-
tical interest in agriculture. He
acquired some of the best land in
this wheat-ju'oducing centre, and
was soon established as one of the
most successful wheat-producers and
stock-raisers in the district. This
practical knowledge was of consider-
Bartletto Perth.
HON. JAMES MITCHELL.
able use in furthering the cause of
land settlement when chosen by the
Moore Cabinet as Honorary Minister
in June, 1906. As the Constitution
provides for the appointment of only
six Ministers there was no portfolio
for Mr. Mitchell till January, 1907,
when he became Honorary Minister


for Agriculture. He retained this
portfolio till June, 1909, when he
was appointed Minister for Lands
and Agriculture. Brief as was his
Ministerial career, Mr. Mitchell soon
made his personality felt in the
internal and external workings of
these two departments. Hostile
criticism was freely levelled at Mr.
Mitchell’s methods, but even his
most censorious critics now admit his
singlemindedness, his enterprise, his
wonderful fertility of ideas, and his
undoubted success in promoting the
State’s usefulness in getting ‘‘people
on the land.” One of his most ener-
getic acts was the promulgation and
promotion of what is known as the
Civil Service Land Settlement Scheme
in 1909. Mr. Mitchell married in
1889 the fourth daughter of Mr. Wil-
liam Spicer, of Bunbury (who was for
some years a member of the Legis
lative Council of Western Australia),
and has three sons and one daughter.
FREDERICK C FI ARLES MON-
GER, representative for York dis-
trict in the Legislative Assembly,
was born at York, Western Aus-
tralia, on January 19, 1863. He
received his education at Wesley
College, Melbourne, and upon his
return to the Western State followed
a mercantile career for about thir-
teen years in the place of his birth.
In October, 1892, he was returned to
Parliament by the electors of that
district, and continued to represent
the constituency for eleven years, at
the end of which period he retired.
Two years later, in 1905, he again
offered himself as a candidate and
has held the seat ever since.
Previous to his connection with
political life he served for some time
as a councillor in the local gover-
ning body of York. He is a member
of the Perth Club. In April, 1895,
Mr. Monger married Ethel Margaret,
daughter of the late Mr. C. W.
Sheridan, one of the first Goldfields
Commissioners in Victoria, and has
four daughters.
SAMUEL JOSEPH FORTES-
CUE MOORE, J.P., member of the
Legislative Assembly for Irwin dis-
trict, is a son of the late Mr. Samuel
Moore, who came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1832 and settled at Oak-
over, on the Middle Swan, where he
was given a grant of land by the
Crown. The late gentleman’s bro-
ther, Mr. George Fletcher Moore,
who was a member of the Irish Bar,
was one of the arrivals by the “Par-
melia” in 1829 and was the first
Advocate-General for the colony. The
two brothers are descendants of a
very old North of Ireland family.
The subject of this notice was born
at Oakover on April 3, 1846, and re-
ceived his scholastic training at
Bishop’s College, Perth, where he
was a schoolfellow of Sir John For-
rest, Mr. Septimus Burt, and other
well-known Western Australians.
Upon leaving school he entered the
Public Service, retiring in 1863,
when he went to Queensland, and
under the leadership of the late
F. T. Gregory made the first survey
for assessment purposes of the now
famous Darling Downs of that State.
In 1867 he returned to Western Aus-
tralia and entered upon commercial
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. SAMUEL JOSEPH FORTES CUE MOORE.
and pastoral pursuits on the Irwin
River at Dongarra, where he con-
tinued until 1901. In that year he
took up his residence at Claremont,
having retired from active business
life, and has since devoted himself
entirely to his public duties. Mr.
Moore has always taken a deep in-
terest in the advancement of the dis-
trict where he was resident for thirty-
three years, and with the develop-
ment of which he was so closely
identified. Having a large stake
both in the mercantile and agricul-
tural progress of the place, where
he owned not only a thriving farm
of 1,100 acres but a well-stocked
general store, with a branch business
at Mingenew and a considerable in-
terest in the wool industry, his sta-
tion property “Cadgy-Cadgy” being
situated some distance inland from
Dongarra, he was prominent in those
offices which require experience and
integrity for their proper discharge.
As Chairman of the local Roads
Board he did good work for the
locality, and in 1876 received his
commission of Justice of the Peace for
the whole State from the Downing
Street authorities, becoming Chair-
man of the local Bench and senior
honorary magistrate for the Victoria
district. In 1884 he was offered a
seat in the Legislative Council which
he refused. Twenty years later he
entered the Assembly as member for
the Irwin district, and has been re-
turned at the top of the poll at
each ensuing election, on one occa-
sion being elected unopposed. He
is a Liberal in politics and has con-
sistently maintained this position
since the beginning of his Parlia-
mentary career. Mr. Moore is a
Commissioner of the Supreme Court
of Western Australia. For two
years he was President of the Pas-
toralists’ Association, and he is one
of the directors of the Western Aus-
tralian Bank. In 1870 he married
Eliza Mary, daughter of the late
Rev. Joseph Johnstone, of the John-
stone Memorial Church, Fremantle,
and has three sons and six daughters.
JOHN FRANCIS MULLANY,
who represents the Menzies elec-
torate in the State Legislative As-
sembly, is a son of the late Mr. Mat-
thew Mullany, of Huntley, near
Bendigo, Victoria, where the gentle-
man under review was born on March
31, 1873. Before reaching his teens
he left school, and for about four
years followed bush life, sub-
sequently becoming engaged in min-
ing pursuits at Bendigo. Here he
remained until 1896, when, obeying
the “call of the West,” he landed at
Fremantle and went straight to
Menzies, where he became well
known as a prospector, and was
identified with the various depart-
ments of the mining industry, finally
rising to the position of mine
manager. Before leaving Victoria
Mr. Mullany had interested himself
in the Labour movement, and joined
the Bendigo Miners’ Union in 1890.
After his arrival in Western Aus-
tralia he became one of the foremost
spirits in the organization of his
Party in the district where he had
taken up his residence, and filled
various positions—among them the


presidential chair—in the local
branch of the old Australian Wor-
kers' Association. Tie also held
other public offices, and gained a
keen insight into municipal manage-
ment during the two years in which
he served as a councillor at Menzies.
On several occasions he declined to
submit himself as a candidate for
political honours, contenting himself
with directing his energies to the
support of Senator Buzacott's cam-
paigns. In 1911, however, he was
selected to contest the Menzies seat
against Mr. H. Gregory, the late
Minister for Mines, who had repre-
sented the constituency for the
lengthy period of fourteen years, and
was elected by a large majority.
Mr. Mullany at the present time is
President of the Menzies Council
and of the Australian Labour
Federation, of the Prospectors and
Leaseholders' Association, and of the
Mechanics’ Institute and Library.
He is a cordial advocate of all kinds
of manly outdoor games, having
been in his younger days a proficient
runner, and has been President of
the Menzies Football Club for six
years in succession. In 1900 he
married Annie, daughter of the late
Mr. J. Hogan, of Ultimo, Sydney,
and has two sons and three daugh-
ters.
SELBY WALTER MUNSIE,
who represents the Plannans elec-
torate in the Legislative Assembly,
was born on September 22, 1870. He
received his education at the State
school in the Newcastle district and
before he was fourteen began work
in the timber trade at Wallsend.
In 1895 Mr. Munsie sailed for Fre-
mantle, and proceeding straight to
the eastern goldfields has followed
the mining industry in those local-
ities ever since. He was well known
in Labour circles in New South
Wales, and since coming to Western
Australia has continued to work in
the Labour cause. He now occupies
the post of General President of the
Federated Miners' Union, having
previously served as an executive
officer and in other capacities. For
three successive terms Mr. Munsie
has been elected President of the
Eastern Goldfields District Council
of the Australian Labour Federa-
tion, and he is also Chairman of the
Board of Directors of The West
Australian Worker, the official organ
of the Labour movement in this
State.
JOHN LEIGHTON NANSON,
M.L.A., was born in Carlisle, Cum-
berland, and obtained his education
in that city’s Grammar School and
afterwards at the King William
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN LEIGHTON NANSON.
College, Isle of Man. While still a
mere youth he emigrated to South
Australia, where he gained some use-
ful colonial experience on a station
near Broken Hill. Subsequently he
entered the service of the Commer-
cial Bank of South Australia in Ade-
laide, and on that institution opening
a branch in Perth Mr. Nanson was
appointed as accountant. When the
Bank went into liquidation Mr.
Nanson joined the staff of The I Vest
Australian as its Fremantle repre-
sentative. He was soon transferred
to the head office, and after occupy-
ing the sub-editorial chair eventually
became leader-writer. In 1897 he
visited England, and on his return
was appointed Associate-Editor of
The West Australian. In April,
1901, Mr. Nanson entered the poli-
tical arena as candidate for the Mur-
chison seat, which he succeeded in
winning from the late member by
the narrow majority of one vote.
Mr. Nanson accepted the portfolio
of Minister of Lands in the brief
Morgans Ministry, considerably in-
creasing his majority on seeking re-
election in his old constituency.
From January, 1902, to July, 1903,
he led the Opposition. At the gen-
eral elections of 1904 the Greenough
and Murchison electorates were
amalgamated into one constituency
Greenough, for which Mr. Nanson
was returned by a substantial major-
ity. From January to April, 1904,
he acted as Minister without a port-
folio in the James Government, when
he became Minister for Works, re-
tiring on the defeat of that Minis-
try in August of the same year.
About this time he severed his con-
nection with The West Australian
and purchased an interest in the
now defunct Morning Herald. Mr.
Nanson's health failing, he, on the
advice of his medical attendants,
visited Switzerland, afterwards pro-
ceeding to London, where he studied
law, and after passing the neces-
sary examinations was called to
the Bar. After three years' ab-
sence he decided to return to Wes-
tern Australia, and reached Albany
just in time to nominate for his old
Greenough seat in the general elec-
tions of September, 1908, being re-
elected before many people were
aware of his return to the State.
On his re-entry into Parliament
Mr. Nanson sat on the Govern-
ment side of the House. When
Mr. Keenan resigned his port-
folio in the Moore Ministry in May,
1909, Mr. Nanson took his place in
the Cabinet as Attorney-General
and Minister for Education. In 1887
he married Janet, daughter of Mr.
F. Durlacher. Mrs. Nanson's liter-
ary contributions under the nom de
plume of “Stigma" are well known
to readers of The West Australian.
PETER O’LOGHLEN, M.L.A.,
representing Forrest electorate in
the Legislative Assembly, is a son
of Mr. Michael O'Loghlen, of
Georgetown, South Australia, of
which town he is a native. Edu-
cated locally, at St. Joseph's
School, he concluded his studies in
the first year of his teens and entered
upon farming pursuits in the same
district. At fifteen he joined the
Public Service of South Australia
and continued in this connection for
some time prior to leaving for Wes-
tern Australia, where he arrived in
1902 in his twentieth year. For
two years he worked on the sawmills
of the south - west, and afterwards
became identified with the North
Coolgardie goldfields, where he
spent about six years, principally at
Laverton and Menzies. Since his
early boyhood he has devoted him-
self to the study of political economy,
particularly in relation to those
questions that chiefly affect the
great masses of toiling humanity,
and has interested himself energetic


ally and practically in the cause of
the worker in the State of his adop-
tion. lie became a member of the
Timber Workers' Union and sub-
sequently connected himself with the
Miners' Union, representing that
body at the first Conference of the
Federated Miners' Union, by which
Conference he was requested to con-
test a seat in Parliament. Owing to
geographical differences he decided
not to stand, but at a later date was
induced to take the preliminary
steps toward entering the political
arena, on which occasion, however,
he was not the selected candidate of
his party. In 1906 he was chosen to
contest the Federal constituency of
Swan against Sir John Forrest, the
Federal Treasurer, by whom he suf-
fered defeat, though he was success-
ful in polling 4,300 votes. Return-
ing to the mines he again came for-
ward at the State general elections
of 1908 at the request of the Forrest
electors and made his entry into the
State Parliament unopposed. In
order again to contest the Swan Fed-
era! seat against Sir John Forrest he
resigned local honours, but, though
10,000 votes were registered in his
favour, the veteran knight again
came out victorious. His re-entrance
into the State Parliament was dial-
Barlletto , Perth.
MR. PETER O'LOGHLEN.
lenged, but he defeated his opponent
by a seven-to-one majority, and at
the elections of 1911 was again re-
turned unopposed. His constituency
is situated in the magnificent timber
belts, and he has done yeoman ser-
vice both in and out of Parliament
for that industry. Much of the
heaviost work in connection with the
construction of the Labour platform
and general organization has fallen
to the share of Mr. O'Loghlen, who
is the second youngest member of
the present Parliament. For the
past three years he has been Vice-
President of the Australian Labour
Federation in this State, and has
shouldered the various responsibili-
ties in connection with his office with
unflinching devotion to the cause.
Apart from his public interests he
is interested in a farm in the eastern
portion of the agricultural district,
where he carries on operations. He
is a member of the Celtic Club, and
gives his cordial support to all
forms of manly outdoor sport.
ARNOLD EDMUND PIESSE,
who represents Katanning district
in the Legislative Assembly, is a son
of the late Mr. William Roper
Piesse, of Toodyay, and was born at
Guildford on April 2, 1872. He pur-
sued his scholastic education at the
Toodyay State School, and having
concluded his studies became identi-
fied with the commercial staff of the
late Mr. George Throssel, C.M.G.,
merchant, of Northam and Toodyay.
After five years in this connection he
joined his brothers, Messrs. F. & C.
Piesse, merchants and millers, at
Katanning, and subsequently took
control of the firm’s operations,
which owes much of its success to
his business capacity and enterprise.
Upon relinquishing the management
he took over the agency department
of his brother’s business which he
carried on for three years under the
style of Arnold Piesse & Co.
Owing to the great expansion
of trade the business was formed
into a limited liability company,
under the title of the Katan-
ning Stock & Trading Company,
of which he is Chairman of Direc-
tors. Since this development in the
firm’s history the subject of our
notice has been able to devote the
major portion of his time to farming
and pastoral pursuits, and also con-
cerns himself in a practical manner
with the efforts made by various
public organizations for the good of
the district. He is a Justice of the
Peace for the whole of the State, and
for eleven years was Chairman of the
Katanning Roads Board, also oc-
cupying the presidential chair of the
Great Southern Districts Pastoral
and Agricultural Society for two
successive periods. Upon the retire-
ment from Parliament in November,
1909, of his brother, the late Hon. F.
IT. Piesse, C.M.G., he was returned
unopposed to a seat in the Assembly
as a supporter of the Moore Govern-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARNOLD EDMUND PIESSE.
ment, and at the general elections of
1911 again received election by a
substantial majority. Mr. Piesse
has been twice married, first to Mar-
garet Mary, daughter of the late
Mr. Stephen Chipper, of Perth, by
whom he had two daughters and a
son. This lady died in 1902, and by
his present wife, Lillie, daughter of
the late Mr. James Johnston, of
Tynemouth, England, whom he mar-
ried in 1904, he has issue a
daughter.
ALFRED NAPOLEON PIESSE,
J.P., who represents the Toodyay
district in the State Legislative
Assembly, is a native of Western
Australia, having been born at
Guildford on July 21, 1866. He is
a son of the late Mr. William
Roper Piesse, one of the early pio-
neers who came to the State in the
year 1841, and is one of eight
brothers, several of whom have
materially assisted in the develop-
ment of the young country and
served the best interests of the com-
munity in Council, Parliament, or
commercial enterprise. Having com-
pleted his scholastic training at the
Northam State school, Mr. A. N.
Piesse entered the Telegraph Service
as messenger, and at the same time
gained an insight into the farming
industry on his brother’s property.


After three years he relinquished his
connection with the Civil Service in
order to join Messrs. F. H. and
C. A. Piesse in their business estab-
lishment at Williams, but subse-
quently re-entered the Telegraph
Bariletto , Perth.
MR. ALFRED NAPOLEON PIESSE.
Department as assistant operator,
and was in turn telegraphist at
Esperance, Israelite Bay, and Bre-
mer, finally being transferred from
his last station at Albany to the Law
Department as Clerk of Courts at
Toodyay. This post he held for over
five years, at the end of that period
being promoted to the office of Resi-
dent Magistrate for the same dis-
trict. Within three years he volun-
tarily resigned this position in order
to engage in horticultural pursuits,
and has now a very fine orchard near
Toodyay on his property, which is
known as ' Key Farm." He com-
bines the cultivation of various
cereals with his other operations
and carries on mixed farming with
excellent results. Mr. Piesse has
always given a great deal of consid-
eration to the affairs of the district
in which he resides, and has made
a study of matters connected with its
best development. Besides being
President of the local Agricultural
Society for some time he has filled
the post of Chairman of the Tood-
yay Fruitgrowers' Association and
represented Western Australia at
the Commonwealth Fruitgrowers'
Conference at Melbourne in March,
1911. At the close of his Civil Ser-
vice career he was appointed to a
commission of Justice of the Peace.
As Chairman for the past four years
of the Toodyay Roads Board, a com-
mitteeman of the Mechanics' Insti-
tute, a member of the local race
club, and a prominent official of St.
Stephen's Church of England he has
been active in his support of the
various institutions of the place, and
all charitable movements find in him
a patron and a sympathizer. In
October, 1911, the electors of the
district displayed their appreciation
of his qualities as a citizen by re-
turning him as their representative
to the Legislative Assembly. He is
a member of the Toodyay Club and
of the Western Australian Club,
Perth. In 1898 Mr. Piesse married
Ada, daughter of Mr. J. M. Lloyd,
of “Nardie,” Toodyay, and has two
sons and two daughters.
WILLIAM PRICE, representa-
tive for Albany district in the Legis-
lative Assembly, is a son of Mr.
Henry Price, of Chepstow, South
Wales, where the subject of this
notice was born on April 16, 1869.
He was educated at the National
School in his native town, and at
the conclusion of his scholastic train-
ing came to Australia, landing at
Brisbane in 1885. Here he was iden-
tified with bush life for some years,
Bartlettoy, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM PRICE.
but abandoned this in order to enter
upon a clerical position in Forbes,
New South Wales. After spending
six years in the Mother State Mr.
Price sailed for Western Australia
in 1896 and became engaged in min-
ing and prospecting on the eastern
goldfields, without, however, meet-
ing with any success. Eventually,
in 1904, he took up Press work,
joining the staff of the Kalgoorlie
Sun and the Western Australian
Truth , and followed up his career
until 1909, when he entered upon a
Parliamentary career. He was first
returned at a by-election for the
Albany constituency, and at the gen-
eral elections of 1911 was again suc-
cessful, the figures polled at previous
elections being doubled in his favour
on this occasion. Mr. Price's con-
nection with the Labour Party dates
back to 1899, when he was organizer
for the General Labourers' Union
in the western district of Queens-
land. He occupied the same position
at a later period for the Australian
Shearers' Union in New South Wales,
and in this State, prior to his re-
turn to the House, was associated
with the Miners and General
Workers' Union, and is now Presi-
dent of the Shearers' Union. In
1898 he organized the first branches
of the Australian Workers' Associ-
ation in the Leonora and Mount
Morgan districts. Mr. Price finds
congenial occupation for his leisure
hours in writing for the local Press.
He married Sarah Ann, daughter of
the late Mr. William Loxley, of
Forbes, New South Wales, and has
three daughters.
BARTHOLOMEW JAMES
STUBBS, who represents the
Subiaco electorate in the Legislative
Assembly, was born on May 31,
1872. Upon leaving school he was
apprenticed to the tailoring trade,
and subsequently followed his calling
in various parts of Victoria. In 1894
he left for Western Australia and
secured employment in Perth,
becoming one of the foundation-
members of the Perth Tailors' Union
in 1896. He has occupied the
presidential chair of this organiza-
tion, and at the present time (1911)
fills the offices of Secretary of the
Union and delegate- to the Metro-
politan Council of the Australian
Labour Federation. Tie was the
first President of the Amalgamated
Tailors and Tailoresses' Union on
the eastern goldfields, where also he
was elected Vice-President and after-
wards President of the Trades and
Labour Council, his introduction to
the Labour Party having taken
place in 1890, when he first joined
a trade-union. In 1910 he contested
Central Ward in the Subiaco muni


cipality, but failed to secure election
to the Council. Two years prior to
this Mr. Stubbs’ name had come
before the Labour Party selection
ballot in connection with the State
elections for that year, and though
not then chosen, in 1911 he was
selected unopposed to stand in the
interests of the Labour Party for the
Subiaco seat, and after a well-con-
tested fight was returned against Mr.
IT. Daglish, the late Minister for
Works, with a majority of sixty
votes.
SYDNEY STUBBS, member of
the Legislative Assembly, is a son
of the late Mr. William Stubbs, of
Victoria, and was born at Warr-
nambcol, in the western district of
that State, on July 19, 1861. He
was educated in Victoria, and after
following the profession of a teacher
in the Education Department for
some time became engaged in the
clerical branch of the firm of Messrs.
John Danks & Son, engineers, of
Melbourne. Eventually he ac-
quainted himself with all depart-
ments of the business and undertook
the duties of colonial traveller, re-
maining in this employ until 1894.
During his periodical visits to Wes-
tern Australia Mr. Stubbs formed
the opinion that the “Cinderella”
State would ultimately become
Queen of the Commonwealth, and in
the above-mentioned year, in con-
junction with Mr. Frederick Drake,
now of Melbourne, he purchased the
hardware business in Hay Street
formerly carried on as Alfred Shaw,
Limited, and for some years con-
ducted a very extensive trade. In
1907 the concern was purchased by
Messrs. Sandover & Co., and Mr.
Stubbs entered upon pastoral pur-
suits at Wagin, in the south-wes-
tern district of the State, where he
still continues. In 1909 he pur-
chased a general store business at
that centre and took into partner-
ship Mr. William Jeffrey. He has
maintained an active connection
with public life during the past
seventeen years, and on four occa-
sions was returned unopposed as
Mayor of Claremont. Twice he re-
ceived election to the Perth mayoral
chair, once unopposed, and in May,
1908, was elected to a seat in the
Legislative Council as representative
for the Metropolitan-Suburban dis-
trict. He resigned the seat in 1911
in order to contest the new elector-
ate of Wagin in the House of
x
Assembly in the interests of the
Liberal Party, of which he is a
standi supporter, and was returned
by a substantial majority. Mr.
Stubbs was connected with the
Chamber of Commerce for fourteen
years and acted as Vice-President of
that body. For a term he has been
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. SYDNEY STUBBS.
identified with many charitable and
public institutions, having occupied
a seat on the Board of the Perth
Public Hospital for a lengthy period
and acted on the Council of the
Blind Asylum, Children’s Hospital,
and Royal Agricultural Society, of
which latter body he is a life mem-
ber. He has been a member of the
Masonic craft for over a quarter of
a century, and in 1909 represented
Western Australia as a delegate at
the Imperial Conference of Cham-
bers of Commerce of the Empire
held in Sydney, New South Wales.
For many years he took a leading
part in the affairs of the Congrega-
tional Church at Claremont, in which
he always displayed a deep interest.
He is one of the founders and Pre-
sident of the Claremont Yacht Club
which owes much to his support, and
is a keen angler, besides giving his
support to all clean and healthy
outdoor sport. Mr. Stubbs married
in 1891 Martha Harriet, daughter
of the late Mr. Nicholas Jeffrey, of
Eaglehawk, Victoria, and has a son
and four daughters.
HERBERT GRAHAM SWAN,
who represents North Perth in the
Legislative Assembly, was born at
Dapto, New South Wales, on August
23, 1875. At fifteen years of age he
was apprenticed to the engineering
trade in the New South Wales Rail-
ways Department, but later was
identified with the mining industry
for a brief period. Mr. Swan came
to Western Australia in 1896 under
engagement to the State Railways
Department, and continued in the
Service until his election to Parlia-
ment in 1908, when he resigned. In
1901 he joined the Railways Associa-
tion and was elected to a seat on the
Executive Committee of that body,
which is now known as the Amal-
gamated Society of Railway Em-
ployes. From 1905 to 1908 he filled
the presidential chair, in the former
year also being elected President of
the Metropolitan Labour Council.
As President of the Amalgamated
Society of Railway Employes he re-
presented the Western Australian
Branch at the Federal Conference
held in Sydney in 1905. His con-
nection with Parliamentary life be-
gan in 1908, when he was returned
by the members of his present con-
stituency to a seat in the Assembly,
which he held against strong opposi-
tion at the general elections of 1911,
defeating his opponent by a large
majority.
GEORGE TAYLOR, Chairman
of Committees (1910-11) and repre-
sentative for Mount Margaret in
the House of Assembly, was
born at Campbelltown, near Syd-
ney, on May 16, 1861. He
was educated privately, and from
the age of twelve years was employed
in various occupations and as a
shearer on pastoral properties in
New South Wales and Queensland.
He remained in the Northern State
for upwards of twenty years, and
while there was a prime mover in the
formation of a Shearers’ Union, af-
terwards becoming a paid officer of
the organization. The administra-
tion of the Australian Labour
Federation also claimed a large por-
tion of his energies, and he was a
foremost advocate in all matters af-
fecting the welfare of the various
Labour bodies. The year 1894 wit-
nessed Mr. Taylor’s arrival in the
Western State, where he immedi-
ately turned his attention to seeking
the precious metal in the districts
surrounding the Coolgardie town-
ship. Meeting with but nominal
success, he went to work in the
Mount Samuel Mine, and while in


this district he was instrumental in
forming a local branch of the Aus-
tralian Workers’ Union. In 1901,
at the request of a large number of
friends, Mr. Taylor became a candi-
date for the Mount Margaret seat in
the Legislative Assembly, his oppon-
ent being Mr. J. W. Hall, at that
MR. GEORGE TAYLOR.
time a well-known mining magnate.
The contest was strenuously fought,
but victory ultimately- rested with
Mr. Taylor by a narrow majority of
72 votes. Mount Margaret is the
largest electorate in the State, and
since the memorable fight just re-
corded Mr. Taylor has continued to
represent it without a break. As
Colonial Secretary in the Daglish
Ministry (1904) he was responsible
for the introduction before the
House of several important Bills,
and at the opening of the Parliamen-
tary Session of 1910 he was elected
to the office of Chairman of Com-
mittees of the Legislative Assembly.
WILLIAM LEMEN THOMAS,
M.L.A., was born near Kilmore,
Victoria, on September 25, 1872.
At the conclusion of his education
he qualified himself for the pharmacy
profession, ,securing his diploma of
M.P.S. in New South Wales. He
came to Western Australia in 1893
and for a time held the position of
assistant dispenser to the Govern-
ment Hospital at Kalgoorlie. In
1894 he commenced business on his
own account as a chemist in that
town, seven years later establishing
himself in Perth. A few years later
Mr. Thomas removed to Bunbury and
opened his present dispensary, since
when he has carried on continu-
ously at this centre. At a very early
period of his career he associated
himself with the Labour movement
and held the post of President of the
Political Labour League at Bunbury
until this body was merged into the
Australian Labour Federation. In
1908 he contested the Sussex seat in
the Labour interest against Mr.
Frank Wilson, at that time
Treasurer in the Moore Govern-
ment, but suffered defeat. He then
became a candidate for the South-
West Province in the Legislative
Council, but without success. He
next contested the by-election for the
Bunbury seat rendered vacant by the
retirement of Sir Newton Moore,
and was returned, being re-elected
for the same constituency in 1911.
Mr. Thomas is a keen supporter of
an Inner Harbour for Bunbury,
which has the fourth largest shipping
tonnage of the Commonwealth.
PHILIP JOSEPH TURVEY,
who represents the Swan electorate
in the State Legislative Assembly,
was born at Glenorchy, Victoria, on
June 25, 1875. He received his
education in the Victorian State
schools, finishing at the Stawell
Grammar School and the School of
Mines in the same town. Joining
the Education Department, he con-
tinued on the teaching staff in Vic-
toria for eight years, at the end of
which period he applied for six
months’ leave of absence in order to
visit the Western State and find out
what prospects offered to members of
his profession there. Even before
leaving Melbourne he received an ap-
pointment as teacher at Northam,
and in January, 1898, joined the
Western Australian Education De-
partment and entered upon his
duties as assistant master at the
above-mentioned place. Subse-
quently he was placed in charge of
schools at Greenbushes and Narrogin
successively, and at a later date tem-
porarily left the department to enter
upon the management of a general
store at Pingelly. While thus en-
gaged he contracted typhoid fever,
which laid him aside for twelve
months, and upon recovery was sta-
tioned at Northam in charge of the
senior and technical classes. From
there he was transferred to West
Northam, and thence to Mundaring
as headmaster, which he re-
linquished when entering upon the
campaign which terminated in his
election by the Swan constituency in
1911. Mr. Turvey possesses a good
knowledge of municipal and allied
work, having been for a time a mem-
ber of the Northam Municipal Coun-
cil, in which he was the first direct
representative of Labour. He has
also held office on Roads Boards and
has obtained considerable experience
of the requirements of country dis-
tricts. He was president of the
A.L.F. in Northam and for many
years has been a prominent member
of the Labour Party. In 1904 he
was the nominee of the Northam
district for the selection ballot for
the Federal Senate, and later was
nominated by the Cunderdin Branch
for the selection ballot for Northam
electorate. He was for some years
Secretary of the Australian Natives’
Association, and obtained his early
training in public speaking in vari-
ous literary and debating societies.
For two years Mr. Turvey occupied
the post of Vice-President of the
Western Australian Teachers’
Union, and was editor and business
manager of the journal issued by
this organization. He has been ap-
pointed by the present Government
a member of the University Site
MR. PHILIP JOSEPH TURVEY.
Committee. He takes a prominent
interest in matters horticultural and
is Patron of the Mundaring Society,
of which he was Hon. Secretary for
a couple of years. A member of the
Ancient Order of Foresters, he holds
office as Past Chief Ranger of that
body. The form of sport which com


mands his loyal adherence is rifle-
shooting, and in 1909 he was selected
as one of the team of fourteen which
represented W estern A ustralia’s
5,000 riflemen in the Commonwealth
match held in Victoria. Pie is a
member of the executive of the Na-
tional Rifle Association, and until
recently was Hon. Secretary of the
Metropolitan Rifle Union. Pie is
Vice-President of the Western Aus-
tralian Athletic Association, of
which for two years he was Plon.
Secretary. In 1901 Mr. Purvey mar-
ried Annie, daughter of the late Mr.
John Draffin, of Boort, Victoria,
and has two sons and a daughter.
RUFUS HENRY UNDER
WOOD, who represents the Nor’-
West district of Pilbara in the
Legislative Assembly, was born near
Ballarat, Victoria, on December 31,
1863, and, having but few opportuni-
ties of early scholastic training, spent
his childhood in such occupations as
were offered by life in the bush.
When seventeen years of age he was
apprenticed to the bootmaking trade
in Victoria, and followed this call-
ing for some time in his native State
and in. South Australia, where he
spent a considerable period, being
President of the Bootmakers’ Union
there. In 1895 Mr. Underwood
came to Western Australia, and for
the ensuing nine years turned his
attention to the mining industry and
allied pursuits. At the present time
he has interests in both mining and
agriculture, and in addition to
owning a share in a gold mine in the
Nullagine district he has a farm at
Tammin. He began his political
career in 1906, when on the occasion
of a by-election he was returned by
the electors of the Pilbara con-
stituency to a seat in the Legislative
Assembly. In 1911 he was again
a candidate for the suffrages of the
district and was honoured by a
majority of votes.
HARRY BROWN, J.P., for-
merly representative for Perth in
the Legislative Assembly, was born
at Leighton Buzzard, Bedford-
shire, on May 6, 1863. He is
a son of Mr. Thomas Brown,
of the same county, and received
his education in his birthplace.
The serious side of his career was
embarked upon when he entered
x 2
A. A. WILSON, member for
Collie in the House of Assembly, is a
native of Scotland, and upon leaving
his native land proceeded to Vic-
toria, where he was employed in the
coal-mining industry at South Gipps-
land. He early became identified
with the Unionist movement, and oc-
cupied the post of Secretary of the
Miners’ Union in the sister State
during the long industrial dispute
which occurred there in the early
nineties. On the occasion of the
second federal election he contested
the Flinders seat in the IPouse of
Representatives, but was defeated,
and shortly afterwards he came to
Western Australia, where he became
prominently associated with coal-
mining, and acted as Secretary of
the Collie Miners’ Union. At the
general elections of September, 1908,
he was returned to represent the dis-
trict in the House of Assembly, and
was re-elected unopposed in Novem-
ber, 1911.
Major EVAN ALEXANDER
WISDOM, J.P., representative for
Claremont district in the House of
Assembly, is a son of the late Mr.
Francis William Wisdom, merchant,
of Inverness, Scotland, where the
gentleman under review was born on
September 29, 1869. Major Wisdom
gained his first military experience
in Edinburgh, where he served in the
Infantry Battalion, and afterwards
for nearly two years in the Mid-
lothian Coast Artillery. In Western
Australia he was among the first to
receive a commission upon the taking
over of the Defence Department by
the Commonwealth, being granted a
lieutenancy in order to take com-
mand of the Cannington Mounted
Infantry, upon the resignation of
Captain Clydesdale. After serving
in this capacity he was appointed
Adjutant to the 18th Light Horse
Regiment, and for a time was Acting
Staff Officer for Light Horse. While
PAST MEMBERS.
the office of the land steward of the
Baroness Mayer De Rothschild, of
Mentmore, Buckinghamshire, where
he continued for a period of seven
years. The death of the Baroness
taking place the estates became the
property of Miss De Rothschild,
who shortly afterwards married
Lord Rosebery. In 1883 Mr.
Brown determined to tempt the
the last three Western Australian
Commonwealth contingents were
under training Major Wisdom was
Staff Officer of the camp at Kar-
rakatta, under Lieutenant-Colonel
Campbell. During an absence in
England he was placed on the un-
attached list for two years, resuming
Bartletto, Perth.
MAJOR EVAN ALEXANDER WISDOM.
duty on his return; and quite re-
cently he was gazetted Brigade-
Major of the newly-formed Western
Australian Brigade. Major Wisdom
has devoted much of his time to the
business of the municipality wherein
he resides, and for the past three
years has filled the office of Chief
Magistrate of the district. At the
election of 1911 he took the field as
a supporter of the Wilson Adminis-
tration and was returned as member
for Claremont, the campaign being
a strenuously fought one. Major
Wisdom is a member of the Masonic
fraternity and of most of the leading
clubs of Perth. He married a
daughter of Mr. Francis Jackson, of
Edinburgh.
fickle goddess Fortune in other
climes, and forthwith took passage to
South Africa, where he entered the
ranks of the Cape Mounted Ritles,
seeing active service with the regi-
ment on both the Pondoland and
Basutoland borders Becoming sur-
felted with the exciting life he pur-
chased his discharge, and once more
found himself on the high seas, this


time bound for Australian shores.
He disembarked at Western Australia
and soon found a position in the office
of Messrs. Stone & Burt, solicitors,
with whom he continued for five
years, relinquishing this employ to
accept the secretaryship of the Perth
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HARRY BROWN.
Benefit Building Society. He ful-
filled the duties attached to the post
with consummate tact, his urbane
manner and geniality gaining for
him the confidence alike of share-
holders and clients. During the
years of his residence in Perth his
popularity secured him a large circle
of friends, and on the first occasion
that he aspired to municipal honours
he was returned with a handsome
majority, defeating a strong oppo-
nent in the person of the retiring
councillor, Mr. C. Oldham, M.L.A.
The contest, which took place in
November, 1898, created an appre-
ciable stir and resulted in a record
number of votes being polled.
Within a short time of his election
to the Council he was appointed one
of the city's representatives on the
Fire Brigades Board, of which at
the present time he is Chairman,
and he is also Secretary of the Perth
Roads Board. In 1901 he was
elected Chairman of the Municipal
Works Committee, and in the follow-
ing year was elevated to the mayoral
chair, retaining that office for three
years. The various public offices
thus far filled by Mr. Brown were
but stepping-stones to greater hon-
ours, and at the election in 1904 he
was nominated as a candidate for the
Perth seat in the PTouse of Assembly,
the electors of the district showing
their appreciation of his past efforts
on their behalf by returning him
with a sound majority. He is a
Justice of the Peace for the State
of Western Australia, a member of
the Licensing Bench for the Perth
Magisterial district, and Deputy-
Chairman of the Perth Hospital
Board. While he is a hearty
supporter of all outdoor recreation,
Mr. Brown derives most pleasure
from cricket, and it is singularly
appropriate that he should have
filled the office of Managing
Trustee of the Western Australian
Cricket Ground. Mr. Brown's mar-
riage took place in 1891 with Min-
nie, eldest daughter of Mr. R.
Pet her, of this citv.
7 */
W. J. BUTCHER, who repre-
sented the Gascoyne district in the
Mr. W. J. BUTCHER.
House of Assembly from 1901 to
1911, is a native of Tasmania, having
7 . op
been born at Richmond, in the
“Apple State,” in July, 1858. He
received his education at a private
school in Melbourne, Victoria, and
came to Western Australia in the
year 1877. Immediately after his
arrival he turned his attention to
mercantile pursuits, but at a later
date engaged in the pastoral in-
dustry. In 1901 he offered himself
as a candidate for the Gascoyne seat
in the Legislative Assembly, and was
successful in carrying the day, de-
feating the then sitting member, Mr.
David Forrest. He continued to
represent the constituency until 1911,
when he was defeated at the elections
held in October of that year. Some
twenty years ago Mr. Butcher was
gazetted a Justice of the Peace for
the State of Western Australia. He
is largely interested in the pastoral
industry of the State, being part-
owner of the Boolathana Station, in
the Gascoyne district. In 1910 he
was elected to fill the presidential
chair of the Pastoralists' Association
of Western Australia, and in the fol-
lowing year was re-elected for a
second term, besides which he acts on
the Boards of several important
financial institutions at Perth. Mr.
Butcher married in 1891 Margaret,
daughter of the late Mr. Thomas
Brockman, a brother of the founder
of Boolathana Station, and has a
surviving family of two sons and
three daughters.
HENRY DAGUISH, Minister for
Works in the Wilson Administra-
tion, was born at Ballarat, Vic-
toria, in 1866, and received
his education at Geelong, after-
wards matriculating at the Mel-
bourne University. Pie started
in life as an apprentice to the
engineering trade in 1882, but
abandoned it in the following year
to enter the public service of his
native State. He remained in the
Service until 1895, when he resigned
to go into business, and in 1896
contested the South Melbourne seat
in the Legislative Assembly. Being
unsuccessful, he turned his steps
Bartletto , Perth
MR. HENRY DAYLISH.
toward Western Australia and en-
tered the Public Service there in


1897, remaining until 1901, when he
resigned to contest the Subiaco seat
in the Western Australian State
Assembly. He was returned by a
large majority as a Labour member,
and continued to represent the con-
stituency until the elections of 1911,
when he was defeated by a narrow
majority. From August, 1904, to
August, 1905, he was Premier of
the State, being at the head of the
first Labour Government in Western
Australia. He occupied the position
of Chairman of Committees from
1907 to September, 1910, when he
resigned to become Minister for
Works in the Wilson Government . In
the municipal affairs of Subiaco he
has for many years been a prominent
figure, having sat as a councillor in
1900-1, since which time he has
been Mayor of the municipality
on several occasions. In 1912 he
was appointed to the office of
employers 7 representative in the
Court of Arbitration. Mr. Daglish
married in 1894 Edith, daughter of
the late Mr. Charles Bishop, of
Smythesdale, Victoria.
The Honourable HENRY GREG-
ORY. To no one, perhaps, can
the credit for the development of
mining in the State during the past
decade be better assigned than to
the Honourable Henry Gregory, who
with but a slight intermission guided
the destinies of the Mines Department
from early in 1901 to October, 1911.
Born at Kyneton, Victoria, in 1860
and educated in that State, Mr.
Gregory opened a store at Rochester
at the early age of sixteen, remain-
ing in business there until 1892,
when the sensational reports of the
great gold discovery attracted him to
the West. Organizing a prospecting
party he landed at Albany in Sep-
tember, 1893, and proceeded to Cool-
gardie via Fanny Cove and Dundas.
The pilgrimage resulted in four
months' hard-earned experience and
4s. 6d. worth of gold found. After
visiting in turn the Old Camp and
Kalgoorlie the future Minister first
opened a store at the Ninety-mile :
thence he proceeded to Menzies and
engaged in business there. From that
time onward he has been closely
identified with the fortunes of that
town, being elected Chairman of the
Progress Committee in 1895 and the
first Mayor of Menzies in 1896, on
that township being declared a muni-
cipality. In the same year he was
made a J.P. for the North Cool-
gardie goldfield. On the creation of
the North Cool gardie constituency
Mr. Gregory opposed Mr. Hugh
Mahon —now M.H.R. in the Federal
Parliament —a strenuous fight result -
ing in a victory for the former, a suc-
cess which was afterwards repeated
nine times against several political
aspirants of varying degrees of abil-
ity. Thus Mr. Gregory enjoyed
the continued representation of the
Menzies electorate for a period of
fourteen years, with the exception of
the brief period in 1908, when his
opponent, Mr. (now Senator) Buza-
cott, was declared elected, an election
which was subsequently declared
illegal, and the second election re-
sulting in an unmistakable majority
for Mr. Gregory. He held for
over nine years the portfolio of
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. HENRY GREGORY.
Minister for Mines in the Leake,
James, Rason, Moore, and Wilson
Governments, in the last three of
which he was Minister for Railways.
During Mr. Gregory's career as Min-
ister for Mines the Mines Depart-
ment witnessed many important and
far-reaching changes and reforms in
connection with internal administra-
tion and the mining industry gener-
ally. The Kalgoorlie School of
Mines was lifted from the realm
of immature proposals, established,
and placed upon a high plane of
usefulness. Ten Mining Acts were
consolidated into one comprehensive
enactment which was pronounced
by a Special Mining Commis-
sioner of the United States to be
wonderfully symmetrical and care-
fully balanced, and which, in the
prospector's parlance, now stands as
“Gregory's Act." The Mines Regu-
lation Act of 1906 and regulations
thereunder, framed by the then
Minister, and containing as they do
the most beneficent provisions for
the safety and well-being of the
working miner, stand, too, as a monu-
ment of careful regard for the wel-
fare of those most closely affected by
mining conditions. The Mining
Development Act, as well as the In-
spection of Machinery Act, owes its
birth to Mr. Gregory. He was
the first • to place the granting of
exemptions on a sound basis —that
is, the granting of exemption by
right on expenditure incurred —and
to stop the iniquitous practice that
formerly prevailed of giving away
freeholds of lands of this State in
exchange for the conditional sur-
render of the surface rights of gold-
mining leases —a practice which has
apparently gone for ever. The
State battery system he made pecu-
liarly his own, establishing these
great aids to prospecting (in con-
junction with water supplies) in
districts throughout the State where
his judgment directed, a practice
which resulted in great good to
the mining industry generally. He
also initiated the prospecting area,
which enables a miner to hold 18
acres of mineral country without
paying rent, but subject to his carry-
ing on development work. In the
Railways Department likewise the
evidences of Mr. Gregory's well-
directed policy are abundant. A com-
parison of the year before he assumed
control of the Railways Department
with the year 1910 shows that the
working expenses were reduced
by over £160,000, notwithstanding
the fact that the mileage of the rail-
ways increased by over 500, while
the percentage of working expenses
to earnings was reduced from
78T to 66*99, which on the
past year’s revenue amounts to
over £196,000. On several occa-
sions Mr. Gregory filled the office
of Acting-Premier, and in 1911, in
the absence of the Premier (Hon-
ourable F. Wilson) at the Corona-
tion festivities, he again discharged
the duties incidental to that office.
In 1907 Mr. Gregory was invested
with the Chevalier Cross of the
Crown of Italy.
JOHN SYDNEY HICKS, M.D.
(Loud.), L.S.A., who represented
Roebourne district in the Legislative


Assembly from 1900 to 1908, is a
son of the late Mr. Janies Sampson
Hicks, of Falmouth, Cornwall,
where he was born in 1864. He re-
ceived his primary education at the
Falmouth Grammar School, matricu-
lating at London University. Upon
obtaining his medical diploma he
was appointed house surgeon and
physician to the London Hospital in
1888, and continued to fill this post
for about a year, during which
period he took his M.D. degree. In
1890 Dr. Hicks left for Western
Australia and upon arrival in the
State proceeded to Roebourne as
District Medical Officer, remaining
there until 1898. In that year he
took a trip to England, and upon his
return in 1900 turned his attention
to public life, being elected unop-
posed for the Roebourne seat in the
State Legislative Assembly. He wa<s
re-elected in 1904 and again re-
turned in September, 1905, subse-
quently holding the portfolio for La-
bour and Commerce in the Rason
Ministry. After resigning this
portfolio Dr. Hicks continued in
the Assembly as private member
until 1908, when he declined
further nomination. He estab-
lished his present professional
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. JOHN SYDNEY HICKS.
practice at Guildford in 1906 and
has continued there ever since. He
is a member of the Medical Board of
Western Australia and also occupies
a seat on the Midwifery Board, the
special function of which is to deal
with the registration of midwives.
He is fond of shooting and finds
recreation chiefly in the exercise of
his skill in this direction, also giving
a considerable amount of his atten-
tion to motoring. In 1899 he
married Margaret, daughter of the
late Captain R. R. Pearce, of
Cornwall, England, and has a son
and a daughter.
Sir NEWTON JAMES MOORE,
K.C.M.G. The present Agent-Gen-
eral for Western Australia, Lieuten-
ant-Colonel the Honourable Sir
Newton James Moore, K. C.M.G.,
was born at Bunbury on May 17,
1870, and was educated at Prince
Alfred College, Adelaide. On leav-
ing school he became a pupil of the
late Mr. Alexander Forrest, C.M.G.,
F.R.G.S., then a leading surveyor,
and was engaged in the survey of
the Great Southern Railway. Pass-
ing his examinations in 1894 he
immediately set up as a Licensed Sur-
veyor, being for many years retained
as a Government Contract Surveyor.
An intimate knowledge of the timber
country gained during his survey
work made his services of particular
value when the jarrah timber com-
panies were being floated on the
London market. His entry into
public life was made in the Bunbury
Town Council, of which he was a
member for several years, first as a
councillor and afterwards ae Mayor.
In 1904 he was persuaded to seek
Parliamentary honours, and at the
elections of that year gained the
Bunbury seat in the Legislative
Assembly, a position he continued to
occupy until 1910, when he resigned
to accept the Agent-Generalship of
the State. During the greater part
of his term in Parliament he has
been a Minister of the Crown ; first
as Minister for Lands (1905-6), then
as Premier and Minister for Lands
(1906-9), and lastly as Premier and
Colonial Treasurer (1909-10). Sir
Newton as Premier has attended
several Premiers’ Conferences with
distinct advantage to the State of
his birth, and at the end of the ses-
sion of 1909 proceeded to England to
reorganize the office of the Agent-
General and to extend the operations
of the Immigration Department. To
the efforts of himself and his col-
leagues may largely be ascribed the
great increase in the number of
immigrants to Western Australia
during the past couple of years.
While in London he was graciously
received by His Late Majesty King
Edward VII., and was the last
colonial statesman to whom that
monarch gave audience. Unfortun-
ately on his return from England his
health gave way, and he was forced
to relinquish his Parliamentary
Bartletto, Perth.
SIR NEWTON JAMES MOORE.
offices. On his recovery early in the
present year he accepted the position
of Agent-General for Western Aus-
tralia. He was created C.M.G. in
1908 and was raised to the dignity
of K.C.M.G. in 1910. In military
affairs Sir Newton Moore has been
particularly active, having held a
commission for over sixteen years,
lie raised the first Mounted Infantry
Corps in the State, commanded the
18th Regiment Australian Light
Horse from 1901 to 1908, and since
that date has commanded the Wes-
tern Australian division of the Aus-
tralian Intelligence Corps. In 1898
he married Isabel, daughter of Mr.
John Lowrie, of the Ferguson, Wes-
tern Australia, and has several
children.
The late Honourable FREDER-
ICK HENRY PTESSE, C.M.G.,
J.P., ex-member of the Legislative
Assembly, is the eldest son of the
late Mr. William Roper Piesse, an
early pioneer of the State, who, after
spending some eight years in pastoral
pursuits, entered the Government
Service in 1850 and retired in 1893,
his demise occurring the following
year. The subject of this review
was born at Northam, Western Aus-
tralia, on December 6, 1853, and
was educated at the State schools
of Guildford and Northam. After
a short experience of mercantile life.


in conjunction with Mr. E. von
Bibra, he opened up the pearling in-
dustry at Shark Bay in 1872. Three
years later he relinquished this en-
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. FREDERICK HENRY PIESSE.
terprise and became connected with
the Post and Telegraph Department
at Williams River, a position he held
until 1880. In that year he resigned
in order to join his brother, the
Honourable C. A. Piesse, M.L.C.,
in establishing the well-known busi-
ness of Messrs. F. & C. Piesse,
general merchants and importers, of
Williams and Arthur River district.
Subsequently Katanning was chosen
as their headquarters, branches being
opened at Wagin Lake and Narro-
gin. At Katanning the firm erected
a flour-mill and granaries, opened an
aerated waters factory, and planted
a large vineyard and orchard. In
1880 Mr. Piesse was elected a
member of the Williams Roads
Board and subsequently was made
Chairman, which position he filled
until his departure for Katanning
in 1889. Here he occupied a similar
post, relinquishing the chair six
years later when departing to tem-
porarily reside at Perth. In 1889
he was gazetted a Justice of the
Peace for the whole State, and
in the ensuing year, upon the intro-
duction of responsible government,
he was nominated and returned
unopposed as Representative for the
Williams district in the Legislative
Assembly. In January, 1894, he
was appointed a member of the
newly-constituted Board of Agricul-
ture, resigning the seat in June,
1896. He succeeded Mr. Venn as
Commissioner of Railways and
Director of Public Works in the
Forrest Administration on April 1,
1896, and held this portfolio for
over four years, during which time
the mileage of existing railways in-
creased from 588 to 1,353 and
the revenue from <£529,616 to
£1,293,312. He was responsible for
the introduction of many important
improvements in connection with the
working of the railways, notable
among them being the lighting of
cars by electricity, the provision of
lavatory cars, improved second-class
accommodation, the installation of
interlocking and signalling apparatus
at all important railway stations
and crossings, and the electric staff
system. The construction of the Fre-
mantle Harbour Works, the Bunbury
breakwater, and various large tanks
for the Goldfields Water Supply and
subsequently the Coolgardie water
scheme was undertaken during Mr.
Piesse’s administration, and impor-
tant public buildings were erected,
including the Perth Observatory,
Victoria Public Library and Mu-
seum, the Royal Mint, additions to
the Perth Public Hospital, the
Perth Markets, etc. In 1900 he
carried out the duties of Acting-
Premier during the absence of Sir
John Forrest, and prior to this, in
1897, was elected a representative
to the Federal Convention meet-
ing in Adelaide. He resigned
his portfolio in August, 1900,
on account of a difference of
opinion between himself and his
colleague, Sir John Forrest, regard-
ing the recognition of the Railways
Association, which he considered an
unwise proceeding under the pro-
posed conditions. Upon the for-
mation of the Throssell Ministry
he was offered, but declined, the
portfolio of Lands, and after the
general elections of 1901, when the
Leake Ministry came into power, he
was unanimously elected Leader of
the Opposition. In 1908 Mr. Piesse
retired from Parliamentary life, the
constant clatter of party warfare
proving too severe a strain for his
physical endurance. By Royal per-
mission he was allowed to retain
the title of Honourable, a notification
to that effect appearing in The
T.ondon Gazette of October, 1900,
and the distinction of C.M.G. was
conferred upon him in token of
valuable services rendered to his
country. In 1878 he married Mary
J., daughter of Mr. Thomas Chipper,
of Kojonup, and had four sons and
a daughter. Mr. F. H. Piesse died
at Katanning on June 29, 1912.
The Honourable TIMOTHY
FRANCIS QUINLAN, formerly
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,
was born at Borrisokane, County
Tipperary, Ireland, in 1861, and
arrived in this State with his parents
in 1863. Within a short time after
his arrival he had the misfortune to
lose both father and mother, but by
the kind assistance of Bishop Gibney
found a home with Mr. J. T. Reilly,
then a storekeeper of Perth and
afterwards proprietor of The Nor-
tham Advertiser. After receiving
an education at the Catholic Boys
School in Perth, at the age of four-
teen, he entered the firm of Messrs.
J. IT. Monger & Co. After some
years' service with this firm he left
to join Messrs. Mcßae & Co. at Roe-
bourne, returning to Perth at the end
of two years to start business on his
own account as proprietor of the
Shamrock Hotel, from which he
retired in 1892 to devote himself to
the large landed and mercantile in-
terests which he had acquired in and
round Perth and Fremantle. His
entrance into public life took place
in 1890, when he was elected unop-
posed to the City Council as repre-
sentative of the Central Ward. This
position he held for over twelve years,
finally retiring in 1892 after unsuc-
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. TIMOTHY FRNCIS QUINLAN
cessfully contesting the mayoralty
with the late Mr. W. G. Brockman.
During his term as a Councillor he
was an active factor in the municipal
life of the community, and on several
occasions he acted in the capacity
of Mayor in the absence of that
functionary. On the establishment
of responsible government in 1890


he was elected to represent West
Perth in the first Parliament, hold
ing the seat for three and a half
years. At the elections of 1894 he was
defeated by the late Mr. Barrington
Wood, but in 1897 was returned to
represent Toodyay, and continued
to represent that constituency until
the elections of 1911. In the Mor-
gan Ministry of 1901 he held the
portfolio of Minister for Works. For
some time previous to 1905 Mr.
Quinlan filled the position of Deputy-
Chairman and Chairman of Com-
mittees, and in that year was
elected to the position of Speaker
of the House. The post had been
offered to him in the previous year,
but unfortunately he was compelled
for health reasons to decline it.
In directions other than Parlia-
mentary and municipal the subject
of our sketch has also served the com-
munity. In 1893 he was appointed
a Justice of the Peace for the State,
and some years ago was made a
Police Magistrate without remunera-
tion. In religious affairs he is a
stanch supporter of the Roman
Catholic Church, and has for many
years been very closely associated
with its administration and inter-
ested in its many organizations. In
1899 the late Pope Leo XIII.
graciously bestowed upon him the
title and insignia of a Knight of the
Order of St. Sylvester. For sixteen
years past Mr. Quinlan has been a
member of the Perth Public Hos-
pital Board of Management, of
which he has acted as Chairman for
many years. He is also a Vice
President of the Institute for the
Blind and a member of the Com-
mittee of the Deaf and Dumb Insti-
tution. He further holds the posi
tion of Trustee under the University
Endowment Act, and is intimately
connected with many commercial and
financial institutions. In 1883 he
married Teresa, daughter of the late
Mr. Daniel Connor, of Toodyay, and
has five sons and three daughters.
Mrs. Quinlan died in 1904.


The Administration of Justice.
SUPREME COURT.
The only reference to the administration of justice
on the establishment of the colony of Western Australia
was contained in a paragraph of the vague letter of
instructions issued to Captain Stirling on his appoint-
ment as Lieutenant-Governor. He was advised “to
endeavour to settle, with the consent of the parties con-
cerned, a court of arbitration for the decision of such
questions of civil rights as may arise between the early
settlers and until a more regular form of administering
justice can be organized.”
Government, as the chairman of the magistracy. In
reporting his action to the Secretary of State in
January, 1830, he pointed out that the growth of the
little colony was such that a more formal establishment
of Civil and Criminal Law and Law Courts was neces-
sary. The authority to do this was given by the Order-
in-Council of November 1, 1830, under which the
Governor was directed to establish a Legislative Council,
consisting of certain officials, which Council should have
power to make the necessary laws and ordinances, sub-
Photo by C. E. Farr.
Bearing this in mind, and acting on the principle
that, until other ordinances take their place, colonists
carry with them the laws so far as applicable of the
country from which they come, Captain Stirling in his
proclamation set out that the laws of the United King-
dom would be deemed to be in force, and that in order
to satisfactorily carry them out he would if necessary
appoint a sheriff, constables, and Justices of the Peace.
In pursuance of this idea the Lieutenant-Governor
selected, before the end of 1829, several gentlemen of
good standing in the community to act as Justices of
the Peace, and in order to render their decisions more
formal appointed Mr. W. H. Mackie, “a gentleman
bred to the law/' and then acting-counsel to the
ject, of course, to review and disallowance by the Home
Government.
The Order-in-Council did not arrive in the colony
until the end of 1831, and consequently the Legislative
Council did not meet until January, 1832. Two of its
earliest acts were to pass the Ordinances 2 Will. IV.,
Nos. 1 and 4; by the first a Court of Civil Judicature
was established, and by the second the jurisdiction of
the Court of Quarter Sessions, brought into operation
in 1829 by the Commission of the Peace, was regulated
and extended so as to embrace practically the whole
criminal law of the United Kingdom. By section seven
of the Act 2 AVill. IV., No. 1, the Civil Court was
given ‘'cognizance of all pleas and jurisdictions in all
SUPREME COURT, PERTH.


cases as fully and amply in Western Australia as His
Majesty's Courts of King’s Bench, Common Pleas, and
Exchequer lawfully have in England.” it was also
given authority to appoint guardians over the persons
and property of infants, idiots, and lunatics; and to
grant probates to wills and letters of administration of
the chattels and effects of persons dying in the colony.
The Court of Civil Judicature was constituted
immediately after the passing of the Act, and Mr.
George Fletcher Moore, a young lawyer of considerable
legal ability, with literary inclinations, was appointed
the first Commissioner of the Civil Court, Mr. Mackie,
who had become Advocate-General, being retained as
Chairman of the Court of Quarter Sessions. This
arrangement held good until August, 1834, when the
Governor, Sir James Stirling, on his return from London
announced that arrangements had been made to con-
solidate in one individual the two offices of Civil Com-
missioner and Criminal Judge, and that the Secretary
of State had appointed Mr. W. H. Mackie to be the
sole Judge. Employment was found for Mr. Moore in
the position of Advocate-General, which he held until
the end of 1840, when he returned to London. During
his residence in Western Australia Mr. Moore kept a
personal diary, which he afterwards published, and to
which history is indebted for a picture of the trials and
tribulations of the early settlers.
The administration of justice as organized in 1834
remained without change until 1857. In that year Mr.
Mackie resigned, after twenty-three years’ continuous
occupancy of the Bench as sole Judge and nearly thirty
years’ service in a judicial capacity. Of Mr. Mackie as
a Judge it may be said that he gave the greatest satis-
faction ; as a man and as a member of the Legislative
Council he earned the general esteem and unbounded
confidence of all classes of the community. The same
could not be said of his successor in office, Judge Alfred
MacFarland, who held the jDosition for only four years,
resigning in March, 1861, to proceed to New South
Wales, where he accepted a position as a District Court
Judge.
The next occupant of the judicial office was Mr.
Archibald Pauli Burt, an English barrister, who had
emigrated to the island of St. Christopher, where from
1849-60 he had filled the office of Attorney-General,
acting also at various times as member of the Legisla-
tive Council, Speaker of the House of Assembly, and
Chief Justice. Soon after accepting office in Western
Australia certain matters came before Judge Burt in
which he decided that under the Constitution he had
no power to issue writs of habeas carpus or certiorari .
An omission so important called for immediate action
on the part of the Legislature, and in June, 1861, an
Ordinance (24 Viet., No. 15) was passed creating a
Supreme Court in Western Australia and altering the
title of the Judge to that of Chief Justice. At the
same time Mr. G. F. Stone was appointed Attorney-
General and Mr. A. H. Stone Master of the Court. Sir
Archibald Burt (who was knighted in 1873) continued
to hold the position of Chief Justice until his death in
1879. Though his decisions can scarcely be said to
have erred on the side of mercy, and though his actions
in the Young case, in which Mr. S. H. Parker, Stirling
Brothers, and Mr. W. K. Shenton were involved,
aroused considerable public resentment at the time and
produced a general feeling of unrest, it must be admitted
that he fearlessly carried out what he conceived to be
his duty and was actuated by only one motive —to keep
the fount of British justice pure and unpolluted. After
the death of Sir Archibald the position of Chief Justice
was temporarily filled by the appointment of Mr. G.
W. Leake, Q.C., who had previously acted as Crown
Solicitor and as Police Magistrate at Perth, and who
in the years succeeding 1879 frequently acted in a
judicial capacity. The permanent position was filled
in 1880 by the appointment of Mr. (later Sir) Henry
T. Wrensfordsley, a Judge of considerable experi-
ence in England and in the colony of Mauritius.
His tenure of office was not a lengthy one, and
was marked chiefly by the fact that a new
Supreme Court Act was passed in 1880 practically
embodying the provisions of the English Judica-
ture Act of 1873. When Mr. Wrensfordsley left the
colony in 1883 he was succeeded by Mr. (afterwards
Sir) Alexander Campbell Onslow. Mr. Onslow, whose
mother was a daughter of the Speaker of the first Legis-
lative Assembly of New South Wales (Sir Alexander
Macleay), was born in 1842 and was educated at West-
minster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, gradu-
ating from that University in 1864. Having been called
to the Bar in 1868 he practised for some years on the
Home Circuit, and in 1878 accepted the position of
Attorney-General of British Honduras. This he held
until 1880, when he was transferred to Western Aus-
tralia in the same capacity. He was appointed Chief
Justice of the colony in July, 1883, and by virtue of
his office administered the Government during the
absence on leave of the Governor, Sir Frederick
Broome, in 1884-5. His relations with the Governor
subsequently became strained owing to his refusal
to advise Sir Frederick Broome upon certain ad
miser icordiam appeals, and the latter ‘interdicted”
him from exercising the functions of his office on
account of the premature publication by Mr. Onslow
of correspondence then pending with the Colonial Office.
The Executive Council confirmed the “interdict,” but
it was afterwards removed by the Privy Council, though
not without censure upon the Chief Justice. Further
trouble having arisen through some newspaper libel
cases, the Home authorities were requested in the in


terests of peace to transfer Mr. Onslow to some other
colony. Ultimately he received a year's leave of
absence, afterwards extended, so that he did not return
to his duties until July, 1891, long after Sir Frederick
Broome s term as Governor had expired. During his
absence Sir Henry Wrensfordsley again acted as Chief
Justice.
The work of the Court had meanwhile grown far
beyond the abil-
ity of one man
to cope with, and
Mr. Edward Al-
bert Stone had
consequently
been appointed a
Puisne Judge in
1884. This still
left the Chief
J ustice supreme
in matters of ap-
peal, and to get
over the diffi-
culty Mr. Alfred
Peach Hensman
was appointed
second Puisne
Judge in 1892.
No further
change was made
until 1901, when
Sir Alexander
Onslow (knighted
in 1895) resigned
his position and
returned to Eng-
land, being suc-
ceeded as Chief
Justice by Sir
Edward Stone,
who was not,
however, knight-
ed till the fol-
lowing year. This
promotion left a
vacancy in the
puisne judge-
ships, and the
Government of
Photos by Bartletto.
the day appointed the Attorney-General, Mr. F.
W. Pennefather, to act for the time being. On
a change of government the permanent appointment
was offered to and accepted by Mr. (now Sir) S.
H. Parker, the present Chief Justice of the State.
Parliament having during the session made provision
for a fourth Judge Mr. Frederick W. Moorhead,
K.C., was raised to the Bench. Very soon afterwards
another vacancy occurred through the death of Mr.
Justice Hensman after ten years' continuous service.
To fill this the Government decided to appoint
an English lawyer, and the choice fell upon Mr.
Robert Furze McMillan, the present senior Puisne
Judge, who was appointed in 1903. During the
same year another occupant of the Bench, Mr. Justice
Moorhead, who
had for some
time been a con-
stant sufferer,
passed away, and
the Crown Soli-
citor, Mr. Robert
Bruce Burnside,
took his place as
the third Puisne
Judge. No fur-
ther changes oc-
curred till 1906,
when the Chief
Justice, Sir
Edward Stone,
resigned on the
ground of ill-
health, and Mr.
S. H. Parker was
promoted to the
position. This
rendered a fur-
ther appo i n t-
ment of a Puisne
Judge necessary,
and the Govern-
ment selected
another English
barrister, Mr.
John Booth, and
the Bench as
then constituted
still remains in
office : Chief
Justice, Sir
Henry Parker:
senior Puisne
Judge, Mr. Jus*
tice McMillan ;
Puisne Judges, Mr. Justice Burnside and Mr. Justice
Booth.
The Full Court, as constituted by the Supreme
Court Act, 1880, and the Amending Act (50 Viet., No.
28), now consists of three Judges, who sit together to
hear and determine all appeals from a Judge or from
any order of the Supreme Court or Courts of inferior
FORMER CHIEF JUSTICES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


jurisdiction. By the Supreme Court rules it is pro-
vided generally that all appeals from Chambers, appeals
and proceedings relating to election petitions (whether
municipal or Parliamentary), appeals from Justices,
applications for new trials, and proceedings on the
Crown side of the Supreme Court shall be taken before
the Pull Court. This order, however, does not abridge
the right of a Judge of the Supreme Court to hear and
determine any matter which he had previously power
to determine. The right of a litigant to appeal from
the Supreme Court of Western Australia to the King-
in-Council is not extinguished by the appellate juris-
diction of the High Court of Australia, which is con-
current with, not exclusive of, the jurisdiction of the
King-in-Council. The conditions governing an appeal
from the Supreme Court of Western Australia to the
Privy Council are set forth in an Order-of-Council
dated October 11, 1861, which provides for appeal by
leave of the Supreme Court, or by special leave of the
Privy Council, from any final judgment, decree, order,
or sentence of the Supreme Court, where the subject
matter at issue exceeds the amount or value of £SOO,
or where any claim or question concerning property or
civil right of that amount is involved. The Supreme
Court may also grant leave, or the Privy Council may
grant special leave, to appeal from any preliminary or
interlocutory order or judgment.
The appellate jurisdiction of the High Court of
Australia with respect to judgments of the Supreme
Court of this State extends to judgments, whether final
or interlocutory, where the subject matter at issue
exceeds the value of £2OO, or where any claim or ques-
tion concerning property or civil right of a like amount
is involved, or where the status of any person under the
laws relating to aliens, marriage, divorce, bankruptcy,
or insolvency is affected, and to any judgments, whether
final or interlocutory, or in a civil or criminal matter,
where the Pligh Court gives special leave to appeal, and
to any judgment of the Supreme Court of the State given
in the exercise of Federal jurisdiction in a matter pend-
ing in the High Court. The leave of the Court
The Honourable Sir EDWARD
ALBERT STONE, at present
Lieutenant-Governor of the State
and Chief Justice of Western Aus-
tralia from 1901 to 1906, is a native
of Western Australia, having been
born at Perth in 1844. His father,
the late Mr. George Frederick Stone,
was one of the pioneers of the colony,
and took his full share of the burden
of its early development in those far-
off days when labour was heavy and
honours were few. For many years
he held the position of Sheriff, and
at a later period served for some con-
siderable time as Attorney-General.
Mr. Edward Stone was educated at
Chigwell, in Essex, and on his return
to the colony in 1860 was appointed
Clerk to the Attorney-General. In
that position he qualified for the
legal profession, and in 1865 he was
called to the Western Australian
Bar, entering into partnership with
Mr. (now the Honourable) Septimus
Burt. In addition to his private
duties he acted from 1870 till 1874
as Clerk to the Legislative Council
under representative government,
and from 1880 till 1882 was a
nominee member of that body. In
1879 lie acted for a time as Attorney-
appealed from is not requisite except in the case of an
interlocutory judgment, in which case appeal may also
be brought by special leave of the High Court.
Included in this appellate jurisdiction of the High
Court are all judgments of the Supreme Court of the
State given before the commencement of the Judiciary
Act, 1903, as to which leave to appeal to the King-in-
Council might at the commencement of the Act be
granted by the Court appealed from, or had then
actually been granted, and all conditions of appeal up
to then duly complied with, or as to which a petition
for special leave to appeal to the King-in-Council had
been lodged and was then pending.
By the Administration of Justice (Civil) Act the
Supreme Court is constituted a Court of Oyer and Ter-
miner and General Gaol Delivery in and for the State,
with the same jurisdiction as to all pleas of the Crown,
prosecutions, and informations as the High Court of
Justice in England, and as Justices of Oyer and Ter-
miner and General Gaol Delivery. In its criminal
jurisdiction the Supreme Court sits monthly in Perth,
except during the long vacation. By 61 Viet., No. 27,
provision was also made for the holding of Circuit
Courts for both civil and criminal cases. So far the
Eastern Goldfields Circuit Court is the only one that has
been proclaimed, and this sits quarterly. The Governor
has also the authority to appoint a Commissioner, with
all the powers of a Supreme Court Judge, to hear
criminal cases in districts where expense or other reasons
makes trial in Perth unwise.
In addition, provision is made by 9 Viet., No. 4,
for holding Courts of General Sessions of the Peace at
such places as shall from time to time be appointed by
the Governor. Such Sessions are now held quarterly at
various centres in the State, and in each case the Govern-
ment Resident or Resident Magistrate is the Chairman
of the Court. Such Courts have jurisdiction over all
felonies not punishable with death and all mis-
demeanours, and also have power to remit for trial
before the Supreme Court at Perth any crime or offence
which by its magnitude or nature ought to be so tried.
General, and in 1882 was appointed
Crown Solicitor, an office which he
resigned in 1884 for the higher duties
of the Supreme Court Bench, to
which he was appointed when the
Government decided to appoint a
Puisne Judge. He was not alto-
gether new to the work, as he had
already in 1880 and 1881 acted as
sole Judge during the absence on
leave of the Chief Justice. Mr.
Stone continued as senior Puisne
Judge until 1901, when on the retire-
ment of Sir Alexander Onslow he was
elevated to the chief judicial office,
Knighted in 1902, he remained Chief


Justice of Western Australia until
1906, discharging the functions of his
office with conspicuous ability and
success. In the latter year, feeling
that he was not able to bear the
physical strain which the duties of
such an important trust demanded,
he resigned his position, and as a
mark of appreciation was appointed
by the Crown to be Lieutenant-
Governor of the State. He had
already acted as Administrator from
March to April, 1901, and from
August, 1902, to March, 1903, and
has since his appointment been
Lieutenant-Governor during the
period that elapsed between the de-
parture of Sir Frederick Bedford
and the arrival of the present Gover-
nor, Sir Gerald Strickland. In the
intervals of an extremely busy life
Sir Edward has found time to
identify himself closely with the re-
ligious, social, educational, and
philanthropic movements of the
State. A member of the Church of
England, he has for years been
intimately associated with its admin-
istration in Western Australia. He
has been President of the Victorian
Institute for the Blind since its in-
ception in 1897. He also served for
some years as a member of the Com-
mittee of the Public Library of Wes-
tern Australia and of the Western
Australian Museum and Art Gallery,
and when those institutions were in
Bartletto , Perth .
HON. SIR EDWARD ALBERT STONE.
corporated in 1911 as the Public
Library, Museum, and Art Gallery
of Western Australia he was induced
to again accept office as one of the
Trustees. Sir Edward married in
-1861 Susan, daughter of the late Mr.
George Shenton, and has issue three
sons and seven daughters.
Sir STEPHEN HENRY PAR-
KER, Chief Justice of Western
Australia. The first native-born
citizen to hold the important and
dignified office of Chief Justice of
the State, Sir Stephen Henry Par-
ker, is the son of the late
Stephen Stanley Parker, M.L.C ,
one of the pioneers of Western Aus-
tralia, and was born at York, Wes-
tern Australia, in 1846. He received
his education at Bishops Col-
lege, Perth, and at the age of
twenty-one was called to the Bar.
Following the traditions of the legal
profession he soon commenced to
take an interest in the Parliamentary
and municipal life of the State. In
1878 he was appointed Chairman of
the Perth City Council, and since
its incorporation has occupied the
mayoral chair on three occasions (in
1880, 1892, and 1901), resigning
before the end of the third term on
account of his elevation to the
Bench. He sat continuously from
1878 to 1890 in the old Legislative
Council, first as an elected member
for Perth and afterwards for the
Vasse. He took a prominent part
in the movement for the establish-
ment of responsible government,
was for some years leader of
the elected members, and in 1890,
after the question had been
settled so far as the colony was con-
cerned, he, in conjunction with the
late Sir Thomas Cockburn-Camp-
bell, formed a deputation sent by
the Colonial Government to assist the
Imperial authorities in the passage
of the Bill, and gave evidence before
a Select Committee of the House
of Commons. As some reward for
his services he was in the same year
raised by Her Majesty Queen
Victoria to the dignity of a Q.C.,
being the last Australian bar-
rister to be so appointed. On the
introduction of responsible govern-
ment he contested and won the
York seat in the first Legislative
Assembly, afterwards resigning his
seat on being nominated as a
member of the Legislative Coun-
cil. In 1894 he was elected to
that body as the Perth representa-
tive, a position which he resigned in
1897 to unsuccessfully contest the
metropolitan seat in the Assembly.
Since then he has not been a mem-
ber of the Legislature : but in 1900,
when the Federal Enabling Act was
before the English Parliament, he
represented this State in London as
its delegate. During his Parlia-
mentary career Sir Henry from 1892
to 1894 held the portfolio of Colonial
Secretary and Minister of Educa-
Bartletto , Perth.
SIR STEPHEN HENRY PARKER.
lion, and represented the Govern-
ment in the Legislative Council. In
September, 1901, he was offered and
accepted a Puisne Judgeship, and in
1906 he was raised to the dignity of
Chief Justice. In June, 1908, the
honour of knighthood was conferred
upon him by His Majesty the King.
Sir Henry married in 1872 Amy
Katherine, daughter of the late
Honourable G. W. Leake, Q.C.,
M.L.C. One of his sons, Major
Frank Parker, served with distinc-
tion in the Western Australian con-
tingent during the South African
war and obtained the D.S.O.
The Honourable ROBERT
FURSE McMILLAN, Senior
Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court
of Western Australia, is the son of
John McMillan, barrister, of Lon-
don, and was born on January 24,
1858. He was educated at West-
minster School, where he was a
Queen’s scholar, and at Cambridge
University, from which he graduated
senior in the Law Tripos, 1880. He
was called to the Bar at the Inner
Temple in 1881 and became a mem-
ber of the Western Circuit. In 1902
the Government of Western Aus-
tralia decided to select from the
English Bar someone to fill the


vacancy then existing on the
Supreme Court Bench, and the
choice fell upon Mr. McMillan, who
accepted the appointment and
arrived in the State in February,
Bartletto , Perth.
HON. ROBERT FURSE MCMILLAN.
1903. In 1910, during the absence
on account of ill-health of the Chief
Justice, Mr. Justice McMillan tem-
porarily filled the position. He is
a member of the Committee of the
Public Library of Western Australia
and of the Western Australian
M useum and Art Gallery, and also
of the Board of Governors of the
Perth High School. Mr. McMillan
married in 1887 Margaret Aitchison,
a daughter of the late Mr. John
Elder, of Victoria.
The Honourable ROBERT BRUCE
BURNSIDE. Robert Bruce Burn-
side, second son of Sir Bruce Lock-
hart Burnside, late Chief Justice of
Ceylon, was born at Nassau, N.P.,
Bahamas, on April 22, 1862, and
educated first at the Royal Navy
School, Newcross, and afterwards at
Nancy, in France. He entered Lin-
coln's Inn in January, 1881, and was
As in all the colonies of Australia the commission
of Justice of the Peace plays a very important part in
minor Courts. Soon after the establishment of Western
Australia the Governor found it necessary to appoint
certain persons of good standing in the community to
be Justices of the Peace, with power to deal with
called to the Bar on January 26,
1884. Arriving in Perth, Western
Australia, on July 4, 1884, he at
once started the practice of his pro-
fession, first alone, and later (1886
91) in partnership with Mr. D. G.
Gawler, M.L.C., of Fremantle. He
was appointed Usher of the Black
Rod in December, 1890, and resigned
in 1894, when he was promoted to
the position of Crown Solicitor. In
December, 1902, a vacancy occurring
through the death of Mr. Justice
Moorhead he was elevated to the
Supreme Court Bench. Mr. Burn-
side was the first Secretary of the
Western Australian Racing Club,
founded in 1884, and is now its
President. He is a keen yachtsman,
and was for several years Commo-
dore of the Royal Perth Yacht Club.
%/
He owns the '‘Genista,'' built to his
order from designs by Fife, of Fair-
lie, Scotland. Mr. Justice Burnside
was appointed President of the Court
of Arbitration in 1903, and resigned
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. ROBERT BRUCE BURNSIDE.
finally in 1910. In 1887 he was mar-
ried at Fremantle to a daughter of
Mr. S. N. Bruce, surgeon, of Lon-
don, and has one son, Bruce, at pre-
sent studying medicine at Cambridge.
MINOR COURTS.
The Honourable JOHN ROOTH,
third Puisne Judge of the Supreme
Court of Western Australia, is the
eldest son of the late Mr. J. W.
Rooth, Barrister-at-Law of the Middle
Bartletto, Perth.
HON. JONN Rooth.
Temple, and was born in London in
1864. He was educated at Highgabe
Grammar School and Trinity Col-
lege, Oxford (8.A., 1888). In the
following year he was called to the
Bar at the Middle Temple, and
joined the Western Circuit as a pupil
of Mr. Blake Odgers, the celebrated
authority on the law of libel and
slander. He continued to practise
in the Common Law Courts until
1906, when he received appointment
as third Puisne Judge in this State.
He was appointed President of the
Court of Arbitration in December,
1911. For some years he was a mem-
ber of the Borough Council of Ful-
ham, London. Mr. Justice Rooth is
an enthusiast at golf and is a keen
cyclist, having covered the whole of
Western Europe on the wheel. He
is also an ardent musician, playing
both the piano and 'cello, and dur
ing his residence in Perth has been
an active supporter of all musical
efforts.
minor criminal cases and with civil cases involving less
than £lO. The next step was the appointment of
Government Residents or Resident Magistrates in
various centres of the population. These not only acted
as Chairmen of the Courts of Petty Sessions and Small
Debts, but were in addition the official mouthpieces in


their several districts of the Central Administration.
In legal matters they had not the power of determining
cases alone until 1863. In that year the Act 27 Viet.,
No. 17, conferred upon Police and Resident Magistrates
the right to do alone any act which, by any law then in
force or subsequently to be made, required the presence
of more than one Justice of the Peace. Such Magis-
trate could not, however, act alone at a Special or
Petty Sessions of all the Justices of the district, or in
General or Quarter Sessions assembled in the district.
In the same year a Small Debts Ordinance (27
Viet., No. 21) was passed, conferring the same power
in minor civil cases, with a limited jurisdiction of £SO
in certain directions. This jurisdiction was afterwards
extended to £IOO. With modifications as to procedure
and so forth this arrangement still holds good gener-
ally, it being understood that the Magistrate, whenever
possible, takes all cases in the Local Court.
Police Courts are held in all the districts and sit
daily if necessary. In Perth the Police Magistrate,
and in other centres the Resident Magistrate, presides.
Local Courts are held ever}' month except in Perth and
other populous districts, where the sittings are more
frequent. The enormous expansion of business follow-
ing upon the gold discoveries of the nineties brought
about such congestion in Perth that it became impera-
tive to institute two Courts, one of which should con-
fine its attention to criminal matters and the other
attend to the multifarious questions that called for
settlement on the civil side. The Government in
taking this step had under consideration the advisability
of raising the status of the Local Court to that of a
County Court, but up to the present nothing further
has been done in the matter, though it is generally
recognized that something on those lines or on the lines
of the District Courts in New South Wales would be
of distinct advantage to the commercial interests of the
community.
Special courts for the control of liquor licences
have been established , for many years. Under the
Licensing Act, 1911, these consist of the Police Magis-
trate or Resident Magistrate of the district as Chair-
man, with two other members appointed for a term of
three years by the Government. Every application for
a licence must be made to the Licensing Court in the
district where the premises are situated. The meetings
of the Court are held quarterly on the first Monday in
March, June, September, and December, and on such
other days as the Minister administering the Act may
appoint. The fees for a general publican’s licence are:
— (a) For any house or premises situated within a
municipality—(l) If the annual value of the house or
premises does not exceed £SOO, £SO; (2) if the annual
value of the house or premises exceeds £SOO, £75;
(3) if the annual value of the house or premises exceeds
£I,OOO, £IOO. (b) For any house or premises not situ-
ated within a municipality —(1) If the annual value
of the house or premises does not exceed £2OO, £4O ;
(2) if the annual value of the house or premises exceeds
£2OO, £SO.
CHILDREN'S COURTS.
A new and much-needed departure was made in
1907 by the passing of the State Children’s Act. The
need for some reform in the method of trying offences
committed by or against children was first recognized
in Boston, U.S.A. There it was decided to adopt the
procedure of clearing the Court after adult cases were
disposed of and taking those against children in the
presence only of the parents and witnesses. The success
of the movement caused other cities in the United States
to adopt it, and not long afterwards South Australia,
which has always been to the fore in matters dealing
with the problems of child life, adopted something on
similar lines. At first the Children’s Courts were only
permissive, but by an Act passed in 1896 they were
made the legal method. Influenced by the advantages
that such a course of procedure possessed Mr. A. S.
Roe, the Police Magistrate at Perth, tried the plan of
trying cases in which children were concerned in the
Magistrate’s Room, and in 1907 had the satisfaction of
JAMES COWAN, senior police
magistrate and magistrate of the
Local Court at Perth, is a son of
the late Mr. Walkinshaw Cowan,
and a descendant of one of those
families which played a prominent
seeing the State Children's Act passed, making Chil-
dren’s Courts necessary in Western Australia. These
Courts take cognizance of offences committed by or
against children not over eighteen years of age, and
also deal with complaints and applications under the
Education Acts. The Police Magistrate or Resident
Magistrate is appointed a Special Magistrate under
the Act, provision being made for Justices to take the
work when the Magistrate cannot be present. Perth
is the only place where the Court is held in a separate
building, being held in a special room at the office of
the Department, where there is also a Children’s
Detention Ward for the temporary reception of children
awaiting trial or awaiting to be transferred to an insti-
tution. In other places the Courts are held as a rule
in the Magistrate’s Room. If the ordinary Court-
room has to be used the hearing takes place at a time
when the usual business of the Court is not being
transacted.
part in the Scottish rebellion of
1745, when “Bonnie Prince Charlie”
attempted to regain the British


Crown for the Stuart family. Mr.
Walkinshaw Cowan came to Western
Australia as Private Secretary to
Governor Hutt in 1839, and was
afterwards made resident magistrate
at York, a position which another
son (Mr. W. D. Cowan) now holds.
Mr. James Cowan was born at Perth
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES COWAN,
on June 26, 1848, and educated first
at York and later at Bishop Hale’s
School, then under the management
of Colonel E. W. Haynes. He next
spent some time on his father’s farm
in order to gain a knowledge of
stock-raising and agricultural pur-
suits, and then (in 1864) entered his
father’s office at York, and was ap-
pointed clerk of courts and sub-
registrar of births, marriages, and
deaths. At the same time he acted
as postmaster for the large agricul-
tural district round York, handling
eighteen mails weekly between that
town, Northam, Newcastle, Beverley,
and Perth, and also looked after the
money order office and the branch
work of the Savings Bank. In 1870
Mr. Cowan was appointed clerk to
the police magistrate at Perth, a
position which he held for five years,
being also Secretary to the High
School. He then became clerk to the
Legislative Council, resigning in
1879 to take up the onerous duties of
Registrar and Master of the Supreme
Court, where he was called upon to
exercise the powers of judge’s dele-
gate in certain matters of bank-
niptcy. He had also to fill the offices
of Taxing Master, Curator of Intes-
tate Estates, Registrar of the Pro-
bate Court, Registrar of Joint Stock
Companies, and Master in Lunacy.
After having held these various
offices for a number of years, during
which he acted on occasion as a
police and Local Court magistrate,
Mr. Cowan was in 1888 appointed
police magistrate in succession to Mr.
R. C. Loftie, who had received the
appointment of Government Resident
at Albany. He also became resident
magistrate of the Swan district and
magistrate of the Local Court, in
the latter capacity he was Chairman
of the Conciliation Board and
Coroner of Perth and Swan districts.
When congestion of work necessi-
tated a separation of offices Mr.
Cowan took up the Local Court
work, the Government having in
view the creation of a County Court,
of which he was to be first judge.
This arrangement, however, was
never carried out. He is now magis-
trate of the Local Court at Perth,
aud Resident Magistrate and Chair-
man of the Licensing Court of the
Swan district, holding Courts at
Midlaud Junction and Moora. Cases
under the Workers’ Compensation
Acts are tried by him, and the whole
work of the Debtors’ Court in the
metropolis falls upon his shoulders.
In the course of his duties Mr.
Cowan has been called upon to try
many important cases, not the least-
being the Police Court proceedings
against Deeming. In all his work he
has found no insuperable difficulty,
and has certainly given general sat-
isfaction. Mr. Cowan became a pro-
perty holder in Mount Street, Perth,
and was the first to build there. For
many years he has held interests at
Cottesloe, York, Kalamunda, and
Swan View. In conjunction with
his brother, Mr. John Walkinshaw
Cowan, and Mr. Harry Higham he
started a large sheep station on the
Ashburton, which is now held by the
latter gentleman. At one time he
was a prominent member of the
Weld Club. In 1876 he married
Edith Dircksey, daughter of Mr.
Brown, of Glengarry, Geraldton, and
has a son, practising as a barrister,
and four daughters.
AUGUSTUS SANFORD KEATS
ROE, police magistrate, Perth, was
born in the Western Australian
capital on January 7, 1852, and is
the youngest of six sons of the late
Captain John Septimus Roe, for
forty-two years Surveyor-General of
this State. He was educated at
Bishop Hale’s College, Perth, and at
the close of his scholastic career was
articled to the legal profession under
Messrs. Stone & Son, a leading firm
of solicitors, the senior partner being
the late Mr. G. F. Stone, one time
Attorney-General, and father of Sir
Edward A. Stone, late Chief Justice
of Western Australia. After being
admitted to the Bar in 1873, and
practising for about twelve months
at Fremantle, Mr. Roe became en-
gaged in pearling pursuits in the
Nor’-West, procuring for this pur-
pose Malay divers from the Nether-
lands - India Archipelago, which
they visited in the slack season for
the sake of recruiting. Upon the fall
in the price of pearlshell some foui
years later he turned his attention to
nautical life, and was sailing and
trading among these islands for up-
wards of ten years, at one time hold-
ing a Holland master mariner’s certifi-
cate. During this period he visited
Hong Kong and the west coast of
Borneo, besides all the Polynesian
Islands, for copra, guttapercha, rat-
tan, coffee, and rice, and in the
course of his voyages navigated the
rivers of Borneo, Brou, Bolongan,
and Koeti, acquiring a familiar
knowledge of the Malay language
and a close insight into the habits
of the people. Returning to Roe-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. AUGUSTUS SANFORD KEATS ROE.
bourne (named after his father) he
practised his profession there for
twelve years, during which period he
gave considerable attention to min-
ing investments and acted as attor-
ney for numerous large English
syndicates, among the more import-
ant being the Consolidated Gold


Mines of Western Australia, Lim-
ited ; the Imperial Western Aus-
tralian Corporation, Limited; the
Pilbara United Goldfields, Limited ;
and various properties on the Ash-
burton River. When, owing to the
expansion of interests in the Nor’-
West and its growing population, sit-
tings of the Supreme Court in its
criminal jurisdiction to try capital
cases became necessary, Mr. Roe was
appointed, under a commission
issued in each separate case, to pre-
side as a Judge —a responsible post
for which he possessed peculiar fit-
ness. He carried out these duties in
a highly commendable manner for
some considerable time, and in 1898
received the appointment of Police
Magistrate of Perth, which he has
held ever since, in his earlier years of
office discharging full Judge’s duties,
with the exception of exercising ap-
pellate jurisdiction in the Full
Court. Mr. Roe has large property
interests throughout the State, but
principally in the city of Perth. Pie
is a member of the Weld Club, and
finds recreation in various outdoor
sports, including boating, fishing,
and shooting, besides which he is an
amateur carpenter of no mean order
and spends many leisure hours in
the manufacture of clever bits of
woodwork. Mr. Roe has been twice
married. His first wife was Mary,
daughter of the late Mr. Edward
Newman, of Fremantle, who died in
1909. His second wife, Elizabeth, is
a daughter of the late Mrs. E. B.
Cook, of Tintern College, Hawthorn,
Victoria. The family consists of
two sons.
EDMOND POWER DOWLEY,
third stipendiary magistrate for
Perth and resident magistrate at
Fremantle, was born in the County
Tipperary, Ireland, on December
15, 1854, and educated at various
schools in Ireland and England,
subsequently taking his B.A. and
B.A.T. degrees at Trinity College,
Dublin. He entered the Waterford,
Dungarvin, and Lismore railway
works as apprentice and after nine
years in connection with various rail-
way companies in Ireland, eventu-
ally joined the Public Works
Department in charge of harbour
extension in the County Clare. In
1885 he came to Australia, and
during a visit of Governor Broome
in 1886 to the district of Lake Muir,
in which he was accompanied by the
Honourable -I. A. Wright, then
y
Engineer-in-Chief and late Resident
Magistrate at Albany, the latter
gentleman offered Mr. Dowley a
position in the Public Works
Department, and shortly afterwards
he received the appointment and was
sent to Kimberley as Resident
Engineer. While there he was
appointed to act as Warden and
Resident Magistrate of the Kim-
berley goldfields and continued at
HalTs Creek administering his
office for nearly six years. In
January, 1893, he was sent as
Warden and Resident Magistrate to
the Murchison goldfields, where he
remained for over seven years.
Upon his transfer in the same capa-
city to Coolgardie in 1900 the resi-
dents of the Murchison district ten-
dered him a banquet and he was the
recipient of various valuable presen-
tations. After three years at Cool-
gardie Mr. Dowley again took a trip
to Ireland, and subsequently was
appointed Resident Magistrate at
Kalgoorlie, from which post he re-
tired to take up similar duties at
Fremantle, his official career at this
centre commencing in October, 1908.
Mr. Dowley was one of the earliest
officers of the Coolgardie Company
of the Goldfields Infantry Regiment,
which he joined as Lieutenant in
1900 and rose to the rank of Major
in 1908, being second in command
of the Regiment when he retired on
his transfer to Fremantle.
WILLIAM LAMBDEN OWEN,
J.P., resident magistrate of Bun-
bury, is a son of Mr. William Dent
Cliffe Owen, of Sleaford, Lincoln-
shire, England, where he was born
on March 12, 1861. Upon the com-
pletion of his education at King’s
Lynn he was articled to the late Mr.
Thomas Parry, civil engineer, of his
native town, and with this gentle-
man served the full five years neces-
sary to qualify in his profession as a
civil engineer. Mr. Owen was con-
nected with some very important
works in England, among others
being the London-Tilbury and
Southern Railway Extension and
Locomotive Works at Plaistowe and
the Spalding and Lincoln Railway
in 1881-2. He superintended the
widening and constructional works
at Magdalen Bridge, Oxford, and,
later, the drainage works at Botley.
The building of a large gas-tank at
Stafford and the Bridgewater Town
Bridge over the River Parrot, which
is one of the four tidal rivers in the
world, gave him opportunities of
exercising his knowledge and skill,
and he also carried out the construc-
tion of the Hydraulic Bascule Span
Bridge at Deptford. At a subse-
quent period he proceeded to Shef-
field to engage in engineering work
in connection with the main drainage
system, which was then being taken
in hand, and was next concerned in
Ford, Bunbury.
MR. WILLIAM LAMBDEN OWEN.
conjunction with Messrs. Colquhoun
Brothers on the Creggan Reservoir
at Londonderry Waterworks, in the
construction of which he acted as
contractors’ engineer. For a number
of years he held a position with Mr.
George Moss, of Liverpool, and
superintended several important
drainage schemes, also being con-
nected with the Lancaster Water-
works in the construction of the
Oamas Gill Reservoir. Leaving
England Mr. Owen arrived at
Albany in 1887, and shortly after-
wards joined the Public Works De-
partment at Perth under the Hon.
J. Arthur Wright. In 1888 he was
elected an associate member of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Lon-
don. He was appointed resident
engineer at Roebourne for the Nor.’-
West district, and while there com-
pleted the Roebourne to Cossack
tramways, this being the first paying
tramway in the State. The hospital,
post-office, and various other public
buildings were erected under his
supervision, likewise the lighthouse
at Jarman Island, four miles from
the Cossack coast. In May, 1889, he
was appointed Warden at Pilbara,
and held the post until October,


1890, being then transferred as
Government Inspecting Engineer on
the Midland Railway until the
arrival of the late Mr. C. Y.
O’Connor. After assisting at the
head office at Perth in the prepara-
tion of plans for the Fremantle Har-
bour scheme and other works Mr.
Owen returned to Roebourne in 1891
to make a survey of the Cossack Har-
hour, and in the following year was
sent to Bunbury as resident engineer
on the Pinjarra to Bunbury section
of the railway line. Upon its com-
pletion in 1894 he proceeded to
Mahogany Creek to superintend the
deviation and improvements to the
Eastern Railway, and witnessed the
completion of this work, which em-
braced the Greenmount tunnel, in
1896. In the same year he was ap-
pointed warden of the North Cool-
gardie goldfields, with headquarters
at Menzies. 111-health compelled his
return to Perth, but he reassumed
duties later in the year and con-
tinued until 1903, when he obtained
long-service leave and visited Eng-
land. Upon his return he was em-
ployed in the Lands Department and
administered the new Roads Act,
afterwards relieving Warden Fin-
nerty at Coolgardie. In December,
1904, he was appointed resident
magistrate for the Wellington, Nel-
son, and Sussex magisterial districts,
with headquarters at Bunbury, tak-
ing up his duties here on January 1,
1905, and since then the wardenship
of Greenbushes and Collie and the
magistracy of Collie have been in-
cluded within his jurisdiction. Mr.
Owen has an interest in the horticul-
tural industry, owning an orchard
at Armadale under cultivation
chiefly of oranges and lemons. He
has had a long connection with mili-
tary matters, retiring with the rank
of Maior in 1906. He is a Diocesan
o
Trustee for the See of Bunbury and
a Governor and Hon. Treasurer of
the local Girls’ Grammar School.
Mr. Owen is a Past Master of St.
George’s Lodge of Freemasons and a
member of the Weld Club, Perth,
and of the Western Australia Turf
Club. He is also connected with the
South-Western Club at Bunbury,
and with the local Yacht, Swim-
ming, and Hunt Clubs. Mr. Owen
married in 1891 Edith, daughter of
Mr. Stewart Gordon, of “Abber
Foyle,” Londonderry, Ireland.
ARCHIBALD EDMUND BURT,
resident magistrate, Albany, is a
son of the late Archibald Piguenit
Burt, who occupied the office of
Attorney-General in the West Indian
Islands, and nephew of the Hon.
Septimus Burt, K.C., of Western
Australia. He was born at St.
Kitts, in the West Indies, on
February 17, 1864, and received his
elementary education there, in 1878
coming to Perth and completing his
scholastic career at the High School
of that city. Upon the termination
of his studies he proceeded to the
Nor’-West, and with two of his
brothers became engaged in sheep-
farming on a property in that dis-
trict, where he still holds pastoral in-
terests. In September, 1895, he en-
tered the Mines Department of the
Civil Service, and in April, 1897, was
appointed to the offices of warden
and resident magistrate of the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARCHIBALD EDMUND RURT.
Mount Margaret goldfield, being sta-
tioned first at Mount Malcolm and
afterwards at Mount Morgans.
When this field began to decline Mr.
Burt was offered his present post,
and, accepting it, arrived at Albany
in November, 1908, since which
period he has devoted his energies to
the carrying out of the duties of the
office. He is resident magistrate of
the Plantagenet, Katanning, and
Williams Magisterial Districts, and
Magistrate of all the local Courts —
six in all—extending from Albany
to Narrogin and the Williams, and
acts as Coroner for the same terri-
tory, uniting with these duties the
position of Returning-Officer for the
Albany Electoral District and the
South-East Electoral Province. He
also holds a Commission of the Peace
for the whole of Western Australia,
an honour which was conferred upon
him by the Forrest Administration
in 1895, prior to his association with
the service, and he is the Chairman of
the Albany Quarter Sessions. Mr.
Burt is well known in racing circles,
being President of the Albany Racing
Club, and has been associated with
this sport since his advent to the
Nor’-West, where he gave consider-
able attention to the breeding of
thoroughbred horses. His duties
give him very little leisure for other
sports. He is a member of the Weld
Club, Perth, and of the Albany
Club. In January, 1902, Mr. Burt
married Florence Maud, second
daughter of the late Hon. W. H.
Roberts, M.L.C., of Melbourne, Vic-
toria, a barrister and solicitor well
known in the public life of that
State. There is issue one son.
ROBERT FAIRBAIRN, 1.5.0.,
J.P., retired magistrate, is a son
of the late Mr. John Fair-
bairn, of Berwickshire, Scotland,
who came to Western Australia in
the year 1839, settling at Bun-
bury, where he was one of
the jDioneer settlers of the district.
The subject of our review was born
at Picton, Bunbury, on June 20,
1841, and educated by his father,
there being no schools of any kind
in those days outside of Perth.
Young Fairbairn acquired his
scholastic training under adverse
conditions, but nevertheless his
studies embraced all the subjects
likely to prove of value to him in
later life. It was after the manual
labours of the day that he usually
received instructions from the
paternal source, and even to the
present day he vividly remembers
having received his first lesson in
Euclid while seated on the stump of
a fallen forest giant. Having
reached the seventeenth year of his
age Mr. Fairbairn accepted an
appointment as second master in the
Perth Boys’ School, the first insti-
tution of its kind in the State.
After occupying this post for nearly
four years in 1862 he accepted the
appointment of clerk to the bench of
magistrates at Busselton, which had
been offered him by the Govern-
ment. For eleven years he fulfilled
the duties appertaining to this office,
as well as a multitude of others
which meanwhile had been added.
In 1873 Governor Weld selected


him to become acting resident
magistrate at Greenough, where he
remained for two years, on two
occasions during that time acting as
Government Resident at Geraldton.
The following year ho was appointed
with Mr. Eliot, Government Resi-
dent of Geraldton, and Dr. Elliott
to inquire into the causes leading to
the cases of lead-poisoning which
had occurred at the Northampton
Mines. Having successfully dis-
posed of this work he was next
authorized to proceed to Shark Bay
to make inquiries into the allega-
tions of cruelty and ill-treatment of
the Malays engaged in the pearl-
shell fishery who, it was asserted,
were being treated like slaves, many
of these unfortunates being reduced
to a state of semi-starvation. Mr.
Fairbairn dealt with the situation
in a most decisive manner
and not only awarded the
sufferers considerable compensation,
but went so far as to sell up huts,
boats, etc., so that they should
receive the benefits awarded them
from the “fonts of justice/’ On his
return to Perth, Governor Weld
having been succeeded by Governor
Robinson, Mr. Fairbairn received
the thanks of the new Governor on
the successful issue of his mission.
Mr. Fairbairn’s next appointment
was at Newcastle, in the district of
Toodyay. Before accepting this
post, however, he was offered, but
declined, the office of sheriff at
Perth. In 1876 he became Acting
Government Resident at Albany,
performing in addition a host of
other duties not connected with that
position, and in 1880 he was
appointed resident magistrate and
Collector of Revenue and Customs at
Busselton. These were strenuous
days, full of incident, and it was
impossible to hazard a guess at the
work of to-morrow by that per-
formed to-day. On one occasion
Mr. Fairbairn had to ride 200 miles
in two and a half days through
heavy bush country in order to
receive instructions from the
Governor relating to a murder on
the Gascoyne which caused consider-
able sensation at the time. In 1882
he was given a commission to pro-
ceed to the Upper Murchison and
Gascoyne districts to inquire into
the condition of the natives who
were causing great trouble to the
settlers. This work occupied a
considerable time, but was finally
brought to a successful conclusion,
the Governor publicly thanking him
v 2
and adopting all his suggestions,
notwithstanding the strong opposi-
tion shown by the settlers of those
districts. In the following year he
was appointed Government Resident
at Kimberley, being the first official
in that part of the State. He took
with him a large party and a
quantity of stores and building
material in the barque “Amur,” and
on arrival at their destination, after
a trip lasting ' twenty-eight days,
dropped a/nchor between Mary
Island and the mainland. The
party consisted of Mr. D. B. Ord as
clerk, Sergeant Troy, now resident
magistrate and warden of the gold-
fields at Cue, several police con-
stables, a carpenter, and three native
assistants. The party was also
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ROBERT FAIRBAIRN.
accompanied by Mr. Turner
(surveyor) with men and horses and
two other survey parties under Mr.
Brooking and Mr. Harry Johnston
(now Surveyor-General), which had
sailed by the steamer “Rob Roy” a
few days previous to the departure
of the “Amur.” Arriving at their
destination unloading was imme-
diately commenced, the horses being
swum ashore, and the provisions
landed in the ship’s boats, after
which they were carried across the
Marsh on packhorses lent by Mr.
Johnston. The boats proving too
frail to take ashore the building
material it all had to be sent back to
Cossack, where it remained for
twelve months, the party meanwhile
living in huts and the provisions
being housed in sheds made of bush
timber. The first difficulty the
party had to overcome was the
scarcity of drinking water. Several
shafts were put down, but the water
obtained was too salty to be of use.
A temporary supply, however, was
drawn from a native spring (now
known as Nobby’s Well), distant
some 10 miles, and carted to the
camp, but ultimately a plentiful
supply was struck about 2 miles
from the landing place. During his
term of office Mr. Fairbairn had
wells sunk along the different routes
into the country. A town site was
surveyed and a tramway laid across
the Marsh (at this point of con-
siderable width) which proved very
useful for some years and enabled
the settlers to ship their wool and
land their supplies. On his arrival
in the district there were only two
stations, those owned by the
Kimberley Pastoral and the Yeeda
Companies, but when his term of
office had expired the settlement had
increased and the town of Derby
(which he founded and named)
could claim in addition to the
Government buildings a couple of
general stores, a butcher’s shop, and
an hotel, as well as several private
residences. During Mr. Fairbairn’s
tenure of office he explored the
country between the coast and the
King Leopold Range, a work which
met with the hearty approval
of Sir F. N. Broome, who in a letter
stated that “it was the kind of work
he liked the Government Resident to
be engaged in.” In 1885 Governor
Broome paid a visit to the district,
and at a public dinner given to him
by the settlers he stated that “the
present settlers, like all pioneers,
would make no money ; the fortunes
would be made by their successors,”
but shortly afterwards unexpected
developments caused a rise in the
price of meat which brought a
period of unlooked-for prosperity to
the pioneers. On his arrival in
Kimberley Mr. Fairbairn found the
natives to be so wild that they fled
from the coast at the sight of the
ship and for some time would not
approach the camp. One day, how-
ever, an old native whom they
named Jacob came in, and he was so
well treated that, accompanied by a
young man, he returned next morn-
ing and invited Mr. Fairbairn to
shoot ducks on a large lagoon about
8 miles from the camp, where they
came upon over a hundred natives—
men, women, and children—who, on
catching sight of the party, fled in
all directions, but on their guide


explaining that the whites were
friendly the men returned, but not
the women or children. On asking
a native how they were living he ran
off, to return shortly afterwards with
his two hands full of roasted locusts.
After talking with them and distri-
buting a little tobacco and damper
Mr. Fairbairn invited them to visit
him at Derby, and on the following
day some twenty native men and
women came in and remained as his
guests for two days. From that
time his relations with the natives
were most cordial, and during his
stay at Kimberley Mr. Fairbairn
lost nothing through the natives,
nor were any of them ever charged
with stealing or killing sheep. One
of the initial difficulties was the out-
break of scab, infected sheep having
been allowed to come to the district,
and it was only by the adoption of
drastic measures that the disease was
eradicated. In his official capacity
as Government Resident Mr. Pair-
bairn received the first gold found in
any quantity in Western Australia,
weighing 11 oz., which was handed
to him at Derby by Hall & Slattery.
This was in 1885, the metal being
found at Mount Abbot, near the
Ord River. The news of the
discovery quickly spread and a rush
at once set in for the new Eldorado.
At the end of two and a half
years Mr. Fairbairn was appointed
Government Resident at Roebourne,
being succeeded by Dr. Lovegrove,
and before taking his departure he
was the recipient of an address
from the settlers expressive of their
appreciation of his efforts on their
behalf during his term of adminis-
tration. He remained but a little
while at Roebourne when he was
appointed Resident Magistrate and
Chairman of Quarter Sessions at
Runbury. In May, 1886, he was
appointed Resident Magistrate at
Fremantle consequent on the
death of Mr. Slade, and in this
capacity he travelled many hundred
miles in the performance of his
official functions. Mr. Fairbairn
continued here until November,
1908, when he retired into private
life after fifty years of faithful
service, taking up his residence at
Cottesloe. LTis valuable services in
the interests of his country were
suitably recognized in 1906, when
the King was pleased to confer upon
him the distinction of 1.5.0. Mr.
Pairbairn finds relaxation after the
heat and burden of his lengthy
official career in the pursuits of read-
ing and gardening at his home at
Cottesloe, and in the autumn of his
lifetime is able to review with honest
pride the important part he has
played in the opening up and
settling of this the largest State in
the Commonwealth. He is a Justice
of the Peace for Western Australia,
a Freemason, and a member of the
Weld Club. He has been twice
married, the first time in 1887 to a
daughter of the late Mr. Patrick
Taylor of Candyup, Albany. His
second wife is a daughter of the late
Mr. T. A. Bussell, of Blackheath
Park, near London. Of the former
union there is issue a son and a
daughter. The son, a B.A. of
Oxford, is now studying for the
medical profession.
ARBITRATION COURT.
This Court is constituted under the Industrial
Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 1902, which took the
place of a previous less complete Act passed in 1900.
The purpose of the Statute is to facilitate the settle-
ment of industrial disputes by conciliation and arbitra-
tion. It provides for the registration of unions of
workers, consisting of not less than fifteen members
each, and for the registration of unions of employers,
consisting of not less than two members each, having
in their employ taken together at least fifty workers.
Any incorporated company may also be registered as an
employers’ union.
A registered union, whether of workers or em-
ployers is termed an “industrial union,” and a number
of industrial unions grouped and affiliated together is
termed an “industrial association.”
Every industrial union must be confined to some
one specified industry, and must adopt such rules as are
in full compliance with the Act. There must not be
more than one industrial union of workers and one
industrial union of employers in a locality in the one
industry. This does not apply strictly to companies
which become industrial unions. In the event of an
industrial dispute occurring between an employer and
his employes the Act provides that, unless amicably
settled, it shall be referred to the Court of Arbitration,
or to a Board of Conciliation created under the Act, for
settlement. The Court of Arbitration, on the results of
whose labours depends in a large measure the success of
the Act, has jurisdiction over the whole State. It con-
sists of three members, namely, a President, who must
be a Judge of the Supreme Court, and two representa-
tives, nominated respectively by the industrial unions
of employers and workers. The representatives hold
office for three years and at the end of that period are
eligible for re-election.
For the purposes of the Act the State is divided
into three industrial districts. Each district is pro-
vided with a Board of Conciliation of three persons (the
Act allows three, five, or seven), consisting of two
representatives elected respectively by the industrial
unions of employers and workers within the district,
and a Chairman, elected by the representatives. Each
member holds office for three years, and is eligible for
re-election. Besides the permanent Boards, special
Boards of Conciliation may be elected from time to time
by the parties to a dispute, to deal with cases of a
special character. The recommendations of the Boards
and awards of the Court are directed by the Act to be
drawn up in plain terms, avoiding technicalities as far
as possible. It is further provided that “the Court
shall, in all matters before it, have full and exclusive
jurisdiction to determine the same in such manner in
all respects as in equity and good conscience it thinks


lit/’ As the parties in a large majority of cases prefer
to go direct to the Court, the Boards of Conciliation
have fallen into disuse.
The recommendation of a Board is binding only on
the parties thereto, and is subject to an appeal there-
from within one month to the Court; an award of the
Court is compulsory, and there is no appeal from its
decision. The awards of the Court bind not only the
parties to the dispute, but also all persons, whether
employers or workers, within the area determined in
the award, who are engaged in the industry to which
the award relates. The Court’s awards have thus a
much larger scope than the recommendations of a Board.
Matters in dispute which are amicably settled without
reference to the Court or a Board may be made the
subject of an industrial agreement between the parties.
An industrial agreement upon being registered is bind-
ing upon each party thereto during its currency, and
thereafter until one party duly retires therefrom.
WILLIAM SOMERVILLE, mem-
ber of the Court of Arbitration,
Albert Street, Cottesloe Beach, is a
son of the late Mr. John Somerville,
of Merry weather, New South Wales,
where he was born on November 24,
1869. He received his education at
a local public school, and at the age
of fifteen was apprenticed to the
blacksmithing trade at Messrs. Mor-
rison & Bearby’s Foundry, in the
Newcastle district. Having com-
pleted his indentures he joined the
Amalgamated Society of Engineers,
with which body he has been con-
nected ever since. Proceeding to
Sydney Mr. Somerville worked at his
trade, and eighteen months later left
for the pastoral districts of Victoria
and New South Wales. Perceiving
more prospects of advancement in
the Western State, he sailed for
Fremantle in 1895, and upon arrival
found employment at that port in
the service of the Public Works
Department, which was carrying for-
ward the construction of the harbour
scheme. Mr. Somerville was identi-
fied with this work for ten years,
during which period he took a lead-
ing part in the operations of the
Labour unionists. During the course
of his career he has held almost
every office in connection with the
Labour movement, including that of
President of the Labour Congress
held at Fremantle in 1902 and Vice-
President of the Kalgoorlie Congress
in 1899, and at the present time acts
as delegate from the Fremantle
Council to the Executive of the Aus-
tralian Labour Federation. In 1905
he was first appointed workers’
representative to the Arbitration
Court, and in virtue of this office was
created a Justice of the Peace for the
whole State, his previous commis-
sion, granted by the James Govern-
ment, having included only the
Fremantle magisterial district. Upon
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM SOMERVILLE.
two subsequent occasions Mr. Somer-
ville has been nominated and re-
turned to the Arbitration Court, and
is now serving his third term of
office. During his connection with
this organization he has been closely
associated with the elaboration of a
scheme of apprenticeship, which has
met with general approval both from
The Statute, having provided a ready means for
the settlement of industrial disputes, enacts that it shall
be an offence, punishable by a penalty not exceeding
<£so, for any person, whether a member of an indus-
trial union or not, to take part in, aid, instigate, or do
anything in the nature of a strike or lock-out.
While the Act cannot be said to have altogether
fulfilled the ideal expected of it, it has without doubt
contributed greatly towards industrial peace. It has,
perhaps, met with the least degree of success during
the past year or two, but that may partly be due to
the fact that industrial unrest seems to constitute at
present a grave menace the world over. An attempt to
amend the Act so as if possible to make it more accept-
able to the workers was made by the present Govern-
ment in 1911, but as the suggestions were not accept-
able to the Legislative Council the matter lapsed for the
time, but forms one of the proposals of the Government
for the session of 1912.
the employers and workers’ point of
view. In 1906 he contested the seat
for West province in the Legislative
Council in the Labour interest, on
which occasion he polled within fifty
votes of the winning member, and in
1911 he was a candidate for the Fre-
mantle constituency at a by-election
for the House of Assembly. Mr.
Somerville in 1911 was co-opted a
member of the Board of Trustees of
the Art Gallery and Public Library,
and in the following year was nom-
inated by the Government to a seat
in the first University Senate. He
married Agnes, daughter of the late
Mr. William Spunner, of Creswick,
Victoria, and has three sons and a
daughter.
FREDERICK DANIEL GOOD,
J.P., employers' representative in
the Court of Arbitration (1907-12)
is a son of the late Mr.
George Frederick Goode, of Brid-
port, England, and was born
at Somerset, in the British Isles,
on January 29, 1860. He was
educated at the Clews Grammar
School, London, and when fourteen
years of age entered upon a clerical
career in the Customs and Docks
Department of the Imperial Civil
Service, in which he remained for six
years. Subsequently he filled a more
lucrative post in the Registered
Letter Branch of the English Postal
Service, and in 1886 left London
for Western Australia. It was his
design to follow the rush to the Pil-
bara goldfields, but upon arrival he


found that the bubble had burst,
and relinquishing that intention he
took a position as accountant with
the late Mr. E. G. Lacey, timber
merchant, trading as Messrs. Gill
and Co. Four years later in
conjunction with the late Mr.
Alec Forrest, he purchased the
business of Messrs. Gill & Co.,
and at a subsequent date ac-
quired a half-interest in Mr. J.
McDowell’s timber concern, the firm
at that time having five large saw-
mills in full swing. In 1897 Mr.
Good proceeded to England and sold
the businesses of Messrs. Gill & Co.
and J. McDowell to an English
syndicate, by which it was after-
wards floated as the Gill-McDowell
Company, with a capital of £250,000.
Mr. Good received the appointment
of Managing Director of this Com-
pany, which post he retained until
the general amalgamation in 1902,
when with most of the rival timber
concerns it was merged into the
Millars’ Karri and Jarrah Co. (1902)
Limited. Retiring from his connec-
tion with the timber trade he pur-
chased and rebuilt the Perth
Tannery, which he later sold to the
present proprietor, Mr. B. Rosen -
stamm. In 1900 he joined with
Messrs. Running Brothers in the
purchase of the Limekiln and Build-
ing Stone Quarries at Cottesloe and
Coogee, and continued in that in-
dustry until the Cottesloe Quarries
were worked out. At the end of
1901, in partnership with Mr. J.
McMahen, he took over the business
of Messrs. Daniel White & Co.,
carriage builders, of Murray Street,
Perth, and has since carried on the
conduct of this large concern. In
1911 the firm erected an extensive
factory in Murray Street, the ap-
pointments of which place it in the
position of being second to none
in the Southern Hemisphere. In
addition to his other enterprises
Mr. Good at one time had an
interest in the pearling industry,
but was with many others
a heavy sufferer from the vio-
lent storms which frequently de-
vastate the pearling grounds on the
Nor’-West coasts of the State. He
was one of the first directors of
Donaldson & Collins, Limited, and
for many years was Director of the
Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance
Company. In 1907 he was invited by
the various Employers’ Associations
to represent their interests in the
Court of Arbitration, and having
acceded to the request was gazetted
in July of that year. He was twice
re-elected unopposed, but in 1912
retired from the position which is
now filled by Mr. H. Daglish.
During his term of office the Court
inaugurated a system of appren-
ticeship which afterwards was
made compulsory by law. Mr. Good
received his commission of Justice
of the Peace for Perth magis-
terial district in 1897, and upon
his appointment to the Court of
Arbitration was gazetted for the
whole of Western Australia. He is
a Past Junior Grand Warden in the
Masonic craft in this State, and is
also Past Grand Treasurer and
Grand Representative of the Grand
Lodge of Denmark. While on a visit
to Denmark in 1907 he had the
honour of dining privately with His
Majesty the King of Denmark, and
on this occasion was the recipient at
his hand of honours in the craft.
He also received a letter from the
Grand Lodge of Denmark requesting
his portrait, in full Masonic regalia,
to be hung in their hall at Copen-
hagen. In 1897 Mr. Good married
Georgiana, daughter of the late
Richard Sands, a noted Court Lais-
man and glover, of Sloane Street,
London, and has three daughters
and three sons.


Federal Government Departments.
Public Service Commissioner.
While the headquarters of all the Commonwealth
Government Departments are at the seat of govern-
ment itself, it has been found necessary to have in
each State certain officers to do the work of various
departments, or, as in the case of the Post Office, Cus-
toms, and Defence Departments, extensive branches
with practically State organization and administration.
With the branches we propose to deal separately, but
before doing so there are some important federal officers
whose duties are confined within the limits of Western
Australia to whom reference should be made.
In the Federal Public Service Act it is provided
that in addition to the Public Service Commissioner
there shall be in each State a Public Service Inspector
charged with the control and inspection of that por-
tion of the Service working therein. Upon the passing
of the Act Mr. A. Green, who still occupies the posi-
tion, was appointed Public Service Inspector in Wes-
tern Australia, and, subject to the Public Service Com-
missioner, has administered the Act in this State. In
AMAZIAH GREEN, Public Ser-
vice Commissioner to the Common-
wealth, St. George’s Terrace, Perth.
The subject of our biographical
notice is a native of Sydney, New
South Wales, where he was born on
December, 18, 1855. He is a son of
Mr. Thomas Hyndes Green, J.P.,
late of Camberwell, England, his
mother being Scotch. At the con-
clusion of his education, which was
of a commercial character, Mr.
Green at the age of seventeen ob-
tained his first experience of business
life in mercantile and shipping offices
at Sydney. Before reaching his
twenty-second birthday he entered
the New South Wales Government
service as registrar of adjustments
in the Auditor-General’s Depart-
ment, being transferred to the Post-
master-General’s Branch as ledger-
keeper in 1877. Ten years later, in
1887, he was appointed chief ac-
countant to the Department of Jus-
tice, remaining in that position until
1896, when he was promoted to the
Colonial Treasury Department as
Treasury I nspector. Subsequently
he received transfer to the Auditor-
GeneraTs Department with the in-
spection staff, which, however, was
Bartletto Perth.
MR. AMAZIAH GREEN
shortly afterwards retransferred to
the Treasury. In 1899 he was
addition to those duties he was, on the passing of the
Federal Old-age Pensions Act, made Deputy-Commis-
sioner of Pensions, and has had the onerous task of
examining into and settling many hundreds of appli-
cations for pensions from aged and infirm persons.
When the Commonwealth Parliament brought the
land tax into existence a Deputy-Land Tax Commis-
sioner had to be appointed in each of the States, and
in Western Australia the position was conferred upon
Mr. J. F. Whitely, who had for many years been a
valued officer in the State Treasury. The Federal Audit
Office is represented by Mr. W. E. Kennedy, and the
meteorological work, so far as the Western State is
concerned, is carried out by Mr. E. B. Curlewis. So
far as other avenues of federal activity, apart from the
large departmental branches, are concerned, the duties
are performed (by arrangement with the State Govern-
ment) by officers in the State Public Service, who receive
some allowance from the Commonwealth whilst so
engaged.
selected to fill the position of Mili-
tary Staff Paymaster, one of the most
responsible financial positions in the
Service at that time. In connection
with this post, the following comment
appeared in The Transmitter , the
official organ of the Post and Tele-
graphs, of October, 1902: —“Mr.
Green has the proud honour to be
one of the very few Australian Gov-
ernment officers, if indeed there were
any others, whose services were per-
sonally requisitioned in connection
with the Boer war. The Imperial
authorities saw the necessity of seek-
ing out an officer with an intimate
knowledge of the military pay
arrangements, as well as having a
local knowledge of the Australasian
conditions regarding pay of Aus-
tralian troops. The General of Com-
munications at the Cape, the late
Sir E. Forrestier-Walker, applied by
cable for the services of Mr. Green
as the officer selected for the duty
required, and requested the Govern-
ment to permit of his being secured
for duty in charge of a branch of
the Australasian Depot at Cape
Town. It was considered, however,


that owing to the great pressure on
the Military Department at this time
in Sydney his services could not be
dispensed with locally, and with
great reluctance the complimentary
request of the British authorities
could not be acceded to by the Gov-
ernment/ * Mr. Green was appointed
Public Service Inspector to the Com-
monwealth in Western Australia in
August, 1902, and ranks as the most
important Federal Officer in the
State. Since taking up his duties
in Western Australia he has held the
office of Electoral Officer for the
State, a post he relinquished subse-
quently on assuming the duties of
Deputy-Commissioner for old-age and
invalid pensions. In addition to
the performance of his multifarious
duties Mr. Green is expected to have
a thorough knowledge of the inland
centres of Western Australia, ac-
quired by some hard travelling. It
has been the opportunity of few men
to know Australia better than Mr.
Green. A man of strong character,
Mr. Green has made his name pro-
minent in the annals of the Civil
Service of Australia. He holds the
commission of Justice of the Peace
and is entitled to act in that capacity
throughout the whole of New South
Wales and this State. He was mar-
ried in 1884 to a daughter of the
late Mr. Henry McCrea, of the firm
of Messrs. Gedys, McCrea, & Co.,
shipping agents, of Sydney. In his
youthful days Mr. Green was keenly
devoted to aquatic pursuits and gave
all his leisure to that fascinating pas-
time, while of recent years he has
made a hobby of fruit-growing,
having an orchard property situated
within easy reach of Perth.
JOHN FRANCIS WHITELY,
Deputy - Federal Commissioner ot
Land Tax, Perth, was born on
February 1, 1858, at York, Western
Australia, and received his pre-
liminary education in his native
town, afterwards being sent to school
in Perth. For some years he fol-
lowed the occupation of teacher in
the State schools of this country (in
his sixteenth year being in charge of
a public school at Albany), and in
1881 he entered the Statistical
Branch of the Public Service as
assistant in the compilation of the
census returns for that year. This
work completed, he secured a posi-
tion as clerk in the General Post
Office and thereafter in the Tele-
graph Department, whence in 1889
he was transferred to the Treasury,
receiving eventually appointment
there as Examiner and Public Debt
Accountant. While holding this
office he represented Western Aus-
Bartletto , Perth
MR. JOHN FRANCIS WHITELY.
tralia at the Mutual Services’ Con-
ference in Melbourne in 1907, and
also attended four Premiers’ Confer-
ences as financial adviser to the Wes-
tern Australian Government. In
December, 1910, Mr. Whitely was
transferred to the Federal Civil Ser-
vice and appointed to his present
position as Deputy-Federal Commis-
sioner of Taxation. Socially he has
come prominently before the public
as an amateur stage manager, and in
1901 established a unique record by
producing three full-night plays in
one week at the Theatre Royal,
Perth. Besides his managerial
aptitude in the dramatic arena he
has literary talent of a high order,
as is evidenced by the many excellent
articles from his pen on educational
matters which appear at intervals in
college magazines. He married in
1897 Mary Alice Magdalen, daugh-
ter of the late Mr. Felix Kenney, of
Moonee Ponds, Victoria, and has
three sons and three daughters.
WILLIAM EDWIN KEN-
NEDY, Examiner - in - Charge in
Western Australia for the Audit
Department of the Commonwealth
Public Service, is a son of the late
Mr. William Henry Kennedy, who
was Chief Accountant to the Postal
Department in Western Australia
for many years. He was born at
Perth on September 18, 1871, and
received his early education at a pri-
vate academy conducted by the late
Mr. G. A. Letch. Subsequently he
spent three years at a Government
school, and upon the close of his
scholastic career became connected
with the firm of Messrs. Sholl and
Foulkes, solicitors, of Perth. Tiring
of the law, in December, 1886, he
joined the State Audit Department
as a junior, and worked his way up,
step by step, until he was promoted
to Inspector of Accounts, which
position he filled for two years. Mr.
Kennedy spent in all twenty years
in this office, and in 1901 was trans-
ferred to the Commonwealth Audit
Office as Examiner - in - Charge
throughout the State, and has re-
tained this appointment ever since.
In 1907 he was admitted as an
Associate of the Society of Account-
ants and Auditors of Western Aus-
tralia. Mr. Kennedy is a great
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM EDWIN KENNEDY.
enthusiast in motor-boating, and
spends much of his leisure time on
the river in pursuit of this en-
livening sport.
HAROLD BURNHAM CUR-
LEWIS, first assistant to the
Government Astronomer, Perth Ob-
servatory, was born in 1875 at
Geelong, Victoria, and educated
at Newington College, Sydney.
After leaving school he entered the
University of Sydney and continued
his studies there, at the same time
supplementing his income by teach


ing at the college where he had
attended as a boy. He retained this
post while reading for the Arts
course and for a year after obtaining
the degree of B.A. (Sydney). He
then came to Western Australia and
was appointed astronomical observer
and computer at the Perth Obser-
vatory. In January, 1908, when
the Commonwealth took over the
meteorological portion of the service,
he was selected for the position which
he now holds, as first assistant to the
Government Astronomer. On two
occasions during the tenure of his
present office Mr. Curlewis has been
called upon to fulfil the duties of
Acting Government Astronomer, the
first occasion being for a period of
six months, while Mr. Cooke was on
a visit to England, and the second
during that gentleman’s trip to
Tonga in connection with the
scientific observations of that rare
and always interesting phenomenon,
the eclipse of the sun.
GEORGE ERNEST WILLSON
was born in August, 1875, at Syd-
ney, New South Wales, and edu-
cated at the public schools there up
to the age of fifteen, when he entered
into commercial life, afterwards
spending a year in the State Obser-
vatory. In 1895 he came to Western
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE ERNEST WILLSON.
Australia to try his fortunes on the
goldfields, and went back to Sydney
the following year. Returning later
to the Western State he entered the
Postal Department in 1897 as clerk
on the confidential staff of the then
Postmaster - General. Two years
afterwards he went to South Africa
on leave of absence, taking part in
the Boer war while attached to the
Second Western Australian Mounted
Infantry. He spent over a year on
active service, beginning at Cape
Town and getting to Mozambique
through the Orange River Colony
and the Transvaal, and was engaged
in the thick of most of the fighting
on the scouting staff of Major-Gen-
eral Pole-Carew in Division XT.
On returning to Western Australia
in 1901 he again took up his duties
in the General Post Office, his posi-
tion having been retained for him
while absent on military service.
Upon the Postal Department being
transferred to Federal control in
1902 he was appointed senior clerk
for the Commonwealth Public Ser-
vice Office in Western Australia,
which post he held until March,
1912, when he was promoted to the
office of senior clerk in the Com-
monwealth Public Service Com-
missioner’s Office, Melbourne. In
1902 he was married to Miss A.
Arnold, of Perth.
Postmaster-General's Department.
No department of the Commonwealth Government,
perhaps, fulfils so important a function in the life of the
community at large as does that controlled at the pre-
sent by the member of the House of Representatives
for Kalgoorlie, the Hon. C. E. Frazer. Upon it we
depend for rapid and sure communication between us
and the outside world, and it is not too much to say
that the whole fabric of modern business life rests
upon its efficiency and celerity. Plow true this is
becomes apparent on those fortunately rare occasions
when the wreck of a steamer causes delay in the receipt
of letters, or the failure of a telegraph line throws
the business of an important centre out of joint. With
the enormous number of transactions carried out annu-
ally by the Department as a whole we are not at present
concerned, but the following digest of the returns will
serve to show the volume of work performed in this
State:
Employes (exclusive of mail contractors) ... 1,272
Number of post offices and receiving offices 430
Number of letters and post cards posted ... 28,496,748
Number of articles registered ... ... 406,732
Number of newspapers posted ... ... 9,985,446
Number of books, packets, etc., posted ... 4,141,205
Number of parcels posted ... ... ... 218,092
Number of telegrams forwarded ... ... 1,714,201
Total number received and dispatched ... 3,362,855
Number of miles of telegraph line ... ... 6,906
Number of miles of wire ... ... ... 11,320
Number of telephone exchanges ... ... 42
Number of telephone connections ... ... 7,319
Value of money orders issued ... ... £997,616
Value of postal orders issued ... ... £231,657
Value of money orders paid ... ... £708,623
Revenue ... ... ... .. ... £315,691
Expenditure ... . ... ... .. £410,296
Up to the time when the Department was taken
over by the Commonwealth the permanent executive
head was termed the Postmaster-General, but as that
became the title of one of the Ministers of State under
the Federation, the permanent head in each State
became Deputy-Postmaster-General. The officer hold-
ing this responsible post in Western Australia in 1901
was Mr. Richard A. Sholl, an old and valued public ser-
vant, who, though he possessed no other experience than
that gained during the "old colonial days,” made a
valiant attempt, with a great measure of success, to
meet the enormous expansion of business in the Depart


iiient consequent upon the abnormal development
caused by the discovery of gold. Being well advanced
in years at the time of the transfer of the Post Office
from the colony to the Commonwealth, he in a little
time sought the opportunity of retirement, and was suc-
ceeded by Mr. R. Hardman, an officer of Western Aus-
tralian training also. Unfortunately, after a few years’
occupancy of the post, Mr. Hardman’s health began to
fail, and finally lie reached a point when retirement
from active work became necessary. The vacancy thus
created was after some delay filled by the appointment
of the present Deputy-Postmaster-General, Mr. F.
Whysall, who has had a long and comprehensive train-
ing in the more strenuous postal departments of the
Eastern States.
A brief resume of the history of the Post Office in
Western Australia may, perhaps, be interesting. On
the foundation of the colony in 1829 no provision
appears to have been made for the receipt and delivery
of mails, but early in the thirties Mr. Charles Macfaull,
who was the publisher of The Perth Gazette , and prac-
tically the official printer to the Government, was
appointed Postmaster, his remuneration consisting of
the amount paid for the transmission of each letter.
Apparently it was not necessary to prepay the postage,
as in 1834 we find a notice in the newspaper to the
effect that after the passing of a Post Office Ordinance
then contemplated no ‘hooking” would be allowed. This
Ordinance (5 Will. IV., No. 5), which was agreed to on
December 31, 1834, provided for the establishment of
post offices, the receipts from which should form part
of the consolidated revenue. A fortnight later a pro-
clamation was issued bringing the Ordinance into opera-
tion and appointing Charles Macfaull principal post-
master at Perth, John Bateman postmaster at Fre-
mantle, and Sarah Lyttleton postmistress at Albany.
At the same lime the following rates for postage were
fixed : —For single letters or packets delivered at Fre-
mantle, Albany, or Augusta from overseas, 3d. ; for
double letters, 4d.; for letters weighing over an ounce,
6d. per ounce; for letters or packets received at Fre-
mantle from overseas for delivery at Perth, 6d., Bd.,
and 10d., according to size and weight ; and for letters
or packets between Perth and Fremantle, 4d., 5d., and
6d. In these days of striving after universal penny
postage these rates seem extortionate, but no doubt
the little community at the Swan River in those days
was only too glad to pay them in return for news from
the great outside world from which the members had
exiled themselves. As it was, oversea letters were very
irregular in delivery, many of the ships trading to and
from Fremantle declining to carry mails, the captains
thereby earning the unanimous disapproval of the
settlers, who reserved for them their special marks of
indignation.
It was not until April, 1842, that a regular mail
service was established between the various settlements
of the colony, in that month daily communication was
opened between Perth and Fremantle, Guildford received
and dispatched letters twice a week, and the other
settlements rejoiced in the improved facilities that a
weekly service with Perth afforded. In many of the
country districts natives were employed as letter-carriers,
an experiment which met with a fair measure of suc-
cess. The cost of transmission in these early days was
paid in cash, no postage stamps being used until August,
1854, when the celebrated one-penny Black Swan stamp
—which has since become of great value in the eyes of
philatelists —was issued. This was soon followed by the
issue of stamps of higher denomination.
All this time complaints were loud and persistent
about the irregularity of communication with England,
which was still at the mercy of the captains of trading
vessels. As an instance of the delay that occurred, it
may be mentioned that the settlers in Perth were un-
aware of King William IV. s death until five months
after Queen Victoria had ascended the throne. The
complaints after a while crystallized into a distinct
agitation for a monthly mail service. A petition was
prepared, and, like all petitions of those days, forwarded
to the Secretary of State for consideration. The Colonial
Office, following out what appears to have been then
its settled plan in colonial matters, treated the request
with indifference. A second memorial was then pre-
pared, and that, dispatched on June 2, 1845, ultimately,
after considerable correspondence, resulted in a monthly
mail being established via Singapore. The letters and
packets were brought to Singapore under arrangement
with vessels trading to the East, and the colonial vessel
was dispatched monthly to that port to bring them on
to Fremantle. This new departure required more sys-
tematic administration in the Post Office, which was
accordingly reorganized, Mr. Anton Helmich, an officer
in the Auditor-General’s service, being made Postmaster-
General .
A further improvement in the methods of com-
munication took place in 1852, when the Royal Mail
Steam Navigation Company decided to make Albany a
coaling station for its steamers trading between London
and Sydney. The first vessel to call was the “Aus-
tralian” in July, and its arrival was heralded with joy,
even though it took two horses six days to carry the
mail overland to Perth ! When a couple of months
later the P. & O. s.s. “Chusan” arrived with a mail
from Singapore the colonists began to feel that they
were once more being brought into touch with civi-
lization. In 1856 the P. & O. Steamship Company
entered into an arrangement with all the Australian
colonies for a direct monthly mail service, King George
Sound being under that agreement the first and the last


port of call in Australia. Within a few months this
service was altered to a fortnightly one, and continued
until 1888, when the Orient Steamship Company was also
subsidized to carry on a fortnightly service, so that since
the beginning of that year there has been regular
weekly communication between the United Kingdom
and the Australian Commonwealth.
In the following year Mr. Helmich, who had been
Postmaster-General since 1849, resigned office, and Mr.
R. A. Shell was appointed to the vacancy. Up to 1891
the postage on letters to the United Kingdom was 6d.
per half-ounce, but in that year Western Australia,
with the other colonies, joined the Universal Postal
Union, and the charge was reduced to 2id., and since
then, owing mainly to the earnest advocacy of Sir llen-
niker Heaton, the Australian Commonwealth has, in
common with
the United
Kingdom, re-
duced the charge
to Id.
One aim which
the Government
had in view in
the construction
of an extensive
and safe harbour
at Fremantle
was to substi-
tute that port
for Albany as
the place of
call for mail
steamers, and
so reduce the
time in which
letters could be
received from
London, as well
as afford more convenience to passengers travelling by
the mailboats. The first company to make the change
was the Norddeutscher Lloyd early in 1898. It was
followed by the P. & O. and Orient Companies in 1900
and the Messageries Maritimes Compagnie in 1902.
It is not proposed to continue the outline of the
arrangements for the ocean mail services through the
various ramifications that have taken place. At
present the four leading companies trading from the
United Kingdom to Australia all carry mails —the
FRANCIS WHYSALL, Deputy-
Postmaster-General of Western Aus-
tralia, entered the Civil Service of
New South Wales in July, 1875, as
telegraph probationer, and in
December of the same year was
GENERAL POST OFFICE, PERTH.
appointed junior operator at the
head office, where he continued until
January, 1888. He was then sent
to Broken Hill, where the quadru-
plex system had recently been in-
augurated owing to the rapid in-
Orient, the P. k 0., the Norddeutscher Lloyd, and
the Messageries Maritimes. The only contract under
which subsidy is paid by the Commonwealth is with
the Orient Steamship Company, the others all being
paid on a poundage basis.
Western Australia being a country of such mag-
nificent distances, and settlement in the earlier days
being scattered over such a wide expanse of territory,
inland postal services have always been a source of
difficulty to the department—difficulty which was
enormously accentuated by the development of the gold-
fields during the nineties. Overwhelmed by a sudden
influx of population, most of which went out into the
far eastern and northern goldfields, the post office, in
common with nearly every other Government depart-
ment, found itself utterly unable to cope with the in-
crease of busi-
nes s. For a
time a state
of affairs ap-
proaching chaos
reigned, not-
withstanding all
the efforts put
forth by those
in authority.
New offices were
opened wherever
reports of gold
discoveries, with
the consequent
rush of diggers,
were made
known ; the staff
was increased
both at the Gen-
eral Post Office
and throughout
the colony; all
the same, some considerable time elapsed before even
moderate efficiency in the dispatch of business was
secured. Probably it would have been secured much
more quickly if the newcomers had been as ready to
assist as they were to blame. Much was said about the
u
obsolete and dilatory methods of the Western Aus-
tralians as compared with the manner of conducting
business in the East, yet many who have known the
Post Office under both colony and Commonwealth fail
to observe any greatly increased efficiency since 1901.
crease of business, and was appointed
telegraph master there, the post-
office at that time being conducted
apart. At a later date, when the
offices were regraded by the State
Public Service Board, Mr. Whysall


was appointed to the dual office of
post and telegraph master at this
station. In 1897 he applied for and
was transferred to the position of
post and telegraph master at Armi-
dale, New South Wales, where he
remained until June, 1900, when he
was promoted to the charge of a
telephone branch at Sydney. He
occupied the position of telephone
manager in that city until May,
1906, when he was transferred to the
mail branch as assistant superin-
tendent. Mr. Whysall acted as
superintendent of mails from Novem-
ber, 1906, to October, 1907, and on
several occasions later was employed
in a similar capacity. He also filled
the position of chief clerk for some
months. In 1911 he was chosen to
succeed Mr. R. Hardman as Deputy-
Postmaster-General of Western Aus-
tralia, and arriving in the State
toward the close of the year imme-
diately entered upon the duties of
that office, which he still continues
to fulfil.
RICHARD HARDMAN, Deputy-
Postmaster-General for Western
Australia from 1904 to 1912, spent
forty-three years of his life in the
service of his country, and by un-
tiring devotion to his work rose from
junior clerk to the exalted position
of Deputy-Postmaster-General of
Western Australia. Born at Ply-
mouth, England, in 1848, he came
to Western Australia in the early
fifties, and received his education at
the school founded by the late
Bishop Serra, and subsequently at
the State School, Perth. In 1863
he embarked on a commercial career,
his first entry into the Public Service
of Western Australia dating back to
January, 1865; and in February,
1868, he accepted a post under the
late Mr. Alexander Francisco, post-
master at Fremantle. Resigning
this position in August, 1871, he
spent some little time in the Customs
Department, but re-entered the Post
and Telegraph Department at Perth
toward the close of 1872. He was
appointed to the responsible position
of postmaster at York in 1873, and
remained in that flourishing town-
ship until twenty years later, when
he was promoted to an inspectorship,
with transfer to the metropolis.
This was in July, 1893, and in 1895
he became Chief Inspector during
the regime of Mr. R. A. Sholl, Post-
master-General of Western Austra-
lia. Some three or four years after
the accomplishment of Federation,
in July, 1904, Mr. Hardman be-
came Deputy - Postmaster - General,
succeeding to the chair vacated by
Mr. Sholl, which he continued to
fill until the year 1912, when,
Bartletto , Perth
MR. RICHARD HARDMAN.
on account of failing health, he
retired from the Service. Mr.
Hardman was associated with
the Telegraph Service from its first
introduction to the State by the late
Mr. E. F. Stirling, and always
took an active interest in promot-
ing its extension to the remoter
settlements, where it has proved it-
self a considerable factor in promot-
ing the development of the State.
RICHARD ADOLPHUS SHOLL,
J.P., 1.5.0., late Postmaster-Gen-
eral of Western Australia, is a na-
tive of this State, having been born
at Bunbury on December 18, 1846.
He is a son of the late Mr. Robert
John Sholl, first Government Resi-
dent of the Nor'-West district of
Western Australia, which post he
continued to occupy for many years.
Upon the close of his education at
Bishop Hales' College in Perth Mr.
R. A. Sholl, at seventeen years of
age, began his official connection
with the Civil Service as a junior
clerk in the General Post Office at
Perth in 1863. At that time the
staff consisted of the Postmaster-
General, four clerks, and two letter-
carriers in the metropolis, while the
Service for the whole State included
only forty-two members. In 1873,
after ten years in the department,
Mr. Sholl was appointed Chief
Clerk which office he held until 1889,
when he received the appointment
of Postmaster-General with a staff
of 200 in the head office and 800
officials in the country centres. In
honour of this event the postal and
telegraph staffs convened a compli-
mentary gathering, when he was pre-
sented with a souvenir in token of
the appreciation of the officials with
whom he had been so long con-
nected. Upon the federation of the
Australian States in 1901, in com-
mon with the other heads of the
postal departments in the respective
States, he retained the duties of his
office, which he continued to dis-
charge until July, 1904, when he re-
tired on a full pension. He has taken
some part in public life, and was
appointed to a commission of Jus-
tice of the Peace by the first Min-
istry under responsible government.
In earlier days he was a member
of the City Council for about six
years, and at a later date was ap-
pointed a member of the Licensing
Bench by the Wilson Government.
During many years he was closely
identified with the volunteer move-
ment, from its initiation in 1861,
receiving the volunteer officer's de-
coration for long service instituted
by Queen Victoria. A brilliant rifle
shot, he was winner of the Governor's
Cup in 1877. In 1850 the Western
Australian Turf Club was estab-
lished by Colonel Reeves, the land
where the present racecourse has
been formed being granted by the
Government on a 999 years' lease,
and subsequently secured as freehold
title under the Forrest Administra-
tion. In 1879, at which period the
affairs of the Club were in a very
precarious condition, Mr. Sholl was
asked to undertake the secretaryship,
and, with the assistance of Mr.
George Parker, virtually laid the
foundation of the successful insti-
tution of to-day. Though resigning
this office on his appointment as
Postmaster - General he still con-
tinued to act as a member of the
governing body of the Club, and for
over thirty-two years has diligently
promoted its interests, being now
Vice-Chairman. The compiling of
the first set of rules for the guidance
of the Club must be placed to the
credit of Mr. Sholl, who gave much
time and attention to the drafting
out of regulations which, with the
necessary additions and amendments
in subsequent years, should appeal
to the best sporting instincts of that


portion of the community which finds
its chief recreation on the racecourse.
“Sport for sport's sake" being his
motto, he was always a severe judge
of anything of a doubtful nature
creeping into the arena, and his con
nection with the turf has not failed
to have its uplifting influence. Some
years ago Mr. Sholl commenced
breeding thoroughbreds in a small
way, and has produced some suc-
cessful performers, among which may
be mentioned “Romulus" and “Dra-
goon." He races only horses which
have been bred and trained by him-
self, and his colours —all green —are
very popular on the field. In ad-
dition to his horseracing interests he
is a supporter of various athletic
clubs, in his schooldays having been
a noted sport and particularly
prominent as a runner and long-dis-
tance walker. He has also done much
to purify the game of football in
Western Australia. Mr. Sholl has
been twice married, his first wife, a
daughter of Assistant Commissary-
General Ashton, dying in 1877. The
present Mrs. Sholl is a daughter of
the late Lieutenant-Colonel Gilbert
Howard Sanders, 30th Regiment,
a veteran of the Crimea.
JOHN JOSEPH LLOYD, J.P.,
Chief Clerk to the Federal Post and
Telegraph Department of Western
Australia, is a son of the late Mr. J.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN JOSEPH LLOYD.
H. Lloyd, of Northam, and was born
at York on September 21, 1860. At
the conclusion of his school-days he
joined the postal service of Western
Australia in May, 1875, and as an
assistant was sent to Bremer Bay,
a station on the interstate line, in
December, 1877. Here he acted as
telegraph master from June, 1882,
until August, 1884, when he was
selected to fill a similar position at
Carnarvon in the Nor'-West. In
June, 1893, he received transfer to
the town of York as postmaster,
and after an interval of about nine
months was brought to Perth to
assume control of the money order
branch, parcels post, and the dis-
tribution of stamps. He continued
at the General Post Office for ten
years, and in June, 1904, was pro-
moted to be postmaster at Fremantle.
In October of the ensuing year he
was transferred to the appointment
which he now holds, and in the years
that have since intervened his cour-
teous manner and genial disposition
have gained for him a host of friends
in the City of Perth. In his youth-
ful days Mr. Lloyd found cricket of
absorbing interest, but his ever-in-
creasing official responsibilities have
compelled him to relinquish the
active pursuit of outdoor recreation
of every kind. He is a Justice of
the Peace for the magisterial district
of Perth, and married in 1886
Sophia, daughter of Mr. J. H.
Gregory, J.P., of Northam, his
family consisting of five daughters.
AUGUSTUS WILLIAM
PIESSE, J.P., Senior Inspector,
Post and Telegraph Department,
and Commonwealth Electoral Officer
for the State, is a member of one
of the oldest families in Western
Australia. His father reached
these shores from England in the
forties and was for several years an
inspector in the police force. His
mother, who is still living (1912) at
the ripe old age of seventy-five
years, has been a resident of New-
castle for many years. Mr. A. W.
Piesse was born at Guildford on
December 8, 1858, and at the age of
thirteen years entered the Telegraph
Branch of the postal service at
Northam. As a youth of sixteen
and a half summers he was
appointed to act as post and tele-
graph master in that town, and in
1878 was transferred to Newcastle
(since renamed Toodyay), where he
remained three years in the same
branch of the Service. In 1881 he
was post and telegraph master at
Williams, and also acted as clerk to
the Court of Petty Sessions, fulfill-
ing the duties of both positions for
twelve years. On the opening of
the Great Southern Railway in 1893
the duties were divided, and Mr.
Piesse was installed as postmaster at
Katanning. With the formation of
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. AUGUSTUS WILLIAM PIESSE.
the Postal Inspection Branch in
1896 he was selected to be Assis-
tant Inspector at Perth, and at the
end of a year was promoted to an
inspectorship. Upon the elevation
of Mr. Hardman to be Deputy-
Postmaster-General the office of
Senior Inspector became vacant and
Mr. Piesse was offered and accepted
the position. In addition to his
postal duties he has acted as Com-
monwealth Electoral Officer for
Western Australia since July, 1908.
Mr. Piesse is a Justice of the Peace
for Western Australia and in 1908,
during the absence in England of
the Commonwealth Public Service
Inspector, carried out the duties
attached to that position. He has
an intimate knowledge of the in-
land centres of the State, having at
one time or another officially visited
nearly every settlement west of the
South Australian border-line. Two-
score years have passed since Mr.
Piesse joined the Service at
Northam, and his record is worthy
of emulation and an incentive to
those aspiring to the higher offices
of the Civil Service, both Federal
and State. In his youth he was
devoted to cricket, but at the pre-
sent time his duties will not permit
of his indulging in recreation of any
kind. Mr. Piesse married a daugh-
ter of the late Mr. Charles Heal,


of York, of which union a daughter
survives. lie was married for the
second time in 1888 to a daughter
of the late Mr. Robert Holmes, of
Mandurah, and has two sons and
one daughter.
THOMAS JOHN BEATTY,
Superintendent of Mails in the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. T HOMAS JOHN BEATTY.
Federal Post and Telegraph De-
partment, is a son of the late Mr.
Irwin Beatty, of Port Fairy, Vic-
toria, and was born there in April,
1855. Educated locally, he supple-
mented his scholastic training by a
long course of private tuition until
in his thirteenth year, when he
joined the Post and Telegraph
Department as a junior clerk. Soon
afterwards he was transferred to the
Electrical Branch of the Service,
where he occupied the post of
operator at the Melbourne office for
fifteen years. During that time he
also filled the position of acting post
and telegraph master in all the im-
portant centres of the Garden State.
On the introduction of the parcel
post system between the L T nited
Kingdom and Victoria he was placed
at the head of the new branch and
was responsible for the inception of
the work of this important depart-
ment, subsequently planning the ex-
tension of the system to the city and
suburban districts of Victoria. Co-
incident with the extensive changes
which were made when the Common-
wealth assumed control of the postal
services of Australia he was
appointed superintendent of mails
at Perth, the duties of which posi-
tion he still ably fulfils. Mr. Beatty
was one of the first senior officers to
be transferred, and on his arrival in
the Western State set about the re-
organization of his department, a
work he completed to the entire
satisfaction of the permanent heads.
What little leisure he has is devoted
to the pursuit of floriculture at his
residence at Peppermint Grove. He
married at Stawell, Victoria, in 1877
a daughter of Mr. A. B. Clemes,
J.P., and has three sons and a
daughter.
THOMAS VOWLES, Accountant
to the General Post Office, was born
on February 14, 1861, at Craigie,
Victoria, in which State his father,
a native of Somerset, England, had
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. THOMAS VOWLES.
been engaged in mining and other
pursuits from the early fifties. Hav-
ing received his education, at the
age of sixteen he obtained employ-
ment as an invoice clerk to the Vic-
torian Confectionery Company, a
year later entering the mail branch
of the General Post Office at Mel-
bourne. After four years’ service he
was transferred to the Accountant’s
Branch, remaining in that office until
1903, when he received the appoint-
ment of accountant at the Perth
office, rendered vacant bv the death
./
of Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Vowles is a
member of the Yacht Club at Clare-
mont, where he resides, and is also a
member of the local Bowling Club in
that charming riverside suburb.
Married in the year 1888 to Miss
Lacy, of Melbourne, he has a sur-
viving family of two sons, the elder
at present studying for commercial
accountancy, the younger being a
cadet at the Commonwealth Military
College.
RITCHIE EAGLE, Comptroller
of Stores, Federal Postal Depart-
ment, Western Australia, is a son
of the late Mr. John Eagle, of St.
Bathans, Otago, New Zealand, and
was born in the Dominion on May
11, 1875. He received his early
education in his native town, and
subsequently studied at Dunedin,
where he specialized in the subject of
mechanical engineering. At the age
of twenty-one, for the sake of ex-
perience he did two years’ practical
work at the New Zealand Govern-
ment railway workshops, and while
there filled the post of instructor to
drawing and mechanical classes in
connection with the workshops. In
1899 he was transferred to the office
of the Chief Mechanical Engineer at
Wellington, where for two years he
occupied the position of draughts-
man. His chief (the late Mr.
Rotheram) being appointed to a
similar post in Western Australia,
offered Mr. Eagle a position with
him in his new sphere, which was
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RITCHIE EAGLE.
accepted by the gentleman under re-
view, who arrived at Perth in No-
vember, 1900. While associated
with the Chief Mechanical Engineer,
Mr. Eagle drafted the specifications
for the new machine tools required


for the installation plant at the Mid-
land Junction Workshops and now
in use there. In 1907 he was
appointed, in conjunction with Mr.
Gallagher, Comptroller of Stores to
the Railway Department to re-
organize that branch of the Service,
and after being employed in that
department as chief clerk until
April, 1911, was promoted to the
position he now holds. Immediately
after his appointment Mr. Eagle was
sent to Melbourne to assist Mr.
Triggs, chief accountant of the
Postal Department, in drafting uni-
form stores regulations for the postal
service of the Commonwealth and to
attend a Conference of Comptrollers
of Stores from the various States.
Mr. Eagle was at one time connected
with the Stock Exchange of New
Zealand at Wellington. He is Sec-
retary of the King’s Park Tennis
Club and himself a player of ability,
being the winner of several trophies
in connection with this sport. He is
also a well-known lacrosseur, having
represented Western Australia
against South Australia, Victoria,
and Canada. In 1904 he married
Edith, daughter of Mr. John lies, of
Kalgoorlie, and has one daughter.
ANDREW THOMSON, post-
master, Fremantle, is a son of the
late Mr. Robert Thomson, of Sorn,
Scotland, where the subject of this
review was born on October 8, 1864.
He was educated at Auchinleck, near
his birthplace in Ayrshire, and upon
attaining the age of thirteen years
joined the postal service at Cumnock
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ANDREW THOMSON.
as junior, and continued in this
nection for about seven years, during
which he occupied various positions.
While still in his teens he received
transfer to Greenock, where he
assumed the duties of telegraphist,
and- some years later, in 1888, left
his native land for Australia. Upon
arrival in Victoria Mr. Thomson
accepted a position as telegraphist in
the General Post Office, Melbourne,
where he remained about three
years. He then came to Western
Australia under engagement to fill
the post of telegraph operator at the
head office at Perth, and in Febru-
ary, 1894, proceeded to Southern
Cross to take charge of the office at
that centre. His next move was to
Coolgardie before the construction of
the railway line in the district.
Here Mr. Thomson was stationed
for the following ten years, and
during those strenuous early days
he watched the rise of the mining
industry which has made the name
of Coolgardie famous. In 1904 he
was transferred to Boulder, where
he occupied the appointment of post
and telegraph master for two years,
and was then placed in charge of the
more important office at Kalgoorlie.
A year later he came to Fremantle,
and has continued in the discharge
of this responsible position ever
since. Mr. Thomson is a great golf
enthusiast, and has won several
trophies in this branch of sport. He
married in 1900 at Coolgardie
Annie, daughter of the late Mr.
John Wilson, of Orchard Valley,
Victoria.
In the matter of introducing the telegraph Wes-
tern Australia certainly lagged behind the rest of the
civilized world. The little community seems to have
grown so self-contained, and in a measure self-satisfied,
that it appears to have almost lost the desire to keep
in touch with the outside world. Some of the more
progressive spirits had repeatedly urged upon the
nominee Legislative Council the necessity of having
telegraph communication between the various towns in
the colony, but their requests fell upon deaf ears. It
was left to two private citizens —Messrs. Edmund
Stirling and Gumming —to take the first step. These
on their own responsibility erected a private line
between Perth and Fremantle, which was opened to the
public in June, 1869. The convenience afforded was so
great that in 1870 the Legislative Council was com-
pelled to take into consideration the matter of tele-
graph communication, and in May of that year a reso-
lution was passed at the instance of the Colonial Secre-
tary authorizing the construction of lines between Perth
and Albany, Bunbury, York, and Newcastle. The work
was to be done by an Electro-Magnetic Telegraph Com-
pany, which was formed with a capital of £12,000, the
interest upon which was guaranteed by the Government.
The directors were Messrs. Leake, Carr, Shenton, Birch,
Glyde, Moore, King, McKail, Clifton, Steere, and
Monger, with Major Crampton as Chairman and A. J.
Hillman as Secretary. A second company was formed
shortly afterwards, but the two were amalgamated in
1871. Tenders were invited for the construction of
the various lines, and by the end of 1872 the work was
completed. When the loan of £35,000 allowed by the
Secretary of State was floated in 1872, £12,000 out of
the proceeds was applied to the purchase of these lines
by the Government, and arrangements were made for
rapid extension. The loan was soon absorbed, and in
1873 a further amount of £lOO,OOO was authorized.
The first moiety of this was raised in Melbourne in
1874, and the second shortly afterwards. It was wholly
applied to railway and telegraph extension. Communi-
cation by wire was established in 1874 between New-
castle and Geraldton, and in January, 1875, just prior
Telegraph System.


to leaving the colony, Governor Weld installed the first
pole of an overland telegraph line between Perth and
Eucla. The project of linking the west of Australia
to the east by telegraph had been first mooted in 1860,
because several of the schemes for connecting Australia
with India included a cable terminus on the west coast.
Another factor that influenced South Australia particu-
larly in favour of the scheme was the fact that the
mail steamers were calling at King George Sound.
Nothing definite was done, however, until 1873, when
an agreement was entered into under which Western
Australia engaged to build a line from Albany to Eucla
to meet the South Australian section at that point on
the border. The South Australian portion was com-
pleted in July, 1877, and the Western Australian sec-
tion a few months later, so that by the end of the year
Australia was crossed both north and south and east
and west by telegraph lines. As Adelaide was already
in communication with London through Port Darwin,
the Albany-Eucla line brought Perth into touch with
the whole civilized world. The length of the line is
about 749 miles, and its cost was <£42,000, nearly 30s.
per head of the population of Western Australia at that
time. A second line to Eucla was constructed through
Coolgardie when the expansion of business through the
MICHAEL RYAN, Manager of
Telegraphs, General Post Office, Wes-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. MICHAEL RYAN.
tern Australia, is a son of Mr.
Michael Ryan, of “Rossmore,”
Northam, and is a native of this
State, having been born at Toodyay
on March 20, 1865. He received his
early scholastic training at the
Roman Catholic School at Newcastle,
and subsequently attended the local
State School, concluding his studies
under private tuition. Upon leaving-
school in 1879, at fourteen years of
age, he entered the postal depart-
ment at Northam as messenger, and
remained there for two years, during
which time he qualified as tele-
graphist, subsequently proceeding to
Eyre’s Sandpatch, on the Eucla line,
as assistant operator. After four
years at this station he was promoted
to the position of postmaster at
Onslow, being at the time of his ap-
pointment only twenty years of age.
Five years later he was sent to
Israelite Bay in charge of the auto-
matic telegraph repeating station,
where he completed a similar period,
and from this place was transferred
to Eucla as post and telegraph
master, continuing in charge of this
office for twelve years. In 1907 he
was removed to Bunbury, and eigh-
teen months later was promoted to
fill a vacancy at Boulder. In Decem-
ber, 1911, he received his present
appointment of Manager of Tele-
graphs for Western Australia, taking
the place of Mr. P. de Gruchy, who
had been transferred to the Sydney
office as Assistant Telegraph Mana-
ger at the General Post Office in that
city. Mr. Ryan has been an honor-
ary member of the Australian
Natives’ Association for some con-
gold discoveries rendered such a course absolutely neces-
sary through the occasional failure of the line from
Albany.
The Eastern Extension Company having made
Broome the terminus of an alternative cable from
Banjoewangie in Java, an overland telegraph line was
built from Perth to connect with it, and in 1892 this
line was extended to Wyndham, on the extreme north,
2,125 miles away from the capital city. In the same
year the telegraph reached Southern Cross, the centre
of the Yilgarn goldfield, and the subsequent pheno-
menal discoveries further eastward and on the Mur-
chison and Pilbara fields brought about rapid exten-
sion of the whole system during succeeding years.
There are two points in Western Australia where
submarine cables end —one, as already mentioned, at
Broome ] and the other at Cottesloe, which forms the
Australian terminus of the Eastern Extension Com-
pany’s Cape-Australian line. Thus in the matter of
rapid communication with the older world Western
Australia, though perhaps a little late in securing the
facility, is now admirably served.
At the present time there are 6,906 miles of tele-
graph lines in the State, in the construction and work-
ing of which 11,320 miles of wire have been employed.
siderable time. In 1889 he married
Clara, daughter of Mr. W. Graham,
of Narrogin, and has two sons and
seven daughters.
PHILIPPE JOHN DE GRUCHY
was born at Jersey, Channel Islands,
on March 5, 1854. He is a son of
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. PHILIPPE JOHN HE GRUCHY.
Captain John de Gruchy, master
mariner, who for many years traded


between England and foreign ports.
He left the Oxenford Public School,
where he was educated, at the age of
seventeen years and entered the office
of a solicitor for twelve months, at
the end of that time joining the Civil
Service as a telegraph clerk. After
three years' service in this position
he emigrated to New South Wales
and became telegraph operator in
the postal service of that State,
ding steadily until appointed to
the position of supervisor of tele-
graphs in the Sydney office. In
1906 he was offered and accepted the
post of Acting-Manager of the Tele-
graph Department in Western Aus-
tralia. In this new position his
The statistics contained in the report of the
Postmaster-General for 1910 show that per head of
the population more use is made of the telephone
in Western Australia than in any other of the
Australian States. In New South Wales the per-
centage of instruments to population is 2*2, in
Victoria it is 1994, and in the other States even
less, while in Western Australia at the end of 1910 it
was 2*4. This affords, at any rate, some evidence that,
in spite of the belief that in modern conveniences the
State lags far behind her Eastern sisters, she is more
progressive than they in the use of some of those con-
veniences.
On July 31, 1882, Mr. (afterwards Sir) George
Shenton, in the Legislative Council, asked the Colonial
Secretary to lay on the table a return showing the cost
of construction and maintenance of a telephone system
in the towns of Perth and Fremantle. The then
Colonial Secretary, Lord Gifford, V.C., in consenting,
said that from inquiry already made there was every
prospect of such a system, if established, being self-
supporting.
On August 24, therefore, of the same year, a motion
brought forward by Mr. Shenton was agreed to, namely,
that the Government should ascertain whether a suffi-
cient number of subscribers could be obtained to war-
rant the establishment of a telephone system in and
between Perth and Fremantle.
JAMES SIMCOE FITZ-
MAURICE, M.1.C.E., M.Amer.-
1.E.E., Electrical Engineer, General
Post Office, Western Australia, was
born at Melbourne, Victoria, on
November 1, 1861, and educated at
St. Philip's and Christ Church
Grammar Schools, Sydney. After
z
natural powers of organization and
control had ample scope, and his
ability receiving early recognition
by those in authority, at the end of
three months he was appointed to
be Manager of the permanent staff,
In 1912 Mr. de Gruchy was trans-
ferred to Sydney, New South
Wales, Mr. Ryan being appointed
to the position thus rendered vacant.
Mr. de Gruchy is an enthusiast in
his work and takes the keenest
interest in anything appertaining to
telegraphy and its advancement as
a science. While he was in Wes-
tern Australia the Wheatstone auto-
matic system was installed be-
tween Perth and Adelaide, thereby
Telephone System.
12 months' experience in the office of
a stock and share-broker he entered
the Sydney office of Mort's Dock and
Engineering Company, Limited,
where he was under the immediate
direction of the late Mr. Thomas
Sutcliffe Mort, whose name and
fame are identified with the history
doing away with the necessity of a
repeating station at Eucla. This
installation was the means of effect-
ing a considerable saving in the
annual expenses of the depart-
ment and led to a substantial reduc-
tion of the working staff on that
line. For the successful control of
this important interstate artery an
expert staff is required, and on Mr.
de Gruchy devolved the respon-
sibility of training and supervising
the operators employed in dispatch-
ing the huge volume of telegraphic
matter handed into the receiving-
office. He married a daughter of the
late Mr. A. K. Page, of Merimnula,
New South Wales.
The matter was again brought forward by Mr.
Shenton on April 8 and on August 3, 1883, when
it was ascertained that, unfortunately, a sufficient num-
ber of subscribers could not be obtained, so little value
being then placed upon this now almost indispensable
convenience.
On September 4 in the same year a proposal was
made by Mr. B. C. Wood to establish telephonic com-
munication in and between Perth and Fremantle on
certain terms, but nothing finally eventuated.
Sir Thomas Cockburn-Campbell, on August 4, 1884,
once more brought the matter under notice, with the
result that on August 27 a message from the Governor
announced that the desired action would be taken, pro-
vided inquiry showed that the system could be estab-
lished on a self-supporting basis. On September 5 Sir
Thomas Cockburn-Campbell formally moved that the
Select Committee on Public Works be instructed to
consider the question, the result of which was that the
Government placed a sum of £2,000 on the 1885 Esti-
mates for the establishment of a Telephone Exchange.
The telephone exchange system was opened in Perth
on December 1, 1887, with seventeen subscribers, and at
Fremantle on January 1, 1888, with nine subscribers.
The number of public subscribers for the two places
at the end of 1888 was only sixty-three. The number
of exchanges have now increased to over forty, and the
instruments connected to nearly 8,000.
of the Mother State. By the
courtesy of the late Mr. T. S. Mort
he was permitted to serve an
engineering apprenticeship of five
and a half years, during which
period he studied mechanical draw-
iug, engine designing, electrical
engineering, chemistry, and applied


mechanics under Professor Warren,
now of the University of Sydney,
and other technical experts. On the
completion of his apprenticeship he
obtained employment as journeyman
with Messrs. G. & C. Hoskins, of
Sydney, and two months later
entered the Fitzroy Government
Dock employ in a similar capacity.
Having made electrical engineering
a special study, he was selected and
appointed by the late Colonel E. C.
Cracknel] (Superintendent of Tele-
graphs) in 1883 to the position of
Engineer-in-Charge of the Parlia-
ment blouse Electric Light Installa-
tion (the first public building per-
manently installed with electric
light in New South Wales). In
1886 he was promoted to the posi-
tion of Chief Engineer of the
Electric Light Branch, which in-
cluded the Parliament House,
General Post Office, Circular Quay,
and Cowper’s Wharf installations.
In 1887 he erected a steam electric
light plant at the Jenolan Caves,
and carried out all subsequent ex-
tensions of the electric lighting up
to the vear 1902 at the famous
%/
tourists' resort. In 1904 he was
appointed Engineer-in-Charge of
Lines (telegraph and telephone) in
New South Wales, and in 1906 was
promoted to the position of Assist-
ant Electrical Engineer in the
General Post Office, Sydney, a posi-
tion he held until December 10,
1910. Upon that date he left
Sydney to take up the position of
Electrical Engineer in Western Aus-
tralia, left vacant by the transfer
and appointment of Mr. A. A.
Dircks to take up a similar position
in Melbourne. For several years he
held the position of representative
of the Professional Division in New
South Wales on the Commonwealth
Public Service Appeal Board and
Vice-President of the Professional
and Clerical Association of the Post-
master-General's Department, and
was subsequently elected to the office
of President, but was obliged to
relinquish the post through pressure
of departmental duties. He is a
member of the Institute of Electri-
cal Engineers, London, of the
American Institute of Electrical
Engineers, of the Engineering Asso-
ciation of New South Wales, and of
the Electrical Association of New
South Wales. In 1889 he was
appointed local Honorary Secretary
of the American Institute of
Electrical Engineers for Australia, a
position he held until a few years
ago, when local honorary secretaries
were appointed for the several
States. At present he holds the
position for New South Wales. He
fulfilled the duties of Secretary to
the Engineering Association for
seven years, and on relinquishing
the post was presented by the
members with a handsome token of
esteem in the shape of a silver-plate,
and was elected a life member of the
Association. Since 1884 Mr. Fitz-
rnaurice has been closely identified
with the military electric lighting
and communication of New South
Wales. He prepared specifications
for and plans of the military defence
electric light plants at South Head,
La Perouse (now removed to Green
Point, Sydney Harbour), Fort
Scratchley and Nobbys (Newcastle),
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES SIMCOE FITZMAURICE.
and superintended their erection.
In January, 1893, he accepted a
commission as Lieutenant in No. 4
Electric Company, New South
Wales, and was placed in charge of
the electric light section of that
Company. On the retirement of
Major J. S. Alexander, V.D., he
was appointed to the command of
No. 1 Electric Company, which was
subsequently formed into two sepa-
rate units —the No. 1 Telegraph
and No. 1 Electric Company
respectively. He was selected to
command the No. 1 Telegraph Com-
pany, a position he held until taking
up the duties of Electrical Engineer
in Western Australia. In 1909 he
passed with special mention and dis-
tinction for Captain, and two years
hence (1913) will be entitled to the
Victoria Officers' Decoration for
twenty years' commissioned service.
During the Kitchener manoeuvres in
1910 the Telegraph Company under
his command carried out important
communications, which earned the
commendation of the military
authorities. Bowling is the favourite
pastime of Mr. Fitzmaurice. He is
a member and Ex-President of the
Balmain Bowling Club, New South
Wales, and has placed several
matches, including championship
honours, to his credit, and has held
the position of pennant captain for
some years. He has taken a very
active part in Masonic matters in
New South Wales, was Past Master
of Lodge Corinthian, No. 100, in
which he was initiated in 1893, and
holds the position of Past Senior
Grand Warden of the Grand Lodge
of New South Wales, having had
seven years of active service under
the Grand Mastership of M.W.
Brother Colonel J. C. Remington
and M.W. Brother Admiral Sir
Harry Rawson, K.C.M.G., respec-
tively. He has occupied the offices
of Grand Steward, Grand Deacon,
Inspector of Working, Junior
Warden, Senior Warden, and was a
member of the Board of Benevolence
from 1901 to 1910 inclusive, and is a
life member of the Freemasons'
Benevolent Institution, New South
Wales. In 1886 Mr. Fitzmaurice
married a daughter of the late Mr.
Hugh Thomas Smith, of Canada,
but latterly of Sydney, and has
three daughters and two sons, the
latter graduating in the engineering
profession.
GEORGE PHILIP STEVENS,
formerly electrical engineer to the
Post and Telegraph Department, but
now retired, was born at Keynsham,
Somerset, England, on June 24,
1861. When only seven years of
age he was brought to Western
Australia by his parents, and after
some years of schooling entered the
Post and Telegraph Department on
April 13, 1874. Two years later he
was transferred to Esperance Bay as
officer-in-charge, pending the com-
pletion of the intercolonial telegraph
line. At the age of seventeen he
was appointed station-master at
Bremer Bay, and in 1882, when only
twenty-one years of age, he was pro-
moted to be station-master and
Customs officer at Israelite Bay.
Four years afterwards he was trans-
ferred to Eucla, on the South Aus-
tralian border, then a most important


link in the telegraph system which
serves to annihilate the distance
between East and West, but since
fallen from its high estate owing to
the installation of the wonderful
‘Wheatstone” system. At Eucla he
remained for ten years, and was
then recalled to Perth to occupy the
post of Manager and Electrician to
the Telegraph Department. In a
similar capacity he was transferred
in 1901 to the Commonwealth Ser-
vice, being subsequently promoted
at a higher salary to be electrical
engineer. During his tenure of this
office he incurred the displeasure of
the permanent and political heads of
the Department by strenuously
opposing the indiscriminate use of
condenser telephones, on the ground
that they seriously interfered with
the efficiency of the telegraph service.
He was subsequently charged with
incompetency, the chief indictment
being waste of money through his
advocacy of an additional telegraph
line to the goldfields at a cost of
£3,900 and the employment of more
telephone attendants than was con-
sidered necessary. A special Board
was appointed to inquire and report
as to his fitness to satisfactorily carry
out the duties assigned to him. The
Board of three included a junior
officer from Sydney and a mail officer
possessing no technical knowledge.
The officer upon whose report the
inquiry was based was present
watching his case throughout the
investigation, but Mr. Stevens had
neither departmental nor legal repre-
sentation. After six weeks, occupied
chiefly in seeking weak points in the
administration, the Board reported
unfavourably, and Mr. Stevens was
informed that he would be trans-
ferred to the position of comptroller
of stores, and simultaneously with
this it was announced that the junior
member of the Board would succeed
him as electrical engineer. Mr.
Stevens protested against the dis-
rating, claiming his right to be
retired under Section 6 of the State
Superannuation Act, and in this he
was supported by the State Govern-
ment and Sir John Forrest, the
latter characterizing his treatment
as unparalleled in the annals of the
British Civil Service. Obtaining
leave of absence, Mr. Stevens pro-
ceeded to Melbourne to personally
urge his claim, which was ultimately
granted, and he was retired with a
pension based on his thirty-two
years' service. He resides at Clare-
mont, where he has been closely
identified with municipal life for the
past twelve years, and it was mainly
through his exertions that the
electric light system at Claremont
was taken over by the municipality.
He has taken an active interest in
the State Civil Service since his re-
tirement, and from 1908 has been
Secretary to the Civil Service Asso-
ciation. Mr. Stevens is a member of
the Masonic community, his mother
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE PHILIP STEVENS.
lodge being the Bruce Claremont,
No. 51, W.A.C. In bowls he finds
congenial recreation, and as Secre-
tary to the Claremont Bowling Club
leaves nothing undone to promote
the interests of the ancient game.
He captained the champion four of
the State in 1906 and won the asso-
ciation singles in 1910, besides hav-
ing several club trophies to his
credit. He was a member of the
team of bowlers sent from this State
to take part in the Commonwealth
carnival in 1910, and during the
tour fulfilled the duties of Manager.
He also had the honour of being one
of the four selected captains to play
in the test matches against the first
visiting team from the Eastern
States. He married in South Aus-
tralia a daughter of Mr. W. Graham,
whilom postmaster at Kadina, in
that State, and has four sons and
five daughters.
JAMES CAMPBELL MUIR,
Manager of the Telephones Branch
in the Federal Post and Telegraph
Department of Western Australia,
is the son of Mr. James C. Muir, of
Melbourne, a well-known figure in
mining circles of the Garden State.
He was born on June 6, 1872, in
the pretty town of Maryborough, in
the heart of the Loddon mining
fields, and it was at the Grammar
School in his native place that he
received his education. At the age
of sixteen years he entered the Vic-
torian Post and Telegraph Depart-
ment, resigning four years later to
accept an appointment at Hobart as
telegraphist in the Government Ser-
vice of Tasmania. Here he con-
tinued for three years, when his ser-
vices were sought by the Western
Australian Government, and in 1894
we find him installed in a similar
capacity at Kalgoorlie, where he ren-
dered yeoman service for nine years.
At the end of that time he received
well-merited promotion to the posi-
tion of Manager of the Telephones
Branch, the duties of which office he
still carries out. Outside of his
official work Mr. Muir is an en-
thusiastic tennis player, of which
game he is a worthy exponent, and
also finds time to indulge in garden-
ing pursuits, his particular hobby
being the cultivation of roses in
infinite variety. He was married in
1907 to a daughter of Mr. Robert S.
Bradley and has one son.
Department of Defence.
Prior to federation the only naval defence force
Western Australia ever possessed was raised in 1879
under the name of the Fremantle Naval Volunteers.
7.2
The corps consisted of thirty-eight of all ranks under
the command of Lieutenant George A. Forsyth, and
was armed with two guns of an obsolete pattern. In
NAVAL FORCES.


1888 this unit was converted into field artillery. In
1910 a reserve force of Naval Militia was recruited at
Fremantle, and the Harbourmaster at that port,
Lieutenant C. J. Irvine, received the appointment of
commanding officer.
The regulations which now govern the department
came into operation on July 1, 1911. Under them 300
naval cadets were enrolled at Fremantle and fifty at
Albany. They are now known as naval reserve “O,” while
the old naval reserve force which has been in existence
in this State for a year is called naval reserve “M,”
and is about fifty strong. At the same time the few
volunteer naval cadets who had been training at Fre-
mantle, and who were under seventeen years of age in
July, 1911, were drafted into one of the naval cadet
companies then being formed, and those eighteen years
or over were absorbed in the naval reserve “M.”
The first offices of the Commonwealth Naval Depart-
ment in Fremantle were at the old Customs House
buildings, and rent was paid to the State Government
for the use of the rooms. It was soon discovered, how-
ever, that the accommodation was totally inadequate
for the service, and in consequence application was made
to have the old Post Office buildings in Cliff Street,
which property was transferred to the Commonwealth
at the time of the federation, put in order and fitted
up as naval drill-rooms, stores, and offices. The appli-
cation was granted, and the State Works Department,
acting for the Commonwealth, made the alterations
necessary to the building and completely renovated it.
It was in March last that the naval staff took pos-
session of the premises, which are in every way suited
for the purpose.
There are on the books at Fremantle forty-six R.A.
naval reserve men and 277 senior naval cadets. On
July 1 ninety more boys who will be fourteen years
of age this year will be enrolled as senior cadets, and
sixty-seven who are eighteen this year will pass into
naval reserve “O,” bringing the strength of the reserve
men up to 113 and senior cadets to 300. At Albany,
which is a subdivision and in charge of Mr. Mutton,
chief gunner, there are forty-nine senior cadets. Eight
of this number will on July 1 automatically pass into
the naval reserve “O” and sixteen new boys will join
the senior naval cadets at fourteen years.
Recruiting is almost continuously going on for the
R.A. Navy, principally for boys for the training ship
“Tingara” in Sydney. Any boys between the age of
fourteen and a half and sixteen of good physique and
character are eligible for entry. They have to pass a
medical examination, and if they do this satisfactorily
they are sent to Sydney at the expense of the Govern-
ment. On joining the “Tingara” they have to agree
to serve for a term of seven years after they are
eighteen years of age. Western Australia has already
sent eight boys. During the year seven or eight men
of various callings have been engaged at Fremantle and
sent to the naval depot at Williamstown. The district
naval officer, who is also royal naval registrar, has
secured for the navy since the “Challenger” was here
in January last fifty-two recruits —men and boys —for
the service.
There are four naval cutters in Fremantle (three
were built in Perth), and a start has been made to erect
a commodious boatshed alongside the fish market jetty,
Fremantle. Authority has also been obtained for
building a boatshed at Albany.
The staff in Western Australia now consists of:-
At Fremantle: The District Naval Officer, Captain C.
J. Clare, C.M.G. ; Assistant-District Naval Officer,
Chief Gunner Mr. R. Fulton; Chief Gunnery Instruc-
tor, C.P.O. C. Frolick; Chief Signal Instructor, C.P.O.
W. H. Jackson; Seamanship and Boating Instructor,
C.P.O. H. Johnson; Chief Armourer, C.P.O. S. H.
Harvey; Storekeeper, C.P.O. H. Downes; Messenger
and Record Keeper, A. L. Rowlandson : Caretakers and
general workmen and assistants, J. Winchester, A. E.
Mingay, and G. T. Vine. The Chief Staff Clerk is
Mr. W. B. Harvey, who has under his control the
whole of the accountancy and clerical work of this
division. The subdivision at Albany is in charge of
the Sub-District Naval Officer, Chief Gunner Mutton,
who has with him as instructor C.P.O. Willett.
In the future of Australian naval defence Western
Australia is to take a most important part. Admiral
Sir Reginald Henderson, K.C.8., in his report to the
Minister for Defence, recommends the division of the
fleet into two units —the Eastern and Western divisions,
the former to have its headquarters at Sydney, the
latter at Fremantle. By all indications the Govern-
ment is inclined to follow the advice of the expert, and
the site selected for the fleet base is Cockburn Sound,
«■
with sub-bases at Albany and Cone Bay. A large area
of land is to be resumed at Cockburn Sound, and the
works to be carried out will include a graving-dock,
building slips, workshops, storehouses, barracks, and a
magazine for ammunition and explosives. A channel
for deep-draught is to be dredged through the Parmelia
and Success Banks and a short breakwater thrown out
from Woodman’s Point. All this will involve a very
heavy outlay in money, but as the fleet unit will not
be completed until 1933 the expenditure will neces-
sarily be spread over some twenty years or more.
The fleet, which will use Fremantle as its base,
will consist of four armoured crusiers, five protected
cruisers, six torpedo-boat destroyers, nine submarines,
one depot ship, and one fleet repair ship, with a per-
sonnel of about 7,500 of all ranks.


Captain CHAPMAN JAMES
CLARE, C.M.G., District Naval
Officer for Western Australia, is a
son of the late Lieutenant J. C.
Clare, R.N.R., and was born in the
Bay of Biscay on June 23, 1853.
He was educated at various private
schools in England, and at fifteen
years of age joined the Mercantile
Marine Service, serving his appren-
ticeship in the sailing ships owned
by the firm of Smith, Fleming, and
Co., of London. For five years
(1875-80) he was officer on board the
steamers of the line of Messrs. Apcar
and Co., trading between Calcutta
and Hong-Kong. Resigning in 1880,
he came to South Australia, where
he joined the Marine Board service
of that State, in 1884 was appointed
to command the South Australian
Government steamer "Governor
Musgrave,” in 1886 receiving the
rank of Lieutenant-Commander in
the South Australian Naval Forces.
In 1900 he received the appointment
of Naval Commandant of South
Australia with the rank of Captain,
taking over the command of
H.M.A.S. "Protector,” and con-
tinuing in the discharge of this ap-
pointment until his transfer to Wes-
tern Australia in 1911 under the
Commonwealth Department of De-
fence. Captain Clare married in
1885 Ellen Minnie, daughter of the
late Lieutenant Cotgrave, of the In-
dian Navy, and has two sons and a
daughter.
EDWARD SMITH MUTTON,
Sub - District Naval Officer at
Albany, was born at Portsmouth,
England, on April 14, 1869, being
the eldest son of the late Mr. J. 11.
Mutton, R.N., who died in 1879 on
board TI.M.S. "Hercules.” Descend-
ant of a family which for genera-
tions had been identified with naval
pursuits, the subject of this review
was educated for the Royal Navy
Service. Owing to his father’s early
death he was taken from Ports-
mouth, where he was being trained
in the engineering department, and
sent to the Royal Naval School at
Greenwich. After five years in this
institution he attained the honour-
able distinction of coming out
second in the school, and upon leav-
ing was apprenticed to the Mercan-
tile Marine Service. Coming to Vic-
toria he joined the naval service of
that State in pre-Federal days, and
for several years occupied the posi-
tion of Torpedo Instructor, passing
his examination for Warrant Officer
in 1892. In 1895, with the idea
of abandoning marine pursuits for a
time, he accepted a position in the
Civil Service of Victoria as assessor
in the Income Tax Department, but
after doing duties in this office for
five months he returned to the naval
forces, on account of his application
for transfer being refused by the
Imperial Studio, Albany.
MR. EDWARD SMITH MUTTON.
naval authorities on the ground that
his services could not at that time
be dispensed with. He holds a chief
officer’s foreign-going certificate in
the Mercantile Marine Service, and
in 1900-1 accompanied the Vic-
torian Contingent to China, where
the troops formed part of the China
Field Force at the time of the
Boxer rebellion. During this period
of service he held rank as Chief
Petty Officer, and while in Tientsin
filled the position of Chief Clerk in
the Lines of Communication Office
there. Upon his appointment as an
officer of the Commonwealth Naval
Service Mr. Mutton took charge of
the Portland and Port Fairy dis-
tricts upon the transfer of these dis-
tricts from the Garrison Artillery,
holding the rank of Warrant Officer
Instructor at these ports. He was
the first officer sent by the Federal
authorities to inaugurate the naval
forces of Western Australia in 1910,
and has been particularly successful
in the management of the affairs
with which he was entrusted. He
has won golden opinions both at
Fremantle and Albany, and, al-
though not an Australian by birth,
has been the subject of most hearty
congratulation from the Board of
Directors for Western Australia of
the Australian Natives’ Association,
which placed on the records of that
body a resolution acknowledging
his valuable national services on
behalf of the naval movement in
this State. He was awarded the
China war medal for services in con-
nection with that country, and also
holds the naval long-service medal.
Mr. Mutton has been an eminent
sportsman, and is the holder of
several amateur championships in
swimming, besides numerous trophies
in the same line of sport. Cricket
and football also receive a share of
his attention, and he is a warm
sympathizer with the various forms
of outdoor diversion. A member of
the Masonic fraternity for many
vears, he has held office at different
times in the craft. In 1891 he mar-
ried Ellen Mary, daughter of the
late Mr. John Troy, of Beaufort.
Victoria.
The Military Forces of the Crown made their first
appearance in Western Australia on Christmas Day,
1826, Major Lockycr of the 57th Regiment, with a
detachment of the 39th Foot, having that day landed
at King George Sound from Sydney, with instructions
to found a settlement.
June 8, 1829, witnessed the arrival of H.M.S.
"Sulphur” in Cockburn Sound. This ship, which
formed part of Captain Stirling’s expedition to form a
settlement on the Swan River, had on board fifty-seven
officers and men of the 63rd Regiment under the com-
mand of Captain F. C. Irwin. On June 17 the troops
disembarked. This unit was relieved in 1833 by two
companies of the 21st Regiment, which, in turn, were
MILITARY FORCES.


replaced in 1840 by a similar force from the 51st Regi-
ment. Later reliefs consisted of one company only, and
were supplied firstly by the 99th Regiment and secondly
and lastly by the 12th Regiment. Royal Engineer
officers and detachments of the Royal Sappers and
Miners arrived at various dates, the total of the latter
corps at one time exceeding one hundred rank and file.
They were principally engaged in directing and superin-
tending the work of the convict gangs on the public
works of the colony. The whole of the regular troops
while stationed in Western Australia formed portion of
the garrison of the Australasian colonies, the head-
quarters being at various times situated in Sydney, Mel-
bourne, and New Zealand.
Enrolled Pensioner Force. —As a part of their
emigration policy the Home Government in 1850 com-
menced to send out parties of military pensioners. These
pensioners, who brought their wives and families with
them, made the voyage on convict ships, of which they
formed the guards. On arrival they either took up land
grants or entered into the service of the settlers. This
policy was continued for many years, and by 1864 some-
thing over 2,000 persons had thus been added to the
population.
Representations made by the Governor as to the
weak state of the garrison in the colony elicited a reply
(1854) from the Duke of Newcastle that in view of the
disturbed state of politics in Europe the Government
was not prepared to increase the number of troops, but
suggested that advantage should be taken of the influx
of military pensioners to enrol them as an auxiliary force
to the regulars. Action was accordingly taken, and
Captain John Bruce, who had arrived in the colony with
the first detachment, was appointed Staff Officer to the
“Enrolled Pensioner Force.” This unit, which at one
time showed a strength of over 600, assisted the line
companies in the various garrison duties, and finally
assumed all responsibilities when the last of the Queen’s
troops left Fremantle for Plobart on March 8, 1863. At
one time some 300 rank and file were thus continuously
employed. Captain C. Finnerty succeeded Captain
Bruce in the command of the force after the latter had
been appointed Commandant, and maintained that posi-
tion until 1872, when the then Commandant, Lieutenant-
Colonel E. D. Harvest, assumed direct control.
In November, 1880, the Enrolled Pensioner Force
was abolished and a new unit, termed the Enrolled
Guard, formed from among its members and placed
under the command of Captain M. S. Smith, the Super-
intendent of Police. March 31, 1887, witnessed the last
parade of this body of old soldiers.
Staff. —For many years the military staff consisted
of the Commandant and Staff Officer of Pensioners only.
Ln 1884 Regimental Sergeant-Major J. A. Campbell, ol
the Cameron Highlanders, came out from England as an
instructor, and was subsequently promoted to Lieutenant
with the appointment of Staff Adjutant. Additional
instructors were afterwards obtained, under a three
years’ engagement, from the Regular Army, and on the
Commonwealth Government assuming control of the
Defence Department in 1901 the staff was further
strengthened.
The officers who have held the appointment of Com-
mandant are as follow :
Captain F. C. Irwin, 63rd Regiment, 1829-33.
Captain R. Daniell, 21st Regiment, 1833-5.
Captain W. H. Armstrong, 21st Regiment, 1835-7.
Lieutenant-Colonel F. C. Irwin, K.H., 63rd Regi-
ment, 1837-54.
Lieutenant-Colonel G. M. Reeves, 99th Regiment,
1854.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. Bruce, 16th Regiment,
1854-70.
Major R. H. Crampton, 1870-1.
Captain C. Finnerty, 1871-2.
Lieutenant - Colonel (afterwards Major-General)
E. D. Harvest, R.A., 1872-8.
Major the Right Honorable Lord Gifford, V.C., 57th
Regiment, 1880-1.
Lieutenant-Colonel E. F. Angelo, Ist Regiment,
1882-6.
Lieutenant-Colonel W. J. Philiimore, R.A., 1886-9.
Lieutenant-Colonel H. L. Pilkington, C. 8., 21st
Hussars, 1890.
Lieutenant-Colonel G. B. Phillips, Local Forces,
1890-2.
Lieutenant-Colonel H. S. Fleming, Essex Regiment,
1892-5.
Colonel (afterwards Major-General) A. Wilson,
C. 8., Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 1895-8.
Colonel G. H. Chippendall, West Riding Regiment,
1898-1901.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. Campbell, Local Forces,
1901-2.
Colonel P. R. Ricardo, C. 8., C.M. Forces, 1902-5.
Colonel R. Wallace, R.A.A., 1905-6.
Colonel H. LeMessurier, C.M. Forces, 1906-9.
Colonel G. G. H. Irving, C.M. Forces, 1909-
Colonel Harvest and Captain Finnerty, who had
other duties in connection with the Imperial establish-
ments in the colony, received no salary for performing
the office of Commandant. Lord Gifford also acted in an
honorary capacity, being the holder of the office of
Colonial Secretary. During portion of the period
1879-82 no officer occupied the post, as the Legislative
Council was not prepared to vote the necessary funds,
and had expressed the opinion that “the senior officers
of volunteers might perform the necessary inspections.”


The present staff of the Forces consists of
Commandant, Colonel Godfrey George llowy
Irving.
Deputy-Assistant Adjutant-General and Deputy-
Assistant Quartermaster-General, Major H. Hunt.
General Staff Officer, Captain J. L. Hardie.
Staff Officer for Artillery, Major J. E. Robertson,
R.A.G.A.
Staff Officer for Engineer Services, Captain A. M.
Martyn, R.A.E.
Principal Medical Officer, Lieutenant - Colonel
Arthur T. White, V.D.
Senior Ordnance Officer, Honorary Lieutenant Wm.
Chalmers.
District Paymaster, Mr. H. S. Norris.
Chief Clerk, Mr. J. W. Healy.
Instructional Staff, Captains F. M. de F. Lorenzo
and J. P. Lalor, Lieutenants A. R. W. Biittner, R. E.
Jackson, and J. H. Peck, and thirty-three warrant and
non-commissioned officers.
Defence Works and Buddings . —The strained
condition of international relations existing almost con-
tinuously through the first half of the nineteenth cen-
tury brought the question of coast defence into promi-
nence very early in the history of the colony. In 1846,
by direction of the Secretary of State, Captain Twiss,
R.E., was sent from Tasmania to report on barrack
accommodation required for the troops in Western Aus-
tralia and defensive measures necessary for the protec-
tion of its resources and the safety of the inhabitants.
In his report Captain Twiss advocated the construction
of a battery at Arthur's Head, on the south side of the
entrance to the Swan River, the armament to consist of
five 32-pounders, and to be manned by one officer and
thirty-two non-commissioned officers and men of the
Royal Artillery. In 1854, on the outbreak of war with
Russia, a further survey was made by Captain E. Y.
W. Henderson, R.E. He reported in favour of the
construction of a martello tower on Point Anglesea and
of five batteries at various places between there and the
river, the whole to be connected up by a military road
protected by a parapet. The tower was to be equipped
with three 8-in. guns and the batteries with four 12-
pounder howitzers. Magazines and accommodation for
the manning details were also included in the scheme.
These works were estimated to cost about £1,500. In a
supplementary report of a few months later Captain Hen-
derson substituted Arthur's Head for Point Anglesea as
the site for the martello tower. In 1860 Lieutenant-
Colonel Bruce considered it his duty to again bring
under the notice of the Government the defenceless state
of the colony, and solicited the Governor's approval to
a request he proposed to send to the War Office
for three 68-pounders to arm a battery to be constructed
on Arthur's Head. In the following year Major Hen-
derson and Captain Grain, both engineer officers, sub-
mitted a joint memorandum containing a scheme for
the protection of King George Sound.
At the Intercolonial Conference held in Sydney in
1881 a general system of defence for Australia was one
of the subjects discussed. Major-General Sir Peter
Scratchiey was about this time engaged on a tour hav-
ing for its objects the noting of all points of strategic
value and the measures necessary to secure them. He
reported in general terms on both King George Sound
and Fremantle. The former post he considered of
greater importance, and his ideas for its defence, if
carried out, would have involved an expenditure of
approximately £70,000. For Fremantle he considered
a light armament would be sufficient. In 1885 the
Secretary of State for War, in a despatch to the Gover-
nor, gave the views of the British Government. Fre-
mantle was to be fortified at the expense of the local
Government, but the War Office offered to provide two
7-in. 6i-ton guns and three 16-pounder muzzle-loading
guns mounted on travelling carriages. With regard to
King George Sound, it was considered that the whole
of the Australian colonies should take this matter in
hand in accordance with the spirit of General Scratch-
ley's report: —“The protection of the Sound and Prin-
cess Royal Harbour is of vital importance for the general
security of the Australian colonies in time of war. If
left undefended, the Sound becomes the weak point in
the Australian system of defence.'* The Legislative
Council approved of the action proposed in regard to
Fremantle, and the two heavy guns duly arrived. The
works, however, were not gone on with, and the guns,
after lying in the sand at the port for some considerable
time, were afterwards placed on their carriages under
cover at Karrakatta, and finally found a resting-place
in King’s Park, Perth.
Further discussion took place at the Colonial Con-
ference of 1887, and in August, 1889, the Home Gov-
ernment submitted its proposals at some length. The
ultimate result was that the Federal Council agreed to
the construction of the forts at Albany, and these were
completed and manned on March 1, 1893, the first com-
manding officer being Captain J. C. Hawker.
After the Commonwealth Government took over the
Department of Defence the whole question of coast
defence was gone into, and in 1904 works of a substan-
tial nature were commenced in Fremantle. At the pre-
sent time forts have been constructed at Arthur's Head
and North Fremantle. These are armed with the latest
pattern guns. The garrison consists of seventy-five
officers and other ranks of the Royal Australian Garri-
son Artillery as well as one company of Militia Garrison
Artillery.


Of buildings for military purposes many of the
older towns of the State possess traces. Small guard-
houses were built wherever troops were permanently
stationed. Barracks were erected in Perth in 1832.
These were situated between the present Town Hall and
General Post Office, and Barrack Street derives its name
from the fact. Barracks for the Enrolled Pensioner
Force were commenced in South Terrace, Fremantle, in
1852, and still stand. In 1863 the building which marks
the western end of St. George’s Terrace, Perth, was
begun. This was designed to accommodate the increased
pensioner force necessitated by the withdrawal of the
regular troops. it contained one hundred and twenty
rooms, hospital, magazine, and other annexes. It
was in the year 1896 that the present Headquarters
Offices were erected, and the Ordnance Stores have
since been added. In the same year Fremantle
gained its drill-hall, and military works in that
town were further increased by the completion in
1911 of most up-to-date quarters for the permanent
troops. Offices for the Field Artillery and a shed for
the guns were provided in Perth in 1901. Drill-halls
have also been erected in other towns such as Kal-
goorlie, Northam, Buubury, Albany, Boulder, and
Geraldton. Recently the State Government has ex-
pressed a desire to resume possession of the block upon
which the offices and drill-halls stand in Perth, but has
made no definite announcement as to what it is
prepared to offer in exchange.
A rifle range was opened on Mount Eliza in 1863
and similar works were afterwards prepared in other
parts of the colony. At Karrakatta, where the principal
magazines are now situated, an extensive range was
equipped in 1896 with “Jeffries” targets. Here the
training for the contingents which went to South Africa
was carried out. Recently this site has been declared
unsafe and a large area resumed on the coast in the
vicinity of Cottesloe, where it is expected the troops will
be able to conduct their musketry practice during the
year 1913.
I Volunteers and Militia. —The volunteer move-
ment, revived in Great Britain in 1859, spread to Wes-
tern Australia in 1861 and was taken up by the inhabi-
tants with considerable energy. Bodies of men in
various towns and districts assembled wherever and
whenever convenient for the purpose of undergoing
military instruction. By Local Ordinance, 25 Viet.,
No. 3, the movement received the approval of the Legis-
lature and also gave the Governor power to raise and dis-
band corps, enrol members, appoint officers (after elec-
tion by corps) and non-commissioned officers, approve of
rules, frame regulations, and call out the force for ser-
vice within the colony in case of war or internal dis-
turbailee. Difficulties, however, were encountered in
arranging for the equipping, training, and periodical
inspection of the various units. The Government had
few spare rifles available and was not disposed to ex-
pend much money on the purchase of same. The War
Office regulations at that time allowed of the issue of
arms to only 25 per cent, of the establishment of the
corps. Up to this stage none of the units had been
regularly enrolled, and in the face of the situation
which had arisen a great many of the members aban-
doned any idea of further training. In Perth and Fre-
mantle, however, where the regular troops and pen-
sioner force were available as instructors and models
upon which to base ideas of discipline and drill, some
progress was made. On September 13, 1861, the Metro-
politan Volunteer Rifles (afterwards the 11th Australian
Infantry Regiment and now the 88th Infantry) were
enrolled at Perth, the first man to subscribe to the oath
of allegiance being M. W. Clifton. One hundred mem-
bers and twenty cadets were thus secured. Almost
simultaneously a similar unit was formed at Fremantle.
During the first few months of their existence the two
corps were commanded by Lieutenant - Colonel Bruce
and Captain Finnerty respectively, but in August, 1862,
the requisite period of probation having been served,
Captains L. S. Leake and S. R. Price were gazetted to
the commands. Much enthusiasm was displayed, and
the Duke of Newcastle in a despatch to the Governor
expressed his great satisfaction at the progress that had
been made.
The Pinjarra Mounted Rifles, the first mounted
force in Western Australia, and one which existed for
twenty years, was raised by Captain T. Fawcett in the
Pinjarra district. A second troop (cavalry) was raised
in Perth in 1870 as the “Union Troop of Western Aus-
tralian Mounted Volunteers,and of which Cornet Frank
de Lisle was the leader. This unit went through many
changes. In 1873 it became a troop of Horse Artillery;
in 1882 a section of field artillery, known as the Perth
Artillery; in 1897, two guns were added, and it was
designed No. 1 Field Battery; 1903, No. 1 Western
Australian Battery, Australian Field Artillery; and
finally No. 14 Battery, Australian Field Artillery, in
1911, when substantial additions were made to its
equipment.
Various other corps were raised from time to time-
Guildford Rifles, 1874: Geraldton Rifles, 1876; Wel-
lington Mounted Rifles, 1877 (disbanded 1882) ; the
Albany Rifles were enrolled in 1878, disbanded in 1885,
revived in the same year as the Albany Defence Rifles,
disbanded in 1888, a fresh corps, and known as the
Plantagenet Rifles, enlisted a few months later, only
to be finally disbanded in 1897. The services of the
York Rifles were accepted in 1878 and continued until
1886.


in 1883 the Legislative Council passed a compre-
hensive measure providing for the better discipline,
organization, and administration of the forces and
placing it, with certain reservations, under the military
law of Great Britain in time of war.
The residents of Northampton furnished a com-
pany of rifles in 1884, and this was retained on the
strength until 1899. By the conversion of the Fre-
mantle Naval
Artillery a sec-
tion of field artil-
lery was estab-
lished at Fre-
mantle in 1888,
but in 1907 this
corps became a
company of Gar-
rison Artillery,
and is now
known as No. 11
Company, Aus-
tralian Garrison
Artillery.
Advantage was
taken of the pre-
sence in Aus-
tralia in 1889
of Major-General
J. B. Edwards,
C. 8., R.E., the
Commander - in -
Chief in China
and Hong-Kong,
to invite him to
inspect and re-
port on the local
forces. This he
did, and while
commenting on
the excellent
stamp and bear-
ing of the men,
pointed out that
without better
organization and
equipment the
material would
be almost value
less for the purposes for which it was intended.
In 1892 the Bunbury Rifles were recruited. In the
following year the corps formally existing at York was
resuscitated, only to be finally dispersed in 1902.
The Defence Forces Act of 1894 enlarged the scope
of previous legislation and provided for the maintenance
and discipline of the permanent force at Albany and the
creation of a militia. The regulations framed under this
Act proved of great benefit to the forces, which during
the next three years greatly advanced in efficiency.
In 1895 the Government, on the recommendation of
Colonel Fleming, and in order to improve the training,
introduced the partially paid system, with bounties for
extra efficiency and musketry. With variations this
system has been continued up to the present time. Bur-
ing the same
year Captain E.
J. A. Haynes
raised a half-
company of
mounted rifles in
Perth, but this
was not con-
tinued after
1897.
In 1896 the
five companies of
infantry in the
metropolitan dis-
trict were organ-
ized as a regi-
ment and placed
under the com-
mand of Major
S. Gardiner,
V.D.
At the Queen s
Diamond Jubilee
the local forces
were represented
by detachments
of field artillery
and infantry in
charge of Cap-
tain J. C. Strick-
land, who had
associated with
him Captain J.
A. Campbell of
the Staff and
Captain J. T.
Hobbs of the
Artillery.
The rumours
of war which
became rife about the middle of 1899 were largely
instrumental in adding to the strength of the various
corps. The garrison at Albany was reinforced by a
company of volunteers of the same arm raised in the
town, and a fine corps, recruited wholly from the Civil
Service, and numbering nearly 300, was formed in
Perth. This latter unit for various reasons did not
SCENES AT THE ANNUAL ENCAMPMENT, TAMMIN.


Officers,
Other
ranks.
Total.
L Permanent — District Headquarters Staff
—
3
9
12
Instructional Staff
Q9
37
94
Royal Australian Garrison Artillery
Major J. E. Robertson
4
90
Armament Artificers
2
9
Royal Australian Engineers ...
Captain A. M. Martyn
1
10
I 1
Ordnance Department
1
11
12
1
Rifle Range Staff
1
Pay Department
5
Rifle Club Reserve Clerical Staff
Total ...
14
1
161
1
175
prove a success, and eventually dwindled away or was
absorbed by those longer established.
On the receipt of the news of President Kruger’s
virtual declaration of war whole units offered their ser-
vices, but the want of equipment, the absence of any
held organization, and the disinclination of the Home
authorities to accept large bodies of colonial troops
negatived these offers. Individual volunteers from the
forces were, however, forthcoming in plenty, and both
officered and formed a large proportion of the con-
tingents that were sent oversea. Their places at home
were quickly filled, and the volunteers as a whole were
in 1901 stronger than they had ever been before or have
been since.
The subsequent demand for mounted troops led Cap-
tain Moore (now Sir Newton Moore, K.C.M.G.) in 1900
to attempt the raising of a corps of mounted infantry.
He met with considerable success, and commencing him-
self with his own district in the south-west he was able
to watch with satisfaction the growth in other localities
of the component parts of the regiment which he after-
wards commanded and which is now known as the 25th
Australian Light Horse Regiment.
The infantry about this time was also reorganized
on similar lines to the force in Victoria. A brigade
(without staff) was formed composed of four battalions
of four companies each and distributed as follows :
Ist Battalion, Perth.
2nd Battalion, Fremantle.
3rd Battalion, Guildford, Geraldton, Bunbury,
York.
4th Battalion, Civil Service Corps, Perth.
The formation of infantry companies at Kalgoorlie,
Coolgardie, Boulder, Kanowna, Menzies, and Broad
Arrow in the same year added a fifth battalion.
The inauguration of the Commonwealth on January
1, 1901, was the occasion of sending to Sydney a mixed
force of over 100, under Major J. W. Hope, to take
part in the military celebrations. At the opening of
the Parliament by the present King, in the following
May, a further contingent of some 350 was taken to Mel-
bourne by Major J. C. Strickland.
On March 1, 1901, the Commonwealth Ministry of
Defence took over the control of the whole of the forces
of the States, the strength in Western Australia at that
date being 2,283 of all ranks. The subsequent changes
in organization and administration, the reduction in
establishments, the withdrawal of the partially paid
system from some units, and the more exacting pro-
visions of the new Defence Act, as well as a certain
reversal of popular feeling after the close of the war,
affected the forces somewhat adversely, and their
strength had become reduced by more than half.
General Hutton’s scheme of reorganization, which came
into force on July 1, 1903, placed matters, however, on
a very much sounder basis. The question of defence was
gradually restored to its position in public favour, and
gave to the State the nucleus of a small field force com-
posed of one regiment of Light Llorse, two batteries of
Artillery, and three battalions of Infantry. In addition
there was the permanent force at Albany and its
auxiliary company of militia.
In 1908 further changes took place, having for their
object the allotment of certain troops to defended ports
and the formation of a mobile mixed brigade. The
garrison troops were placed under the orders of
Lieutenant-Colonel J. C. Strickland, V.D., who had his
headquarters at Fremantle, and Lieutenant-Colonel J. T.
Hobbs took over the command of the field force now
designated the Western Australian Brigade. After this
date no addition in the way of large units was
authorized, but various specialist and departmental
corps have since been raised, such as field and electrical
engineers, a detachment of the Australian Intelligence
Corps, Signallers, Army Service Corps, and details for
medical and veterinary services.
A special camp of training was arranged in
January, 1910, in order to afford Field-Marshal Vis-
count Kitchener an opportunity of seeing officers and
men at work. On what he witnessed at this camp, and
those held in the eastern parts of Australia, he based
his report as to the requirements for future organization
and training. His recommendations are now being car-
ried into effect.
At the close of the financial year 1911-12 the authorized units , their commanding officers, and strength were as
follow :—


Officers.
Other
ranks.
Total.
2, Militia —Fremantle Defence Staff
Lieut.-Col. J. C. Strickland, V.D. ...
1
1
W.A. Brigade Staff
Lieut.-Col. J.T. Hobbs, V L>., A.D.C.
3
1
4
18th A. L. H. Regiment
Major N. Brazier
20
199
219
No. 14 Battery, A.F.A.
Major A. J. Bessell-Browne, D.S.O.
5
56
61
No. 12 Company, A.G.A.
Major P. H. Meeks
3
43
46
No. 13 Company, A.6. A.
Lieut. A. W. Woodley-Page
5
69
74
No. 4 Field Company, C. of A.E.
Major J. Pidgeon
2
28
30
No. 4 Electric Company, C. of A.E.
Captain H. Dowson
1
28
29
1st Battalion 11th Australian Infantry Regiment
Lieut.-Col. H. B. Collett ...
20
183
203
1st Battalion W.A. Infantry Regiment
Major C. Battye
19
247
266
1st Battalion Goldfields Infantry Regiment
Lieut.-Col. J. Lyon Johnstone
16
205
221
Australian Intelligence Corps
Major E. J. H. Nicholson...
10
—
10
No. 8 (D Company, C.A.S
Captain T. C. Wilson
1
19
20
A.A. S C. Transport and Supply Column
Lieut. A. Mathieson
2
24
26
No 4 Field Ambulance, A.A.M.C.
Major H. A. T. Leschen ...
4
22
26
A A.M.C. Staff'and Officers attached to Regiments ...
—
8
—
8
A.A.V.C.
—
1
—
1
Total Militia ...
121
1,124
1,245
o. Chaplain Department
—
22
—
22
Nursing Staff
—
—
10
10
J. Unattached List —Militia
—
24
—
24
5. Reserve Forces— Reserve of Officei s
—
55
—
55
Rifle Clubs
—
—
4,510
4,510
6. Area Officers
—
15
—
15
7. Cadets —Senior
—
51
3,916
3,997
Area Medical Officers
—
9
—
9
Total Permanent
14
161
175
Grand Total
311
9,751
10,062
Training. —The instruction acquired by the early
volunteers would not in these days be considered of
much value, but it must be remembered that with their
small numbers, obsolete weapons, paucity of funds, and
the almost entire absence of equipment there was little
that their instructors could impart beyond the habits
of discipline, the movements of the parade ground, and
the use of the rifle. Their enthusiasm was, however,
unbounded, and successive commandants have placed on
record how zealously and satisfactorily they responded
to the efforts put forward to fit them for duty as
defenders of their country. The smallness of the Gov-
ernment grant was a subject for frequent comment by
the officer commanding the troops, but with a limited
revenue and an unresponsive Legislature it was many
years before any movement could be made toward in-
creased efficiency in the force. In 1884 Colonel Angelo
conducted a camp at Cottesloe which was attended by
355 of all ranks. In 1888 and 1889 similar camps, not
so largely attended, were held at Greenmount and
Guildford. Having secured the assistance of Sir John
Forrest, the State Minister for Defence at that time,
Colonel Wilson was enabled to improve the reserve pre-
viously acquired at Karrakatta, and during the years
1896-8 carry out camps of training on a very much more
extensive scale.
The federation of the colonies and the adoption of
a policy of national defence laid the foundations of the
system of training which, although now improved almost
beyond recognition, is still in force at the present day.
To Colonel Ricardo must be conceded the credit for
its introduction to this State. In 1903 the first School
of Instruction was held. Some twelve mouths later
General Hutton personally conducted a staff ride for
senior and regimental officers. In the annual camps,
which from this date were regularly held, work of a
more advanced nature was undertaken and the various
arms taught to appreciate the value of co-operation.
The difficulties encountered through the want of a suit-
able training ground were overcome in 1909 by an
arrangement arrived at between the Commonwealth and
State Governments, resulting in a tract of some 43,000
acres at Tammin (119 miles from Perth on the Eastern
Goldfields Railway) being reserved for military purposes.
Opportunities for officers to improve their military
knowledge are now more frequently available. Schools
or classes of instruction are arranged; staff and regi-
mental tours are conducted by members of the District
Staff ; series of lectures are given to candidates for pro-
motion; and periodically individual officers are selected
to attend a course in staff duties under the Director
of Military Science at Sydney University. By arrange-
ment with the War Office one officer is sent each year
to India to be attached to the army during the training
season.
Cadets. —As have been previously noted, cadet corps
formed adjuncts to the earlier volunteer units, but
apparently the movement was shortlived. Attempts to
revive it were made from time to time, and with more or
less success. A large number of the boys took part in
the celebrations attendant on the proclamation of


responsible government in 1890. Again in 1896 Colonel
Wilson secured financial assistance from the Government
and was enabled to form a battalion of senior cadets and
two or three battalions of junior cadets. Subsequently
the Education Department took the matter in hand, and
with the assistance of a small inspection staff and the
male teachers was able to organize and train a large
number of the boys between the ages of ten and eighteen
years. By arrangement the Commonwealth Government
later on assumed control, and appointed officers and non-
commissioned officers to supervise and impart physical
instruction and elementary military drill. Small
mounted units were added. On June 30, 1908, there
were 2,139 cadets in the State. On the inauguration of
universal training, January 1, 1911, all cadet corps
ceased to exist, and the staff was transferred to do duty
with the citizen forces. The force at this time was com-
posed of one battalion senior cadets, one squadron of
mounted cadets, and five battalions of cadets —in all
about 3,000 strong.
Rifle Club s. —Rifle Clubs are of comparative
recent origin in this State. One or two clubs were formed
during Colonel Wilson’s tenure of the command, but the
absence of any material encouragement from either the
Government or the Commandant retarded the growth of
the movement. Since 1901, however, considerable pro-
gress has been made. In that year a National Rifle
Association, incorporating the whole of the clubs of the
State, was formed. A branch of this Association was
afterwards established on the goldfields, and this and
the parent institution appointed a council as an executive
for the whole. The regulations issued under the Defence
Act of 1903 conferred upon the clubs certain privileges
and subjected them to enrolment and military discipline
as reserves to the Citizen Forces.
In 1910 a rearrangement took place and the two
Associations were replaced by seven District Unions.
Each Union now elects its delegates to the Central
Council, which is composed of twenty such members, with
the District Commandant as President and all command-
ing officers as ex-officio members.
On June 30, 1912, the number of clubs existing was
134, with a membership of 4,510.
Universal Training . —It is interesting to quote
from the Proclamation issued on June 18, 1829, when
Captain Stirling assumed the office of Governor : -
“And whereas the safety of the territory from in-
vasion and from the attack of hostile native tribes may
require the establishment of a Militia Force which on
emergency may be depended on to assist His Majesty’s
regular troops in the defence of the laws and property
of the inhabitants of the territory, and moreover the
efficiency of such an armed body, depending wholly on its
organization, discipline, and preparation for service, all
male persons whatsoever between the ages of fifteen and
fifty are hereby required to enrol themselves in the Muster
Roll of the Militia of the country in which they may
reside, and to observe that the days for muster and exer-
cise, and the names of the officers whom 1 may see fit to
appoint to command them will be duly notified, and that
on proof of their disobedience to such officers or of negli-
gent performance of the duties required of them, they
will be subject, in the absence of martial law, to a
pecuniary fine and to imprisonment until the same shall
be liquidated.”
The fear of the enemies of England of those days
has given place to a desire on the part of the people not
only to protect themselves from any chance of immediate
aggression, but also to provide for the future of the
young nation and the maintenance of the Australian con-
tinent as an integral portion of the British Empire.
With this end in view the first Defence Act of 1903 pro-
vided for the services of every able-bodied male, between
the ages of eighteen and sixty years, being available in
time of war. On the principle that prevention is better
than cure the Parliament of 1909 went farther, and
universal compulsory military training in time of peace
became the law of the land. As a result of the recom-
mendations made by Lord Kitchener the scope of this
measure was enlarged by the Defence Act of 1910. All
persons between the ages of twelve and twenty-six were
called upon to undergo training —from twelve to fourteen
in the junior cadets, fourteen to eighteen in the senior
cadets, and eighteen to twenty-six in the militia forces.
Residents in the remote parts of the continent were
exempted from service, and the area in Western Aus-
tralia thus affected is bounded on the south by a line
drawn east from the mouth of the Murchison River to a
point near Mount Margaret, and on the west by a line
running south from Mount Margaret to Esperance.
Within these lines it is now proposed to raise for service
four squadrons of Light Horse, three batteries of Artil-
lery, and seven battalions of Infantry, in addition to
technical and departmental corps and details for the
manning of the forts. Altogether nearly 8,000 men will
be under arms at the one time, and the numbers in the
reserves will be continually growing.
The law became effective on January 1, 1911. Like
most great measures which affect communities as a whole,
it has not been received with unanimous approval. With
many it was not understood, and its effect on voluntary
enlistment in the existing forces was illustrated by a very
marked falling off in the number of recruits forthcoming.
At its inception the operations of the measure were
restricted to those who were born in the years 1894, 1895,
1896, 1897, and the result to date has been as follows:


Census return of boys between the ages of fourteen
and eighteen in Western Australia on April 3, 1911,
9,322.
Registrations.—lB94 Class, 1,615; 1895 Class, 1,707 ;
1896 Class, 1,842; 1897 Class, 1,809. Total, 6,973.
Medically Examined. —Fit, 4,033; unfit or tempor-
arily unfit,.4B9. Total, 4,633. Yet to be examined, 111.
Total exemptions, for all causes, granted, 2,829.
Total liable for training, 4,033.
Total actually training, 3,911.
On July 1, 1912, those cadets who were born in the
year 1894 were drafted to the Citizen Forces, and the
extensive scheme of reorganization previously arranged
for is now in progress.
Colonel GODFREY GEORGE
HOWY IRVING, Commandant of
the Western Australian Military
District, is a son of Professor M. H.
Irving, M.A., LL.D., one of the first
professors appointed on the founda-
tion of the University of Melbourne.
He was born at Melbourne on
August 25, 1867, and educated at
the Hawthorn Grammar School,
subsequently joining the staff of
Messrs. McCulloch, Sellar, & Co.,
merchants, of Melbourne. During
his schooldays, at the time of the
Russian war scare, he joined the 2nd
Battalion Victorian Rifles as a
private in June, 1885, passed
through the ranks as private and
corporal, and in 1887 was granted
his commission as Lieutenant in the
same Battalion. He was promoted
to the permanent staff as Adjutant
of the 2nd Infantry Regiment from
January 1, 1891, to July, 1893,
General Sir Alexander B. Tulloch
being at that time Commandant in
Victoria. From 1893 to 1897 he was
Adjutant to the Ist and 2nd Bat-
talions, and again from November,
1899, to March, 1900; and trans-
ferred to Ballarat, Castlemaine, and
Bendigo as Adjutant to the 3rd,
4th, and sth Battalions in 1897. He
was Adjutant to Rangers from
March, 1900, to February, 1901, and
durino- the absence of Colonel Otter
o
at the South African war from
February to November, 1901, took
temporary command of the Regi-
ment. He was Adjutant to Rangers
from November, 1901, to March,
1902; D.A.A.G., Victoria, from
March, 1902, to November, 1903;
from November, 1903, to January,
1904, Actipg A.A.G., Common-
wealth headquarters staff, under
General Hutton; D.A.A.G., head-
quarters, with temporary rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel from January,
1904, to January, 1905; and
D.A.A.G., temporary, from January
to June, 1905. He was on the
instructional staff, Queensland, for
fourteen months from July, 1905,
and on the instructional staff, New
South Wales, during the succeeding
year. In 1905 Colonel Irving pro-
ceeded to England, where he was for
some months in the School of
Musketry, Mythe, the Aldershot
Brigade and divisional trainings and
inspections, the Royal Army Cloth-
ing Department, Pimlico, the Royal
Smallarms Factory, Enfield, the
Royal Smallarms Factory, Spark-
brook, the Aldershot Army Corps
manoeuvres, and the School of Mili-
tary Engineering, Chatham. In
November of the same year he sailed
B artletto , Perth.
COLONEL G. G. H. IRVING.
for India, where he was attached to
the army headquarters manoeuvres
from December 4 to 9, Rawal Pindi
Northern Command, at which
H.R.H. the Prince of Wales (now
King George V.) attended —and was
at Lucknow, Calcutta, Secundera-
bad, and Bangalore successively.
Colonel Irving was D.A.Q.M.G.,
New South Wales, from July, 1907,
to June, 1908; Acting D.A.A.G.,
New South Wales, June, 1907, to
June, 1908, D.A.A.G., New South
Wales, from July, 1908, and received
his present appointment in Septem-
ber, 1909. At college the subject of
this review headed each division of
sport, being in turn captain of the
football club and stroke of the row-
ing crew. He is a rifle shot of no
mean order, in this department-
winning the representative match in
1884 and the ladies’ match at the
annual meeting of the Victorian
Rifle Association in 1895. He was
Hon. Secretary and Treasurer and
a member of the Council of the Rifle
Association from 1888 to 1902.
Colonel Irving married in 1896 a
daughter of the Honourable F. T.
Derham, of Melbourne, and has a
son and two daughters.
Lieutenant - Colonel JOHN
CHARLES STRICKLAND, V.D.,
the senior militia officer in the Com-
monwealth Military Forces in this
State, was born on April 13, 1856,
at Perth. Being at an early age
imbued with the military spirit,
Colonel Strickland enlisted in the
Perth Metropolitan Rifle Volunteers
as a private in 1874, and served in
the ranks of that corps until 1885,
rising through the various non-
commissioned grades. In 1885 he
was promoted to the commissioned
ranks as a first Lieutenant, four
years later attaining his captaincy.
In 1897 he was promoted Major, and
was in command of the Perth In-
fantry for some time. On the for-
mation of the 11th Australian
Infantry Regiment from the scat-
tered infantry units in the metro-
politan area Major Strickland
assumed command, being promoted
to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel.
In this position he gave evidence of
more than ordinary administrative
capacity, and he succeeded in weld-
ing together the hitherto detached
infantry units into one homogeneous
regiment. On relinquishing com-
mand to take over that of the newly-
formed Fremantle Defences Troops
Lieutenant-Colonel Strickland left a
regiment in which most of the ad-
ministrative details were matured,
an excellent record of five years’
strenuous labour. Since March 3,


1908, this officer has been in com-
mand of the Fremantle Defences,
having at the present time a record
of thirty-eight years’ continuous
military service in this State. In
1897 Colonel Strickland was detailed
to command the Western Aus-
Bartletto, Perth.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. C. STRICKLAND.
tralian troops at the Diamond
Jubilee of the late Queen Victoria.
During 1900 he had conferred upon
him the Colonial Auxiliary Forces
officers' decoration for long service.
In 1901 he commanded the Western
Australian contingent of troops
incidental to the ceremonies on the
opening of the first Commonwealth
Parliament. During the corona-
tion ceremonies of the present King
Colonel Strickland, who was in Eng-
land, formed one of a Guard of
Honour of overseas officers at Buck-
ingham Palace, being at one time in
command of the Australian section.
Colonel Strickland has at all times
been keenly interested in mercantile
pursuits, and has served a term as
city councillor of Perth.
Lieulenan t-Colonel JOSEPH
JOHN TALBOT HOBBS, V.D., and
A.D.C. to His Excellency the
Governor-General of Australia, was
born in Middlesex, England. Having
graduated as an architect and gained
experience on the south coast he
determined to follow his profession in
a new sphere, and migrating to Wes-
tern Australia in February, 1887,
commenced to practise in the capital,
which at that time was quite a
small town without any preten-
sions to architectural dignity. After
establishing himself in Perth he soon
became known as an architect of
ability, and received commissions to
carry out many important works. In
1905 he entered into partnership
with Messrs. Smith & Forbes, and
from that time onward the firm was
known as Messrs. Hobbs, Smith, and
Forbes. Lieutenant-Colonel Hobbs
holds the office of diocesan architect
to the Anglican Church, and since
he has been in practice in AVes-
tern Australia his work has ex-
tended all over the State. During
his practice he has at various times
been employed by the State Govern-
ment and has acted as Chairman of
the Royal Commission in connection
with the erection of the Law Courts
and the use of Donnybrook freestone.
He also sat for some two years as
a member of the Public Service
Appeal Board. Lieutenant-Colonel
Hobbs is a Justice of the Peace, was
senior member of the Central Board
of Health (abolished in the year
1911), is Deputy-Chairman of the
Karrakatta Cemetery Board, and
was for many years a member of the
Diocesan Council of the Anglican
Church. He is also a Past Junior
Grand Warden of the Western Aus-
tralian Grand Lodge of Freemasons.
Viewing the life of Lieutenant-
Bartletto, Perth.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. J. T. HOBBS.
Colonel Hobbs from a military
aspect, we find that altogether he has
spent some twenty-eight years as a
soldier and an officer, having while
still a youth joined the Garrison
Artillery in England as a gunner,
serving there for three and a half
years. On his arrival in Western
Australia he joined the Volunteer
Field Artillery as a gunner, passing
through all ranks, and obtained the
command of what is now No. 14
Battery, A.F.A., in 1897, when he
was promoted to the rank of Major.
In the same year he attended the
celebration of Queen Victoria's
Diamond Jubilee as second in com-
mand of the Western Australian con-
tingent. On the defence forces of the
various States being brought under
the control of the Commonwealth he
continued his services in the militia,
and also accepted the staff appoint-
ment as Staff Officer for engineer
services for the Western Australian
military district. In 1908 his ser-
vices were further recognized by the
military authorities by his promotion
to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel
with the command of the Western
Australian Brigade (now the 22nd
Infantry), and in the same year he
was honoured by receiving the ap-
pointment of Aide-de-Camp to Lord
Dudley, then Governor-General of
the Commonwealth. Lieutenant-
Colonel Hobbs is one of the founders
and the first President of the Wes-
tern Australian Military Association,
and is President of the Naval and
Military Club of Perth. He finds
diversion from the routine of pro-
fessional and military duties by
taking an interest in rowing and
yachting, was one of the founders of
the Swan River Rowing Club, and
is a member of the Royal Perth
Yacht Club and Fresh-water Bay
Club. He is owner of the fast motor
launch “Hermes,” which is fre-
quently placed at the disposal of the
Rowing Association (of which he is
a member) at its regattas on the
Swan River. He was married to a
daughter of Mr. J. Hurst, of Perth,
in 1890, and has a family of two
sons and three daughters.
Lieutenant - Colonel HERBERT
BRAVLEY COLLETT, second son
of the late Mr. Francis A. E. Col-
lett of Perth, was born at St.
Peter’s Port, Guernsey, on Novem-
ber 12, 1877, and arrived with his
parents in Western Australia on
October 11, 1884. At the close of
his scholastic career at the Perth
Grammar School he joined the staff
of the Public Library on October 7,
1891, and was appointed sub-libra-
rian exactly six years later. His
military career opened in 1894, when
he enlisted as a private in the Metro


politan Rifle Volunteers, and his
promotion through the various
grades to the high rank of Lieuten-
ant - Colonel has been singularly
rapid. He appeared in Orders as Cor-
poral in 1897, Sergeant in 1898, and
was gazetted Lieutenant in 1899,
receiving his captaincy in 1900. In
1906 he attained to his Majority,
and two years later received his
commission of Lieutenant - Colonel,
holding the unique honour of being
the youngest officer in the Empire to
reach that rank. He acted as Ad-
jutant to the Ist Battalion Western
Australian Infantry Brigade, from
November 21, 1901, to August 31,
InAO tv-.,.,, a j- j. i i i i
1902, Militia Adjutant to the Ist and
2nd Battalions from September 1,
inrvo . r on lAno r n , ,
1902, to June 30, 1903, and acted in
. ? ./ , ’ i-.ii a T
a similar capacity to the 11th A.I.
/ J T ,
Regiment from July 1, 1900 to
June 30, 1906 Lieutenant-Colonel
Collett assumed command of the
regiment on the promotion of Lieu-
tenant-Colonel J. C Strickland,
V.D., to the Fremantle defences
and on July 1,1912 was appointed
to the 88th Infantry. In 1900
he commanded a company of
infantry sent to represent the State
at the inauguration of the Com-
monwealth, subsequently being the
first officer appointed to the new
militia as authorized by the De-
fence Act of 1903. At the Schools
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL H. B. COLLETT.
of Instruction he was successful in
gaining two certificates with hon-
ours, and was the first to obtain
recognition of this kind in the State.
In 1907 he was selected to attend a
course of military science at the
University of Sydney, and he has
also taken part in several staff rides.
The gentleman under review is as-
sociated with Freemasonry, and has
been twice Master of the Military
Lodge of Western Australia and
Master of the Royal Stuart Lodge.
He was Grand Director of Cere-
monies in 1904-5, and is represen-
tative for the Grand Lodge of Can-
ada in Western Australia. In 1904
he married Annie, eldest daughter
of Mr. T. Whitfield, of West Perth,
and has two sons.
Lieutenant - Colonel ARTHUR
THOMAS WHITE, V.D.,
A.A.M.C., principal medical officer
to the Commonwealth Military
Forces of Western Australia, is a
son of the late Mr. John W. White,
of London. Pie was born at that
well-known Torquay,
in Devonshire, England, on October
27, 1860, and educated in his native
town up to the age of twelve years,
when his parents took him with them
to reside in Ireland. Having finished
his education under private tuition
he decided to study for the medical
profession, and passing over to Scot-
land he was successful in taking the
degree of L.R.C.P. & S. A little later
he returned to Ireland and went in
for a further course of study at Dub-
lin, where he gained the degrees of
L.A.H.P. & L.M., Rotunda. In
order to further qualify himself he
practised his profession for three and
a half years in various towns and
cities in England and Ireland, ulti-
mately deciding to settle in Western
Australia, where he arrived in 1888.
Joining Dr. Hope, now commissioner
for health for Western Aus-
tralia, he practised with him for a
period of sixteen years, at the end
of that time dissolving the partner-
ship and taking a practice of his own
at Fremantle. He holds the position
of honorarv medical officer to the
to'
Fremantle Hospital, and is also
deputy-Government medical officer
to the Port, besides being a member
and lecturer of St. John Ambu-
lance Association. Outside his pri-
vate practice Dr. White's interests
are centred in his military career,
which holds pride of place. In 1889
he obtained his commission as Cap-
tain, ten years later being gazetted
Major. In 1910 he underwent with
success an examination to qualify
for the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel,
and holds the distinction of being
the first medical officer in the State
to attain such high rank by exam-
ination. In the same year he received
the Volunteer Officers’ Decoration.
Dr. White is particularly fond of
music and has been a member of the
Fremantle Orchestral Society for the
past twenty years, frequently taking
part in the production of orchestral
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL A. T. WHITE.
music at the concerts of the Society,
of which body he is now Chairman.
He is also a member of the Naval
and Military Club, Perth. Married
in 1896 to May, third daughter of
the late Dr. Elliott, of Tasmania,
he has a famil} 7 of three sons and
one daughter.
Major FRANCIS MAITLAND
WYBORN PARKER, D. 5.0.,
Crown Prosecutor, is a son of
Sir Stephen Henry Parker, Chief
Justice of Western Australia, and
was born at Perth on September 18,
1876. Upon the completion of his
scholastic career at the High School,
Perth, he was articled to the law in
the firm of Messrs. Parker & Parker,
and three years later, on July 19,
1899, was admitted to the Western
Australian Bar. He was engaged in
the practice of his profession at
Perth and elsewhere in the State
during the years 1903 to 1909, and
in February of the latter year joined
the Crown Law Department in the
capacity of Assistant Crown Prose-
cutor. Major Parker previous to
this period had associated himself
with the Imperial military forces of
Western Australia, and when war
was declared between the British


and the Boers he proceeded to South
Africa as Senior Subaltern and Cap-
tain in the first contingent under
Major Moor, and subsequently took
command upon the death of that
officer in July, 1900, continuing in
this capacity until December of the
same year. Major Parker then re-
turned with the contingent to Wes-
tern Australia, but eventually went
back to the scene of action and
served on the staff at the base of
operations as Embarking Staff
Officer during the last twelve months
of the war. When peace was pro-
claimed he settled at Johannesburg,
where he filled the appointment of
Registrar of the Special Criminal
Court for a year, ultimately return-
ing to the land of his birth in 1903.
For over two years he held the com-
mand of the 18th Australian Light
Horse, resigning on March 31, 1912.
Major Parker married in 1901 a
daughter of Mr. John Stenhouse, of
Melbourne, and has one son.
Major WILLI A M MILLER
BUCHANAN, V.D., examining
officer relieving to the Customs De-
partment of Western Australia, is a
son of the Rev. A. Buchanan, of
Bunbury, where the subject of our
notice was born on March 10, 1868.
Educated locally, at the age of six-
teen he entered the commercial
arena and for two years gained valu-
able mercantile experience in the
office of Messrs. Padbury, Loton,
and Co., Perth. Major Buchanan
then joined the State Civil Service
as a junior clerk in the Treasury,
whence after a period of two years
he was transferred to the Audit
Department. Three years later he
was sent to Geraldton to fill the
dual offices of Treasury cashier and
landing waiter, duties which he con-
tinued to perform with every satis-
faction until the advent of Feder-
ation, when the two offices were
divided and separate administrators
appointed. This was in 1901, and
with the culmination of this great
event further promotion fell to
Major Buchanan, he being installed
as sub-collector of Customs at the
same centre. In 1909 he was again
transferred, this time to Fremantle,
where he took up the duties attached
to the office he now holds. His work
is of a varied character and necessi-
tates frequent journeys to the
various ports of Western Australia,
in each of which he is a well-known
figure. Major Buchanan's military
experience extends over some twenty-
eight years, as it was in 1884 that
he joined the ranks of the Metro-
politan Rifle Volunteers, serving first
as private and then as a non-
commissioned officer. Ten years from
that time he received his first com-
mission, being gazetted as Second
Lieutenant of the Geraldton Rifles
in 1894. The following year he
received his lieutenancy, and in 1897
he attained to the rank of Captain,
being at that time the senior officer
commanding the Geraldton Rifles.
In 1907 he was gazetted Major and
on November 9, 1909, was awarded
the Volunteer Officers' Decoration,
being the youngest officer in the State
to receive this distinction. Major
Buchanan w'as in command of the
Western Australian Infantry Regi-
ment from October, 1909, to Decem-
ber, 1910, but the insistent pressure
of his civil duties compelled him to
relinquish this honour and tem-
porarily retire from active service.
At the present time he is on the un-
Bartletto , Perth.
MAJOR WILLIAM MILLER BUCHANAN.
attached list, but in military matters
he is as keen as ever, being an
enthusiast in everything pertaining
to the Commonwealth forces.
Major CHARLES BATTYE was
born on October 15, 1869, and is a
son of Mr. Dan Battye, of Geelong,
Victoria. Pie received his elemen-
tary education in the State schools
of Victoria and by private tuition,
concluding his scholastic career by a
finishing course at the Gordon Tech-
nical College at Geelong. Subse-
quently he accepted the appointment
of Senior Instructor in Science in
connection with the latter Institu-
tion, and in 1902 came to Western
Australia. He was Assistant Master
in the Guildford Grammar School
for six months, but resigned this
position in order to enter upon the
duties of Assistant Librarian of the
Public Library of Western Australia.
Major Battye joined the Common-
wealth Military Forces on January
1, 1903, as Second Lieutenant, 11th
Australian Infantry Regiment. He
was gazetted Captain on July 9,
1906, and was appointed Staff Officer
in Fremantle Defences Command on
April 1, 1908. On July 1, 1909, he
received his commission of Major,
and was transferred to command Ist
Battalion, Western Australian In-
fantry Regiment (now the 86th
Infantry), on April 1, 1911. In 1903
Major Battye married a daughter of
Mr. David Robertson, of Geelong,
and has a daughter. He resides at
Churchill Avenue, Subiaco.
Major THOMAS FLTNTOFF,
Second in Command of the 11th
Australian Infantry Regiment, is
a son of Mr. T. Flintoff, of
Grafton, New South Wales, and
was born in that town on
October 31, 1874. After a pre-
liminary course of study at a local
educational institution, when seven-
teen years of age he was articled to
Mr. J. J. Driscoll, dentist and
pharmaeist, of Grafton, and con-
tinued under the tuition of this
gentleman for four years. Later he
entered the wholesale house of
Messrs. Elliott Brothers, of Sydney,
taking a position which allowed him
time to devote to his studies, and
while there attended lectures at the
University of Sydney and obtained
his diplomas from the Pharmaceuti-
cal and Dental Boards. He came to
Western Australia in 1900, and
establishing himself in professional
practice at Fremantle has followed
his calling in this city ever since.
Major Thomas Flintoff gained his
first military experience as Second
Lieutenant in the Fremantle Volun-
teers, being gazetted Captain three
years later. Subsequently the Volun-
teers’ Corps was merged into the
Australian Infantry Regiment, and
he received his commission as Major


in 1910. Recently he has passed the
theoretical examination for the rank
of Lieutenant-Colonel. He is an
advocate of all forms of outdoor
recreation, and hours in which he is
Bartletto , Perth.
MAJOR THOMAS FLINTOFF.
free from the pressure of military
and professional duties are spent on
the golf links, where he derives con-
siderable enjoyment from an expert
wielding of the clubs. He is an
honorary office-holder in the East
Fremantle Football Club, and in the
fraternity of Freemasons has attained
the rank of Past Master of his
Lodge. In 1902 he was married to
Minnie, daughter of the late Mr.
John Gray, of London, an old
Crimean officer, who was one of the
official pioneers of Western Aus-
tralia, and has a son and a
daughter.
Major JOHN ERNEST ROB
ERTSON, Commanding Officer of
the Royal Australian Artillery at
Fremantle, is a son of the late Hon
curable William Robertson, who is
well remembered as a pastoralist in
the Colac district of Victoria. He
was born at Toorak, a suburb of
Melbourne, on January 10, 1868,
and educated at the Geelong Gram-
mar School. Having finished his
schooling, he was sent to England to
continue his studies at the Oxford
University. In 1890 he returned to
his native land and became attached
to the Royal Australian Artillery
stationed at Queenscliff, Victoria,
for two years, as a military officer
AA
holding rank as Lieutenant. In 1892
he again went to England, this time
to make a study of military tactics,
and having entered at Woolwich
and attended the Shoeburyness
School of Gunnery he went through
the long course of gunnery, gaining
an instructor of gunnery’s certificate.
Returning to Australia after an in-
terval of two years he was re-
appointed to the Royal Australian
Artillery at Queenscliff, and in the
second year of the South African
war was sent to Natal and the
Transvaal in command of a Wes-
tern Australian squadron, disem-
barking at Durban in May, 1902.
Arriving at the base of operations
Major Robertson became attached
to the 14th Battalion of Australian
Commonwealth Horse and saw active
service at Newcastle and Elandsfon-
tein under General Lyttelton. At
the termination of the war he again
visited England and underwent a
short course at the Golden Hill
School of Gunnery, going thence to
Woolwich Arsenal, where he con-
tinued his studies, subsequently re-
turning to New South Wales. In
the Mother State he was appointed
to the command of No. 1 Company
of Royal Australian Artillery, which
he retained for two years, and was
then transferred to Portsea, Vic-
toria, where he was raised to the
rank of Captain. From Portsea he
was ordered to Queenscliff, where he
was Staff-Captain and Adjutant of
the regiments, and from there he
was transferred to the administra-
tive staff as Deputy-Assistant-Adjut-
ant and Quartermaster - General,
Western Australia, with the tem-
porary rank of Major. After two
years’ occupancy of the position he
was gazetted to the Commonwealth
Section of the Imperial General
staff at the headquarters of the
military forces in Melbourne. About
a year afterwards a vacancy occurred
for the office of Major, and he was
promoted to that rank and given
command of the Royal Australian
Artillery in Western Australia early
in 1911. A great lover of out-
door recreation, Major Robert-
son devotes much of his leisure to
the pursuit of the popular Western
Australian pastime, yachting, and
he also derives no little pleasure
from fishing and boating. He mar-
ried in 1893 a daughter of the late
Mr. Edward Viles, of Pendryl Hall,
Codsall Wood, Staffordshire, Eng-
land, and has two children—a son
and a daughter.
Major EDMUND ALFRED
DRAKE-BROCKMAN, command-
ing “A” Company Ist XI. Austra-
lian Infantry Regiment, is a son of
Mr. F. S. Drake-Brockman, chief
surveyor, Western Australia, and
was born at Busselton, in this State,
on February 21, 1884. He was
educated at the Guildford Grammar
School, and at the conclusion of his
schooldays was articled to the law
in the office of Sir Walter James,
K.C. He was admitted to the Bar
in 1909 and entered upon profes-
sional practice at Perth in partner-
ship with Mr. H. M. Henning.
Major Brockman has been interested
in military matters from an early
age, and while still at college joined
the “A” Company, 3rd Battalion,
W.A.1.8., subsequently incorporated
in the 11th Australian Infantry
Regiment. In 1903 he received his
commission as Second Lieutenant.
He was gazetted Captain, two years
later receiving the appointment of
Adjutant to the regiment, and
Major in September, 1911. Upon
the decision of the Commonwealth
Defence Department to send mili-
Bartlettoy, Perth.
MAJOR EDMUND A. DRAKE-BROCKMAN.
tary officers to India for special
training he was one of the first four
selected, and while absent from
Australia became attached at
various times to different Imperial
regiments and staffs, including the
Sherwood Foresters, the 14th Hus-
sars, Headquarters Staff, 9th
Division, in which he acted as
D.A.A.G., the 9th Brigade of Artil-
lery, and Seaforth Highlanders. He
also attended a School of Artillery


Tactics at the Staff College, Quetta.
Major Brockman was chosen as
Aide-de-Camp to His Excellency Sir
Frederick Bedford, Governor of
Western Australia, in 1906, and
upon his return from India in 1909
was appointed on the staff of His
Excellency Sir Gerald Strickland, in
j *
the same capacity. He is a member
of the Naval and Military Club of
Perth and of several Service Clubs
in India. He is Consular Agent for
Italy, having accepted the appoint-
ment on the retirement of Mr. H. M.
Henning. At college Captain Brock-
man was prominent in all kinds of
sport, was Captain of the Football
Eighteen, the Cricket Eleven, and
the Boats. He stroked the school
crew to the head of the river in
1903. In general athletics he won
the school championship for three
years successively, and has seven
intercollege championships to his
credit.
Major ALFRED JOSEPH
BESSELL-BROWNE, D. 5.0., Com-
manding the 14th Battery Australian
Field Artillery, is a son of Mr.
William Henry Bessell-Browne, of
Sydney, New South Wales. He was
born at Auckland, New Zealand, on
September 3, 1877, and was educated
Bartletto , Perth.
MAJOR ALFRED J. BESSELL-BROWNE.
first at the Camden Grammar School,
New South Wales, and afterwards at
the Perth High School, where he con-
tinued until his seventeenth year,
when he entered the Patents Branch
of the Government Service of Wes-
tern Australia. After a lapse of
seven years he resigned this
position and launched out in
business for himself under the name
and title of Messrs. Bessell-Browne
and Co., merchants and manu-
facturers’ agents. Major Bessell-
Browne joined the No. 1 Battery,
Field Artillery, on August 3, 1896,
and continued with that unit until
October 15, 1899, when he was
transferred to the Western Austra-
lian Mounted Infantry for active
service. He proceeded to South
Africa with the first contingent, was
appointed Lance-Corporal, October
16, 1899; Corporal, February 15,
1900; Sergeant, March 12, 1900; and
finally gazetted to a lieutenantcy
on April 22, 1900. He served
with the fifth contingent as a Lieu-
tenant from January 12, 1901, to
June 24, 1901; was promoted Cap-
tain, June 25, 1901, and on January
18 of the following year Adjutant to
fifth and sixth Western Australian
Mounted Infantry, serving with that
rank until June 18, 1902. Lie was
mentioned in despatches by Lord
Kitchener on July 8, 1901, for con-
spicuous gallantry at Brakpan on
May 16, 1901, and again in
despatches from the Commander-in-
Chief, South Africa, dated Pretoria.
March 8, 1902, and published in the
London Gazette of April 25, 1902,
for conspicuous good service in the
Ermelo district from December,
1901, to January, 1902. In Sep-
tember, 1911, he was gazetted
Major. The pursuit of his mili-
tary career absorbs the whole
of his time, and he has but
little leisure or inclination for any
other kind of recreation. In 1903 he
married Muriel Maud, a daughter
of Mr. H. E Manning, of Perth,
and has three sons and a daughter.
Major ERNEST ALBERT Le-
SOUEF, P.V.0., is a son of the late
Mr. Albert A. C. LeSouef, of Mel-
bourne, where the subject of this
notice was born on September 13,
1869. He received his scholastic
training at Carlton College, and
subsequently studied at the Mel-
bourne Veterinary College (where he
qualified in 1895) and the Mel-
bourne University, where he gradu-
ated as Bachelor of Veterinary
Science in 1911. He became asso-
ciated with his late father, then
Director of the Melbourne Zoological
Gardens, until 1897, when the Wes-
tern Australian Government engaged
his services to establish zoological
gardens in the capital. The site
which was placed at his disposal for
the carrying out of the project was
then scrubland, and the present well-
arranged and attractive gardens,
with their suitable and handsome
buildings, prove a monument to his
Bartletto , Perth,
MAJOR ERNEST ALBERT LBSOUEF.
energy, resource, and thorough
knowledge of the details of design
necessary to make the undertaking a
success. Major LeSouef was one
of the founders of the Cannington
Mounted Rifles at its inception under
command of Captain Clydesdale.
This was his first military experi-
ence, and after a month in the ranks
he received his commission as Lieu-
tenant. Three years later he was
transferred to the Veterinary
Branch, and in the capacity of
Principal Veterinary Officer did yeo-
man service. He is now Major of
the Veterinary Corps and Principal
Veterinary Officer for the whole
State in the Defence Department.
In 1912 he was chosen as a mem-
ber of the first Board appointed
under the Veterinary Act of 1911.
Major LeSouef has devoted much
spare time in the past to the breed-
ing of sporting dogs and has won
many prizes and trophies for these
animals. He is a keen lover of
horses and makes a hobby of breed-
ing ponies at the present time. He
was married in 1899 to a daughter of
the late Rev. F. A. Hagenauer, In-
spector-General of Aborigines, Vic-
toria, and has a son and two
daughters.


Captain HAROLD ARTHUR
FAULKNER WILKINSON,
A.D.C., is a son of the late Cap-
tain G. Faulkner Wilkinson, of the
68th Durham Light Infantry. He
was born at Perth on May 16, 1879,
and educated at the High School in
the native town. At the age of
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN HAROLD A. F. WILKINSON.
sixteen years he entered the Audit
Department of the Civil Service as
a junior, and has since risen step by
step to the post of Inspector, which
he now holds. In the year of his
attainment to manhood's estate he
joined the ranks of the Civil Service
Corps, which afterwards merged into
the Western Australian Infantry
Regiment. In 1901, a little previous
to the historic visit of Their Royal
Highnesses the Duke and Duchess
of York at the time of the inaugura-
tion of the Commonwealth, Captain
Wilkinson received his Lieutenant's
commission, having at that time
served in the ranks only for
a period of a year. Three years
later (May, 1904) he was fur-
ther promoted, this time to a
captaincy, and he subsequently
held the appointment of Adjutant
for three and a half years. In 1909
he was selected by the Common-
wealth Government to proceed with
four other officers to India to receive
special training in the arts of war,
and was attached to the Ist Bat-
talion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment
(Imperial Forces), stationed at Pes-
hawur, on the north-west frontier.
Subsequently he was attached to the
Worcestershire Regiment and also to
the staffs of Generals Martin and
aa2
Campbell, at the expiration of his
period of service proceeding to Eng-
land, where he remained some
months. Returning to Australia he
temporarily assumed the command of
his own regiment. In July, 1906, he
was appointed Aide-de-Camp to the
Lieutenant-Governor, Sir E. A.
Stone, K.C.M.G., and on the arrival
of Sir Gerald Strickland, K.C.M.G.,
he was also attached to His Excel-
lency's honorary staff as Aide-de-
Camp, and is now filling the office of
Private Secretary.
Captain THOMAS CHARLES
WILSON, Commanding No. 8
Company, Australian Corps of
Signallers, is a son of Mr. Edward
Wilson, formerly of the Imperial
Army, but now resident at Leeds,
Yorkshire. He claims the famous
fortification, Gibraltar, as the place
of his birth, and having been born,
so to speak, in a martial atmosphere,
it seems but fitting that in after-
years he should be attracted to the
service of his country. Captain
Wilson was born on August 30, 1877,
and received his education at the
St. Stephen (Westminster) School,
London, and in Yorkshire. He
entered the Postmaster-General's
Department of the Civil Service of
Great Britain in his fourteenth year
and continued there until the middle
of 1896, when with many others he
was transferred to Western Australia
by the Imperial authorities at the
request of the local Government,
which was perplexed how to deal with
the large increase in the telegraph
and postal business created by the
rich gold discoveries in the Coolgardie
district. Captain Wilson was one of
the chosen, and landed at Albany in
September of that year. He was
immediately attached to the staff at
the head office as telegraphist, and
continued to hold the post until
1900, when he received transfer to
Kanowna. After about four years
at that centre he returned to Perth
in 1905 to take up the duties of the
position he now occupies. It was in
the Old Country that he commenced
his military career, having joined the
Volunteer Medical Staff Corps at
Leeds, with which he served for two
years. Subsequent to his arrival in
Western Australia he entered the
ranks of the Perth Infantry Regi-
ment, and passing the necessary
examination soon received promotion
to the non-commissioned rank as
Sergeant to “A” Company. His
transfer to the goldfields, already
referred to, occurred at this
juncture, and he was attached to the
newly-formed sth Battalion Infantry
Brigade, Kanowna Company (Gold-
fields), being raised to the rank of
Colour-Sergeant. In June, 1901, he
was gazetted Second Lieutenant,
Lieutenant about a year later, and in
December, 1904, he received his com-
mission as Captain of the Company
at Kanowna. Following his return to
Perth he was placed on the un-
attached list, and it was not until the
end of 1905 that he re-entered the
active list at the request of the Com-
mandant to undertake the formation
of a Corps of Signallers, which he
did with great success. He has been
Commander of the Corps since its
inception, and at the Kitchener camp
at Tammin the Company received
the highest praise for the soldierly
manner in which it had carried out
the work allotted to it during the
manoeuvres. Outside his military
and civil duties he derives consider-
able pleasure from horticultural pur-
suits, of which he makes a hobby,
and he is particularly interested in
the cultivation of a large variety of
fruit-trees. He is a member of the
Masonic fraternity and of the
A.0.F., and has passed through most
of the chairs of the latter order,
being at the present time a Past
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN THOMAS CHARLES WILSON.
District Chief Ranger. Captain
Wilson was mairied in 1901 to a
daughter of Mr. Hans Neilson, of
Sunvale Dunach, Talbot, Victoria,
and has two sons and three
daughters.


Captain J. E. FERGUSON
STEWART, A.A.M.C., is a son of
the late Rev. Robert Stewart, of
Lisbon, Portugal, which was his
birthplace. Tie was educated in
England and subsequently matric-
ulated at Glasgow University, where
he also studied for the medical pro-
fession, taking his diploma in 1895.
Shortly afterwards he came to Wes-
tern Australia and entered upon pro-
fessional practice at Guildford and
Midland Junction, where he still
continues. He joined the Western
Australian Defence Forces in 1899
as a member of the Guildford Com-
pany, ultimately being placed on the
unattached list. In 1908 he was
gazetted Captain of the No. 4. Field
Ambulance in the Australian Army
Medical Corps. Captain Stewart is
District Medical Officer for Swan
District and Health Officer for
Guildford and Midland Junction.
Captain JOHN BRIER MILLS,
second in command, No. 14 Battery,
Australian Field Artillery, is the
eldest son of Mr. George Alfred
Mills, J.P., of Perth, Western Aus-
tralia. He was born at St. Mary’s,
New South Wales, on May 23, 1870,
Bartletto, Perth.
CAPTAIN JOHN BRIER MILLS.
and was educated at St. J ohn’s
Grammar School, Parramatta, and
the High School, Sydney, New
South Wales. From his nineteenth
year he was engaged in journalistic
work for ten years, of which six
were spent at Broken Hill, New
South Wales, and four years —1895
to 1899 —on the staff of The West
Australian at Perth. In 1899 he
commenced the study of law in the
office of Mr. R. S. Haynes, K.C.,
of Perth, and was admitted as a
barrister and solicitor of the Supreme
Court of Western Australia on
March 21, 1905, the ordinary period
of study having been exceeded owing
to the Barristers’ Board imposing
an extra term on account of his hav-
ing been absent on military service
in South Africa during the Boer
war. He was appointed a Commis-
sioner for Affidavits in April, 1906,
and a Notary Public in July, 1909.
He has since been in practice at
Perth, where, in addition to the
practice of law, he is assistant editor
of The West Australian “Law Re-
ports.” Captain Mills’ military ser-
vice commenced in January, 1883,
when he joined the Parramatta Com-
pany of the 3rd New South Wales
Infantry Regiment as a bugler, and
except for several intervals necessi-
tated by the exigencies of civil life he
has been a member of the Australian
military forces ever since. Shortly
after the outbreak of the South
African war he enlisted in Decem-
ber, 1899, in the second Western
Australian contingent (Mounted In-
fantry), and served in South Africa
from the beginning of February,
1900, until its return to Western
Australia at the end of April, 1901,
having taken part in all the engage-
ments in which the contingent par-
ticipated. He received the South
African (Queen’s) medal with six
clasps, including clasps for the en-
gagements of Johannesburg, Dia-
mond Hill, and Belfast. On his
return from South Africa he joined
the present No. 14 Battery, Aus-
tralian Field Artillery, and was
J y
shortly afterwards selected as one of
seven representatives of the military
forces of the State to attend the Cor-
onation of King Edward VII., re-
ceiving the coronation medal at the
hands of the present King. He
received a commission as Second
Lieutenant in the present 14th Bat-
tery, Australian Field Artillery, on
July 21, 1905, was promoted Lieu-
tenant on May 7, 1907, and Captain
on October 1, 1908. In March, 1911,
he was awarded the colonial auxiliary
forces long-service medal. He mar-
ried in 1894 Miss Mary Blanche
Robinson, of Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia, and has surviving a son and
two daughters.
Captain REGINALD WILLIAM
EVERETT was born at Goulburn,
New South Wales, on September 30,
1873. lie began his military career
in 1891, when he joined the 2nd In-
fantry Regiment, New South Wales,
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN REGINALD WILLIAM EVERETT.
with which he served for a number
of years in the ranks. On August
1, 1905, he received his commission
as Second Lieutenant in the 11th
Australian Infantry Regiment, and
was promoted to be Lieutenant on
July 1, 1907. He was Acting-Ad-
jutant to the regiment from Septem-
ber, 1908, to June, 1909, during the
absence of Captain E. Drake-Brock -
man on duty in India, and on Sep-
tember 16, 1908, received his promo-
tion to the rank of Captain. Cap-
tain Everett was appointed Area
Officer for Fremantle Area under the
new defence scheme on November 1,
1910.
Captain RICHARD REGINALD
GARLAND, of the 18th Austra-
lian Light Horse Regiment, is a son
of Mr. Richard Garland, newspaper
proprietor, of Horsham, Victoria, of
which town the gentleman under re-
view is a native, having been born
there on June 8, 1878. He received
his education at the local State
school and privately, with a subse-
quent course at the Technical Col-
lege in the same town, and at the
age of sixteen embarked on a jour-
nalistic career, being engaged on the
staff of The Wimmera Star news


paper, of which his father was and
still is proprietor. In 1897 he
joined the literary staff of the Perth
Morning Herald and continued in
this connection for two years, when
he returned to Horsham to under-
take the editorship of his father's
paper. Captain Garland occupied
the editorial chair until 1901, in
that year joining the Victorian
Mounted Rifles for service in South
Africa, and in the following year
becoming associated with the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth Horse. Re-
turning to V ictoria in 1902 he re-
sumed Iris editorial duties, and three
years later obtained an appointment
on the literary staff of The West
Australian , and again took up his
residence in Perth, where he has re-
mained ever since. Captain Gar-
land displayed a penchant for mil-
itary atiairs in early youth, when
quite a lad being one of the junior
cadets in his native town. Having
served in this capacity for four
years he joined the ranks of the Vic-
torian Rangers, and later received a
commission in his former Cadet
Corps. He served in the South
African war as Lieutenant, and was
awarded the Queen's Medal with
five clasps. His connection with the
18th Australian Light Horse Regi-
ment began on May 9, 1905, when
he was appointed Second Lieutenant,
gaining his promotion to a lieuten-
ancy on September 1, 1906. He was
Adjutant of his regiment from 1907
to 1911, and was gazetted Captain on
January 1, 1909. Captain Garland
is a member of the Wimmera Lodge
of Freemasons, No. 70, V.C., and
holds membership in the Perth
Club. He has taken considerable in-
terest in most branches of athletics,
more particularly in football, cycling,
and tennis, and has several trophies
to his credit as an amateur. In 1909
he married a daughter of the late
Mr. W. H. Oakley, of Bendigo,
Victoria.
Captain ALLAN WILLIAM
LEANE, Officer Commanding “D"
Company, 11th Australian Infantry
Regiment, is a son of the late Mr.
Thomas John Leane, of Prospect,
South Australia, in which State he
received his scholastic training. He
served his apprenticeship to a com-
mercial career in Adelaide, and in
1896 came to Western Australia as
Departmental Manager for the well-
known firm of warehousemen, Messrs.
Goode, Durrant, & Co. Ultimately
Captain Leane relinquished his con-
nection with this business, and is
now a partner and Director of the
Economic Limited, the widely known
drapery and softgoods establishment
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN ALLAN WILLIAM LEANE.
in High Street, Fremantle, of which
he is also a joint Manager. He com-
menced his military career at an
early age, when eighteen, joining the
old 3rd Battalion of Infantry in
South Australia. He was trans-
ferred to the South Australian
Lancers in 1890, subsequently re-
turning to his former regiment, and
was gazetted Lieutenant in October,
1891. Upon his arrival in the
Western State Captain Leane re-
mained for a time upon the un-
attached list, but a vacancy occur-
ring he accepted the appointment of
Lieutenant to the 11th Australian
Infantry Regiment. Business inte-
rests demanding his removal to Kal-
goorlie, he transferred his services
to the Goldfields Infantry Regiment,
with which corps he was identified
for two years. At the end of that
period, returning to Fremantle, he
again became attached to the 11th
A.1.R., taking command of “D"
Company and receiving promotion to
the rank of Captain. In the world
of sport Captain Leane is devoted
chiefly to the game of bowls, and in
the pursuit of this pastime has won
several club championships and
trophies. He was married in 1895 to
a daughter of the late Mr. W. Scutt,
of Bere Regis, Dorsetshire, and has
one son.
Captain FRANCIS BIRD CAR-
TER is a son of Mr. T. E. Carter,
of Kingston-on-Thames, and was
born at Uxbridge, Middlesex, on
April 4, 1875, subsequently pursuing
his scholastic studies at the Lough-
borough Grammar School, Leicester-
shire. His first military experience
was obtained as a private in the
ranks of the 20th Middlesex Regi-
ment of Volunteers, with which
corps he was identified until his de-
parture for Australia in 1901. Land-
ing at the Western State he pro-
ceeded to Kalgoorlie, and soon after
his arrival accepted the honorary
position of Secretary to the local
Rifle Association and Rifle Club,
which he held for a period of three
years. Subsequently, after taking
up residence in Perth, he had control
of the first Commonwealth Rifles
meeting held in the State, and suc-
cessfully inaugurated a higher
standard for Australian aspirants for
military honours. Captain Carter
received his commission of Second
Lieutenant in August, 1905, and in
the year following was promoted to
Lieutenant, was appointed Adjutant
of his regiment in January, 1910, and
gazetted Captain in April, 1911. He
is a member of the Weld, Naval and
Military, and other Clubs, and acts
as Secretary to the Metropolitan
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN FRANCIS BIRD CARTER.
Rifle Club. He takes a deep interest
in most forms of manly sport, par-
ticularly football, rowing, and gym-
nastics. He is a crack shot with the
rifle and took part in the Great Na-
tional meeting at Bisley in 1906.


Lieutenant WILLIAM CHECK-
LEY MILLS was born at Hornsby,
New South Wales, on November 22,
1878, and is the second son of Mr.
G. A. Mills, J.P., of Perth, Western
Australia. He came to Western
Australia in 1897 and entered the
Civil Service in the Postmaster-
General’s Department. He joined
the Perth Artillery Volunteers (now
the 14th Battery, Australian Field
Artillery) in March, 1897, and
served with that corps until the out-
break of the South African war,
when he was selected as a member of
the first Western Australian contin-
gent, which sailed from Albany in
November, 1899. He served with
this contingent until its return to
Western Australia in December,
1900, having taken part in all the
engagements in which it partici-
pated. He returned to South Africa
with the sixth Western Australian
contingent, and on June 23, 1901,
near Ermelo, Eastern Transvaal, he
was severely wounded, being hit in
four places. After having been in-
valided to Australia, and upon
recovering sufficiently, he was
appointed Lieutenant in the Bth
Battalion, Australian Common-
wealth Horse, and returned to
Africa with that corps. He
received the South African (Queen's)
medal with five clasps, including
Johannesburg, Diamond Hill, and
Wittebergen. Lieutenant Mills is
at present filling the position of Area
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM CHECKLEY MILLS.
Officer for North Perth under the
new defence scheme. Since the foun-
dation of the Naval and Military
Club at Perth in 1906 he has carried
out the duties attached to the
secretaryship. lie married in 1909
Miss Bertha Grundy, of Perth, and
has three sons.
Lieutenant GEORGE CHARLES
EVERETT, Area Officer 85a, em-
bracing the military district from
Imperial Studio , Albany.
LIEUTENANT GEORGE CHARLES EVERETT.
Albany to Wagin and from the
Frankland to the Pallinup Rivers, is
a South Australian by birth, having
been born at Windsor, in that State,
on July 12, 1885. He is a son of Mr.
Edward Gamble Everett, grocer and
provision merchant, of Albany, and
his education, received primarily in
Adelaide, was completed at the
Claremont Training College, Western
Australia, where he was prepared for
the teaching profession. He was con-
nected with the Education Depart-
ment of this State in all for nine
years, holding appointments in
metropolitan schools and at Albany,
Beaconsfield, and Geraldton. He re-
signed the post of first assistant in
the State school at Geraldton in
order to engage in business at Albany
in conjunction with his father, and
continued in this connection for five
years. He obtained his first military
experience in the Junior Cadet Corps
at Albany, in which he held the com-
mission of second Lieutenant. When
severing his connection with the
Education Department he resigned
from the Cadets and joined the Gar-
rison Artillery at Albany, where he
was given the provisional appoint-
ment of Second Lieutenant. In 1910
he was promoted to the rank of Lieu-
tenant, and in October of that year
received the appointment of Area
Officer for the Albany district, which
has since been extended to its present
size. During the course of his career
he also served for a short time in the
ranks of the 11th Australian
Infantry Regiment. Lieutenant
Everett's mercantile and military in-
terests absorb the greater portion of
his time and attention and allow
little leisure for recreation. His
occasional attendance on the football
field, the bowling green, or the tennis
court quickly shows that he is no
novice in these games, and in the
more difficult art of sailing he also
displays practical experience, and
though unable to devote much time
to sport he still continues his mem-
bership in the various local clubs. He
is a member and office-holder in the
Masonic fraternity, and for many
years has been connected with the
A.N.A., in which he has filled the
honourable post of President.
Lieutenant PERCY MALCOLM
EDWARDS, Adjutant 18th Austra-
lian Light Horse Regiment and Area
Officer, Subiaco and Leederville,
Western Australia, is a son of Mr.
W. S. Edwards, of Malvern, near
Melbourne, Victoria, and was born
at Port Melbourne on December 5,
1876, receiving his education at the
High School, East Prahran. Upon
the conclusion of his studies he
entered the firm of Messrs. Robert
Reid & Co., the well-known ware-
housemen of Melbourne, and
obtained a comprehensive knowledge
of the business during the six years
spent in this employ. At twenty-
one years of age he left Victoria in
order to enter upon an appointment
under the Western Australian
Government in the clerical division of
the Railways Department. After ten
years in the Civil Service, perceiving
an opening in this State for the
establishment of a softgoods manu-
factory he resigned, and in 1908
inaugurated his present business in
Strelitz Avenue, a fine central posi-
tion, with a staff of six employes. So
rapidly has the trade expanded
under his far-sighted and enter-
prising management that fifty hands
are now busily employed in meeting
the demands of its patrons, and
there are no signs of a falling-off of
the popularity which has so signally
marked its progress since its incep-
tion. As a military man Lieuten


ant Edwards is well known, and his
experience in this line has not been
of a limited nature. From boyhood
he has made a hobby of matters mill
tary, before he could read or write,
learning the mysteries of flag-signal-
ling from his father, who was a
soldier before him. As a lad he
belonged to the junior cadets at Mel-
bourne, and later was transferred to
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT PERCY MALCOLM EDWARDS.
the senior cadets, where he rose to
the rank of Colour-Sergeant. He
served five years in the Field Artil-
lery and was the youngest Sergeant
in the Brigade when he left for Wes-
tern Australia in 1898. Immediately
on his arrival in this State he
joined the Field Artillery, and a few
months after, on the outbreak of the
Boer war, joined the first Western
Australian contingent as a private.
Before reaching South Africa he was
promoted to the position of Ser-
geant-Major, and during the course
of the war saw active service at
Slingersfontein, Arundel, Rensburg,
Ta’Banchu, Modder River, Johan-
nesburg, Diamond Hill, Pretoria,
Vaal River, Elands River, Botha-
ville, Wittebergen, Heidelberg, and
Bethlehem, besides being under fire
at various other times during the
campaign. He was awarded the
Queen’s Medal with four bars, was
twice mentioned in despatches, and
subsequently received the D.C.
Medal. This last distinction was
conferred upon him for getting
through the Boer lines, under cover
of darkness, with two other men at
exceptional risk and blowing up the
Delagoa railway near Diamond Hill,
thus materially strengthening the
British position, and at the same
time recovering a trainload of Bri-
tish prisoners and two trainloads of
merchandise. Upon his return to
Perth he was offered a commission to
accompany the fifth contingent to
the scene of action, but for private
reasons declined the honour. Since
1907 he has been attached to the
Light Horse as Officer Commanding
Pom-Pom section. He received his
commission in the same year and was
appointed Area Officer in November,
1910. In 1901 Lieutenant Edwards
was married to Nellie, daughter of
the late Mr. W. Hanson, of Mount
Gambier, South Australia.
Lieutenant ROBERT EDWARD
JACKSON is a son of Mr. Samuel
Jackson, of Perth, and was born at
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT ROBERT EDWARD JACKSON.
Crow’s Nest, Queensland, on Jan-
uary 1, 1886. He received his edu-
cation at the Brisbane Grammar
School, and subsequently took up ac-
countancy work in Queensland for
about two years. Leaving for
Western Australian in 1904, upon
arrival he entered the Education
Department as assistant master in
the Perth Boys’ School, holding this
position until 1911. Lieutenant Jack-
son has always been distinguished
for his keen interest in military
affairs, and in 1910 received his com-
mission as Captain of the senior
cadets, in which capacity he served
until his appointment as Lieutenant
on the Permanent Staff in February,
1911, his qualifications fitting him
for the duties of Light Horse and
Infantry Instructor. He is an en-
thusiast in athletics and won the
Bedford shield for physical culture
and squad drill in 1910. A promin-
ent Rugby footballer, he played in
the Federal team until precedence
was given to the Australian game;
and is still well to the fore in all
manner of outdoor sports. The
gentleman under review is a strong
supporter and a local preacher of
the Methodist Church, and is con-
nected with the Baden - Powell
Scouts, in which organization he was
one of the first Scout Masters and
afterwards a member of the Council.
Lieutenant HAROLD VIVIAN
PIESSE, No. 3 Squadron, 18th Aus-
tralian Light Horse, began his mili-
tary career as a gunner attached to
the No. 1 Battery, Perth, at the
time that his father, the Honourable
F. H. Piesse, C.M.G., occupied the
position of State Minister for
Defence. Two years later, upon his
arrival in New South Wales, he
joined the Reservists in that State
and served for a similar period in
that body. In 1906 he joined Cap-
tain Strachan in the formation of
the Third Squadron Light Horse at
Katanning, and was gazetted as
Second Lieutenant. Upon the re-
tirement of Captain Strachan Lieu-
Biltoft , Katanning.
LIEUTENANT HAROLD VIVIAN PIESSE.
tenant Piesse took charge of the
Katanning Squadron, which he now
commands.


Lieutenaut-Colonel JOSEPH
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL, J.P.,
is a son of the late Mr. Alex-
ander Campbell, of Dalkey, County
Dublin, Ireland, and was born
on October 26, 1842. He re-
ceived his education at the
Reverend Doctor Slater’s School,
Killiuey, County Dublin, and joined
the Queen’s Own Cameron High-
landers on August 8, 1857, sailing
the same day for India. As the first
warrant officer appointed, he became
Sergeant-Major of his regiment on
April 18, 1878, and served with the
regiment during the Indian Mutiny
campaign of 1859, including the
passage of the Gogra at Fyzabad and
the capture of Rampore Russia, and
subsequent operations in Oude
across the Gorgra and Rajffee Rivers
(medal). He was Sergeant-Major of
the regiment throughout the Egyp-
tian campaign of 1882, and was pre-
sent at the battle of Tel-el-Rebir,
for his bravery being mentioned in
despatches and receiving the silver
medal for distinguished conduct in
the field, a medal with clasp and
the Khedive’s star. In February,
1884, he was appointed chief of the
instructional staff, Western Austra-
lia, and was promoted to Chief Staff
Officer in 1886. He accompanied a
detachment of Western Australian
Bartletio, Perth.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. A. CAMPBELL.
volunteers to the late Queen Vic-
toria’s Diamond Jubilee celebrations
in London in 1897, and was
appointed Staff Officer to Colonel
Ivor Herbert, C. 8., C.M.G., Grena-
dier Guards, Commandant Colonial
Contingent, London. From 1899 to
1902 he was Camp Commandant and
Chief Instructor at Karrakatta,
training troops for duty in South
Africa, and for this service was
favourably mentioned in Parliament
and officially thanked by the
Government of Western Australia.
He was appointed Acting Command-
ant of the Commonwealth military
forces of Western Australia, with
the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel, in
August, 1901, and upon his retire-
ment, after forty-five years' service,
on September 30, 1902, received the
official thanks of the Government.
Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell is in
possession of the silver medal for
meritorious service and for long ser-
vice and good conduct. He was ap-
pointed an Honorary Associate of the
Grande Priory of the Order of the
Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in
England on February 26, 1907. In
1871 he married at Kamptee, India,
the only daughter of Mr. Henry
Hott, and has three sons, two of
whom served in the South African
campaign.
Major THOMAS SHERWOOD,
on the retired list, is a son of the
late Mr. Frederick Sherwood, an
architect and surveyor in the early
days of the State. He was born in
Dorsetshire, England, on January 24,
1838, and as a child of five was
brought by his parents to Western
Australia, where he received his
scholastic training. In 1855 he
entered the Imperial Commissariat
Department in a clerical capacity,
and when in 1875 the transfer of the
convict department to the Crown
Colony by the Imperial Government
was being effected he was transferred
to the office of chief clerk and
accountant of stores, which appoint-
ment he held until the completion of
the transfer in 1886. Subsequently,
Major Sherwood joined the Civil
Service in the Lands Department
and continued in this connection for
seventeen years. His association
with the local military forces began
m 1861, when he joined the first
Volunteer Corps formed in Western
-Australia under Colonel Bruce
y(Commandant of the forces).
After serving in the ranks and as
non-commissioned officer he received
his first commission as Lieutenant in
the Metropolitan Rifle Volunteers in
1875, a corps which has passed
through many changes and is now
known as the 88th Infantry
Regiment. At the close of thirty-
four years he retired with the rank
of Major, to which he had previously
received promotion, and was the
recipient of the volunteer officer’s
Bartletto , Perth.
MAJOR THOMAS SHERWOOD.
decoration in 1894. The gentleman
under review, who now lives in retire-
ment at Harvest Terrace, Perth, has
been associated with the Anglican
Church for a lengthy period, was a
member of the Cathedral Chapter for
many years, and sixteen years ago
held the office of Diocesan Secretary,
while at the present time he is
Diocesan Treasurer and a Trustee.
He was in former days a yachtsman
of note, and took his share of
honours in the cricket and boating
circles of Western Australia.
Major Sherwood has also been one
of the leaders of Freemasonry in
V estern Australia. He was initi-
ated in the Lodge of St. John, No.
485, E.C., on July 23, 1866, and
was Worshipful Master in 1872 and
again in 1875. Lie became District
Junior Grand Warden under the
English Constitution in 1889 and
District Senior Grand Warden in
1892, and was created a Past Deputy
Grand Master of the Grand Lodge
of Western Australia in 1903. He
is at present a member of the Lodge
of St. John, No. 1, and an honorary
member of the Lodge of Unity, No.
11; Military Lodge, No. 15 ; Lord
Nelson Lodge, No. 46 ; Roebuck
Lodge, No. 56; and Excelsior
Lodge No. 61. Since 1908 Major
Sherwood has been President of the
Freemasons’ Club. Married in
August, 1862, to Miss Caroline
Mews, of Perth, he lias six sons and
five daughters.


Major JOHN CAMPBELL is a
son of Lieutenant-Colonel J. A.
Campbell, J.P., and was born at
Edinburgh Castle on June 24, 1876.
He received his education at the
Christian Brothers College, Ade-
laide, and at the age of sixteen
joined the staff of the Bank of Aus-
tralasia, from which he resigned to
accept the position of chief clerk and
accountant at the military head-
quarters, Perth. In 1894 he joined
the Perth Artillery Volunteers as
driver, and was promoted Second
Lieutenant and Staff Officer to the
Commandant in 1897. He volun-
teered for service in South Africa
with the Ist Western Australian
Mounted Infantry in October, 1899,
and was promoted Lieutenant and
placed in charge of a section of
machine-guns during the Boer war,
1899-1902. He was present at opera-
tions in Cape Colony between No-
vember, 1899, and March, 1900, in-
cluding actions at Colesburg and the
advance on Kimberley; in the
Orange Free State between March
and May, 1900, including actions at
Vet River; in the Transvaal between
May and June, of the same year,
including actions near Johannesburg
and Pretoria on June 4 and at Dia-
mond Hill on June 11 and 12; and
assisted in the operations in Orange
Bartletto , Perth.
MAJOK JOHN CAMPBELL.
River Colony between June and No-
vember, 1900, including actions at
Bindley, Bethlehem, and Witte-
bergen. He was granted a Commis-
sion in the Royal Garrison Artillery
(London Gazette , May 23, 1900),
which he resigned to take command
of the 6th Western Australian
Mounted Infantry —two squadrons.
He was in command of the sixth
contingent, Western Australian
Mounted Infantry, during the
operations in Eastern Transvaal,
Orange River Colony, and Zululand
frontier between April, 1901, and
April, 1902, and was present at
Brakpan on May 16, 1901. Shortly
after the retirement had commenced
a man was seen about sixty yards in
the rear of the line, running, his
horse having been shot. Captain
Campbell turned and galloped back
to his assistance, under a very heavy
fire and in face of an enemy advanc-
ing at a hand gallop. When he
reached the man the latter was in a
state of collapse, but managed to
put his foot in the stirrup, and Cap-
tain Campbell assisting him to
mount carried him away, the enemy
pursuing close behind. He was
mentioned in despatches, London
Gazette , July 28, 1901, and was
awarded the Queen's Medal with
four clasps and the King’s Medal
with two clasps, was promoted
Brevet-Major by the Commonwealth
Government for good service in
South Africa, and was appointed
Staff Officer for Mounted Infantry
and acting paymaster on his return
from the war, a position he resigned
at the end of two years. Major
Campbell is now following farming
pursuits in the Bowes district, Wes-
tern Australia. He married in 1911
Miss Grace Rintel, of Perth.
The late Major JOHN ALFRED
ERNEST HUMBLE was born at
Fremantle in 1867, and received his
education locally and at Geelong,
Victoria. In 1883 he joined the
staff of the National Bank of Aus-
tralasia at Fremantle, and spent the
next fourteen years in the Bank’s
service, from which he resigned in
order to establish himself in busi-
ness at Fremantle. In 1883 Major
Humble joined the ranks of the Fre-
mantle Volunteers, and was in com-
mand from 1896 until the corps
became merged into the 11th Aus-
tralian Infantry Regiment. He
received his commission of Second
Lieutenant in 1888, was promoted
to the rank of Captain in 1895, and
gazetted Major on his retirement
from active service in 1909. Major
Humble was second in command of
the Australian Infantry Regiment
for some time. His death occurred
in 1912.
Captain THOMAS JOHN TODD,
D. 5.0., of the firm of Messrs. Todd
Brothers, contractors, St. George's
Terrace, Perth, and the Perth
Brick Company, Midland Junction,
was born at Christchurch, New Zea-
land, on March 2, 1873. He is a
son of the late Mr. James Todd,
of Perth, formerly of New Zea-
land, and received his education in
the city of his birth and at Auck-
land. He became engaged in mer-
cantile life in a merchant's office,
where he laid the foundation of a
good commercial training. At the
outbreak of hostilities in South
Africa Captain Todd, who pre-
viously had become a member of
the Volunteer Forces, accompanied
a contingent to the scene of action,
being apointed Adjutant to the New
Zealand Forces under Major Crad-
dock. He displayed great bravery
on the field and served at the front
during the whole of the war, being
present at some of the most impor-
tant operations, and was mentioned
in despatches by the noted Generals
French, Hutton, Mahon, and
Plumer. He received the decoration
of D.S.O. in 1900 and was also
awarded the King's and Queen's
medals, the latter with five
bars. Upon the proclamation of
peace Captain Todd returned to
New Zealand and in 1904
came to Western Australia to
join his brothers, Messrs. Alex-
ander and James Todd, in the large
building, contracting, and brick-
making business so successfully es-
tablished in this State. Since then
he has thrown his energies into the
building up and advancement of
this important concern, and resides
at Midland Junction, where he has
interested himself in the affairs of
the district, and for the past three
years has occupied a seat in the local
Municipal Council. He is a member
of the Western Australian, the
Naval and Military, and the Ma-
sonic Clubs, being a member of the
Masonic craft, in which he holds
office at the present time. In earlier
days Captain Todd was an active
participant in all athletic sports and
has represented New Zealand in
Rugby and Association football. At
the present time he finds recreation in
the game of bowls, and is a member
of the Perth and Midland Junction
Bowling Clubs.
Captain FRANK MANFORD,
who holds the rank of Honorary
Lieutenant in the Imperial Army,


was born on November 15, 1868, and
is the son of the late Dr. Manford,
of Newcastle-on-Tyne, England. He
was educated at St. George's College,
Harrogate, and Mill Hill School,
London, and having served an ap-
prenticeship of four years left Eng-
land for Australia, where he re-
mained for eight years. Returning
to the Old Country in 1898 Captain
Manford joined the 3rd Volunteer
Battalion, Northumberland Fusi-
liers, afterwards being selected as
an officer of the Ist Volunteer Com-
pany and drafted into the 2nd Bat-
talion, Northumberland Fusiliers
(Regulars), with which regiment he
saw two years' active service in
South Africa. For his military
services in the Boer war he holds the
Queen's Medal with four clasps and
also the King’s Medal. He also
holds the bronze medal of the Royal
Humane Society. In 1902, instead
of returning to the Old Country with
his regiment, he once more sailed for
Western Australia, being desirous of
making his home in the State to
which he had become so much at-
tached, and entering into business
pursuits at Fremantle he has con-
tinued there ever since. Captain
Manford's favourite recreation is
found on the golf links, but in the
Bartletto, Perth.
CAPTAIN FRANK MANFORD.
past he made his mark in Rugby
football, having played for his
county in England.
Captain ROBERT THOMPSON
McMASTER, of South Perth, is a
native of Victoria, being a son of
the late Mr. Vincent Robert
McMaster, of Melbourne, where the
subject of this sketch was born on
Bartletto, Perth
CAPTAIN ROBERT THOMPSON MCMASTER.
December 29, 1865. He attended
the Scotch College in his native city
until sixteen years of age, when he
was articled to the late Mr. Egan, a
well-known Melbourne architect, and
served eight years' indentures under
this master of the profession. In the
early nineties he joined the architec-
tural staff of the Government of
Western Australia, and having
spent two years in that service, in
1893 established himself in practice
on his own behalf at Perth, con-
tinuing until 1899, when he retired
from the profession. Among the
buildings for which Captain McMas-
ter has been responsible may be
numbered the Central Arcade, the
United Service Hotel, Ozone Hotel,
Smith's Chambers, and the Broken
Hill Hotel, Victoria Park, besides
many other mercantile and residen-
tial structures. He has considerable
landed interests in the State, own-
ing large pastoral and agricultural
properties in the eastern districts,
and devotes a great deal of time and
attention to the breeding of blood
stock on his stud farm at Merriden,
mention of which is made in the pas-
toral section of this work. Captain
McMaster has always been dis-
tinguished for his keen interest in
military matters, and upon the de-
parture for South Africa of troops
from this State was placed in charge
of the Western Australian second
contingent, with the rank of Cap-
tain. For two years he saw active
service at the scene of the war, and
was present at the notable engage-
ments of Diamond Hill and Sand
River, and received the King’s Medal
and six clasps. Upon his return from
South Africa he went on the retired
list, finding the demands on his time
too great to allow of his continuance
in the forces. He was married in
1894 to Emjly Frances, daughter of
t he late Mr. John Holman, of Devon-
shire, England, and has three sons,
land two daughters.
Captain ARTHUR REGINALD
WHITE, of the Australian Intelli-
gence Corps, is a son of Mr. William
White, of Perth, and was born at
Sydney, New South Wales, on Octo-
ber 31, 1886. He pursued his
scholastic studies at the public
schools at Dubbo in his native State,
and upon coming to Western Aus-
tralia at the age of seventeen en-
tered the local Civil Service in the
draughting division of the Survey
Department, and has continued in
this office ever since. Descended
from a family whose members have
served in the Imperial Army for
several generations, Captain White
early showed his military tendon-
Bartletto, Perth.
CAPTAIN ARTHUR REGINALD WHITE.
cies by joining at the age of twenty
the Western Australian Highlanders
(W.A.1.R.). He received his com-
mission as Second Lieutenant in
1907, was subsequently promoted
to , First Lieutenant, and finally
transferred to the Intelligence
Corps, being gazetted Captain on


October 10, 1910, and at the pre-
sent time he is senior officer in the
Topographical Section. The gentle-
man under review is a prominent
oarsman and upon two occasions al-
ready has represented Western Aus-
tralia in the interstate eight-oar
championships. He is a member of
the Western Australia Rowing Club
and one of the crew which is at
present (1911) the champion eight
of Western Australia. He is also
an enthusiastic member of the Wes-
tern Australia Bulldog Club.
Lieutenant GEORGE ALFRED
MILLS is a son of the late Mr. John
Mills, of Parramatta, New South
Wales, and was born at Parramatta
on March 10, 1848. He was edu-
cated at Newington College, New
South Wales, and after leaving
school entered the Department of
Public Instruction, then known as
the Council of Education, and was
headmaster in various schools in the
premier State for over sixteen years.
At the expiration of that time he
retired from the Service and entered
into commercial pursuits with the
firm of Messrs. Mills & Pile, with
whom he remained as Manager in
Parramatta for six years. Proceed-
Bartletto, Perth
LIEUTENANT GEORGE ALFRED MILLS.
ing thence to Broken Hill in 1899 he
became part-proprietor of The Bar
rier Miner daily newspaper. During
his residence at Broken Hill, extend-
ing over seventeen years, he was for
a considerable period senior magis-
trate of the town and deputy-sheriff,
and was also a member of the Licen-
sing Bench, being appointed to the
latter office soon after his arrival.
Since 1906 he has resided at Perth.
Mr. Mills is a Justice of the Peace
for New South Wales, Queensland,
and South Australia. As far back
as 1866 he joined the ranks of the
No. 1 Company, Western Battalion
(now the 3rd A.1.R.), at Parra-
matta, being transferred three years
later to the Penrith Company. In
1887 he was promoted to the rank
of Lieutenant and Quartermaster of
the regiment, and at the time of his
retirement from the Service concur-
rently with his departure for Broken
Hill he had completed twenty-three
years' service. He was subsequently
awarded the colonial auxiliary forces
long-service medal. He was married
in 1869 to a daughter of the late
Mr. William Kendall, erstwhile
inspector and district officer of police
at Penrith, New South Wales, and
has a surviving family of three sons
and three daughters.
The Department of Trade and Customs in the Com-
monwealth of Australia is charged with the administra-
tion of all matters relating to trade, Customs, excise,
bounties, commerce, fisheries, and quarantine, and it is
proposed that, as soon as the necessary legislation is
passed, navigation and shipping, lighthouses, lightships,
beacons and buoys, and weights and measures shall also
come within the sphere of its operations.
The present Federal Minister of Trade and Customs
is the Hon. Frank Gwynne Tudor, M.P., and the Per-
manent Head and Comptroller-General is Nicholas Col-
ston Lockyer, 1.5.0., J.P.
The personnel of the Department in Western Aus-
tralia is as under :
Fremantle.
State Collector of Customs, Registrar of Shipping,
and Receiver of Wrecks —Oswald Septimus Maddocks.
Inspector —O. T. Orr.
Chief Clerk —J. J. Broomhall.
Accountant —R. H. Quick.
Cashier —M. J. Moody.
Paying Officer —J. J. Morphett.
Clerk in Charge of Statistics —J. M. Clifton.
Examining Officers —E. S. P. Troode, P. E. Fettl-
erick, A. T. Patrick, E. \V. T. Back, A. H. Martin, F.
W. Johnson, and J. Blinco.
Supervisor—T. Blinco.
Boarding Inspector—O. W. Hough.
Excise Branch.
Inspectors- P. Awcock and five others.
Perth.
Sub-Collector of Customs —A. T. Sherwood.
Examining Officers —H. A. G. Hill, A. E. L.
Cowan, and W. A. Clifford.
OUTPORTS.
Albany: Sub-Collector--J. M. Dickson.
Broome: Sub-Collector—H. W. Huggins.
Bunbury : Sub-Collector—W. H. Lovegrove.
Carnarvon: Sub-Collector—C. P. Johnstone.
Cossack: Sub-Collector—W. F. S. Richards.
Geraldton : Sub-Collector —E. P. Erskine.
Onslow : Sub-Collector—L. C. Timperley.
Port Hedland : Sub-Collector, Walter Moore.
Shark Bay: W. J. Kestel.
At the following outports the duties of Customs
Officer are performed by the Postmaster: —Busselton.
Derby, Esperance, and Wyndham.
Trade and Customs.


When Western Australia joined the other States
in forming the Commonwealth of Australia the revenue
derived through the Customs and excise amounted to
nearly £7 per head of the population, an amount more
than three times the per capita return of any other
colony. This fact made the Government hesitate to
recommend federation to the people. It was recognized,
though but tardily, by the other colonies that to come
in on ordinary terms would work an injustice upon
the Western State, and consequently a clause (95) was
included in the Constitution allowing Western Australia
to collect duties upon goods from other ports of Aus-
tralia for a term of five years, decreasing by 20 per
cent, each year. After the term was completed and
interstate freetrade fully established the State felt the
loss of revenue severely, and the severity was further
accentuated when the Braddon clause in the Constitu-
tion, under which three-fourths of the Customs revenue
had to be returned to the States, expired in 1910. So
OSWALD SEPT. MADDOCKS,
Collector of Customs for Western
Australia, was born at Sydney on
December 23, 1860, and attended
various schools, concluding his
scholastic career at Morvern College,
Double Bay. When seventeen years
of age he entered the Customs
Department, some time after being-
placed in the gauging depart-
ment of the permanent ser-
vice, where he remained for
some years. In 1888 he was
transferred by the State Government
Burtletto, Perth.
MR. OSWALD SEPT. MADDOCKS.
to Broken Hill in the capacity of
Sub-Collector of Customs, and con-
tinued in the discharge of this office
for some fourteen years. Within a
couple of months after the inaugu-
ration of the Australian Common-
wealth Mr. Maddocks was recalled
to Sydney and was attached to the
examining officers’ division, two years
later receiving the appointment of
chief boarding inspector, which
he filled for a similar period. After
a further promotion to the post of
Inspector he received instructions to
proceed to Western Australia to take
over the duties of Acting Collector
upon the retirement of Mr. Clayton
T. Mason, and upon June 1, 1894,
was gazetted to the permanent
appointment. With his advent a
strict adherence to the regulations
was brought into force in the admin-
istration of departmental business,
and the internal workings of the
several branches of the department
were closely investigated and revised
by the new officer.
The late CLAYTON TU R-
NE R MAS O N, 1.5.0., was
born at Tarrington, Herefordshire,
England, on May 25, 1847. Upon
the conclusion of his scholastic career
at King Edward’s School, Birming-
ham, he was articled to the late Mr.
Thomas Waring, M.1.C.E., prac-
tising at Cardiff, South Wales. He
went to America in 1870, and
extending his travels to Fiji and
Australia he received an appoint-
ment in the Railway Branch of the
Public Works Department of New
South Wales and remained in that
service until 1877, when he was
offered and accepted the appointment
of Resident Engineer of the Gerald-
serious was the position that all political parties recog-
nized that the case of Western Australia required
special treatment. For that reason, and in order to
give something approaching justice to the State, the
Commonwealth Parliament decided in 1911 to give the
State a special grant for ten years, the grant for the
first year to be £250,000, and to diminish during each
of the ten years by equal sums. This was in addition
to the 255. per head returned to all the States as com-
pensation for the loss of Customs revenue. Though in
the aggregate these concessions amount to nearly
£600,000 a year, that sum does not by amy means repre-
sent the amount that the State would have received
yearly from the Customs. Though the ultimate, and to
a certain extent the present, advantages of federation
to Western Australia must be admitted it is doubtful
whether they are not more than counterbalanced by
the revenue lost through thus showing her loyalty to the
Australian ideal.
bon and Northampton Railway, the
first line built by the Government of
Western Australia. Subsequently he
was appointed to the position of
Resident Engineer of the Eastern
Railway for four years. In 1882-3
he acted as Commissioner of Rail-
ways and in the year following was
provisionally appointed Director of
Public Works and Commissioner of
Railways, with a seat on the
Executive and Legislative Councils.
In June, 1885, he received the ap-
pointment of General Manager and
Maintenance Engineer for the Wes-
tern Australian Railways and retired
from the Legislative and Executive
Councils. Later he was, in conjunc-
tion with his other duties, aq-ain ap-
pointed Commissioner of Railways
and a member of the Executive
Council, and remained as such until
the introduction of responsible
government in 1891, when in con-
sequence of departmental changes he
severed his connection with the Rail-
ways Department and was trans-
ferred to the important position of
Collector of Customs. In 1901 the
Customs and Excise Department was
taken over by the Federal Govern-
ment, and in that year Mr. Mason
attended a Conference of all the
State Collectors and assisted in
drafting all the necessary regula-
tions, etc., for the proper working
of the department. In 1909 Mr.
Mason visited England for the
benefit of his health, returning to
Australia in 1910, but in conse-
quence of continued ill-health he re-
tired with a pension in March, 1911.
Mr. Mason was elected a member of


the Institute of Civil Engineers on
April 1, 1884, and received his com-
mission of Justice of the Peace in
1882. At the time of the corona-
tion of King George V. he was made
a Companion of the Imperial Service
Order (1.5.0.) for long and dis-
tinguished services. He was a Mas-
ter Mason for over thirty-six years,
was one of the founders and Wor-
shipful Master of St. George’s Lodge,
was a member of St. John’s Lodge,
No. 1, and a P.S.G.W. of the Grand
Lodge of Western Australia. He
was a prominent rifleman and was
invited by the King of Belgium in
1868, when a member of the Queen’s
Westminster Volunteers, to compete
in the great international matches
held in that country, and carried off
the sixth prize among 6,000 com-
petitors. Mr. Mason, who died on
October 4, 1911, married a daughter
of the late Captain Daniel Scott, of
Fremantle.
ORLANDO THEOPHILU S
ORR, Inspector of Customs, West-
ern Australia, is a son of the late
Mr. J. PI. M. Orr, of the Victorian
Civil Service, and was born near
Bristol, England, on May 24, 1852.
lie pursued his scholastic studies at
various schools, being Dux in Eng-
lish of the Scotch College, Mel-
bourne, Victoria, in 1867, when he
was presented with the special prize
by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh,
who was then visiting Australia.
Subsequently Mr. Orr took a posi-
tion as private tutor to the family
of the late Mr. Lewis, owner of a
gold mine at Whroo, near Rush-
worth, Victoria. Later he joined
a party proceeding to the Island of
Ovalan, in the Fiji group, to engage
in the occupation of cotton and
sugar-growing. At the outset, how-
ever, they were met with very
adverse conditions, the seasons at
that period being most unpropi-
tious. Mr. Orr therefore under-
took the duties of supercargo
on board a vessel trading among
the islands with the object of
recruiting labour to work the planta-
tions, and during this period was the
subject of experiences sufficiently
numerous and interesting to fill a
volume. Returning to Australia,
while taking a trip round the coast
he offered himself to fill a vacancy
caused by the death of the principal
of a Presbyterian Church School
at Naracoorte, and upon being
accepted combined literary work
with his other duties, writing for
the local Herald and doing a
large amount of work of a descrip-
tive character for the South Austra-
lian Press. In 1880 he was offered
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ORLANDO THEOPHILUS ORR.
the position of assistant master at
All Saints’ Grammar School in St ;
Kilda, under the late Mr. W. H.
Goff, then principal of that well-
known scholastic institution. After
several years in this connection,
during which he also acted as pri-
vate tutor in several of the leading
families in St. Kilda, he resigned in
order to accept a post offered him in
the Civil Service when the late
Honourable J. H. Graves was the
Commissioner of Customs of Vic-
toria, and entering the office of the
Jerquer, was promoted through the
various grades of the Service until
he was appointed landing-waiter at
Melbourne in 1901. At the inaugu-
ration of Federation he was sent to
Sydney with several other special
officers to assist in the administra-
tion of the protective tariff, the
Sydney Customs Department having
experience only of practically free-
trade principles. He continued in
the service of the department at
Sydney until 1904 when he was
specially selected by the Reid-Mc-
Lean Government to act as Secre-
tary on the Royal Commission on the
Commonwealth tariff, presided over
by the Honourable Sir John Quick.
This Commission sat for two years
and eight months, travelling from
Bundaberg in Queensland to Kal-
goorlie in Western Australia, and at
its close Mr. Orr was officially con-
gratulated by the Chairman and
members of the Commission on the
able manner in which he had dis-
charged his duties, and was pre-
sented with a substantial bonus by
the Federal Executive, and with a
handsome piece of plate by the
members of the Commission. While
on the Commission he received the
appointment of Inspector of Customs
in Western Australia, and though
unable at that time to take up the
duties of the position, eventually, in
August, 1907, he arrived at Fre-
mantle and began his discharge of
the office to which he had been
appointed a couple of years before,
and which he still occupies. Mr.
Orr has always taken a live interest
in sport generally, being particu-
larly addicted to yatchting, and till
recently was Vice-Commodore of the
Claremont Yacht Club. He is fond
of golf and is a member of the Cot-
tesloe Golf Club. Tie is also asso-
ciated with the Masonic fraternity
and is a member of the Masonic
Club. In 1878 he married a
daughter of the late Dr. Gunning, of
Naracoorte, South Australia, who
died in 1893. His second wife was
the widow of the late Mr. W. W.
Jeremy, draughtsman, of the Public
Works Department, Victoria.
JOHN JAMES BROOMHALL,
J.P., chief clerk to the Federal
Bartletto , Perth
MR. JOHN JAMES BROOM HALL.
Customs Department of Western
Australia, was born at Fremantle on
May 24, 1861, and is a son of the
late Mr. J. G. Broomhall, of Fre*


mantle, whilom superintendent of
works in the Imperial Service. At
the close of his educational career
young Broomhall entered the employ
of Messrs. J. & W. Bateman, genera]
merchants, and remained with the
firm for eight years, at the end of
which time resigning his position in
order to assume control of the late
Sir George Shenton’s business at Fre-
mantle. Two years later he entered
into partnership with the elder mem-
ber of the firm with which he first
found employment, and established
at Roebourne a general storekeeping
business which continued for six
years. During this time Mr. Broom-
hall interested himself in the munici-
pal affairs of the district and received
the honour of being elected the first
Mayor of Roebourne. In 1892 he left
the Nor’-AVest, and in May of that
year was offered and accepted a posi-
tion as warehousekeeper to the Cus-
toms Department at Fremantle, a
post he retained for twelve years, at
the expiration of that time being
appointed to the position he now fills.
On several occasions he has acted as
Collector of Customs, having a thor-
ough grasp of the essentials necessary
to the performance of the duties of
that important office. Mr. Broom-
hall, who was made a Justice of the
Peace in 1904, married in 1887
Jessie, daughter of the late Mr.
John Bateman, of Fremantle.
AUBREY THOMAS SHER
WOOD, Sub-Collector of Customs,
Perth, is the eldest son of Major
Thomas Sherwood, of that city,
where the gentleman under review
was born on November 11, 1865.
He attended various scholastic insti-
tutions, principally the High Schools
at Perth and Fremantle, and at
eighteen years of age entered the
Customs House at the latter port as
a junior. Since that time he has
passed through every grade of the
Service and in 1890 was appointed
to open the Customs House at the
capital from the head office, Fre-
mantle. In January, 1895, he was
placed in charge as Sub-Collector of
Customs at Perth, which appoint-
ment he has held ever since. Mr.
Sherwood gives his cordial support
to all aquatic sports and makes a
special hobby of yachting. His
boat, “Lotus,” is well known among
the river craft, and has won for her
owner numerous prizes in connection
with the various racing events which
command much interest in the yacht-
ing season. He was one of the
founders of the Freshwater Bay
Yacht Club, for which he acted for
some years as Hon. Secretary and
Commodore, and latterly as Vice-
Bartletto , Perth
MR. AUBREY THOMAS SHERWOOD.
President. He is also a member of
the Claremont Yacht Club. Golf
claims a portion of his leisure,
and he is often to be seen on the
Cottesloe links, of which club he is
a member. He is connected with
the fraternity of Freemasons and
a well-known identity at the Masonic
Club. Mr. Sherwood married in
1893 Louisa, daughter of Mr. F.
W. Wisdom, of Inverness, Scotland.
JOHN MAXWELL CLIFTON,
Acting Inspector of Excise Customs,
Fremantle, is a son of the late Mr.
Leonard W. Clifton, who held the
appointment of Collector of Cus-
toms for over thirty years at that
seaport, where the gentleman
under review was born on September
26, 1871. He received his scholastic
training at the Fremantle Grammar
School under the tuition of the
Honourable H. Briggs, M.L.C.,
and when about eighteen years of
age entered the Customs Depart-
ment in the capacity of assistant
tide-waiter. Subsequently he was
promoted to the position of landing-
waiter, and in 1893, on his own ap-
plication, was transferred to the sta-
tistical department, of which office
he ultimately took control. In Janu-
ary, 1911, Mr. Clifton was given the
appointment of Acting Inspector of
Excise Customs, and has carried out
the duties of this office ever since.
Apart from his official life, he makes
a hobby of photography, and his
work in this line has been classed by
artists as bearing favourable com-
parison with many of the produc-
tions from professional studios. He
is also an amateur carpenter and
takes great delight in the execution
of various useful and ornamental
pieces of woodcraft. A member of
the fraternity of Freemasons, he
takes an interest in all matters for
the advancement of this body. In
1908 he married Kathleen Swaine,
daughter of the late Mr. Henry
Hooper, of Adelaide, and has a
son and a daughter.
JOHN MOORE DICKSON, Sub-
Collector of Customs, Albany, is a
son of the late Thomas James Dick-
son, of Gisborne, New Zealand, and
was born at Dunluce, in County
Antrim, Ireland, in the vicinity of
the famous Giant's Causeway, on
November 15, 1864. Being taken to
New Zealand while quite an infant,
he subsequently pursued his scholas-
tic studies at the Gisborne State
School and the Gisborne Grammar
School, at a later date attending
the Canterbury College, Lincoln,
New Zealand. He was engaged in
agricultural and pastoral pursuits on
his own behalf for six years prior to
leaving the Dominion for Western
Greenham & Evans , Perth.
MR. JOHN MOORE DICKSON.
Australia in 1890, but on arrival in
this State turned his attention to
prospecting on the Southern Cross
goldfields. Shortly after the dis


covery of the great Coolgardie field
Mr. Dickson contracted typhoid
fever, and returning to the coast ob-
tained a temporary position on the
staff of the Customs Department. In
1893 he was gazetted to a permanency
in the department, and a year later
was transferred to Esperance in the
capacity of landing-waiter, shortly
afterwards being appointed landing-
surveyor at the same port, holding
in addition the posts of Clerk of
Local Court and Petty Sessions,
Treasury Cashier, and District Land
Agent. In May, 1899, he was pro-
moted to the post of sub-collector,
and after more than ten years' ser-
vice at Esperance was granted trans-
fer and promotion to Albany by the
Federal Government in 1904. Mr.
Dickson's whole time and attention
practically is given up to official
duties, but he finds leisure for need-
ful recreation in riding, fishing, and
shooting. He was the founder and
for some time President of the Esper-
ance Rifle Club, and may be said to
excel in this form of sport, in his early
days in New Zealand, while a mem-
ber of the East Coast Mounted Hus-
sars, having won a championship
which greatly redounded to the hon-
our of his corps. While at school he
was, after competitive examination,
appointed First Lieutenant of the
Gisborne Cadets before attaining the
age of sixteen, and he has been well
known as a first-class cricketer and
footballer. A member of the
Masonic craft, he is at present an
office-holder in the Plantagenet
Lodge, E.C. Mr. Dickson married in
1898 Maud, daughter of the late
Thomas Hill, of Parramatta, New
South Wales, and has two sons and
two daughters.
EDWARD SCOBLE POMEROY
TROODE was born at Fremantle in
1864, being educated privately and at
tiie Fremantle Public School. In
1883 he accepted a position as tide-
waiter, in which capacity he con-
tinued until the Fremantle wharves
were vested in the Customs Depart-
ment in 1886, when he was appointed
to the post of Wharfinger's Assist-
ant. In 1889 he received transfer
to Albany and held numerous offices
in that important shipping centre
until 1898, when he was promoted
to be Sub-Collector of Customs in
charge at that port. When Albany
ceased to be a port of call for the
Royal Mail steamers Mr. Troode s
services were requisitioned for Fre-
mantle, where subsequent to the
retirement of Mr. Goodsir he acted
as Landing-surveyor. With the re-
organization of the service by the
federal authorities in 1904 Mr.
Troode was classified as First-class
Examining Officer, and has since on
various occasions acted as Inspector
during the temporary absence of the
head of the Department.
Patents, Trade Marks, and Copyright.
PATENTS.
Since the inauguration of the Commonwealth the
granting of patents has been vested in the Federal
Government, though it was not until June, 1904, that
the Act governing the matter came into force. There is
a Commissioner of Patents and Registrar of Trade
Marks and Copyright at the seat of Government, but
the records for each State are kept at the Customs
Department, where all information upon questions deal-
ing with patents, etc., is obtainable. So far as Wes-
tern Australia is concerned this is the procedure adopted,
but owing to the fact that the patent files at the Public
Library are the only ones in the State approaching com-
pleteness, they are considerably used for purposes of
research.
Application for a patent may be made by — (a) The
actual inventor; or (b) his assignee, agent, attorney, or
nominee; or (c) the actual inventor or his nominee
jointly with the assignee of a part interest in the inven-
tion * or (d) the legal representative of a deceased actual
inventor or of his assignee; or (e) any person to whom
the invention has been communicated by the actual in-
ventor, his legal representative or assignee (if the actual
inventor, his legal representative or assignee, is not resi-
dent in the Commonwealth).
An application for a patent must be for one inven-
tion only, and must be made in the form prescribed
and must be lodged by being left at or sent by post
to the Patent Office in the prescribed manner, and must
be accompanied by either a provisional specification or
a complete specification, together with the prescribed
fee, <£l. The application must contain a declaration
in the form prescribed setting out the facts relied on
to support the application, and must be signed by the
applicant and attested by a witness.
The term limited in every patent for the duration
thereof is fourteen years from its date. But every
patent shall cease if the patentee fails to pay the renewal
fee within the prescribed time —seven years from date
of application. If in any case by accident, mistake, or
inadvertence a patentee fails to pay the renewal fee
within such prescribed time, he may apply to the Com-
missioner for an enlargement of the time for making
that payment.
The Commissioner, if satisfied that the failure has
arisen from any of the above-mentioned causes, and on
receipt of the prescribed fee for enlargement, shall en-
large the time accordingly, subject to the following con-
ditions : (1) The time for making any payment shall
not in any case be enlarged for more than one year;
(2) if any proceeding is taken in respect of an infringe-
ment of the patent committed after a failure to make
any payment within the prescribed time, and before the
enlargement thereof, the court before which the pro-
ceeding is taken may, if it thinks fit, refuse to award
or give any damages in respect of the infringement.
TRADE MARKS.
A registrable trade mark must consist of essential
particulars with or without additional matter. The
essential particulars must be one or more of the follow


ing : — (a) A name or trading style of a person printed,
impressed, or woven in some particular and distinctive
manner; or (h) a written signature or copy of a written
signature of the person applying for registration thereof
or some predecessor in his business; or (c) a distinctive
device, mark, brand, heading, label, or ticket; or (d)
an invented word or invented words: or (e) a word
or words having no reference to the character or quality
of the goods, and not being a geographical name used
or likely to be understood in a geographical sense. The
additional matter which may be added to the essential
particulars of a registrable trade mark shall be: -
(n) Any letters, words, or figures; or (h) any combina-
tion of letters, words, or figures, or of any of them.
COPYRIGHTS.
Copyright subsists in every book, whether the
author is a British subject or not, which has been printed
from type, set up in Australia, or plates made there-
from, or from plates or negatives made in Australia, in
cases where type is not necessarily used, and has, after
the commencement of the Copyright Act, 1905, been
published in Australia, before or simultaneously with its
first publication elsewhere.
Performing right subsists in every dramatic or
musical work, whether the author is a British subject
or not, which has, after the commencement of the Copy-
right Act, 1905, been performed in public in Australia,
before or simultaneously with its first performance in
public elsewhere.
Lecturing right subsists in every lecture, whether
the author is a British subject or not, which has, after
the commencement of the Copyright Act, 1905, been
delivered in public in Australia, before or simultaneously
with its first delivery in public elsewhere.
Copyright subsists in every artistic work, whether
the author is a British subject or not, which is made
in Australia after the commencement of the Copyright
Act, 1905.
The copyright in a book, the performing right in a
dramatic or musical work, the lecturing right in a lec-
ture, or the copyright in an artistic work, begins with
the first publication of the book, performance of the
dramatic or musical work, delivery in public of the lec-
ture, or the making of the artistic work in Australia,
and subsists for the term of forty-two years, or for
the author’s life and seven years, whichever is the
longer.
The owner of any copyright, performing right, or
lecturing right, under the Copyright Act, 1905, may
obtain registration of his right by lodging at or sending
to the Copyright Office an application in the prescribed
form, and accompanied by the prescribed fee.
Every person applying for the registration of the
copyright in any book shall deliver to the Registrar two
copies of the whole book, with all maps and illustrations
belonging thereto, finished and coloured in the same
manner as the best copies of the book are published and
bound, sewed, or stitched together, and on the best
paper on which the book is printed. One copy of each
book so delivered to the Registrar shall be forwarded by
him to the librarian of the Parliament.
Every person applying for the registration of the
copyright in any work of art shall deliver to the
Registrar one copy of the work of art or a photograph
of it.


State Government Departments.
Under the Constitution Act, 1889, provision was
made for five salaried responsible Ministers, and the
titles of those chosen were Colonial Treasurer, Colonial
Secretary, Attorney-General, Commissioner of Crown
Lands, and Commissioner of Railways and Director of
Public Works. The original departments under the
new regime were, therefore, the Treasury, Colonial Sec-
retary’s Department, Crown Law Department, Lands
Department, and Public Works and Railways Depart-
ment. This arrangement held good until the end of
1894, when it became apparent that, owing to the gold
discoveries and the consequent growth of a great mining
industry, a separate department for the control of min-
ing was necessary. It was also felt that the great influx
of population demanded the establishment of a more
modern educational system. These two spheres of
administrative action, therefore, which had previously
ranked as subdivisions of other departments, were
separated into distinct departments, and by a rearrange-
ment of Ministerial Offices the Colonial Secretaryship
was combined with the position of Colonial Treasurer,
and a new responsible post —Minister of Mines and
Education —was created. This change made it possible
to cope with the work of administration for a while
longer; but when the amendment to the Constitution
This office —really a department—though an
anomaly under the Constitution and in a measure pecu-
liar to Western Australia, is, nevertheless, one of the
busiest and most important sections of the Public Ser-
vice. The abnormal conditions existing in the colony
during the last decade of the nineteenth century and the
dominating influence in political affairs of the then
Premier, Sir John Forrest, contributed to make the
Premier’s office the centre and focus of all administra-
tive work and the depository of confidential matter
ALFRED COLENSO KESSELL,
F.R.G.S., J.P., Secretary to the
Honourable the Premier, has held
that confidential office since 1903 in
the successive Administrations of
Sir Walter James, K.C., Kt.; Hon-
ourable H. Daglish (now a member
of the Arbitration Court); Sir Corn-
thwaite Rason, Kt. ; Honourable Sir
Newton Moore, K.C.M.G. : the Hon-
ourable Frank Wilson, C.M.G.; and
BB
PREMIER’S OFFICE.
is now occupying a similar post
under the second Labour Adminis-
tration of which the Honourable
John Scaddan, M.L.A., is the head.
Mr. Kessell, who was born and edu-
cated at Adelaide, South Australia,
commenced his commercial career
in the offices of the South Australian
Advertiser , and at a later date
became a teacher in the Adelaide
Shorthand Institute. Subsequently
was under consideration in 1896 the Government deemed
it wise to increase the number of salaried Ministers to
six, as the enormous expansion in every phase of Gov-
ernment activity had increased the work to such an
extent that the task of properly controlling it was beyond
the power of the number of Ministers allowed by the
original Constitution. Consequently since 1896 there
have been six Ministers of State. From time to time
alterations in their designations have been made by the
Governor-in-Council to meet the exigencies of the period,
and it has also become the practice to appoint as Hon-
orary Ministers gentlemen of leisure sufficient to allow
them to assist their responsible confreres. When respon-
sible government was inaugurated the Premier (Sir
John Forrest) reserved the Treasurership as his Cabinet
office, and that combination, owing probably to the fact
that Sir John Forrest held it for over ten years, seems
to be the usual one in Western Australian politics,
though Sir Walter James was Premier and Attorney-
General, and Sir Newton Moore for a time combined
the Leadership of the Government with the position of
Minister for Lands and Agriculture.
The present distribution of State departments and
branches is, according to the Estimates for 1911-12, as
under:
relating to the administration. The procedure adopted
by Sir John was found by successive Leaders of the
Government to be so convenient that it has practically
grown into a system the justification for which is its
very great usefulness. All matters requiring the atten-
tion of the Premier as head of the Government, as well
as those matters which do not specifically relate to any
particular State department, pass through this office,
which also fulfils in a measure the functions of a dis-
tributing medium for correspondence and requests.
he established a successful Commer-
cial and Shorthand Institute in Bal-
larat, Victoria, and has passed a
number of examinations in Adelaide,
London, and New York. He re-
mained in Ballarat for six years,
when having an intense inclination
to widen his knowledge and experi-
ence, and thereby his future useful-
ness, by means of travel Mr. Kessell
undertook a tour of the world as a


Press correspondent (from 1894 to
1896), in the course of which he
met with some exciting and most in-
teresting adventures on land and
sea. Among other events he was
arrested at Jenin, Palestine, by the
Turkish authorities on suspicion of
being a spy, and had to appear
before two Provincial Governors and
the British Consul at Haifa (Mount
Carmel) before demanding his re-
lease as a British subject. In addi-
tion he had a very narrow escape
from shipwreck among the icebergs
off the coast of Newfoundland, no
great distance from the spot where
the “Titanic” foundered. In the
course of his journeyings on this trip
Mr. Kessell had the pleasure of in-
terviewing a number of world celeb-
rities, among whom were Arabi
Pashi, “Mark Twain,” Henry M.
Stanley, and General Booth. Early
in 1896 he was recalled to South
Australia from Canada on account
of family bereavements, and subse-
quently decided to settle in Western
Australia. After spending six years
in secretarial work on the goldfields
Mr. Kessell came to Perth, having
been appointed confidential short-
hand writer to the Commissioner of
Railways (Mr. W. J. George).
From that post he was promoted to
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ALFRED COLENSO KESSELL.
the office which he at present holds.
When the Premier (Sir Newton
Moore) decided to visit England in
1910 in connection with the immi-
gration policy of the Government
and to look into the question of re-
organizing the London Agency, Mr.
Kessell was selected to accompany
him in the position of Confidential
Secretary. He has also attended in
the same capacity every conference
of State Premiers held since 1904.
He was unanimously elected as the
first President of the Western Aus-
tralian Shorthand-writers' Associa-
tion owing to the keen interest he
has shown in educational and com-
mercial matters. Mr. Kessell has
always manifested a deep interest in
political, social, and municipal affairs
—an interest which has proved in-
valuable to him in his present posi-
tion. He is a Fellow of the Royal
Geographical Society (London), a
Fellow of the Institute of Com-
merce (London), a Fellow of the
National Shorthand Association (In-
corporated) of London, and a Jus-
tice of the Peace. Mr. Kessell was
married in 1899 to Emily, daughter
of Mr. H. J. Summerscales, one of
the leading merchants of Ballarat,
Victoria, and has three children —
two boys and a girl.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONER.
While Western Australia remained a Crown colony
all appointments to official positions were in the gift of
the Home Government or of the representative of that
Government in the colony. After the introduction of
responsible government this patronage was transferred
to the Ministers; but when the colony began to ex-
pand, and public servants were numbered by thousands
instead of hundreds, it became apparent that some
change was necessary, as well in the interests of mem-
bers of the Government as for the efficiency, welfare,
and economic administration of the Public Service.
It was not until 1904, however, that anything in
the nature of a Public Service Act of a comprehensive
character was agreed to by Parliament. In that year
the Public Service Act, which still controls the Public
Service of the State, was passed, but it did not come
into operation until May of the following year. Under
it the control of the Service was vested in a Public
Service Commissioner, to whom was also committed the
duty of preparing a classification of all positions and of
fixing the salaries proportionate to the work performed.
The first Commissioner appointed under the Act was
Mr. Martin Edward dull, the term of his appointment
being in the first instance for seven years. Before that
period had elapsed Mr. Jull was reappointed, and there-
fore still holds the position. His first work was to pre-
pare regulations for the internal management of the
Service. These did not at first meet with any great
approval, but with slight amendments they have since
been accepted as fair and reasonable. The task of
classifying the officers and their positions, which was
next undertaken, was a much more difficult one. Recog-
nizing that fact, the Act gave power to the Government
to appoint if necessary two Assistant Commissioners to
help Mr. Jull; but that officer, probably studying
economy, decided to undertake the work without assist-
ance. The result was a classification which was received
with almost unanimous disapproval, and appeals were
as “thick as leaves in Vallombrosa.” Due consideration
was given to these by an Appeal Board constituted
under the Act, but the outcome was far from satisfac-
tory from the point of view of the Service.
Ultimately the Government agreed to appoint Mr.
W. W. Alcock and Mr. H. S. King, the Under-Secretary
for Mines, to assist Mr. Jull in preparing a reclassi-
fication. The result of their labours was published early
in the present year and has recently been adopted by
the Government. While not perhaps in every case
satisfactory to the individual, the classification has cer-
tainly met with the approval of the Service generally.
At present Mr. Alcock is acting as Public Service Com-
missioner during the absence on leave of Mr. Jull.


MARTIN EDWARD JULL, the
first Public Service Commissioner for
the State of Western Australia, was
born at Horsham, Sussex, England,
on January 18, 1862, his father
being a chemist in that town.
He received his education at the
Brighton Grammar School, and at
the age of seventeen was articled
to the firm of Messrs. T. G. Wharton
and Co., surveyors and assessors, of
Wallbrook, London, afterwards join-
ing Messrs. Weather all, Green, and
Co., of Chancery Lane, with whom
he remained until reaching his
twenty-fourth year. During the
time he spent with this latter firm
he undertook an extensive tour
round the world, partly for pleasure,
but mainly for the purpose of seek-
ing experience. After leaving New
Zealand on this trip he proceeded,
in company with a party of friends,
to the South Seas, and together they
visited many unfrequented places be-
fore returning to London. Leaving
England in 1886 to settle in Aus-
tralia Mr. Jull decided to remain in
Perth, and the first position held
by him in this State was on the
staff of The Daily News , a post he
relinquished to become a draughts-
man in the Public Works Depart-
ment of the Colonial Government.
The opportunities which the land
boom in Victoria seemed to offer
induced Mr. Jull, in company with
many others, to try his fortunes in
that State. Proceeding there at the
end of 1887, he spent about three
years which from a financial point of
view were far from successful, and
returned to Perth in 1891 a poorer
if not a wiser man. Upon the estab-
lishment of responsible government
in that year he accepted the post of
Chief Clerk to the Department of
Railways and Works, and continued
to hold that office until the one De-
partment was divided into two, and
he became Under-Secretary for
Works. During his occupancy of
that office he was intimately con-
nected with the working of the Rail-
ways, the construction of the Fre-
mantle Harbour, and of the Gold-
fields Water Scheme, and had charge
of the arrangements at the opening
ceremony of the Harbour Works
when Lady Robinson, the wife of
the then Governor, tipped the first
load of stones into the sea. When
the Roads administration was trans-
ferred from the Lands to the Public
Works Department Mr. Jull was en-
trusted with the drafting of a new
Roads Boards Act, a measure which
resulted in greatly popularizing and
extending local government. During
his term of office the first Public
Works Act embodying the conditions
under which works undertaken by
the State should be constructed be-
came law. The great expansion in
every department of State work
owing to the gold discoveries
occurred during the time Mr. Jull
controlled the administrative side of
the Works Department, and the wis-
dom and judgment exercised by him
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. MARTIN EDWARD JULL.
and the late Mr. C. Y. O’Connor,
C.M.G., the Engineer-in-Chief, be-
tween whom there existed both an
official and a personal friendship, are
evidenced by the forward condition
of public works and useful services
throughout the State. The staff of
the Department, which numbered
thirty when he took charge, was in-
creased by successive reorganizations
to 650, and at that time in one year
alone the Public Works expenditure
rose to an amount equal to the pre-
sent (1910-11) total annual expendi-
ture of the whole of the State De-
partments. Many interesting phases
of life passed under his view during
those strenuous times, and when
opportunity offers Mr. Jull can tell
many anecdotes of the early dates of
the gold rush to Coolgardie and else-
where. In 1905, upon the passing
of the Public Service Act, he was
appointed to the important position
of Public Service Commissioner,
which he still continues to hold. His
principal work has been the classifi-
cation of the whole of the Service,
thus bringing it into line with the
Services of the Eastern States and
forming a model of which Western
Australia has every reason to be
proud. Not the least part of his
duty has been the framing of a com-
plete set of regulations* nothing of
the kind having previously been in
existence. For many years he has
taken an active interest in Church
matters and for some time past has
been a member of the Diocesan
Council of the Anglican Church, and
has been interested in the Y.M.C.A.
movement since its reintroduction
into the State, having been Chair-
man of the Building Committee for
the new premises erected in 1909.
A keen horticulturist, he cultivated
a vineyard and orchard at Arma-
dale, and introduced to this State
the fine varieties of wine grapes
known as “Carbinet - Souvignon,”
"Malbeck,” etc. Not being able to
find the necessary time to devote to
it, he some few years ago disposed
of the property to the late Sir
Arthur Stepney, Bart. In the old
days he was a most active member
of the Upper Swan Horticultural
Society and read several papers be-
fore that old pioneer Society. In
sporting affairs we also at one time
find Mr. Jull taking a prominent
place, being a foundation member of
the Western Australian Cricket As-
sociation and a strong supporter of
all forms of boating and sailing. He
was married in 1889 to Miss Roberta
Stewart, M 8., the first lady doctor
in Western Australia, and has one
daughter.
Like the Public Service Commissioner, the Auditor-
General is directly responsible to Parliament, and though
nominally an adjunct of the Treasury, the office is one
which ought to be treated as a separate department.
bb2
The financial transactions of the State as a business
concern are necessarily both large and complicated, as
the yearly statement of accounts amply testifies. The
Government is the largest employer of labour in the
AUDIT OFFICE.


State, has an immense carrying trade, runs manufac-
tories, sells water, controls mining plant, is a licensed
victualler, a tourist agent, and in many other ways per-
forms services that in older countries are usually left
to private concerns. It is obvious, therefore, that its
book-keeping must be both voluminous and elaborate.
While each department keeps its own accounts a general
supervision is necessary, both to minimize the risk of
error and detect irregularities which, even without
criminal intent, must necessarily occur in human affairs.
This work is performed by the Audit Office, which also
aims at securing economic administration and, where
possible, uniformity of method. It is therefore evident
that the office is not only a necessary part of the
SAMUEL TOPPIN
son of the Rev. Canon Toppin,
Rector of Tramore, County Water-
ford, Ireland, was born at Donohill
in October, 1866, and received his
education at the Diocesan School.
At sixteen years of age he went to
London and entered the firm of
Christy’s, hat manufacturers, with
whom he held a clerical position for
about five years. In 1887, having
received an appointment with the
newly-formed Western Australian
Land Company, which had received
a grant of three million acres from
the Government for the construction
of a railway from Albany to
Beverley, he left for the Western
State. Four years later he was
appointed accountant of the Com-
pany, a position he held until 1897,
when upon the purchase by the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES SAMUEL TOPPIN.
Government of the Company's con-
cession and the taking over of the
Great Southern Railway he came to
Perth and served in the head office
of the Government Railways De-
partment in the capacity of sub-
accountant until July 1, 1900. He
was then promoted to the position of
assistant accountant, and became
acting chief accountant in July,
1903. Under his supervision and
direction the system of railway
accounts was completely and satisfac-
torily reorganized, and it may be
said that on matters of accountancy
and finance he has always been re-
cognized as an authority. After
seven years Mr. Toppin severed his r .
/ connection with the railways, and on
! February 1, up the
position of Auditor-General for the
j State and Deputy Auditor-General
for the Commonwealth, the latter
duties terminating in 1906 on the
establishment of local staffs through-
out all the States. Other appoint-
ments held by Mr. Toppin under
Government were those of Co-
Trustee, with the President of the
Legislative Council and Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly, of the
Local Inscribed Stock Sinking Fund
from February, 1904, to July, 1906,
when the management was trans-
ferred to London; and Royal Com-
missioner in connection with the
Illingworth inquiry in December,
1907. Unofficially Mr. Toppin for
many years has been associated with
the Institute of Accountants and
Auditors of Western Australia, of
which Society he is Vice-President.
His chief relaxations are tennis, ama-
Iteur gardening, and fishing. He was
married in IgQJ to Evelyn, widow
of Mr. John Donaldson, M.L.A.,
Minister for Education, Queensland.
ARTHUR TREACY MERRI-
FIELD GORDON, Chief Inspector
of Accounts, Audit Department,
machinery of government, but that it occupies a most
responsible position in State affairs. Its operations are
conducted under the authority of the Audit Act, 1904,
which superseded the earlier Acts of 1881 and 1891
respectively. The present Auditor-General, who was
appointed when the Act of 1904 came into force, is
Charles S. Toppin, and the Chief Inspector is A. T.
M. Gordon. The annual reports of the Auditor-Gen-
eral, while not always pleasant reading either to the
Government or the departments, contain a comprehen-
sive survey of the financial transactions of the year, and
show that no effort is spared in the interests of the people
to stop leakages and secure legal and economic expendi-
ture of the various funds,
Perth, was born on April 12, 1873,
at Geelong, Victoria, and was edu-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ARTHUR T. M. GORDON.
cated in South Australia, to which
State his parents had removed dur-
ing his early boyhood. After leav-
ing school he entered a solicitor’s
office in Adelaide, and in 1887 went
to Albany, Western Australia, and
was employed there for a few months
in the Post and Telegraph Depart-
ment. Returning to Adelaide he
was engaged in the accountant’s
branch of the firm of Messrs. G. P.
H arris, Scarfe, & Co., and later with
Messrs. F. H. Faulding & Co.,
wholesale chemists. His next sphere
of labour was Melbourne, where he
received an appointment in the
George & George Emporium, Collins
Street, afterwards being employed
for three and a half years in the
warehouse of Messrs. Sargood, But-
ler, Nicol, & Ewen, In 1892 he


Colonial Treasurer.
From
To
Sir John Forrest
Dec. 29, 1890
Feb. 15, 1901
G eorge Throssell
Feb. 15, 1901
May 27, 1901
Frederick Illingworth..
May 27, 1901
Nov. 21, 1901
Albert Edward Morgana
Nov. 21, 1901
Dec. 23, 1901
Frederick Illingworth...
Dec. 23, 1901
J une 24, 1902
James Gardiner
June 24, 1902
May 20, 1904
Sir Cornthwaite Hector Hason
May 20, 1904
Aug. 10, 1904
Henry Daglish
August 10, 1904
Aug. 25, 1905
Sir Cornthwaite Hector Rason
August 25, 1905
May 7, 1906
Frank Wilson
May 7, 1906
June 30, 1909
Sir Newton James Moore
June 30, 1909
Sept. 16, 1910
Frank Wilson
Sept, lb, 1910
October 7, 1911
John Scaddan
October?, 1911
Still in Office
joined the firm of Messrs. Boan
Brothers at their headquarters in
Broken Hill, New South Wales, and
two years later came to Perth, where
he became attached to the Public
Service of Western Australia as a
As a department the Treasury is charged with the
control of the finances of the State, including the man-
agement of the Public Debt and the raising of loans.
The preparation of the annual Estimates of Revenue
and Expenditure and of the financial returns required
in connection therewith are also part of its work, while
it supervises in addition the following sub-departments
and branches : —Compassionate Allowances, Government
Savings Bank, Government Stores, Indenting Office,
Literary and Scientific Grants, Lithographic Office,
Government Printing Office, Taxation, Refunds, and
Miscellaneous Services. The London Agency, Audit
Office, and Public Service Commissioner are also nomin-
ally subordinate to the Treasury, but as they are legally
independent of any department it is obviously more
correct to treat them separately. The present Agent-
General for Western Australia in London is Sir New-
ton James Moore, K.C.M.G., who for several years was
Premier of the State, and in that capacity inaugurated
the policy of land settlement that has been so exten-
sively carried out during recent years. The Secretary
to the Agent-General’s Office is Mr. Reginald Hare.
The importance of the Treasury as a branch of the
Public Service is readily seen from the foregoing state-
ment. The magnitude of its functions may be in some
measure indicated by a study of the financial statement
junior in the Audit Department. In
this branch he steadily rose until in
September, 1906, he was appointed
to his present position. He acted as
Assistant Secretary in 1900 and
1907 to the Freemasons’ Club at
The Treasury.
Perth, and was acting for the Grand
Secretary in 1900 and 1907 to the
Freemasons’ Grand Lodge of Wes-
tern Australia, and is an Associate
of the Society of Accountants and
Auditors of Western Australia.
for the year ended June 30, 1912. From that it appears
that the revenue was £3,966,673, of which amount rail-
ways contributed £1,896,579, taxation and duties
£305,743, land £356,690, goldfields water supply
£141,421, harbour dues £140,131, and Commonwealth
contribution and interest on transferred properties
£638,527, the remainder being made up of miscellaneous
receipts. The expenditure for the same period totalled
£4,101,182, thus exceeding the revenue by £134,409,
due mainly to increases in salaries and wages and to
the partial failure of the harvest.
The following table shows the succession of Colonial
Treasurers since the establishment of responsible gov-
ernment :
GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANK.
The earliest legislation relating to Savings Banks
in this State was an Ordinance (18 Viet., No. 3) passed
on April 12, 1855, to provide for the encouragement,
safe custody, and increase of small savings in Western
Australia.” This measure was, however, very short-
lived, and remained in force but little more than a year,
being repealed by an Ordinance passed on June 9, 1856,
which stated that the provisions of the previous Ordin-
ance were “found to be inapplicable to existing circum-
stances,” and that in consequence the whole of that
Ordinance was repealed, “save and except so far as the
same relates to the repayment of any moneys deposited
and still being in the hands of the Colonial Treasurer,
together with interest thereon.”
Seven years after this the attempt to encourage
small savings was again made by the Legislature, when
"The Post Office Savings Bank Ordinance” (27 Viet., No.
5) was passed on July 1, 1863. Under this Ordinance
the Post Office Savings Bank was established, and pro-
vision was made that interest at the rate of per cent,
per annum should be paid on deposits, such interest to
be computed on the minimum monthly balance of each
account, exclusive of fractions of a pound, and to be
added to the depositors’ accounts on December 31 in each
year. No mention was made of the maximum amount
to be allowed on deposit; but in the following year,
on July 11, 1864, an amending Ordinance (28 Viet., No.
1) was passed, which provided, amongst other things,
that no depositor should be allowed to increase the
amount standing to his credit with the Bank by more


than £3O in any one year, nor to more than £l5O in
all, and also that whenever, by the annual addition of
interest, the sum standing in the name of any depositor
should amount to £2OO in all, no further interest would
be allowed so long as the total remained as high as £2OO.
Additional amending enactments were passed in
1865 and in 1874, both of which related to the manner
of investing the funds of the Bank.
These four measures were repealed by “The Post
Office Savings Bank Consolidation Act, 1893” (57 Viet.,
No. 3), which consolidated and amended the law on
the subject, and which was itself amended by Acts
passed in 1895, in 1896, and in 1902.
The rate of interest payable to depositors which, in
the Act of 1863 and also in that of 1893, is laid down
at 3| per cent., remained at that figure until 1896, when
the Colonial Treasurer, in accordance with power given
him by the Amending Act of 1895, notified through
the Government Gazette that on and after July 1, 1896,
the rate of interest would be 3 per cent. This rate
continued in force until June 30, 1904, when it was
raised to per cent. ; it was, however, on December
31, 1904, again reduced to 3 per cent. Interest is still
computed on the minimum monthly balance exclusive of
fractions of a pound, and is added to deposits annually
on June 30, but in the event of any account exceeding
£I,OOO no interest is allowed on such excess.
On March 1, 1901, the Postal Departments of the
several States were taken over by the Commonwealth
Government, and in anticipation of this the Savings
Bank Amending Act of 1900 was passed by the Wes-
tern Australian Legislature to make such alterations in
the principal Act of 1893 as would be rendered necessary
by the transfer, the Colonial Treasurer being authorized
therein to make, with the approval of the Governor,
arrangements ‘ with the postal authorities of the Com-
monwealth, that the officers of the Post Office shall per-
form, on such terms as shall be agreed upon, all or any
part of the duties which have hitherto been performed
by such officers in connection with the Post Office
Savings Bank.”
Such arrangements having been duly made, the
business of the agencies of the Bank is now carried on
much as it was before the Commonwealth assumed con-
trol of the Postal Department. The head office of the
Bank, however, which is situated in Perth, is quite dis-
tinct from the Postal Department, as are also the agen-
cies at Boulder, Coolgardie, Fremantle, Geraldton, and
Kalgoorlie, all the officers being members of the State
Public Service. All the accounts are kept at the head
office, the branch business merely consisting in the trans-
mission to the head office of money deposited and the
payment of withdrawals on the receipt from the head
office of the necessary funds. The privilege of with-
drawing by telegraph has been extended to all the
branches throughout the State.
Although no change has yet been made it is quite
clear that the passing of the Federal Bank Act will
materially affect the position of the existing State Sav-
ings Bank, unless a working agreement either on the
lines suggested by the Federal Treasurer or on other
lines agreeable to both Commonwealth and State can be
arrived at. The Federal Government will naturally use
the Post Offices in outlying districts for the transaction
of its own banking business, thus displacing the State
system. The various difficulties in the way of joint
action have been subjects of discussion for some months
past. No actual working basis has yet been fixed, but
there seems to be a tendency on the part of the State
Government in Western Australia, at any rate, to fall
in with the federal view.
The position of the Savings Bank at the close of
the financial year 1910-11 may be fairly gauged from
the following extracts from the Annual Report of the
Manager (Mr. Carl Leschen) :
“The total number of depositors has grown from
84,262 to 97,147, whilst their combined savings have
risen from £3,481,764 Bs. 3d. to £4,092,504 Bs. 9d.,
being an increase of £610,740 os. 6d., of which accumu-
lation no less a sum than £8,718 17s. belongs to the
pupils and was collected by their teachers in the schools
of the State; £3,701 2s. Id. still remains in the un-
claimed fund. Everything possible is being done to
popularize the Bank and extend its facilities to all, but
I regret that circumstances over which the Bank has no
control have made it impossible to establish during the
year agencies in a number of localities where they would
be both used and appreciated.
“The deposits for the year aggregated £3,177,106
10s. 6d., as compared with £2,404,368 4s. 9d. for the
previous year. The interest added to depositors’ bal-
ances, calculated at 3 per cent., aggregated £104,982
os. Id., as against £90,472 6s. 3d. The withdrawals
totalled £2,671,348 10s. Id., as against £2,072,813
17s. lid.
“The Schools’ Penny Savings Bank Department is
making satisfactory headway. Thirty-four additional
schools have agencies established, their number now
totalling 172. The total number of deposits received
increased from 61,176 to 91,726, representing a sum of
£6,779 os. 9d., averaging Is. per deposit, as against
£4,404 ss. 9d. for an average of Is. sd. ; whilst the
number of withdrawals advanced from 2,173 to 3,332
for £3,634 ss. 9d., averaging £1 Is. per with-
drawal, as against £2,066 17s. for an average of 19s.
for the previous year. Interest at 3 per cent, added
to the children’s balances aggregated £123 19s. 7d., as
against £6B 4s. The accumulated funds saved by the
9,578 children has now grown from £5,450 2s. 9d. to
£8,718 175., the average per depositor having increased
from 16s. Id. to 18s. 24d. Two thousand five hundred
and six children have balances of £1 and over.”


GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
In the early days of the existence of the Swan River
Settlement the official printing was carried out by Mr.
Charles Macfaull, whose newspaper, The Perth Gazette ,
fulfilled the functions of a Government Gazette for the
time being. During the thirties it was decided to issue
a Western Australian Government Gazette as an official
publication, the actual printing remaining under the
control of Mr. Macfaull. After the introduction of con-
victs the printing was carried on as part of the establish-
ment for a number of years, but in 1870 a Government
Printing Office was established and Mr. Richard Pether
appointed Government Printer. Mr. Pether occupied
the position until 1901, when he retired on a well-earned
pension, after having successfully administered his
department during the abnormal expansion that took
place after 1890. His successor, Mr. W. A. Watson, re-
mained in office for only four years, resigning in 1905,
when Mr. A. Curtis was temporarily appointed as
Acting-Government Printer. Convinced that the estab-
lishment was not carrying out its functions with that
attention to economy and efficiency so necessary in a
business concern the Government instructed the Public
Service Commissioner to report upon the matter and
make such recommendations as he thought necessary.
As a result applications were called for the position of
Government Printer, and ultimately (in 1906) Mr.
Frederick W. Simpson, the present occupant of the office,
was appointed. Mr. Simpson, who is a thoroughly prac-
tical man, lias inaugurated several important changes
in the operation and management of his department,
among which have been the introduction of more
up-to-date machinery and the reorganization of the
working of the department generally. By these means
greater economy has been secured and at the same time
efficiency has been increased.
It may be observed that the work of the department
is not limited to the printing of Parliamentary papers
and The Government Gazette. Practically all the official
stationery of the various Government departments
issues from the Government Printing Office, and it is
responsible for the publication of the scientific and pro-
fessional papers prepared by the Government Geologist
and other officers. That it is capable of very high-class
letterpress printing there is ample evidence, the "Hand-
book of Western Australia” issued during this year being
only one instance of the fact.
The estimated cost of the office for salaries, wages,
etc., for 1911-12 was £20,158, while £12,000 was set
aside for machinery, stationery, and printing paper,
making a total annual expenditure upon printing of
£32,158. In return for this it was estimated that a
revenue of £40,664, based upon actual cost of performing
the work, would be received from various departments
of the Public Service. These figures give some idea of
the magnitude of the operations of the Government
Printing establishment.
LITHOGRAPHIC OFFICE.
This office is a natural corollary to a Government
Printing Office. Where the one carries out all printing
required by the Government and the Public Service, the
other issues copies of all maps and plans prepared by the
Lands, Mines, Public Works, and other departments for
the information and guidance of the public generally.
The first lithographer in the colony was Major Hillman,
assistant to the original Surveyor-General (Captain J. S.
Roe), and the work was performed as part of the duties
of the Survey Office. After the introduction of the con-
victs in 1850 and the erection of the Fremantle Prison
provision was made for the lithographic work, in com-
mon with the Government printing, to be done by the
convicts as part of their labour. After the convict
establishment was disbanded and the colony began to
expand each department requiring lithographs set up
its own plant. This arrangement continued until 1900,
when in the interests of efficiency as well as economy the
whole were amalgamated as the Government Litho-
graphic Office, under the administration of the Treasury,
the present head of the office, Mr. Harry J. Pether, being
placed in charge. The improved results obtained since
that time are evidence of the success of the alteration
then made.
GOVERNMENT STORES.
The present organization of this branch of the
Treasury is one of those systems in favour of economy
and efficiency that have been the direct outcome of the
ajDpointment of the Public Service Commissioner. In
his first report issued in July, 1906, Mr. dull pointed
out the multiplicity of Stores organizations. In addition
to the General Stores at North Fremantle there were
officers dealing with stores in connection with the Tender
Board, Treasury, Colonial Secretary's Department,
Education Department, Lands, Mines, and Public
Works. He was of opinion that the whole matter re-
quired investigation with a view to more systematic
administration. While he considered it unlikely that
all the different organizations could with convenience


be merged into one, he advocated the abolition of the
General Store at North Fremantle, the establishment of
a Central Store in Perth, the amalgamation if possible
of various branches, and the appointment of one official
to control the whole if such could be done without loss of
efficiency.
As a result of the Commissioner’s representations a
Stores Inquiry Board was appointed by the Government,
and subsequently Mr. G. W. Simpson was made Stores
Manager. Under his administration the whole system
has been reorganized. In the matter of purchasing
stores and requisites Mr. Simpson acts under the advice
and with the assistance of a strong Tender Board
appointed by the Government and consisting, in addition
to himself, of the Engineer-in-Chief and the Inspector-
General of Schools. The Stores Branch also acts as ship-
ping agent to the Government, taking charge of the
despatch and receipt of all official material, and thus
saving large sums which would otherwise have to be
paid to private clearing agents.
TAXATION DEPARTMENT.
This department which was instituted only some
‘ four years ago, when the Acts imposing land and income
taxes were passed, is charged with the collection, in addi-
tion to those taxes, of the dividend duties and totalizator
tax. Existing as it does to secure the direct payment
of actual cash into the Treasury, thereby affecting the
population in the most sensitive part of its anatomy —its
pocket —the department can scarcely be said to be
popular. It must be admitted, however, that the un-
popularity does not extend to the officers of the depart-
ment, all of whom are eager to make the path of pay-
ment pleasant—to those who do not try to avoid paying.
The schedules are not unnecessarily inquisitorial,
and every assistance possible is given to those who have
difficulty in making up their returns, while vigilant care
is exercised to correct that tendency inherent in human
nature to evade the payment of financial obligations or
to reduce their amount. The smooth and successful
working of an office so easily capable of being made dis-
tasteful is due to the tact and judgment of the Commis-
sioner of Taxes, Mr. E. T. Owen, who has held the posi-
tion since the establishment of the department.
Though subject like the other States to land and
income taxes, Western Australia may congratulate itself
upon the fact that the rates of taxation are on a lower
scale than anywhere else in Australia. The land tax is
at the rate of one penny in the £ on the unimproved
value of land which is not improved within the meaning
of the Land and Income Tax Assessment Act 1907, and
one half-penny in the £ where the land is so improved.
The income tax is at the rate of 4d. in the £ on all
incomes with a general exemption of £2OO.
LAND TAX.
Land tax is payable on all land owned on December
31, unless it is exempted by the Act from taxation. If
the land held by any person does not amount altogether
to £5O in unimproved value, such person is exempt from
land tax, and lands outside a municipality which are
used solely or principally for agricultural or pastoral
purposes —that is, country lands which are used as farms,
orchards, sheep, and cattle stations —and which are im-
proved within the meaning of the Act, are entitled to
an exemption of £250; that is to say, the first £250
of unimproved value of such land is free from taxation.
It may be explained that country lands are deemed to
be improved within the meaning of the Act if the
improvements thereon equal in value £1 per acre, or one-
third of the unimproved value of the land. Town lands
are deemed to be improved if the improvements are
equal to one-third of the unimproved value of the land.
In order to encourage new settlers to take up and
cultivate land, a special provision has been inserted in
the Act exempting them from taxation during the first
five years from the date on which the land is granted to
them by the Lands Department. This concession is with-
held only in cases where the settler owns more than
1,000 acres of cultivable land or more than 2,500 acres
of grazing or mixed land. Free homestead farms are
not entitled to this concession.
If a person who owns land in the State which is
liable to land tax resides outside the Commonwealth of
Australia, he is liable to a rate of tax 50 per cent,
greater than that payable by a resident.
INCOME TAX.
The income tax as previously stated is at the rate of
4d. in the £, and is payable only on incomes derived
from, or earned or produced in the State, during the
calendar year. Interest on Government inscribed stock
and Government debentures of this State is exempt from
taxation altogether. Every taxpayer is free from income
tax on the first £2OO of his income, and is entitled to
deduct from his income for taxation purposes £lO for
each child under sixteen years of age resident with and
dependent upon him, also life assurance premiums not
exceeding £5O.
Where a taxpayer derives income from the use or
cultivation of land, and is liable to land tax thereon, the
Act permits the taxpayer to claim, as a deduction from
the income tax assessed on the income derived directly
from such land, an amount equal to so much of the
income tax as is equal to the land tax payable on such
land.


Incomes earned in any other part of the world are
not taxable in this State, but incomes earned in this
State by persons who do not reside within the Common-
wealth of Australia are liable to a rate of tax 50 per
cent, greater than that payable by a resident.
Companies and mining corporations being liable to
dividend duty at Is. in the £ under The Companies’
Duty Act and The Dividend Duties’ Act, are not liable
to income tax, and taxpayers are not liable to pay tax
on the portion of their personal income which is derived
from company dividends.
From the Commissioner’s Report for the year 1910
published toward the end of 1911 we extract the
ing information as of interest to all:
Land Tax.
Total unimproved value of the land assessed £16,420,221
Total land exempted ... ... ... 1,956,246
In addition to the above branches the Treasury con-
trols the granting of all compassionate allowances and
pensions to retired officers; the disbursement of grants
to various literary and scientific institutions; the dis-
bursement of grants approved by Parliament in aid of
LAURENCE STIRLING ELIOT,
1.5.0., Under-Treasurer of Wes-
tern Australia, is one of the oldest
and most highly respected servants
of the State. He was born at Bun-
bury in 1845 and is the son of the
late Mr. George Eliot, some-time
Government Resident of Geraldton,
who came to Western Australia with
his relative, Sir James Stirling,
Governor of the new colony, on the
‘■Parmelia” in 1829. Mr. Eliot is
not only descended from one of the
pioneers of the State, but can also
claim descent from a very old Eng-
lish family. The Elyots or Eliots
first settled at Green Place in Sus-
sex in 1347, and the Under-
Treasurer can claim lineal descent
from Thomas Elyot, Filazer
(Keeper of the Files) for Surrey
and Sussex in 1467. One of his
ancestors, Laurence by name, cir-
cumnavigated the globe wdth Sir
Francis Drake. Mr. Eliot was
educated first by the Rev. Henry
Brown, Rector of Bunbury, and
afterwards at Bishop’s College,
Perth, a college through which
many of those prominent in Western
Australia official life have passed.
In 1863 he entered the Public Ser-
vice as clerk to the magistrates,
landing and tide waiter, postmaster
OTHER SERVICES.
and assistant district registrar at
Bunbury. Here he remained until
1872, when he was appointed to a
clerkship in the Colonial Secretary’s
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. LAURENCE STIRLING ELIOT.
Ofh.ce at Perth. The following year
he was appointed Secretary to the
Central Board of Education and
Total land improved (within meaning of Act) 11,659,088
Total tax levied, including fines, etc. .. 37,333
Income Tax.
Total amount of income ... ... £4,878,820
Amount exempted ... ... ... ... 2,587,169
Amount taxed ... ... ... ... 2,291,651
Total tax ... ... .. ... ... 38,679
Average per assessment, £4 11s. 4d.
Companies’ Duty and Dividend Duties.
Collected during year 1910-11 ... ... £84,495
Totalizator Tax.
Amount passed through totalizator ... £309,503
Amount of duty collected per cent.) . 7,739
Total taxes collected by Commissioner of Taxes,
£168,246.
the up-keep of various forms of charitable endeavour;
and the administration of those numerous small
avenues for the distribution of public money which
do not come within the compass of any particular
department.
assistant clerk to the Legislative
Council. At that time the question
of denominational grants for educa-
tion was causing considerable dis-
cussion in the community, a cir-
cumstance which made the post of
Secretary to the Board a difficult
one to fill, but when Mr. Eliot left
it to become Registrar-General in
1876 he received the sincere thanks
of the Roman Catholic community
for his tact and consideration. From
1878 to 1880 he was acting chief
clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s
Department and in 1881 was en-
trusted with the compilation of the
census. On the completion of that
w’ork he was appointed chief clerk
and accountant in the Treasury.
From 1889 to 1890 he acted as
Assistant Colonial Secretary and in
1891 was promoted to be Pay-
master of Imperial Pensions, being
made Under-Treasurer in the same
year on the establishment of respon-
sible government. In 1902, after
the inauguration of the Common-
wealth, he received the additional
appointment of Permanent Head of
the Commonwealth Sub-Treasury.
Mr. Eliot is a Justice of the Peace
for the State, and in 1903 received
the distinction of the Imperial Ser-
vice Order. In 1871 he married


Ernestine, daughter of the late Mr.
F. L. von Bibra, of Tasmania, by
whom he has three sons and a
daughter.
SAMUEL JOSEPH RANDELL,
Accountant to the State Treasurer’s
Department and Sub - Treasury
Accountant of the Commonwealth at
Perth, was born in the western
metropolis on May 7, 1866. His
early instruction was received pri-
vately, and was supplemented by
some six years’ study at Oxford
County School, England. He
returned to Western Australia in
October, 1882, and joined the Public
Service in the following year as
junior draughtsman in the Lands
Department, after being transferred
for three months to the Treasury as
junior clerk. He steadily rose in
this department, was appointed to
be clerk in 1887, bookkeeper in 1892,
sub-accountant in July, 1897, and
accountant in April, 1899. He
became Commonwealth Sub-Treasury
accountant in 1901, and now carries
out the duties appertaining to both
offices. Altogether Mr. Randell has
a record of twenty-nine years in the
Government Service of Western
Australia. In the social world he
has always given a great deal of
attention to Church matters, and
was for some time deacon and super-
intendent of the Sunday-school of
Trinity Church, St. George’s Terrace,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. SAMUEL JOSEPH RANDELL.
Perth. For six years he has held
similar offices in connection with the
Congregational Church at Leeder-
ville. He is keenly interested in
floriculture, and for several years
has acted as Judge for the Royal
Agricultural Society and the Perth
Horticultural Society. A hearty
supporter of all outdoor sports, he
has devoted much of his spare time
to the encouragement of manly
exercises among the young people of
the State. He married in 1891
and has a family of five sons and one
daughter.
EDGAR THEODORE OWEN,
Commissioner of Taxation for Wes-
tern Australia, was born at Fitzroy,
Melbourne, on May 16, 1861. He
matriculated at the Melbourne Uni-
versity in 1877, and almost immedi-
ately afterwards entered the Public
Service of Victoria as an assistant in
the office of the Railway Accountant.
Four years later he was transferred
to the office of the Actuary for
Friendly Societies and Government
Statist, where he was trained as an
actuary. After thirteen years’ ser-
vice in that office, during the course
of which he succeeded in passing
Part I. of the examination of the
Institute of Actuaries of London,
Mr. Owen was appointed to the
position of Registrar of Friendly
Societies and Government Actuary
for Western Australia. This office
he held until 1909, having mean-
while, in February, 1908, on the
coming into operation of the Land
and Income Tax Act, been appointed
Commissioner of Taxation for the
State. He resigned the position of
Registrar and Actuary on the ap-
pointment of his successor, Mr. S.
Bennett, in June, 1909. In 1894
Mr. Owen was admitted as a member
of the Royal Statistical Society of
England, and in 1909 was elected a
Fellow of the Society of Accountants
and Auditors of Western Australia.
From time to time he has written
extensively on questions of State
finance, Government loans, and tax-
ation, and prior to federation upon
the financial aspects of that move-
ment, particularly as they affected
Western Australia. Many of the
results incidentally predicted in
those brochures have since been rea-
lized. So much did his financial
acumen impress the Government of
this State that in 1897 and 1898 he
attended the Federal Conventions as
statistical and financial adviser to
the representatives from this State.
As Commissioner of Taxation it may
be said that he discharges the duties
of an onerous and unpopular office
with very great discretion and tact.
ALAN HAYNES BARLEE,
Chief Land Tax Assessor, is a son
of the late Mr. Charles Haynes
Barlee, of New South Wales, and
nephew of the late Sir Frederick
Palgrave Barlee, K.C.M.G., Colonial
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALAN HAYNES BARLEE.
Secretary in Western Australia
from 1855 to 1877, who afterwards
filled the office of Governor of
British Honduras and Trinidad,
where he died. Born at Brisbane,
Queensland, on September 3, 1866,
Mr. A. H. Barlee was educated at
the Sydney Grammar School, and
upon the conclusion of his scholastic
career in 1882 was articled to a firm
of surveyors in Sydney. Having
completed his indentures, he con-
tinued with the firm in all for nine
years, at the end of which period he
was offered a lucrative position by
Messrs. Forrest, Crossland, & Co.,
surveyors, of Perth, and came to
Western Australia in January, 1891.
During his connection with this firm
Mr. Barlee in his capacity of sur-
veyor and draughtsman gained much
valuable experience in the laying out
of townships and in the subdivision
of suburban lands for building pur-
poses, together with the survey of
the Midland Railway and the large
areas selected by that Company. In
January, 1894, at the inception of
the Mines Department of Western
Australia, Mr. Barlee accepted the
post of chief draughtsman, and after
filling the position for a number of
years was appointed Chief Land Tax
Assessor upon the creation of this
office by the Government of the day.
Upon the continuance of hostilities


between the British and the South
African Boers he offered himself for
the service of the Empire and went
to the front with the second con-
tingent from Western Australia. He
served under General Sir Reginald
Pole-Carew in the 11th Division,
and holds the Queen's Medal
and five Bars, viz., Belfast, Diamond
Hill, Johannesburg, Orange Free
State, and Cape Colony. He is also
on the retired list of Lieutenants of
the Commonwealth Naval Forces,
having served in H.M.S. “Wol-
verine.” Mr. Barlee has been a
member of the Weld Club for nearly
twenty years and is a foundation
member of the Naval and Military
Club, and of the Civil Service Asso-
ciation. His chief recreations are
tennis and boating, and he is a warm
advocate of all forms of healthy out-
door sport. In May, 1909, he mar-
ried Flora, daughter of the late Mr.
M. J. O'Connor, of Victoria, and
has one surviving son.
CARL PAUL JOHANN AUG-
UST LESCHEN, Manager of the
Government Savings Bank, was born
at Adelaide, South Australia, in
1866, and educated at a private
school by his father, Mr. Adolph
Leschen. At the age of fourteen,
his health being indifferent, he was
compelled to relinquish his studies,
and he entered the office of an Ade-
laide softgoods establishment, where
he remained for three years, at the
end of that time taking a position
as bookkeeper and assistant to his
uncle, Mr. C. E. Cranston, of Wir-
rabara, South Australia, and re-
maining - with him for about three
and a half years. Returning to the
metropolis he accepted an appoint-
ment with Mr. J. M. Wendt as
accountant and fulfilled the duties
of this position for about eight
years. Outdoor existence always
held strong attraction for Mr. Les-
cheu, and he was easily persuaded
to enter into partnership with his
friend, Baron von Swaine, and
engage in fruit-growing. Accord-
ingly he resigned his post at
Adelaide and proceeded with the
Baron to Lancaster, Victoria, where
together they planted some 18,000
fruit-trees of various kinds. Although
this healthy mode of living agreed
with him to perfection, after a little
over a year he decided to withdraw
from the undertaking and settle in
Western Australia, where he arrived
in March, 1896, soon afterwards
entering the Government Service
under Mr. Sholl as clerk in the
Money Order Department of the
General Post Office, later on serving
in the parcels post for a short time.
Being transferred to the Savings
Bank as clerk he made swift pro-
Bartletto, Perth
MR. CARL P. J. A. LESCHEN.
gress in this institution owing to his
energy and keenness for work,
coupled with a marked capacity for
transacting financial business. In
turn he fulfilled the duties of
senior ledger-keeper and senior clerk,
and in 1903, when Mr. Richard
Wynne (the Manager) retired on a
pension, the subject of this article
was appointed in his place, after
successfully passing a competitive
examination for the position. He
has represented the Western Aus-
tralian Savings Bank at Conferences
held at Sydney in August, 1906, and
at Adelaide in October, 1910. At
the Sydney Conference a reciprocal
scheme was adopted under which
the Savings Banks of the various
States, although separate institu-
tions, became one harmonious whole
for the convenience of travelling
depositors. At the Conference held
at Adelaide the principle to place on
a uniform basis the main forms and
statistics of the whole of the Com-
monwealth Savings institutions was
confirmed, and this when adopted
will have the effect of facilitating for
all concerned the immense volumes
of business transacted by the popular
"People's Banks." In 1906 Mr.
Leschen was appointed a Justice of
the Peace for the Perth magisterial
district. Being much interested in the
Y.M.C.A. movement Mr. Leschen
has been a Director of the institution
since its inception in Perth in 1908,
and is also a foundation officer of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Perth. He has been twice married.
A son and daughter survive his first
wife, Elizabeth, daughter of the
late Pastor Strempel (Evangelical
Lutheran), of Hahndorf, South Aus-
tralia. He married, for the second
time, in 1907, to Wilhelmine, daugh-
ter of Mr. Friedrich Nenke, of Perth.
FREDERICK WILLIAM SIMP-
SON, Government Printer of Wes-
tern Australia, was born at Stock-
ton-on-Tees, England, in 1878. He
was educated at the British school
in that town, and at the conclusion
of his scholastic career was appren-
ticed to the firm of Messrs. J. Slee
and Co., general printers, litho-
graphers, and manufacturing sta-
tioners in his native town, with
whom he remained for many years,
relinquishing his position only when
about to proceed to Australia. Dur-
ing his years of service with Messrs.
Slee & Co. he filled various respons-
ible positions, and just prior to his
departure for the Southern Hemi-
sphere was offered a partnership in
the firm, but he declined to accept
it. Sailing from the Old Country
in 1901 Mr. Simpson proceeded to
Sydney, where for upwards of three
years he held positions in leading
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. FREDERICK WILLIAM SIMPSON.
printing establishments of the Mother
State. In 1904 he was appointed
Manager of 2he Morning Herald job
printing department, being selected


Minister for Lands.
From
To
William Edward Marmion
Dec.
29,
1890
Dec
4.
1894
Alexander Robert Richardson
Dec
4,
1894
March,
1897
George Throssell
Marc
h.
1897
Feb.
15,
1901
Charles John Moran
Feb.
15,
1901
M av
27,
1901
Charles Sommers
May
27,
1901
Nov.
21,
1901
John Leighton Nanson...
Nov.
21,
1901
Dec
2.3,
1901
Adam Jameson ...
Dec.
23,
1901
Jan.
2.3,
1903
John Marquis Hopkins
Feb
17,
1903
Aug.
10,
1904
John Michael Drew
Aug.
10,
1904
June
7,
1905
Thomas Henry Rath
June
7,
1905
Aug.
25,
1905
Sir Newton James Moore
Aug.
25,
1905
June
30,
1909
James Mitchell ...
June
30,
1909
Oct.
7.
1911
Thomas Henry Rath
Oct,
7,
1911
Still
in Office
for that post by Mr. L. Nanson, then
Attorney-General for Western Aus-
tralia, who was at that time
Managing Director of Stirling Bros,
and Co., Ltd., proprietors of The
Morning Herald. Here he con-
tinued in control until 1906, in which
year he received the appointment of
Government Printer to the State.
Mr. Simpson resides at Rupert
Street, Subiaco.
HENRY JOHN PETHER, Gov-
ernment Lithographer, is a native of
Perth, Western Australia, having
been born at St. George's Ter-
race in the year 1868. His
education was acquired at a
private commercial grammar school,
with a short period at the old
Government Boys' School. His
schooldays ended, Mr. Pether entered
the Lithographic Branch of the
Lands and Surveys Department as
a cadet draughtsman, where he
gained promotion from time to time
until he reached the position of
Assistant-in-Charge. In 1896 he was
transferred to the head office to the
ranks of senior draughtsmen, hold-
ing the latter position until 1899,
when he was selected and appointed
in charge of the Amalgamated
Lithographic Departments of the
State, which post he still holds. Mr.
Pether is well known in musical
circles, and for many years devoted
a large portion of his leisure to fur-
thering the interests of the late
Perth Musical Union, of which body
he was prominent among the first
violins, under the baton of the late
Judge Hensman. He has performed
in many oratorios, and on nineteen
occasions has taken part in the pro-
duction of ‘ k The Messiah," each time
under a different conductor. He is
an enthusiastic yachtsman and a
noted amateur boatbuilder, having
designed and constructed no less
than eleven different craft. His
racing boats were always successful.
Mr. Pether was married in 1893 to
Lilian Maud, daughter of Mr.
Frederic Gillett, of Upton Downs,
Burford, England, and has a family
of seven daughters.
HENRY PERSSE TAGGART,
Government Advertising Clerk, Trea-
sury, was born at Dublin, Ireland,
in 1867, and received his scholastic
training at Erasmus Smith's School,
Harcourt Street, in the same city.
He arrived in Western Australia in
1895, and after varied experiences in
the early days at Kalgoorlie joined
the Government Service during the
latter part of 1896 as paymaster of
Public Works at a time when the
State was enjoying considerable
prosperity. After three years he re-
signed in order to visit England,
and upon his return rejoined the
Service in 1899 as bookkeeper in the
Fremantle Harbour Department.
From there he was transferred to
the Treasury and received appoint-
ment to the position he now holds.
Department of Lands and Surveys.
LANDS DEPARTMENT.
The Department of Lands, which controls the
administration of the Crown Lands, the Survey Branch,
and the care of Woods and Forests, is one of the oldest
of the State offices in Western Australia, having been
constituted under the name of the Survey Office upon
the establishment of the colony in 1829. The first
Surveyor-General, to whose accurate work and wise judg-
ment the State owes so much, held office from that date
until 1870, having for the latter part of the term been
officially designated as Commissioner of Crown Lands and
Surveyor-General. He was succeeded by Mr. (after-
wards Sir) Malcolm Fraser, who on being appointed
Colonial Secretary in 1883 gave place to Mr. (now Sir)
John Forrest, who remained in charge of this important
phase of official work until the establishment of
responsible government in 1890. The office then became
a department, the title of Commissioner of Crown Lands,
later changed to Minister for Lands, being retained as
a ministerial designation, while the administration was
placed in the hands of an Under-Secretary. The Survey
Office became a branch of the wider department, the
position of Surveyor-General being conferred upon Mr.
J. S. Brooking, who was succeeded in 1896 by the pre-
sent occupant of the position, Mr. Harry F. Johnson.
The Under-Secretary for Lands, Mr. Robert Cecil
Clifton, appointed on the reorganization under
responsible government, still holds that office. The work,
however, has grown so enormously as a result of the
system of land settlement adopted by the Government of
late years that it has been found necessary to appoint
assistants to the Under-Secretary. The principal of
these is Mr. C. G. Morris, who in the absence of Mr.
Clifton has control of the department. The other
assistants are Messrs. Hugh Hamersley and John T.
Conway, while Mr. William Rowley is Chief Inspector.
The names of the responsible Ministers administering
the department since the inauguration of responsible
government are as under :


Land Transactions for the Year.
Nature.
Financial Year 1910-11.
Financial Year 1909-10.
No.
Acres.
No.
Acres.
(a) Alienation.
Sale of Grants—Town and Suburban
791
1,950
792
1,649
Rural
1,076
186,699
570
103,869
Total ... • ...
1,867
188,649
1,362
105,518
In process of alienation —
Selections, with alienation in view approved during year
4,265
1,923,172
5,403
1,891,367
Total thus held
41,575
§ 11 843,236
38.991
* 12,880,195
Total area alienated in State
7,202,696
t 4,449,326
Total alienated or in process of alienation
—
§ 19,045,932
* 17,329,521
Total area of State ...
—
624,588,800
—
624,588,800
(h) Occupation.
Pastoral and other Leases approved during year
396
9,302,655
505
10,700,566
Total thus held
6,927
169,837,307
7,149
167,108,072
(c) Work of the Year.
Applications of all classes approved during year
6,528
13,979,197
7,270
12.697,451
Holdings of all classes existing at beginning of year
46,141
179,988,267
42,410
174,787,796
Business on books for year, exclusive of rejected and pending
applications
52,669
193,967,464
49,680
187,485/247
Completions, redemptions, cancellations, etc., during year
4,166
12,286,921
3,539
7,496,980
Remaining current at close of year
48,503
§ 181,680,543
46,141
179,988,267
(cl) Revenue
£
s. d.
£
s. d.
Sales X
253,960 17 4
194,875
5 4
Rent X
69,228 14 4
64,87
4
1 5
Timber
34,667 11 3
27.705
7 7
Guano
58 13 6
Fees
22,111
11 8
31,849
15 11
All other sources
5,320 18 0
7,105
12 1
Recoup freight and fare
835 9 7
841
9 2
Inspection fees (Timber)
2,809 12 2
3,843
19 4
388,993 7 10
331,095
10 10
(e) Expenditure.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Lands and Surveys—Salaries and allowances ...
61,423 13 7
53,331 1 3
Surveys
72,651 11 2
69,335 16 2
General
19,850 5 3
30,515 16 6
153,925 10 0
153,182 13 11
Woods and Forests -Salaries and allowances...
7,461 5 8
7,345 0 8
General
1,399 9 3
1,186 0 I
8,860 14 11
8,531 0 9
162,786 4 11
161,713 14 8
♦Including 2,686,521 acres granted to Midland Railway Company, but for which Crown grants have not issued.
t Including 749,199 acres granted to Midland Railway Company in fee simple.
X Including 3,313,920 acres granted to Midland Railway Company in
fee simple.
§ Including 121,800 acres granted to Midland Railway Company, hut for which Crown grants have not issued.
The whole question of land settlement and develop-
ment, including the methods of acquiring land, the uses
to which it is put, the prospects of agriculture, and the
generous assistance given by the State to farmers and
fruit-growers, will be so fully dealt with in another por-
tion of this work that it is unnecessary to dilate upon
them here. The following table from the Report of the
Under-Secretary for Lands, 1910-11, may, however, be
inserted not only as showing the activity of the depart-
ment, but as refuting the opinions of those who consider
land development in Western Australia an impossible
achievement:
We learn further from the report that although the
total number of applications approved (6,528) for the
year 1910-11 was rather less than that for the year
1909-10 (7,270), the area granted was considerably in
excess (13,979,197 acres as against 12,697,451), the de-
mand for farming areas was much greater, and the num-
ber of actual applications as distinguished from those
actually approved showed a very heavy increase. This
resulted in a very much greater volume of work for dis-
posal by the Land Board.


In addition to the above, there were over a thousand
applications for unsurveyed land in the office waiting
survey and classification in accordance with the new
regulations. The total area approved with alienation in
view was 1,923,172 acres, which, compared with 1,891,367
acres for the previous year, shows an increase of 31,805
acres.
To show how the work of the department has in-
creased there were 52,669 holdings of various classes on
the books of the department, exclusive of rejected ex-
pending applications, as against 49,680 at the same time
last year, although 1,867 Crown grants have issued during
the year.
It is gratifying to note that, in the majority of cases,
applicants take almost immediate possession of their land
and commence operations after obtaining the approval,
no matter how far the subdivisions are from existing
railways.
This activity may be regarded largely as the outcome
oi the immigration policy pursued by the Government,
under which a man is not only brought to Western Aus-
tralia with little or no expense to himself, but after his
arrival is provided with a selection of land, from the
cultivation of which he is enabled to gain at least a fair
competence.
The year just closed is scarcely likely to show the
same progress, as the dry winter of 1911 militated con-
siderably against a bountiful harvest, and the lateness of
the rains in 1912 made the farmers fearful of a con-
tinuance of adverse conditions. As a result settlement
flagged a little, but with the recent rains there is every
probability rapid development will continue,
and that the exertions of the Lands Department to
settle population upon the land will meet with ample
response.
In order to facilitate the work of the department
and at the same time have officers competent to advise
intending settlers close at hand, district offices and land
agencies are established in the main centres of popula-
tion, while until June 30, 1912, an agency was maintained
in Melbourne for the benefit of those desiring to take
up land in Western Australia. Though this agency had
undoubtedly done good work in the past, the Government
arrived at the conclusion that its further continuance
was unnecessary, as there was no dearth of applicants
for the land immediately available in the State.
WOODS AND FORESTS.
The question of reafforestation by native or
acclimatized trees in countries where timber is an article
of merchandise has long been recognized as one of
importance. It is particularly so in Western Australia,
which in the jarrah and karri possesses hardwoods of un-
surpassed excellence, and in sandalwood a fragrant wood
in great demand for various purposes. How valuable an
asset these timbers are to the State may be seen from
the fact that during the year ending June 30, 1911, the
value of hardwoods exported was <£913,841, and of
sandalwood £69,141. The total area of timber lands in
Western Australia is estimated to be 20,400,000 acres,
made up as follows: —Jarrah, interspersed with black-
butt and redgum, 8,000,000 acres; karri, 1,200,000 acres :
tuart, 200,000 acres; wandoo or white-gum and other
allied timbers, 7,000,000 acres; York-gum, yate, jam-
wood, and sandalwood, 4,000,000 acres. Of them all the
karri is the most stately and picturesque. Rising to over
300 ft. in some cases, with a diameter of over 30 ft. and
a clear trunk sometimes of over 100 ft. before a branch
is found, it presents a tree comparable only in its majesty
to the giant trees of California and Tasmania. Tn 1904
Mr. Ednie Brown estimated that in round matured
timber the State had 62,300,000 loads available, the
value of which on the market was considerably over
a hundred million pounds.
Left to themselves, however, the vast timber forests,
notwithstanding natural reafforestation, would be far
from inexhaustible, and therefore one of the principal
functions of the Woods and Forests Department is the
planting of indigenous trees to replace those sacrificed
to the commercial spirit of the age. Old colonists speak
with regret of the destruction of the natural forests, but
something more than sentiment suggests that every step
should be taken to prevent the valuable native flora from
becoming extinct.
Fortunately natural reafforestation is continually
going on, with results which, as illustrations of cut over
areas show, are eminently satisfactory. When, however,
Nature is aided by the care and attention of experts in
arboriculture results may be obtained which prove that
as a timber country Western Australia has an almost
unlimited future.
Another function of the department is the distribu-
tion among the towns and settled areas of acclimatized
trees and shrubs to take the place of that natural vegeta-
tion which has been sacrificed to the onward march of
civilization. Tn this direction excellent service is being
rendered. Scientific knowledge has been brought to bear,
and in conjunction with actual experiments has rendered
immense service to the State. As to what is being done
to promote afforestation in various localities it may be
mentioned that during the year 1910-11 57,799 trees
were supplied to various public bodies, while something
like 150,000 trees and shrubs were raised in the nurseries.
One class of tree found to flourish in Western Australia
as in many other parts of the Commonwealth is the
Finns insignis , the Remarkable Pine. Speaking of the


wisdom of promoting the planting of this tree the Acting
Inspector-General of Forests says: —“As an instance of
the wisdom of planting pines and of the potential value
of such plantation to the State it may be mentioned that
out of an eight-year-old pine, grown in one of the planta-
tions at the State Nursery, Hamel, forty-two fruit cases
were made. The timber of the Remarkable Pine of Cali-
fornia (Finns insignis) is admirably suited for making
fruit cases, as well as other more important purposes, and
is largely used in the Eastern States and South Africa
in place of imported softwood. Large areas of fruit-trees
are being planted every year in this State, and as these
areas are likely to increase greatly in the future, there
is every prospect of pine-planting turning out a paying
proposition, even if the timber is used only for fruit
cases. Firms insignis is so highly thought of in New
South Wales that the Master Builders’ Association ex-
ROBERT CECIL CLIFTON,
1.5.0., Under-Secretary for Lands,
was born at Alverstoke, near Bun-
bury, in 1854, being the son of the
late Mr. Robert Williams Clifton,
of Australind. His school days over
he entered the Public Service, first
as acting clerk of courts and landing
waiter and afterwards as postmaster
at Bunbury in 1873. In the follow-
ing year he was transferred to the
Lands Department as clerk, and two
years later he went to the Customs
Office, from which he returned in
1880 to the Lands and Survey De-
partment as chief clerk. On the in-
troduction of responsible government
in 1891 Mr. Clifton was promoted to
his present position. Although the
office has nominally remained the
same, the responsibility attaching to
it has greatly increased. Instead of
being one of the smaller departments
it has during recent years grown to
such an extent, owing to the rapid
development and settlement of the
agricultural and pastoral industries,
that recently assistants have had to
be appointed for the purpose of
assisting Mr. Clifton in the arduous
and multifarious duties of his office.
To-day there is no State department
of wider significance or greater im-
portance in the expansion of Wes-
tern Australia than that which Mr.
Clifton controls. In 1904, having
completed thirty years' continuous
service in the public interest, the
dignity of 1.5.0. was bestowed upon
him. Mr. Clifton married in 1882
Rose Louisa, daughter of the late
Mr. George Walpole Leake, Q.C.
CHARLES GLAZE BROOK
MORRIS, senior assistant to the
Under-Secretary for Lands, was
born in 1868 at South Melbourne
and educated privately at various
institutions in the Garden State.
In his youth he occupied posi-
tions as junior clerk with various
firms in Sydney until 1886, when he
went to Western Australia and re-
ceived a Government appointment
in the Survey Department under Mr.
(now Sir) John Forrest, resigning
MR. CHARLES GLAZEBROOK MORRIS.
three years later on account of ill-
health. Returning to Melbourne for
medical advice, he obtained a post
in the following year in the National
Bank of Australasia, where he re-
mained until the latter part of 1891.
He re-entered the Service as chief
correspondence clerk in the Lands
Department of Western Australia,
and in 1902 was appointed head of
the Land Selection Branch, receiving
pressed the opinion that plantations of it would be of
inestimable value to that State in twenty-five or thirty
years, when it is anticipated that imported softwoods will
be more difficult to obtain and far more costly than at
present. The association also strongly recommended that
an immediate start should be made in planting pines
generally. Altogether, we have now about 300 acres
under pines at the Ludlow, and as it is intended to
increase the planting every year, there will soon be a
large area set apart for this purpose ; the total area,
including the Hamel plantation, now amounting to about
600 acres."
At present the office of Conservator of Forests, held
so long by the late Mr. J. Ednie Brown, one of the
authorities upon Forestry, is vacant, but the work is
losing nothing at the hands of Mr. C. G. Richardson, the
Acting Inspector-General.
splendid credentials from Mr. J. M.
Hopkins, then Minister for Lands,
and Mr. R. Cecil Clifton, Under-
secretary in the same Department,
testifying to his energy and organ-
izing capabilities, particularly in the
work of amalgamating the divisions
of land sales, selection, and inspec-
tion. For the past fourteen years
he has been Secretary to the Land
Surveyors' Licensing Board, and has
also acted as Secretary to the Caves
V
Board. In 1906 he was a member
of the Board created to inquire into
the system of accounts of the Lands
Department. Consequent upon the
reorganization of the Department in
January, 1909, Mr. Morris was
selected to be one of the three
assistants to the Under-Secretary for
Lands, and in 1911 he was appointed
senior assistant, carrying on the
duties of Under-Secretary whenever
that officer is temporarily absent.
During Mr. Morris' twenty-five
years' record he has received excel-
lent testimonials from the different
Ministers for Lands, the Under-
secretary for Lands, and the Sur-
veyor-General. He is a member of
the Land Board, Secretary of the
Perth Lodge of Freemasons, No. 33,
W.A.C., and honorary life member
of the Western Australian Short-
hand and Typewriters’ Association.
In 1892 he married Guiliva, daugh-
ter of Mr. G. Bertoli, of Lake
Manual, Victoria.
JOHN THOMAS CONWAY,
assistant to the Under Secretary for
Lands, was born at Kyneton, near
Bendigo, Victoria, in 1862. Having
completed his education at the Chris-
tian Brothers’ College, Melbourne, he


turned his attention to journalism,
and was for twenty years on the
staff of the Bendigo Advertiser. He
was then attracted to Western Aus-
tralia, and arrived in the State in
1897, entering the Lands Depart-
MR. JOHN THOMAS CONWAY.
ment as Statist, holding that office
till the end of 1910, when a Minis-
terial reorganization of the depart-
ment occurred, and Mr. Conway was
elevated to the position he now so
ably fills.
WALTER PRETTY ODELL,
Assistant to the Under-Secretary for
Lands and Officer-in-Charge of
MR. WALTER PRETTY ODELL.
Roads and Reserves, was born at
Beech worth, Victoria, in 1876, and
educated at All Saints' Grammar
School, St. Kilda. He came to
Western Australia in 1895, and was
engaged in commercial pursuits for
about two years. He then entered
the Government Service as typist
and shorthand-writer in the Lands
Department, and a few years later
was advanced to the position of chief
correspondence clerk, in which capa-
city he proved himself of such
invaluable assistance to the Under-
secretary that he was promoted to
the office he now holds. Mr. Odell is
a member of the Perth Lodge of
Freemasons, No. 33, and is at pre-
sent Worshipful Master of that
order. Aquatic sports have always
claimed a good deal of his spare
time, and he is a keen supporter of
rowing, being at the present time a
Vice-President of the Swan River
Rowing Club.
EDWIN ALEXANDER BLACK,
A.1.A., W.A., accountant to the
Lands Department of Western Aus-
tralia, was born at Grafton, New
South Wales, on April 12, 1872.
His primary education was obtained
at Sydney, he afterwards attending
the Grafton Grammar School. On
leaving school he joined the Post and
Telegraph Department of New South
Wales, subsequently becoming assist-
ant postmaster and junior operator
at Yamba, where he remained four
and a half years. For two years and
four months he was a clerk in the
Harbours and Rivers Branch of the
Public Works Department in the
Clarence River district. He then
became bookkeeper to Messrs. J. F.
Cox & Co., general storekeepers, of
Clarence River. In 1895 Mr. Black
came to Western Australia, where he
entered the office of the Canning
Jarrah Timber Company, but ill-
health caused him to resign after two
months' service. After a brief rest
Mr. Black joined the Fremantle Har-
bour Works as timekeeper, and for
seven years fulfilled the duties of
accountant, holding a similar ap-
pointment for two years to the
combined branches of the Fremantle
harbour works, harbours and rivers,
and railway construction, when he
received transfer to the accountants'
branch of the Public Works, going
thence to a similar position in the
Lands Department. He was suc-
cessively appointed Inspector in the
Audit Department, and then ac-
countant and chief income tax
assessor to the Taxation Department,
being Acting Commissioner of Tax-
ation for twelve months. In Feb-
ruary, 1911, he was selected by the
Public Service Board to take his
present position of accountant to the
Lands Department. He is an Asso-
ciate by examination of the Institute
of Accountants and Auditors of
Western Australia and Vice-Presi-
dent of the Students' Society in
MR. EDWIN ALEXANDER BLACK.
connection with the same body. He
is a member of the Masonic craft,
his mother lodge being North Fre-
mantle No. 858 S.C. (now No. 84,
W.A.C.), and an elder of the St.
Columbus Presbyterian Church at
Cottesloe. Married in 1894 to Lucy
Ann, third daughter of the late Mr.
Alexander McLeay, of Harwood
Island, Clarence River, New South
Wales, Mr. Black has a family of
six children.
PERCY GEORGE WICKEN,
Officer-in-Charge of the Information
Branch, Lands Department, Perth,
was born in 1866 at London, where
he received his education. He was
engaged for a time in commercial
life, and in 1884 came to New South
Wales, where he joined the Govern-
ment Agricultural Department,
eventually being appointed agricul-
tural experimentalist and officer-in-
charge of students at the Hawkes-
bury Agricultural College. Here he
was awarded various diplomas and
medals, and in 1900 accepted an ap-
pointment in the Agricultural De-
partment of Western Australia as
field officer, which he retained until
recently. In 1905 Mr. Wicken repre-
sented Western Australia at the
Exhibition held by the Chamber of
Manufactures in Adelaide, and in
the following year acted in a like
capacity when the Australian
Natives' Association promoted its


large exhibition in Melbourne. In
1908 he proceeded to England to
represent the State at the Franco-
British Exhibition in London. On
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PERCY GEORGE WICKEN.
this occasion the Western Australian
Court was the first to be opened and
was highly commended, the success-
ful arrangements being due largely
to the ability and enterprise of the
gentleman under review. Shortly
after his return to the country of
his adoption Mr. Wicken received
the appointment to his present posi-
tion, and has held it ever since.
GEORGE FREDERICK GLYDE
is the son of the late Mr. George
Glyde, J.P., who as one of Perth’s
early and successful merchants and
a useful member of the Legislative
Council assisted materially in the
development of the Western Aus-
tralian State. The late gentleman
came out from England in Novem-
ber, 1829, with his father, and, after
reaching manhood, eventually took
over from Mr. Henry Saw the large
grocery, drapery, and general store
conducted under the style of Messrs.
G. Glyde & Sons, and situated in
Hay Street. He was one of the
founders in 1862 of the Perth Bene-
fit Permanent Building and Loan
Society, was Treasurer and after-
wards Chairman of the old Perth
Town Council, and in 1874 was
elected Chairman of the Perth
Board of Education. For many
years he occupied a seat in the
cc
»
Legislative Council and was gazetted
a Justice of the Peace in 1873. The
subject of our memoir was born at
Perth on April 24, 1848, and having
finished his education at Bishop
Hales’ College, in this city, entered
the Government Service as clerk in
the chief office of the Police De-
partment. After some years he was
transferred to the Treasury Branch
at Geraldton, and eight years later
was recalled to Perth and appointed
to the position of Collector of Land
Revenues. Subsequently he was pro-
moted to be chief clerk, which post
he continued to hold until his re-
tirement in 1902, after thirty-nine
years’ useful service. In addition
to his duties in the Government em-
ploy he has always been keen in re-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE FREDERICK GLYDE.
gard to land investment and at the
present time divides his energies be-
tween the necessary attention which
these interests demand and the cul-
tivation of the beautiful and exten-
sive garden surrounding his home on
the banks of the Swan River. Mr.
Glyde is a member of the Western
Australian Club and has held office
in St. John’s Lodge in the fratern-
ity of Freemasons, of which he is a
member. In 1867 he married Alma, N
daughter of Mr. John Taylor, of
Yangedine, near York, and has five
daughters.
CHARLES GOUGH RICHARD-
SON, Acting Inspector-General of
Forests, Perth, Western Australia,
was born in December, 1865, in
County Dublin, Ireland. He re-
ceived his early scholastic training
under a tutor and was afterwards
sent to Germany to finish his edu-
cation. In 1887 he came to Wes-
tern Australia and was appointed
First Associate to the Chief Justice
of Western Australia, Sir Alexander
Onslow. He entered the Lands
Department in 1890, and in the
year 1895 became an officer of the
Woods and Forests Department
under Mr. Ednie Brown, who was
then Conservator of Forests. On
the death of Mr. Brown in 1899 Mr.
Richardson was appointed success-
ively Acting Conservator of Forests,
Conservator of Forests, Secretary to
the Forestry Department, and Act-
ing Inspector-General of Forests,
which post he still occupies. Under
his direction the pine plantations
commenced in 1898 by the late Mr.
Ednie Brown at Hamel, on the
South-Western railway line, have
been greatly extended and pine-
planting on a very large scale begun
in the Ludlow district. Both these
experiments have been attended
with great success; so much so,
indeed, that planting of softwoods
has received a very considerable im-
petus. Reafforestation by natural
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES GOUGH RICHARDSON.
means has been initiated under Mr.
Richardson’s directions, and a large
area of typical jarrah country re-
served in the south-west for the pur-
pose promises to be a great success.


In a country of such vast area as Western Australia
which, so far as extended settlement is concerned, is as
yet only at the dawn of its existence, the duties of the
Survey Office are both onerous and multifarious. In the
pre-mining days when the population was small and
closer settlement unheard of the Surveyor-General, like
other officials, could pursue a placid existence; but when
mining towns
sprang up like
mushrooms and
population grew
almost as quickly
the Survey Office
became one of the
most strenuous
branches of State
administration.
With the waning
of mining activity
came the growth of
agriculture, bring-
ing increased work
and responsibility to
that office answer-
able for the accu-
rate determination
of boundaries and
areas. In fact, since
1909, when the
Government decided
that the land
should be surveyed
and classified before
being thrown open
for selection, the
survey officers have
been largely em-
ployed in marking
off areas for selec-
tion along the
wheat belts and in
the timber country.
The work of the head office became so congested on
account of the general expansion taking place that in
1910 a policy of decentralization was adopted, and in
HARRY FREDERICK JOHN-
STON, Surveyor-General of Wes-
tern Australia, was born at Bunbury
on May 24, 1853, and was educated
at the State and private schools in
the colony. Having chosen survey-
ing as a profession, he served his
articles in that science, and in 1874
SURVEY BRANCH.
NATURAL RE-AFFORESTATION IN CUT OVER JARRAH FOREST DARLING RANGES.
NEW GROWTH OF JARRAH ( Euc. marginata).
became a contract surveyor. Nearly
ten years later he became one of
the staff surveyors of the Survey
Office, to which he has remained
attached ever since, being appointed
Surveyor-General in 1896 in succes-
sion to Mr. J. S. Brooking, who
retired on the ground of age.
September district survey offices were established at
Albany, Bridgetown, Geraldton, Narrogin, Northam,
and Perth. This departure has been found to afford con-
siderable relief to the congestion at headquarters, and
has had the further advantage of bringing settlers,
selectors, and those having business with the department
into closer touch with its officers, thus enabling surveys
and inquiries to
be more promptly
dealt with than in
the past. The dis-
trict surveyors are
Messrs. F. S. Brock-
man, J. H. M.
Lefroy, A. W. Can-
ning, J. P. Camm,
M. Fox, and A. J.
Lewis, all of whom
are experienced
officers, and some,
particularly Messrs.
Brockman and Can-
ning, have done
valuable explora-
tory work for the
State.
In addition to his
duties as Surveyor-
General Mr. H. F.
Johnston is by
statute Chairman of
the Licensing Board
for Surveyors, a
member of the
Lands Purchase
Board, and Chair-
man of the Work-
ers' Homes Board.
This latter is a
new departure in
Western Australia,
but judging by its
success in other advanced communities is one likely to
prove of considerable value to the workers in this great
Western State.
Among the many services rendered
to the State by Mr. Johnston may be
mentioned the survey of the Kim-
berley district in 1883 and 1884,
when that vast territory was thrown
open for pastoral occupation. Sub-
sequently he triangulated the same
area, and in the course of his sur


vey, which partook largely of the
nature of exploration, discovered the
Elvire and Mary Rivers, since proved
to contain gold. From 1886 to 1889
he had charge of the construction of
the telegraph line from Roebourne
to Derby, and in 1901 organized an
exploring party to proceed to the
Kimberley district to examine and
report on a large tract of country
not then properly known and de-
scribed. Mr. Johnston is also a
member of the Board of Examiners
for Surveyors in Western Australia,
and when the Government early this
year decided to appoint a Board to
administer the Workers’ Homes Act
passed in 1911 he was chosen for the
responsible position of Chairman.
ALFRED WERNAM CANNING,
District Surveyor, Survey Depart-
ment, Perth, was born at Mel-
bourne, Victoria., in 1861 and re-
ceived his education at the old Carl-
ton College in that city. Pie entered
the Government Service as a cadet
in the Survey Department and at a
later date became engaged in con-
tract surveying under Government,
on the south coast of New South
Wales, and also in the back country,
continuing in this connection until
1893. Coming to Western Australia
in that year, he immediately joined
the Government Survey Depart-
ment of this State, and for a time
was engaged in the Compiling
Branch of the Service. In 1901 he
began the survey work in connection
with rabbit-proof fencing through-
out the State, and while engaged in
this and other duties incidental to
the carrying out of such an im-
portant enterprise traversed the
country between Starvation Har-
bour to Wallal, on the north coast,
a distance of 1,175 miles. In 1906
his services were transferred to the
Mines Department to assist in
carrying out an exploration expedi-
tion across the supposed desert from
Willuna, with the main object of
ascertaining whether there was suffic-
ient water to travel stock from Kim-
berly to the goldfields. This he
brought to such a successful issue
that he was accorded a reception by
both Houses of Parliament upon
his return, and in 1908 was in-
structed to proceed practically across
the same route to put down a line
of wells. To carry out this mission
Mr. Canning started from Willuna
with twenty-six men and full equip-
ment of provisions, well-sinking ap-
pliances, etc., and was successful in
finding water at reasonable distances
and at a fairly shallow depth. He
travelled as far as Sturt Creek, put-
ting down about fifty-four wells
over 800 miles of country, and was
absent about two years. He took a
trip to England after his return to
Perth, and on arrival once more in
the land of his adoption entered up-
on the duties of District Surveyor
in the head office, an appointment
he has held ever since.
NORMAN STATHAM BART-
LETT, compiling draughtsman and
officer-in-charge of trigonometrical
surveys, Western Australia, was
born at London in September, 1864.
After some years at a Grammar
School in England he left that
country in 1881 for New Zealand
and completed his education at the
Dunedin University, subsequently
joining the Survey Department in
Dunedin as a survey cadet. Having
obtained his certificate as an
authorized surveyor for New Zea-
land he secured an appointment in
the Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch of
the Victorian Railways Department,
and was engaged upon the construc-
tion of the second section of the
Great Southern Railway and on the
trial surveys of the lines from
Gerang - Gerung to Netherby,
Noradjua to Casterton, Natimuk to
Goroke, and the South Australian
border. As a member of the firm
of Messrs. Bartlett & Cookson, civil
engineers and licensed surveyors,
Mooroopna and Kyabram, Victoria,
he carried out contract surveys for
the Rodney Irrigation Trust and
drainage works for the Shire of
Shepparton. In the early nineties
his attention was attracted to the
Western State by the wonderful
gold discoveries, and in 1895 he
came to Perth and entered the
Public Works Department of the
Government Service. Six months
later he was transferred to the
Department of Lands and Surveys
as draughtsman in the Compiling
Branch. He is a member of the
Land Surveyors’ Licensing Board
and holds surveyor’s licences from
the Boards of New Zealand,
Victoria, and Western Australia,
and certificate of competency from
the Municipal Surveyors’ Board of
Victoria. In 1910 he was a member
of the Council of the Institute of
Surveyors of Western Australia.
Department of Agriculture.
Until the last few years no Department of Agricul-
ture as an office separate from the Lands Department
existed in Western Australia. When, however, the
falling off in the gold returns, the operation of interstate
free trade, and the consequent depression caused the
Government and people to look around for other avenues
of industry, it was borne in upon the State that in its
lands it possessed an asset which, if developed scienti-
fically, might place Western Australia upon the highest
pinnacle as an agricultural community.
The possibility became by experiment and research
more even than a probability —it became a practical cer-
cc2
tainty —and with this knowledge a Department of
Agriculture was established to foster all the primary
industries of the soil.
At present it administers all matters relating to
agriculture and industries generally; to the development
of the extensive wheat belt; to the development of the
South-West; to the extension of fruit industries; to the
control of Government refrigerating works, abattoirs,
saleyards, and markets; to Rabbit and Vermin Boards;
to the inspection of stock; and, lastly, to the operations
of that important institution, the Agricultural Bank.
Up to 1904 the portfolio of Minister of Lands covered


Name.
From
To
John Michael Drew ...
August 10, 1904
August 25, 1905
Sir Newton Janies Moore ...
August 25, 1905
June 30, 1909
James Mitchell
June 30, 1900
October 7, 1911
Thomas Henry Bath...
October 7, 1911
Still in Office
the administration of the agricultural branch also, but
since that time there has been either a separate Minister
for Agriculture or a Minister for Lands and Agriculture
combined. The holders of the position have been as
under:
In a State comprising such an immense territory as
Western Australia there is almost every variation of
climate and soil, and new settlers are often at a loss to
know what are the most suitable crops or fruit trees to
grow in a particular district, the best methods of cultiva-
tion to adopt, and the fertilizers best adapted for particu-
lar localities. On
these and other
points informa-
tion, which will
minimize the risk
of loss that
would otherwise
be incurred, can
be readily ob-
tained on appli-
cation to the de-
partment, where
experienced and
scientific officers
are ready at all
times to place
their knowledge
at the disposal
of settlers.
The department itself is the outcome of the Bureau
of Agriculture established nearly twenty years ago, when
with the abnormal growth of the colony other industries
besides gold-mining seemed to offer inducements. The
Secretary of the Bureau, the late Mr. L. Lindley-Cowan,
a man of considerable administrative ability, had the
satisfaction a few years later of seeing the comparatively
small bureau expand into one of the most important
departments of the State. The first Director of Agricul-
ture, Mr. William Paterson, combined with that office the
managership of the newly-established Agricultural Bank.
When development made each of these positions of such
importance that no one man could satisfactorily carry
out the two duties, Mr. Paterson became manager of the
Agricultural Bank and Mr. Alexander Crawford Acting-
Director of Agriculture. A further reorganization took
place in 1905, when Mr. Crawford became Under-
secretary to the Department and Mr. F. C. Chaplin
Director of Agriculture. Further changes were made in
the following year. Mr. Chaplin resigned the Director-
ship, and Mr. W. B. Hooper became Acting-Director and
Under-Secretary, while Mr. Crawford was placed in
charge of the arrangements for preventing the incursion
of rabbits into Western Australia. The next alteration
was the appointment of Mr. A. Despeissis to be Under-
secretary in addition to his duties as Viticultural and
Horticultural Expert, and this was followed by a further
reorganization under which Professor William Lowrie,
M.A., B.Sc., an agricultural expert of undoubted
authority, became Director of Agriculture, and Mr. T. S.
McNulty Under-Secretary of the department. No other
change was made until the beginning of 1911, when Pro-
fessor Lowrie resigned his appointment to accept a
similar post in South Australia. Mr. Despeissis again
became Acting-Director of Agriculture for a time. As
stated in the departmental report: —“When the question
of providing a
successor to Pro-
fessor Lowrie
came under re-
view, the Hon.
Minister for
Agriculture, Mr.
James Mitchell,
after very care-
ful consideration
and after four
years' experience
of departmental
operations, form-
ed the conclu-
sion that, in
view of the vast
area of the
State, the diver -
sity of its agricultural interests, and the multiplicity
of problems facing the many new settlers within
its borders, it would be advisable to split up the work
in the expert field and secure specialists in three distinct
spheres. The Government concurred in this, and the
lion. Mr. Mitchell and the Public Service Commissioner
(Mr. Jull) proceeded to the East to inquire into the
merits of the men available in the other States as com-
pared with those of local applicants. After exhaustive
inquiry the qualifications of the Eastern applicants were
found to outweigh those of the gentlemen offering them-
selves locally, and it was decided to appoint Mr. George
Lowe Sutton to be Commissioner of the Wheat Belts of
the State, Mr. James M. B. Connor to be Commissioner
of the South-East, and Mr. James F. Moody to be Com-
missioner for the Fruit Industries.”
Mr. Despeissis had some time previously been ap-
pointed Commissioner for Tropical Agriculture. This
OFFICES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE


Area under Cultivation .
Year.
Cereals.
Hay.
Other
Crops.
Vices.
Orchards.
Total,
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
1901
82,569
104,254
5,894
8,325
5,296
201,338
1911
648,841
175,432
11,218
2,795
16,738
855,024
office has, however, been recently abolished, and Mr.
Despeissis has retired from the service. The professional
staff of the department was further strengthened by
securing the services of a botanist and pathologist from
the Birmingham University, England. This official,
Frederick Stoward, D.Sc., has already resolutely attacked
the problems put to him in connection with plant diseases,
and when his laboratory is completed and his scientific
apparatus available, the department should be placed in
possession of much valuable information in this regard.
Dr. Stoward has recently received the degree of Doctor
of Science of the Birmingham University for a thesis on
the physiology of germination.
To educate settlers in regard to the classing of wools,
a wool expert in the person of Mr. A. H. Codrington was
secured to give lectures at different country centres
throughout the year. These have been well attended.
Expert, Engineer for Water Supply and Road Clearing,
Poultry Adviser, and Inspector of Fertilizers.
If further evidence should be required, the following
tabulated statement, showing the actual area under culti-
vation in 1911 as against that in 1901, affords even more
striking proof of development. Even these figures fall
far short of the expectations formed of the State’s agricul-
tural possibilities.
We are not, however, so much concerned at the
STRIPPING WHEAT AT NARROGIN.
Two new veterinary surgeons, in the persons of
Messrs. E. A. Weston, B.V.Sc., and W. Young,
M.R.C.V.S., were appointed during the year, and have
been actively at work in connection with stock problems
in different parts of the State.
This short study of the department is perhaps the
best evidence of the growth of the industry in the State.
Where a few years ago the staff consisted of a Director
of Agriculture, Viticultural and Horticultural Expert,
Botanist, two Veterinary Surgeons, Travelling Entomolo-
gist, and an Inspector of Fertilizers, there are now in
addition a Commissioner for the Wheat Belt, Commis-
sioner for the South-West, Commissioner for Fruit Indus-
tries, Botanist and Pathologist, four Veterinary Sur-
geons, Entomologist, Dairy Expert, Irrigation Expert,
Lecturer in Wool-classing, Cool Storage and Abattoirs
moment with the result of the department’s operations.
These will be treated at length elsewhere. Suffice it to
say generally that the amount of money which the depart-
ment costs over and above any revenue derived is more
than repaid by its usefulness to the State.
In addition to the control of matters relating to
agriculture generally, the department is also responsible
for the proper administration of various branches of
State activity which relate to agricultural matters or to
the development of primary industries.
REFRIGERATING WORKS, ABATTOIRS,
SALEYARDS, AND MARKETS.
Cold storage has for many years been looked upon
as a necessary adjunct to the proper marketing facilities
of the meat and fish trade, more particularly in the case


of export, but it is only of recent years that its advan-
tages to the fruit-grower and dairyman have been recog-
nized. To be able to store surplus fruit under satisfactory
conditions, and so avoid sacrificing it, confers a distinct
benefit upon the grower, while a steady supply through-
out the year is equally excellent from the consumer’s
point of view. This fact was clearly demonstrated some
five or six years ago by the Department of Agriculture,
and since that time the Government Cold Storage Works
in Perth, under the managership of Mr. A. D. Cairns,
have become a factor of great importance to the success
of the fruit-grower. They are also of value in handling
and preserving the meat and fish supply of the city. The
question of providing refrigerating works in connection
with the meat and fruit export trade has also been
engaging the attention of the authorities for some time
past. With that end in view an establishment has
already been equipped at Albany and proposals for ex-
tensive works at Wyndham in the far north were re-
ceiving earnest consideration at the hands of the late
Government, and doubtless will equally commend them-
selves to the present administration.
Besides being Manager of the Refrigerating Works,
Mr. Cairns is Controller of Abattoirs, and in that capa-
city is responsible for the public abattoirs, saleyards, and
markets. The only jmblic abattoirs at present are those
at Kalgoorlie. In the metropolitan area the work has
been carried on privately. For some time past, however,
the Government has felt the necessity of bringing the
slaughtering of cattle directly under its control, and but
for the difficulty of fixing a site the metropolis would ere
now have been as satisfactorily served as the goldfields.
Recently it has been decided to erect up-to-date abattoirs
at North Fremantle, and before very long the depart-
ment hopes to have them in full swing.
So far as saleyards are concerned, there are at pre-
sent three which are directly under Government control;
they are situated at North Fremantle, Midland Junction,
and Kalgoorlie. The lastnamed are run in connection
with the abattoirs, and judging from the departmental
reports are both a convenience to the people and a safe-
guard to health. The North Fremantle yards are
gradually superseding those at Midland Junction, both
on account of being closer to and on account of
their better equipment, facilities having been provided
for both day- and night-loading operations. When the
system is completed by the construction of abattoirs and
export depots, Western Australia will be fully equipped
for the handling of meat on a large scale. On this matter
the Controller in his report for 1910-11 writes :—''Unfor-
tunately these saleyards lack a very necessary outlet
for such establishments—that is, a central abattoir and
export depot. These have been laid out, and, when
complete, we will have the most compact abattoir and
saleyard in Australasia and ample for the needs of the
metropolitan area and the exjjort business for the next
twelve years. The whole of this scheme has been hotly
disputed, and the site and everything else condemned by
those who may be slightly affected by this installation.
The whole opposition to this scheme is clearly seen to be
that their biggest concern is not so much where the
business takes root, as that it does not take root any-
where. The leading articles in the daily jDress, letters,
re|3orts, and general comments, all summed up together,
show the absolutely complete inevitableness of this site
being specially designed by Nature for this purpose.
During a six weeks’ visit to the Eastern States, the writer
made a thorough of the plans of abattoirs and
saleyards at Homebush made by the Government Archi-
tect, the existing saleyards and abattoirs under the City
Council and Board of Health, together with all the export
works on the Harbour. Special attention was also given
to the saleyards and abattoirs at Flemington and Mel-
bourne, and the export works at Footscray, Melbourne,
and Geelong; and, of course, a week was sjient at our
next-door neighbour in Adelaide, where new municipal
saleyards and abattoirs are under construction.
' Not one of these units in any of the States possesses
the natural advantages of North Fremantle. In fact,
any of those States would give millions of money to have
a site half as good as North Fremantle. The export depot
in South Australia had to be built on a swamp to get
as near the shipping as we are. Our ground level is
22 ft. above high-water mark. We can reach the ship-
ping over the head of the traffic on the wharf
independently, and have none of the disadvantages of
shunting or stoppage as seen at most of these Eastern
installations, which were erected before the Commerce
Act dictated the methods. This new Act deals with the
stock from the paddock through the factory into the
ship, and North Fremantle is most favoured naturally
to comply with the conditions laid down with the smallest
outlay of capital.”
The only markets under the direct control of the
department are the Perth City Markets, which, how-
ever, do not constitute the only markets in the metropolis.
So far as other markets in the State are concerned they
are in a measure under departmental supervision, in that
Government Inspectors are charged with the duty of
inspecting all meat, fruit, produce, etc., sold therein.
RABBITS AND VERMIN BOARDS.
Another phase of departmental activity is to be
found in the measures taken to assist the settlers in resist-
ing the incursion of rabbits and in preventing the possi-
bility of damage by "vermin,” such as wild dogs, destruc-
tive marsupials, and so on. For many years it was firmly
believed that the wide expanse of desert would effectually
prevent rabbits from crossing from the Eastern States


to Western Australia. When the presence of an occa-
sional rabbit on the eastern goldfields proved the fallacy
of that belief the Government proceeded to build a
rabbit-proof fence from north to south of the State as a
means of protection, and as those with a knowledge of
“bunny’s” peculiar little ways firmly expected, shortly
afterwards rabbits were found west of the fence. This
necessitated a further fence, and the two together have
certainly been fairly efficient in preventing those trouble-
some and destructive results from which our Eastern
neighbours have so long suffered. The rabbit branch of
the department was established to look after this fence, a
task which, according to the report of the Chief Inspector,
Mr. Alex. Crawford, is one of no little difficulty. At
the same time the Government agreed to afford assistance
fencing in of its boundaries, but none of the other boards
have, up to the present, gone in for fencing their
boundaries.
INSPECTION OF STOCK.
The enormous possibilities that lie before Western
Australia as a pastoral, dairying, and stock-raising
country make the proper and efficient inspection of stock
a constant necessity. This has been all along recognized
by the Government, though never perhaps so much as
of recent years. At present the staff engaged in the work
consists of the Chief Inspector (Mr. Robert E. Weir,
M.R.C.V.S.), two Veterinary Surgeons (Messrs. J. L.
Burns and E. A. Weston), and eight travelling In-
FARM SCENE AT WAGIN.
to those settlers who desired to surround their holdings
as a further protection with rabbit-proof fencing. This
has been largely availed of, while some of the pastoralists
have made their runs secure at their own expense entirely.
The Government has also provided means whereby
settlers desirous of fencing whole areas away from the
rabbits and of destroying wild dogs and other noxious
animals may constitute themselves into a Vermin Board
and obtain easy terms from the Government to assist
them in fencing. From Mr. Crawford’s report we learn
that there are now five Vermin Boards in existence,
namely, Shark Bay, Gascoyne, Upper Gascoyne, Roe-
bourne and Tableland, and Black Range.
The Gascoyne Board has almost completed the
specters. These are busily employed in the constant
supervision of the flocks and herds of the State and in a
close examination of all animals landed, whether they are
imported for stock-raising, wool-growing, dairying pur-
poses, or food consumption. To the activity of the
inspectors is mainly due the comparative freedom that
Western Australia enjoys from serious animal diseases,
such as pleuro-pneumonia, anthrax, and swine fever.
One of the great difficulties is to cope with the question
of tuberculosis among the dairy herds. That it is present
there is undoubted proof, and that such a disease is
serious in a country with a future in dairying is beyond
argument. The best we can say is we are no worse than
our neighbours, and that the officials whose duty it is


Horses
Overseas.
... 22
Interstate.
2,984
N.-W. Ports.
556
Camels
... —
6
—
Donkeys
—
91
—
Cattle ...
—
163
30,145
Bulls ...
—
26
—
Cows
—
173
—
Stores ...
... —
45
—
Goats ...
—
44
—
Sheep ...
—
15,895
138,434
Rams ...
—
5,873
—
Ewes
—
11,875
—
Pigs ...
3
—
—
Dogs
... 15
182
—
Poultry
—
326
—
to cope with the disease leave no stone unturned to pre*
vent tubercular meat or the produce of tubercular cows
from passing into consumption. On this particular
branch of his work Mr. Weir in his report for 1910-11
says: —“The work of inspecting dairy cattle throughout
the State has been carefully carried out during the year,
and the elimination from the herds of all dairy cows
showing clinical lesions of tuberculosis has been aimed at.
Altogether a total of about fifty head has been removed
from the dairies, and these have been either isolated or
immediately destroyed. The tuberculin test was applied
to about 400 cows, and gave reactions varying from 5 per
cent, to 25 per cent, in the different herds. In all cases
those showing reaction from the test are being weeded
out, and their places supplied by healthy animals. The
process of the total eradication of the disease must be
of necessity a slow one under the most favourable condi-
tions, and especially in our case, where the method of
feeding and the difficulty of isolation (in the metropolitan
and sub-metropolitan districts) are so favourable to the
spread of the disease. Regular inspection and methods
of dealing with affected animals will be required for a
number of years before the practically complete eradica-
tion of the disease can be secured. It is generally recog-
nized that although the heavy-milking breeds are more
THOMAS SYDNEY McNULTY,
Under-Secretary to the Department
of Agriculture, Western Australia,
was born in New South Wales. On
leaving college he entered into com-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. THOMAS SYDNEY MONULTY.
mercial pursuits in the office of a
large Sydney firm and after seven
years’ mercantile experience came to
Western Australia during the boom
of 1896. In that year he joined the
Public Works Department and held
various responsible positions until
1903, when he was selected to fulfil
the duties incidental to the post of
Secretary of the Goldfields Water
Scheme Administration. In June,
1909, he was appointed to take up
the work of Under-Secretary to the
Department of Agriculture.
JAMES FREDERICK MOODY,
Fruit Industries Commissioner, De-
partment of Agriculture, Perth, was
born at Tooronga Road, Hawthorn,
Victoria, and received his education
at the Fligh School at Kew under
Mr. J. H. Thomjison, M.A. At the
close of his scholastic career he
entered a solicitor’s office in Mel-
bourne, and having continued there
for about four years in 1891 went to
Mildura, on the River Murrav.
Here he occupied the position of
overseer for the Mildura Exchange
Company for about twelve months,
when, joining the firm of Messrs.
Chaffey Brothers, he obtained a
comprehensive knowledge of nursei’y
work, fruit-drying, and general
orchard operations, and during the
five years sjxent in this connection
took up a block of twenty acres,
which he planted with citrous and
other varieties of fruit-trees. Dis-
subject to the disease than other cattle, yet none are
immune when brought into close contact with affected
animals.”
The total number of livestock imported into the
State for 1910 was as under :
When to the duty of inspecting these, the continual
examination of the stock already in the State is added, it
becomes evident that the work of stock inspection is both
arduous and exacting.
posing of this he joined Mr. H. B.
Russell on his large farm in the
Wirnmera district, where he aug-
mented his experience by practical
work in general agriculture and
Bartletto, Perth.
Mr. James Frederick Moody.
received some insight into the pas-
toral industry in connection with
sheep-raising. Three years later he
became assistant orchardist at the
llawkesbury Agricultural College


and held this position for twelve
months, when he took the manage-
ment of an orchard on the Penang
Mountains, which he worked suc-
cessfully on the share system, culti-
vating a large variety of fruit
trees, including the citrous and
deciduous species, and vines and
passion fruit. His next appointment
was that of orchardist and irriga-
tionist to the Kameruka Estate at
Bega, New South Wales, owned by
Sir R. L. Lucas-Tooth, Bart., and
which he held for seven and a half
years, the work consisting chiefly of
irrigation operations on the lucerne
fields and other fodder crops for
cattle, and the cultivation of 150
acres of different kinds of fruits,
more especially for drying purposes.
This period was followed by a year
and nine months as manager for the
Toomuc Valley Orchard Property
Company, Victoria, comprising 210
acres, and the largest export orchard
in Australia, having its own cold
stores of 30,000-case capacity and its
own evaporating plant. On July 1,
1911, Mr. Moody received appoint-
ment to his present position under
the Western Australian Govern-
ment, for which his twenty years'
experience in the fruit industry has
endowed him with every qualifica-
tion.
JAMES MILLAR BROCK
CONNOR, Agricultural Commis-
sioner for South-West district, was
born at Geelong, Victoria, on Dec-
ember 30, 1871, and is a son of the
late Honourable J. H. Connor,
M.L.C., who represented Geelong
and Western districts in both State
Houses of Parliament for over twenty
years. The subject of this notice, at
the completion of his scholastic
studies at Geelong College, became
one of the early and brilliant
students of the Dookie Agricultural
College, where he obtained the gold
medals awarded for the best prac-
tical-work student, the best dairy
student, and for the most up-to-date
method of improving the swine herd ;
also a silver medal for the best ento-
mological collection. A certificated
dairy student of the late Professor
J. L. Thompson, he is also a certifi-
cated dairy supervisor under the
Victorian Milk and Dairy Super-
vision Act of 1903. Previous to
joining the Western Australian
Department of Agriculture in May,
1911, Mr. Connor was attached tc
the Department of Agriculture, Vic-
toria, his official title being Agricul-
tural Superintendent. His duties
embraced the establishment of ex-
perimental and demonstration plots,
of manurial and variety test-plots
of wheat, cereals, and fodder plants,
and the judging of large district-
farm and forage competitions
throughout the State. He brought
to the discharge of this office a wide
experience gained during several
years of successful farming, stud
stock-breeding, and dairying on his
own account in the Western district
of Victoria, where he became known
as one of the most noted exhibitors
of pure-bred Ayrshire and Jersey
cattle, dairy cows, and Welsh cob
ponies at the leading agricultural
shows. Mr. Connor was in constant
request as adjudicator in both
dairy cattle and horse sections at
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES MILLAR BROCK CONNOR.
these functions throughout the
State of Victoria, including the
Royal Agricultural Show, Mel-
bourne. His late father had been
especially successful in the breeding
of Jersey, Ayrshire, and dairy cows,
whose milk and butter yield, as
proved by the Babcock test, carried
off the awards in the milking-test
competitions, including three gold
medals presented by Lord Brassey
at the Royal Show, Melbourne, and
the Geelong and Colac Agricultural
Shows. Mr. J. M. B. Connor was
instrumental in establishing the
Lady Talbot Milk Institute's model
pure milk farm for infants' milk,
situated at Caulfield, one of the
finest pure-milk supplies and closer
settlement farms in Victoria. Dur-
ing the past four years he has con-
tributed to the Victorian Journal of
Agriculture over thirty articles
dealing with closer settlement, and
these invariably have been repro-
duced by the agricultural Press in
the different States. Always keenly
alive to all matters pertaining to agri-
culture and its allied branches when
likely to be of benefit to the rural
producers, he held membership in
the Victorian Chamber of Agricul-
ture, the Colac Shire Council, was
Vice-President of the Colac Agricul-
tural Society successively for two
years, and received nomination as
its delegate to the Annual Farmers'
Convention in three successive years.
During the recent tour of the
Scottish agricultural commissioners
throughout Victoria Mr. Connor was
chosen by the Minister for Agricul-
ture to escort them through the
State, and he holds a very compli-
mentary letter from the Commis-
sioners expressing the high opinion
formed of his experience, expert
knowledge of live stock, and genera]
grasp of agricultural affairs, entitling
him to give an authoritative state-
ment on a subject so vital to the
future prosperity of the various
States of the Australian Common-
wealth.
GEORGE LOWE SUTTON,
Wheat Commissioner for the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, was born at
Liverpool, England, in 1872. Arriv-
ing at Sydney, New South Wales, at
ten years of age his education was
completed at the Sydney High
School, and upon its conclusion he
became engaged in dairy-farming at
Liverpool, in Central Cumberland,
for about two years. He then took
a trip which occupied a year among
pastoral areas on the borders of
Queensland in order to enlarge his
experience, after which he returned
to the Liverpool district. Mr. Sut-
ton gave up dairy-farming in order
to accept the position of experimen-
talist at the Hawkesbury Agricul-
tural College in connection with
which institution two years later he
became lecturer on Agriculture.
Here he became associated with the
late Mr. William J. Farrar, the Aus-
tralian wheat-breeder, and had
charge of the wheat-breeding plots
at the College. After five years'
work at the institution he was trans-
ferred to Cowra to establish and
manage a new experiment farm


with the object of studying and
solving the problems affecting the
wheat-farmers of New South Wales,
and to extend the work of breeding
new varieties of wheat specially suit-
able for Australian conditions.
Banrtletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE LOWE SUTTON.
Shortly after entering on this work
the dry farm at Coolabah was placed
under his control. This is situated
100 miles outside the present safe
wheat belt of New South Wales, and
he succeeded in obtaining satisfac-
tory crops with only 3 in. of rain
during the growing period. Owing
to the inaccessibility of the Coola-
bah farm it was decided to transfer
operations to a more suitable site,
and to Mr. Sutton fell the task of
arranging the transfer from Coola-
bah and of starting a demonstration
farm of 5,000 acres at Nyngan. Upon
the death of the late Mr. William J.
Farrer Mr. Sutton was appointed
his successor, his duties requiring
him to supervise the wheat-breeding
at five experiment farms. In 1911
he accepted an appointment by the
Western Australian Government as
Wheat Commissioner for the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, and entered
upon his duties in May of that year.
Already he has formed the opinion
held by many whose experience ex-
tends over years in this State that
Western Australia is destined to
become a great wheat-producing
country, and possesses a climate
capable of producing perhaps the
finest wheat in the Commonwealth.
Mr. Sutton was one of the members
of the Experiment Supervision Com-
mittee of the New South Wales
Department of Agriculture. He is
an active member of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of
Science, and was an examiner in
practical agriculture at the Hawkes-
bury Agricultural College.
ARTHUR HENRY SCOTT,
Government Irrigation Expert,
Perth, wa,s born at Horsham,
Sussex, England, in 1878. He was
educated at the Bedford Grammar
School, and at the age of sixteen
went to sea under a scheme inaugu-
rated by Lord Brassey, visiting Aus-
tralia twice via Cape Horn. He
gained some experience in the
pastoral industry on sheep-farms in
Victoria, as his ship was detained
for a considerable period owing to
the great maritime strike. His love
of the land ultimately induced him
to forsake the sea, and he studied
farm and market-garden work in the
Old Country. Leaving England he
proceeded to Renmark, South Aus-
tralia, and became identified with
the irrigation colony. During the
seven years passed at Renmark he
became familiar with the various
processes of fruit culture and under-
took the charge of 400 acres of irri-
gated orchard for absentee owners,
besides cultivating his own estate.
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ARTHUR HENRY SCOTT.
He constructed many of the large
irrigation channels for Messrs.
Chaffey Brothers, and the grading
and preparation of land for fruit-
growing occupied a large share of his
attention both at the settlement and
in the surrounding districts. After
a very successful experience in this
line Mr. Scott further enlarged his
knowledge of irrigation by visiting
the chief centres of cultivation,
where workable schemes have been
brought to perfection, and in pursuit
of this expert experience made two
journeys to the United States, visit-
ing also Canada, Mexico, and Nor-
thern Italy. He has also been con-
nected with several business ventures
in this State, and has made six trips
between the Old Country and Aus-
tralia. The knowledge thus gained
has found practical outlet in various
parts of Australia, Mr. Scott having
l3een employed to carry out irriga-
tion schemes on several estates in
Victoria and New South Wales. In
1907 he joined the Western Austra-
lian Government Service in a tempo-
rary capacity to put into operation
an experimental scheme of irrigation
on the Brunswick State Farm, which
from its inception has been a marked
success, and in 1909 received appoint-
ment to the permanent post which he
now holds.
ADRIAN JEAN DESPEISSIS,
M.R.C.A., formerly Commissioner of
Tropical Agriculture for Western
Australia, was born in December,
1860, at Mauritius, and educated in
his native place at the Royal Col-
lege, an institution affiliated with
the London University. Soon after
leaving college he was entrusted by
the Government of Mauritius with a
responsible mission to India, where
the beet-sugar importers from Ger-
many were competing in the Indian
market with the producers of cane-
sugar from his native country. On
his return from India he was
appointed Executive Commissioner
for the island at the Indian and
Colonial Exhibition in London. He
then decided to learn the science
and technique of agriculture, and
after three years’ study in England
was awarded the membership of the
Royal Agricultural College, coming
out with honours, and also the
diploma of the Royal Agricultural
Society of England. After some
study at the National Agronomic
Institute and at the Pasteur Insti-
tute in Paris, where he made a
special research in experimental fer-
mentations, he gained practical ex-
perience in vine-growing and wine-
making at Messrs. A. & W. Gilbey’s
vineyards in the Medoc, as well as
taking a special course at the Mont-
pellier School of Viticulture. About


this time he was offered the position
of viticulturist to the State by the
New South Wales Government, and
proceeding to Sydney he entered
upon his duties in connection with
the vine and fruit-growing indus-
tries of that sub-tropical country.
Four years after receiving this
appointment the Bureau of Agricul-
ture in Western Australia arranged
with the New South Wales Govern-
ment for the loan of Mr. Despeissis'
services for a period of nine months,
and this eventually led to his en-
gagement as vine and fruit expert
to the Government of the Western
State. A few years ago he visited
Algeria, Spain, and Portugal to in-
quire into the methods of agricul-
ture in those warm countries, and on
his return to Western Australia was
given the post of Under-Secretary
and Acting-Director of Agriculture.
Later he was appointed Commis-
sioner of Tropical Agriculture, and
while holding this office visited North
Queensland, the Federated Malay
States, Singapore, and Java, re-
turning via Port Darwin, in order
to study the methods adopted by
the agriculturists of these tropical
countries. Mr. Despeissis afterwards
visited the northern districts of
the State, and covered over-
land the distance between Carnar-
von and Wyndham. He is a mem-
ber of several Australian Scientific
Societies and has contributed
largely to agricultural reviews
and magazines both in New South
Wales and this State, besides having
published a comprehensive treatise
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ADRIAN JEAN DESPEISSIS.
on the horticulture and viticulture
of Western Australia. In 1901 he
married Letitia Ellen, daughter of
the late Mr. Alexander Wyndham,
of New South Wales.
ROBERT EDGAR WEIR,
M. R.C. V. S., V eterinary-Surgeon
and Chief Inspector of Stock for
Western Australia, was born at
Campbelltown, Scotland. He was
educated at the Normal School,
Glasgow, afterwards studying for
his profession at the Veterinary
College in the same city. After
some six months' preliminary
experience in his native country in
1882, he came to Australia and
settled at Ballarat, Victoria, where
he practised his profession for about
eight years. Being offered a
Government appointment at Fre-
mantle as stock inspector he
migrated to the Western State and
took up the arduous duties of vete-
rinary officer to the Stock Depart-
ment and the investigating of the
diseases of stock in all parts of the
State. After being stationed at
the Port for about six years he was
appointed to the post of Chief
Inspector of Stock, rendered vacant
by the resignation of Mr. Morton
Craig. Mr. Weir was appointed a
member of the first Board created
under the Veterinary Act of 1911.
He is a member of the Royal Agri-
cultural Society of Western Aus-
tralia and of the Sanitary Institute,
being on the Council and Commit-
tees of both Societies.
AGRICULTURAL BANK.
When the Premier of the day (Sir John Forrest)
decided in 1894 to bring into existence an Agricultural
Bank to assist in the development of rural industries, he
“builded better” than even he contemplated at the time.
From small beginnings it has grown to be the very king
pin of agricultural settlement, and many a successful
farmer owes his present enviable position to its assistance.
Passed in 1894 as an experimental measure, the Act
was repeatedly amended, always in the direction of
enlarging its scope, until 1906, when a new and compre-
hensive enactment took the place of all former ordinances.
The method of administration which had formerly been
carried out by a manager with the assistance of trustees
was remodelled, and the Manager (Mr. Wrn. Paterson)
became Managing Trustee, with Mr. A. McLarty as
Deputy-Managing Trustee and Messrs. A. R. Richardson
and F. V. Cooke as Co-Trustees with Mr. Paterson.
Even since 1906 it has been found necessary, in order
to meet the growing demands of settlement, to make
various amendments, the last being made in January,
1912. This amending Act, under which the scope of the
Bank’s operations has been revised, provides that the
capital of the concern, which in 1894 was £200,000 and
had been periodically increased by further authoriza-
tions, should be raised to £3,000,000 —in itself an
eloquent tesimony not only to the success of the work of
the bank, but also to the enormous agricultural expansion
of the past fifteen years. Subject to the provisions of the
principal Act, “the bank may make advances to persons
engaged in the business of farming or grazing, or in
agricultural, horticultural, or pastoral pursuits, to an
amount not exceeding £2,000, or in any industry that the
Governor may by proclamation declare to be a rural in-
dustry, for any purpose incidental to or in aid of any
such business, pursuit, or industry, including the erection
of a dwelling-house for the borrower on any land occupied
or used by him in connection with such business, pursuit,
or industry : provided that no advance shall be made to
any borrower for the purpose of any proclaimed rural
industry to an amount exceeding a sum to be limited by
such proclamation." Applications for advances have to
be made in a prescribed manner, and the advances are


For year ended June 30, 1911.
Total amount to date.
Liabilities taken over
For purchase of stock
For purchase of plant
For purchase of implements
For purchase of fertilizers
For developmental purposes
£ s. d.
4,517 19 4
25,825 0 0
1,572 4 2
251,243 13 1
£ s. d.
64,028 17 9
147,550 3 0
6,494 0 0
1,833 9 2
3,278 0 0
1,317,057 1 9
£283,158 16 7
£1,540,241 11 8
Year ending June 30, 1911.
Total to date.
Costing.
Costing.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
Clearing
123,868 acres
126,205
10
6
727,384 acres
... 1,021,306
0
0
Cultivating
213,042 acres
120,491
0
0
Ringbarking
241,542 acres
26,627
11
3
1,137,409 acres
107,676
0
0
Fencing
198,374 chains
57,348
11
2
1,029,968 chains
297,077
0
0
Draining
443
16
0
5,386
0
0
Water supply
17,194
7
1
78,581
0
0
Buildings
83,868
0
0
Orchard
321 acres
4,321
0
0
Blackboy and Poison grubbing
13,826 acres
1,974
3
0
48,246 acres
10,585
0
0
£229,793
19
0
£1,729,291
0
0
made by progress payments, the Managing Trustee hav-
ing the right to refuse to continue instalments if the
money is not being rightly applied. The loans have a
currency of thirty years, but may be repaid earlier if the
borrower desires. Interest is calculated at the rate of
5 per cent., and for the first five years only the interest
is charged; after that interest and capital must be repaid
by half-yearly instalments extending over 25 years.
By co-operation with the Lands Department the
bank is enabled to determine before selection whether
the land being offered will justify development, and to
allot the amount which will be advanced. This is of
great benefit to the new settler, as it provides him with
working capital and relieves him from any anxiety as to
whether the land will stand inspection by the bank.
The annual report for 1910-11 shows that on June
30 of the latter year there were 6,228 accounts current
at the bank; that there were 2,839 applications for loans
totalling £534,650; that £283,158 was actually advanced
and £242,307 repaid, thus leaving the large amount of
£976,811 on loan to the settlers on that date.
The amount advanced has been applied, as prescribed
by the 1910 and previous Acts, to the following pur-
poses :
The improvements effected by farmers , with the assistance of the bank’s funds, are as follows: —
ALEXANDER ROBERI RICH-
ARDSON, one of the Trustees of
the Agiicultural Bank, was born at
Islington, England, in the year 1848,
his father being the Rev. Thomas
Elliott Richardson, M.A., of Glas-
gow University, who came out to
Australia in the early days and was
well known as a Presbyterian min-
ister for many years in Victoria, and
latterly as editor of The Portland
Guardian newspaper. Mr. A. R.
Richardson was educated at various
schools in Victoria, and at the age
of seventeen accompanied a party
of five young men, including himself
and his brother, and Messrs. Ander-
son, Grant, and Edgar, on a jhoneer-
mg trip to the Nor’-West of Wes-
tern Australia. Chartering the ship
Maria Ross” they took with them
1,600 ewes, ten horses, and sta-
tion outfit and supplies, and landed
at Tientsin Harbour (Cossack Bay),
the port of the Roebourne district,
where they secured a lease of over
200,000 acres and formed the Pyra-
mid Station. Four years later
Messrs. Grant and Anderson went
out of the partnership, and the
management of the station fell upon
Mr. A. R. Richardson, who con-
tinned to control operations until
1876. Two years prior to this date
he had married Ellen, daughter of
Mr. John Wellard, a widely known
and respected pioneer, who owned a
farm at Serpentine. Having arranged
with his brother and Mr. Edgar for
the appointment of a manager for
Pyramid, being anxious to give his
wife more of the comforts of civiliza-
tion than could be enjoyed in the
back country, Mr. Richardson pur-
chased this property from his father-
in-law, and taking up his residence
there proceeded to develop and im-
prove the estate. In 1880 he was
instrumental in the formation of a
company to take up a considerable
area of pastoral leaseholds from the
Crown on the Fitzroy River in the
Kimberley district, explored by the
late Mr. Alexander Forrest in the
previous year. This enterprise be-
came known as the Murray Squat-
ting Company, and under Mr.
George Patterson as manager gave
considerable stimulus to the opening
up of the rich lands in this remote
region. Pastoral enterprise might
almost be termed a passion with Mr.
Richardson, who at another period
took up virgin country not far from
Port Hedland, when as yet no port
existed, and formed the Boodarrie


Station conjointly with Mr. J.
Pierce Wellard, his brother-in-law,
who became resident manager. In
1883, after personal inspection, he
purchased Mardie Station on behalf
of the Company. Other ventures of
a similar nature were engaged in, and
in 1904 Mr. Richardson visited the
Broomehill district, with the possi-
bilities of which he was impressed.
Securing several blocks he established
three of his sons on the land, and
with their valuable assistance many
improvements have been effected
and a flock of high-class merino
sheep established. Mr. Richardson,
while still a young man, became in-
terested in the affairs of local admin-
istration, and at various times filled
the post of Chairman of the North-
ern Roads Board, of which he was
elected a member in the seventies.
Upon settling nearer to the capital
he turned his attention to politics
and was returned to represent the
interests of the Northern district in
the old Legislative Council in 1887,
his colleague being the Honourable
S. Burt. Upon the inauguration of
responsible government he stood for
De Grey electorate in the House of
Assembly, and upon the retirement
of the Hon. W. E. Marmion from
the office of Minister of Lands
accepted the portfolio in December,
1894. In 1897 he resigned his port-
folio and his seat in Parliament.
FRANK VAUGHAN COOKE,
J.P., Trustee of the Agricultural
Bank, Perth, is a son of the
late Mr. Henry John Cooke, and
was born in 1872 on his father’s
farm at Northam, his grand-
father being the late Mr. John Tay-
lor Cooke, an early settler and owner
of the property “Newleyine” at
Northam, and his father a well-
known man in the pastoral world.
The gentleman under review was
educated at Mr. H. Briggs’ Grammar
School at Fremantle, and sub-
sequently served his apprenticeship
to commercial life as a junior in an
office at that seaport. At a later
period he returned to the calling of
his fathers, and after having ob-
tained considerable experience in
contracting and general country work
in the northern districts, in 1894
acquired the property of '‘Stoney
Ridges,” near Northam, which has
since been developed and increased
to 3,000 acres. Mr. Cooke has met
with considerable success as an
agriculturist and has 1,000 acres
under cultivation annually, the aver-
age yield being from 14 to 15 bushels
of wheat to the acre. He also
engages in fat-lamb raising, which
he has found a profitable branch of
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANK VAUGHAN COOKE.
the industry. He has interested him-
self in public matters, and is a Vice-
President of the Agricultural
Society of Northam, to the affairs
of which he gives his close attention.
In November, 1908, he was
appointed one of the Trustees of the
Agricultural Bank of Western Aus-
tralia.
WILLIAM PATERSON, Man-
ager of the Agricultural Bank,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr. Nicol
Robertson Paterson, formerly of
Stromness, Orkney, Scotland, a well-
known merchant of Fremantle, who
afterwards owned and farmed a pro-
perty of 12,000 acres at Pinjarra.
Mr. Paterson was born at the
latter place on June 21, 1847,
and received his preliminary educa-
tion at Fremantle, concluding his
scholastic studies at a private
academy in Birmingham, England.
In 1864 he returned to Western Aus-
tralia and entered upon agricultural
pursuits on his father's property,
continuing the management of the
estate in conjunction with his bro-
ther, after the death of the late Mr.
Paterson, until 1882. About this
time the brothers joined issue with
Messrs. A. R. Richardson, T. R.
Elliot, and J. Cornish in pioneering
work in the Kimberley district, and
took up land on behalf of a Company
on the Fitzroy River, which was
afterwards sold and a property on
the Fortescue River, in the Nor’-
West, secured. Mr. Paterson was
among the earliest to form a favour-
able opinion of the pastoral possibili-
ties of the Kimberley district, and
the cattle brought there by him were
the first placed in those areas. After
a few months he returned south and
subsequently was engaged in the
management of a foundry for a short
time in Perth. Country life, how-
ever, reassumed its attractions, and
he left the city to reside on his pro-
perty at Whitby Falls, Jarrahdale.
In 1889 Mr. Paterson entered Parlia-
ment as representative for the Murray
and Williams district, which he
continued to represent for five years.
In 1894 he played a prominent part
in the drawing up of the Bill in-
augurating the foundation of the
Agricultural Bank, and by the ex-
press wish of both sides of the House
was offered and accepted the position
of Manager, which post he has con-
tinued to fill. The gentleman under
review is a Justice of the Peace for
the whole of Western Australia, hav-
ing received his commission in 1889.
He is Chairman of the Lands Board
and of the Railway Advisory Board,
having at an earlier period occupied
a seat on the Murray Roads Board
Bartlett o, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM PATERSON.
for nearly twenty years. In 1872 he
married Susannah Sarah, daughter
of Mr. W. Chidlow, one of the
pioneers of the Western State, and
lias two sons and three daughters.
o


Minister of Mines.
From
To
Sir Edward Horne Wittenoom
Dec. 4, 1894
Apr. 28, 1898
Henry Bruce Lefroy
Apr. 28, 1898
May 27, 1901
Henry Gregory
May 27, 1901
Nov. 21, 1901
Henry Gregory
Dec. 23, 1901
Aug. 10, 1904
Robert Hastie
Aug. 10, 1904
June 7, 1905
William Dartnell Johnson ...
June 7, 1905
Aug. 25, 1905
Henry Gregory
Aug. 25, 1905
Oct. 7, 1911
Philip Collier ...
Oct. 7, 1911
Still in office
EDWARD AUBREY Me-
LARTY, Deputy Managing Trustee
of the Agricultural Bank of Western
Australia, is a native of this State,
having been born at Pinjarra in
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WDWARD SUBREY McLARTY.
1875. He received his educational
training at the State school and Fre-
mantle Grammar School, and at the
conclusion of his schooldays became
engaged in agricultural pursuits
Up to the time of the enormous expansion in min-
ing due to the gold discoveries of the early nineties, the
control of such mining operations as existed in Western
Australia was of the work of the Lands Depart-
ment. With the discoveries at Yilgarn, Coolgardie,
and Kalgoorlie, however, there grew up such a large
branch of administrative work that in December, 1894,
the Government decided to form a separate Department
of Mines, the first Minister of Mines being Mr. (now
Sir) Edward Horne Wittenoom and the first Under-
secretary Mr. Henry T. Prinsep. The succession of
responsible Ministers since that time is as follows:
near his birthplace until reaching
the age of twenty-one years. He
then entered the service of the Agri-
tural Bank in 1897, beginning
with a clerkship and steadily rising
in the service until in 1910 he was
promoted to his present position.
ARTHUR GEORGE HEWBY,
J.P., Chief Inspector of the Agri-
cultural Bank, Perth, was born at
London in 1867 and received his
scholastic education in the same
city, with a supplementary course at
Portsmouth, where he made a special
study of naval engineering. In 1888
he came to Western Australia and
was associated with Mr. E. Keane in
land surveys and railway construc-
tion, continuing in this connection
for the entire period that the Mid-
land Railway was being built, with
but one exception during the tempo-
rary cessation of the work, when he
engaged in land surveys for Messrs
Crossland & Hardy. After the
completion of the important enter-
prise referred to Mr. Hewby turned
his attention to agricultural pursuits
in the Gin Gin district for five and
a half years, but relinquished this
industry and subsequently under-
took the supervision of some of the
construction work in connection with
Mines Department.
the Coolgardie water scheme. Ulti-
mately he became inspector on the
first section, from Mundaring to
Merriden, and in 1904 was trans-
ferred to the Lands and Surveys De-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR GEORGE HEWBY.
partment as Land and Agricultural
Bank Inspector, receiving his present
appointment in 1907. Mr. Hewby
is a member of the Railways
Advisory Board.
The history, development, present position, and
future possibilities of mining as an industry in the State
will be fully dealt with elsewhere; we are here more
immediately concerned with the department as a large
branch of Government activity. The Mines Depart-
ment, in addition to the general administration of min-
ing, is charged with the control of the following
branches: —Explosives and Analytical, Inspection of
Machinery, Mines'Water Supply, Mining School, State
Batteries, and, perhaps the most important of all, the
Geological Survey of Western Australia.
The principal administrative officers of the depart-
ment are:—Under-Secretary, Mr. Henry S. King;
State Mining Engineer, Mr. Alexander Montgomery,
M.A.; Chief Clerk, Mr. M. J. Calanchini; Inspecting
Surveyor, Mr. T. J. Breen; Registrar, Mr. S. Roberts-
Chief Inspector of Machinery, Mr. C. J. Mathews;
Engineer of Water Supply, Mr. P. V. O’Brien; Super-
intendent of State Batteries, Mr. A. M. Howe. In
addition to these, each goldfield is under the charge of


a Warden, who in the majority of cases is also the
Resident Magistrate of the district.
The Acts in force relative to mining are:
(1) The Mining Act, 1904.
(2) Sluicing and Dredging for Gold Act, 1899.
(3) Mines Regulation Act, 1906.
(4) Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1902.
(5) Mining Development Act, 1902.
(6) Mines and Machinery Inspection Act, 1911.
The last-named Act was assented to on February 16,
1911, and provides for the conferring on a Chief In-
spector or Inspector appointed under the Mines Regu-
lation Act, 1906, the Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1902,
or the Inspection of Machinery Act, 1904, of all or any
of the powers of the Chief Inspector or Inspector, as the
case may be, under all or any of the said Acts, subject
to such conditions and restrictions as may be deemed fit.
Speaking generally, it must be admitted that the
mining industry in the State is generously governed
with the object of affording every possible encourage? -
ment to development. There is probably no country
where the mining laws are more complete and less
oppressive ; evidence of this may be found in the fact
that Mr. A. C. Veatch, Special Commissioner appointed
by the United States Government to report upon Aus-
tralian mining laws, after thorough investigation pro-
nounced the Western Australian law to be wonderfully
complete and well balanced.
One of the special phases of the work of the depart-
ment is the provision made under the Mines Develop-
ment Act, 1902, for the development of mineral leases.
Parties working approved mines are enabled to obtain
loans to assist in developing them and equipping them
with machinery, the loans, secured by mortgage on the
property, to be repaid if success follows the efforts of
the party. Advances are also made to persons erecting
public crushing plants, to boring parties, to those who
have to cart the ore long distances, and to those who
are developing mines below the level of 100 ft. from the
surface or below the waterline. Prospectors desirous of
opening up new country may also, under certain condi-
tions, secure assistance in the way of camels, horses,
and carts. Under this Act the department in 1911
expended £8,519, and at the end of that year the
amount outstanding by way of loans and interest was
£28,877, while £14,651 had been written off as
irrecoverable.
STATE BATTERIES.
Another extremely useful sphere of departmental
activity is the State battery system, established on a
scale unequalled elsewhere. This movement is particu-
larly valuable to prospectors endeavouring to develop
the finds they have discovered. As soon as reasonable
prospect of permanency is assured the Government pro-
vides treatment works suitable to the peculiar nature
of the ore in the locality, and thus affords the prospector
the opportunity of paying his way out of the stone
raised, without incurring liability, which he would pro-
bably be unable to meet, in the way of providing plant
for himself.
From the Report of the Department for 1911 we
learn that the number of State batteries existing at the
close of the year was thirty-three, as compared with
thirty-four during 1910, the 10-head mill at Kalpini
having been dismantled and removed to Linden for re-
erection to take the place of the unit stamp.
From the inception of the battery system to the
end of 1911 gold and tin to the value of <£3,733,939
have been recovered at the State plants; 843,780 tons
of gold ore were treated and produced £3,146,990 worth
of gold by amalgamation, £429,274 worth by cyanida-
tion, £88,974 from slime treatment, and 51,553 tons of
tin ore produced tin to the value of £68,701.
During the year the gold ore treated was 59,373
tons for 56,265 fine ounces, and in the preceding year
89,278 tons produced 80,074 fine ounces.
The working expenditure for all plants during the
year totalled £60,061 11s. 5d., and the revenue £53,321
19s. 5d., which, after including £750 17s. 6d. for addi-
tions, etc., and paid from revenue, shows a loss of
£7,490 9s. 6d. on the year’s operations. The capital
expenditure from the inception of the scheme was
£290,732 13s. Bd., £91,981 Is. Bd. being paid from
revenue and £198,751 12s. from loan. The cost of
administration for the year was £3,764 3s. 10d., as
against £3,891 16s. Bd. for 1910.
The working expenditure from inception to Decem-
ber, 1911, exceeds the receipts by £28,870 Bs. 2d.
MINES WATER SUPPLY.
The Coolgardie water scheme was, of course,
primarily undertaken with the object of supplying ample
water to the eastern goldfields, but in addition to that
the State maintains a mines water supply branch of
the Mines Department, the function of which is to make
arrangements for the supply and conservation of water
throughout all the areas where mining is carried on.
As soon as a new discovery is reported the district
engineers of the department set well-sinking and boring
parties to work, so as to make provision for whatever
population may be attracted to the find. If the find
turns out to be permanent, then larger schemes for
supply and conservation are entered upon, and when
completed placed under the control of local Water
Boards. The branch also undertakes the work of sur-
veying, clearing, and forming roads throughout the
fields, and controls the operations of the diamond drill-
ing plants.


General Classification
of Analyses .
Explosives
... 4,750
Spirits
... 290
Waters (general)
... 141
Soils
Fertilizers
70
275
33
52
Rocks ...
Essences
Oils
... 221
Foodstuffs and Miscellaneous
351
Sewage
... 010
Wheats and Flours ...
22
Criminal Investigations
54
Lime
45
Fabrics
12
Vinegar
12
Medicinal Compounds
51
Milks
... 720
Kerosine, Benzine, Turpentine, etc.
... 125
Butter
... 104
Hydrometers ...
37
Stomachs (human) ...
9
Matches
45
Hairy Thermometers
98
Cheese ...
42
Metals
17
Waters (special)
95
Bread ...
15
Total
... 7,990
‘ The work of the mines water supply for the year,”
says the Engineer’s Report for 1911, “consisted of sur-
veys for and construction of tanks, reservoirs, pipe lines,
and conservation of water generally; boring for water
and minerals; sinking wells for towns, roads, prospec-
tors, and mining camps ; construction of stock routes ;
clearing tracks and roads; collection of revenue from
water sales; investigations and reports on requests
relative to water supply on or about the mineral belts
of Western Australia; maintenance of all existing
water supplies.”
The summary shows that 162 bores were put down
by hand and six with the diamond drill; that fourteen
new wells were sunk and ten new tanks (the capacities
ranging from 40,000 to 4,000,000) were constructed,
two of them being on the agricultural areas. At the
close of the year there were in all forty-nine water sta-
tions leased, 1,353 watering stations on the department's
list, and about 250 men employed on the work.
INSPECTION OF MACHINERY.
The administration of the Inspection of Machinery
Act, 1904, though wider in scope than mining, is
placed under the Department of Mines, as being the
department most concerned by its operations. The Chief
Inspector of Machinery (Mr. C. J. Mathews), who is
responsible for the proper observance of the Act, is
also charged by it with the inspection of boilers, the
examinations for engine-drivers' certificates, and the
necessary inquiries in the case of injury or death from
machinerv accidents.
J
The Chief Inspector is assisted in his work by seven
District Inspectors, and for convenience the State is
divided into ten machinery districts. During the year
1911 these inspectors travelled 39,340 miles in the
course of duty, making 3,559 inspections of boilers and
machinery.
STATE MINING ENGINEER.
There is probably no more important office held
under the Minister for Mines than that of the State
Mining Engineer, at present occupied by Mr. Alexander
Montgomery, M.A., F.G.S., who is responsible for prac-
tically the whole mining system as an industry, and
also for the proper inspection of all mines under the
Mines Regulation Act, 1906, and the Coal Mines Regu-
lation Act, 1902. Assisted by a staff of nine Inspectors
of Mines he keeps a thorough check on all mining opera-
tions, examines and tests all mining machinery, sur-
face and underground workings, and generally super-
vises the industry in the interests of the miner, the
public, and the Government. It is also his duty to
advise the authorities upon applications for loans or
subsidies under the Mining Development Act and the
Mining Development vote, and to act as Chairman of
the Board of Examiners for colliery managers under the
Coal Mines Regulation Act, 1902. Mr. Montgomery,
who has held the position since 1902, came to Western
Australia well fitted for his work by extensive experi-
ence gained in New Zealand and Tasmania.
EXPLOSIVES AND ANALYTICAL.
The Explosives and Analytical Office is another of
those branches of State administration which for con-
venience sake is placed under the Department of Mines,
although its operations are far from being confined to
that department. As Chief Inspector of Explosives
Mr. Edward A. Mann no doubt comes into close touch
with mining, especially as he is usually called upon in
addition to those duties to act upon all Boards of In-
vestigation connected with the mining industry where
the advice and assistance of an expert analyst and in-
vestigator is required. As Government Analyst Mr.
Mann is practically at the disposal of all State Govern-
ment Departments, and very often of the Federal Cus-
toms. Under the various liquor laws his analyses as to
purity and genuineness are constantly required; under
the new Health Act he is ex officio a member of the
Advisory Board on Pure Poods; investigations in agri-
culture and the possibilities of the soil repeatedly
demand his attention ; and the distasteful work of per-
forming analyses in the interests of criminal investiga-
tion also falls to his lot. No better evidence of the com-
prehensive nature of his duties can perhaps be afforded
than the lists showing the analyses conducted during
1911 and the various departments for which they were
performed :


Departments for which I York was performed.
Customs 982
Agricultural 288
Crown Law ... ... ... ... ... 77
Inspector of Liquors ... ... ... 80
Mines ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Works and Railways ... ... ... 451
Goldfields Water Supply ... ... ... 130
Public Health ... ... ... ... 946
Private Analyses ... ... ... ... 44
Miscellaneous ... ... ... ... 153
Explosives .. ... ... ... ... 4,750
Total ... ... ... ... ... 7,996
In his professional capacity Mr. Mann has the
assistance of an Assistant Government Analyst (C. E.
Stacy), Assistant Inspector of Explosives (T. N. Kir-
ton), and ten analysts.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL
OF MINES.
In a country such as Western Australia, possessing
one of the richest mineral belts in the world, it is only
of the school, and a main building at Kalgoorlie, which
was commenced in April, 1903, was completed at the
end of the year. Lectures in several subjects were given
from the beginning of November, 1903, but on the com-
pletion of the school, early in 1904, lecture work was
systematically entered upon in all School of Mines sub-
jects, with a full staff of lecturers and a good equip-
ment, and the Coolgardie branch was closed.
In accordance with the recommendation of the
School of Mines Commission, and following out the
wishes expressed by the mining men on the goldfields,
the School of Mines has been placed under the direct
control of the Mines Department, which will issue
diplomas and certificates to students complying with
the regulations.
Location. —The School of Mines at Kalgoorlie is
built upon about two and a half acres of ground on the
block between Egan, Cassidy, and Macdonald Streets,
THE BOULDER MINES FROM MARITANA HILL, 1902.
to be expected that a fully-equipped School of Mines
would be found capable of holding its own with at least
any school of its kind in Australia. The institution at
Kalgoorlie amply fulfils this expectation, and the
account of its history and scope as set out in the
Director’s Report for 1911, from which we have made
copious extracts, forms instructive and interesting
reading:
The School of Mines of Western Australia was
started in November, 1902, in the Exhibition Buildings
at Coolgardie, where classes were regularly conducted up
to the end of 1903. In the meantime plans and specifi-
cations were drawn up by the Public Works Depart-
ment from drawings and notes supplied by the Director
DD
and consists of several buildings for the conduct of differ-
ent portions of the work. The main structure is a com-
modious one-storey building 104 ft. by 140 ft. in the
form of a square enclosing a central quadrangle. The
right wing consists of assaying, chemical, and metal-
lurgical laboratories and balance-rooms, the left wing
of lecture-rooms for mathematics, surveying, mining,
physics, drawing, mechanics, etc., all being adequately
equipped with the necessary appliances for the proper
instruction of the students.
In the western angle of the schoolground a brick
building suitable for the combined purposes of a museum
and for classrooms in geology, petrology, etc., has been
erected. The museum room is 70 ft. by 30 ft. in size,


the geology classroom adjoining is 40 ft. by 27 ft., and
provision has been made for such extensions as may be
necessary in the future. At the back of the main
school, and detached from it, are the electrical and
mechanical engineering lecture-rooms, the machine shops
for fitting and turning, and the classroom for engine-
driving.
The school, by its position in the centre of one of
the chief goldfields of the world, offers exceptional
opportunities to students to become acquainted with the
most modern methods of mining, mechanical equipment,
and ore treatment, and the managers of the mines and
mills at Kalgoorlie, many of them School of Mines men,
have at all times assisted the students to gain the prac-
tical knowledge which is the necessary accompaniment
of a course of lectures at a School of Mines.
The school was established primarily to give instruc-
tion to those engaged in mining occupations, and its
laboratories have been equipped and the classes arranged
so as to give a thorough technical and practical train-
ing, thus enabling students to qualify for responsible
positions in the industry. At the same time it offers
facilities for general education, more particularly in
elementary science, which ought to be even more largely
taken advantage of than it is.
There is excellent equipment for both theoretical
and practical teaching in chemistry, assaying, metal-
lurgy, physics, mining, surveying, geology, mineralogy,
petrology, drawing, applied mechanics and mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering and practical elec-
tricity, fitting and turning, and engine - driving.
Attached to the school is a museum, in which there is
being gathered together a valuable collection of samples
of Western Australian minerals which is proving of con-
siderable assistance to the prospector, the student, and,
indeed, to every mining man on the fields. These, along
with several special collections of rocks and minerals
obtained from reliable European and American sources
and samples of economic and metallurgical products
from Broken Hill, New South Wales; Mount Bischoff,
Tasmania; Port Pirie, South Australia, etc., have now
been displayed in suitable cases, and form a very in-
structive exhibit, which is constantly being added to by
donation and by purchase.
The work of the school is divided into two sections
-preparatory work and course work. The preparatory
classes which have been established in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, geology, and drawing are proving
successful and are attracting a number of students who
are able to attend regularly throughout the whole year.
By attendance at these classes the younger students
obtain an excellent preparation in elementary principles
which will enable them to proceed with advantage to
the more advanced work of the regular courses. Boys
leaving the State schools may attend the preparatory
classes either during the daytime or at night, and so
have the opportunity of obtaining a training in science
which might well be embraced not only by the youths
who intend to follow mining as a profession but also
by those who desire to obtain some secondary education
before entering upon the serious business of life. As
the best students at the regular classes of the School of
Mines are those who come equipped with a knowledge
of the fundamental principles underlying the class
work, the preparatory classes deserve every encourage-
ment, and it is gratifying to find that during the past
year they have attracted a fair number of students,
many of whom have done excellent work.
The course work is divided into three sections, in
each of which a Diploma of Associateship is con-
ferred :
(a) Mining.
(h) Metallurgy.
(c) Mechanical and electrical engineering.
Each full course of study for an associateship in
either of these divisions will require three years for a
student devoting his whole time to study, and in con-
junction with the one year of practical work is cal-
culated to qualify him to enter upon responsible work
about a mine treatment or mechanical plant.
As far as possible the class subjects are treated
from a practical standpoint, and the lectures will be
illustrated by periodical visits to the mines and plants,
the proximity of which to the School of Mines now estab-
lished on the goldfields affords an excellent opportunity
to students to enter into the practical application of
much of the work covered by the lectures.
A two years’ course for the Assayer’s Certificate has
been arranged for students who may be unable to attend
the full course in metallurgy.
To meet the requirements of the mines regulations
bearing on mines surveys and plans, a two years’ course
for a Mine Surveyor’s Certificate has been provided.
Students taking an Assayer’s Certificate are recom-
mended to also study the extra subjects required for
the Mine Surveyor’s Certificate.
To meet the requirements of students working in
the mines and plants, all the classwork is duplicated by
repeating in the evening the lectures held during the
day, and students unable to enter upon a full course in
either division for the Associateship are afforded oppor-
tunities of taking a partial course of study in the sub-
jects more immediately useful to them.
Scholarshfjfs. Valuable scholarships, arranged
upon a liberal scheme, are offered for competition by
the Mines Department. These comprise a Junior, an
Entrance, and a Senior Scholarship, tenable for one,


three, and two years respectively, as well as six bur-
saries for second- and third-year students. The Junior
Scholarship is intended for those who have not already
attended classes in any School of Mines subjects, and
successful candidates are expected to at once enter upon
classes in preparatory mathematics, chemistry, physics,
geology, and drawing as laid down in the School of
Mines syllabus. The Entrance Scholarship is open
to students who are attending the preparatory classes
in School of Mines subjects, and the Senior Scholarship is
for competition by those who are completing the first
year’s course for one of the Associateships. In addition
the Chamber of Mines of Western Australia provides three
annual scholarships, and Mr. Neil McNeil provides one
for competition among first-year students.
Mine Surveyor’s Certificate have obtained positions as
assistant surveyors. Several other students have ob-
tained positions in connection with the electrical plants,
and several have been appointed metallurgists and
assayers on the mines. It is distinctly encouraging to
the present students and those who in the future will
take up a course of study at the school that those
students who have been through a set course of study
at the local School of Mines are so well able to take
their place in outside practice.”
The teaching staff, in addition to the Director, Mr.
F. B. Allen, M.A., B.Sc., who is also Director of
Technical Education in the State, consists of Thomas
Butement, A.0.U.5.M., Assistant Director, Lecturer in
Mining and Surveying; B. H. Moore, B.Sc., F.S.A.S.M.,
Thus it will be seen that the school is not only
admirably equipped for training, but offers every facility
to the student to gain that knowledge necessary for a
successful career in mining and other technical indus-
tries. That it is achieving that object is evident from
the Director’s Report: —“The students,” he says, “con-
tinue to secure responsible positions, which in many
cases have been obtained directly as a consequence ot
the technical training given at the school. During the
year several students who have taken the course for the
HENRY SANDFORD KING,
Under-Secretary to the Department
of Mines for Western Australia, was
born in May, 1862, at Creswick,
Victoria. He was educated first at
dd2
THE FREAT BOULDER DOLD MINE, 1902.
the Geelong Grammar School and
afterwards at Wesley College, Mel-
bourne, Victoria. His schooling
finished, he decided to take up the
profession of surveying, and with
Lecturer in Metallurgy, Chemistry, and Assaying; A.
F. Heseltine, B.Sc., F.S.A.S.M., Assistant in Engin-
eering and Lecturer in Mathematics; C. O. G. Lar-
combe, Assoc. S.T.C., F.G.S., Lecturer in Geology,
Mineralogy, etc., and Curator of Museum; M. Cop-
land, 8.M.E., Lecturer in Engineering Subjects, Draw-
ing, etc.; D. McDougall, A.I.E.E. (Lond.), Lecturer in
Physics, etc.; Charles Bircher, Instructor in Electrical
Engineering, Practical Electricity, Engine-driving, etc.;
J. Murray, Instructor in Fitting and Turning.
that end in view entered the Lands
Department of Victoria, finally
passing his examinations as licensed
surveyor in 1883. In the following
year he came to Western Australia


and was employed for several years
on the trigonometrical surveys in
the northern parts of the State.
In 1887 he was appointed staff
surveyor in the Lands Depart-
ment, and two years later made
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HENRY SANDFROD KING.
mining and other surveys on the
Yilgarn goldfields. lie occupied the
post of inspecting surveyor on the
Eastern goldfields from 1894 until
appointed to his present position in
1899. Mr. King is a member of the
Land Surveyors’ Licensing Board
and of the Australian Intelligencß
Corps. In 1894 he received the com-
mission of Justice of the Peace for
the State of Western Australia.
ALEXANDER MONTGOMERY,
M.A., F.G.S. When the develop-
ment of mining in Western Australia
rendered the appointment of a State
Mining Engineer necessary the choice
of the Government fell upon the
subject of this sketch. Alexander
Montgomery was born in Edinburgh,
Scotland, in 1862, but left there at
an early age for New Zealand, and
received his education at the Otago
University and School of Mines.
After completing his studies he was
for some three years engaged in the
Public Works Department of the
Dominion, principally in connection
with railway surveys and construc-
tion. About 1885 he was transferred
to the Mines Department and was
placed in charge of the Thames
School of Mines, a position which
he occupied until 1889, when he
accepted an appointment in Tas-
mania as Inspector of Mines and
Geological Surveyor. He remained
in that State until 1896, when he
returned to New Zealand for the
purpose of becoming Superintending
Engineer of the Kauri Freehold Gold
Estates Limited. lie fulfilled the
duties of this appointment until
1902, when he accepted the post of
State Mining Engineer of Western
Australia. His duties take him all
through the mining districts of this
State, and he has seized every oppor-
tunity of becoming thoroughly con-
versant with the various phases of
mining activity. Mr. Montgomery
is M.A. of the University of New
Zealand and a Fellow of the Geo-
logical Society of London, as well as
a member of the American, Austral-
asian, and Federal Institutes of Min-
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. ALEXANDER MONTGOMERY.
ing Engineers. He was Vice-President
of the Civil Service Association of
the State for the year 1911. Pie
was married in 1887 to a daughter
of Mr. R. J. Allom, J.P., of the
Thames, New Zealand, and has four
sons and a daughter.
PERCY VINCENT O’BRIEN,
M.1.C.E., Chief Engineer of Mines,
Department of Water Supply,
Western Australia, was born at
Auckland, New Zealand, on October
9, 1865. He received his early
education at Auckland College,
subsequently graduating at St.
Ignatius’ College, Sydney, New
South Wales. When eighteen years
of age he entered as cadet the engin-
eering firm of Messrs. Boylan and
Lundon, Auckland, and continued
in their employ until 1886, when he
became assistant engineer on the
Porotoran Tunnel Trunk Line, New
Zealand. At the completion of this
contract Mr. O’Brien for a couple of
years was engaged as engineer for
contractors, first on the West Walls-
end Railway, New South Wales, and
afterwards on the line from Coburg
to Somerton, Victoria. In the year
1890 he was appointed Assistant
Engineer in the Victorian Railways
Department and was engaged on the
construction of three sections in the
Western district of Victoria. Upon
their completion he left the Service,
and proceeding to South Australia
undertook surveys of the irrigation
colony at Renmark. In 1893 he
arrived in Western Australia and
accepted employment with the Rock-
ingham Railway and Jarrah Timber
Company as engineer on surveys and
construction of light railways in the
Darling Range, also in feature-
survey of the Company’s Concession.
During the following year Mr.
O’Brien joined the Public Works
Department of Western Australia,
and as Assistant Engineer was
engaged on water supply works on
the eastern goldfields under Mr. C.
Jobson, M.1.C.E., being appointed
Resident Engineer on the goldfields
from 1896 to 1899. In 1903 he
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PERCY VINCENT O’BRIEN.
was appointed District Engineer-in-
Charge of the eastern goldfields,
and during the same year, the
water supply of the interior being
removed from the Public Works


Department and placed under the
control of the Minister for Mines,
Mr. O’Brien received the appoint-
ment of Chief Engineer of Mines,
Department of Water Supply. Con-
servation of water for towns, roads,
and mining purposes, exploration,
various surveys, and boring for water
and for minerals are all included in
his supervision, and as since 1899
practically all the work has been
carried out departmentally after-
construction remaining under the
control of the engineer, who is
responsible for the maintenance,
including the collection of revenue,
the engineer must be regarded as
virtually General Manager. The
works under his control cost approxi-
mately two millions sterling, a
capital which is being added to each
year. Mr. O’Brien is a member of
the Council of the Western Austra-
lian Institute of Engineers, and a
member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers, London.
EDWARD ALEXANDER
MANN, Government Analyst and
Analyst to the Commonwealth of
Australia, Chief Inspector of Ex-
plosives, and Agricultural Chemist,
Wellington Street, Perth. The sub-
ject of our review was born in 1874
at Mount Gambier, South Australia,
Bartletto, Perth
MR. EDWARD ALEXANDER MANN.
and received his early education
by private tuition. He afterwards
went to the University of Mel-
bourne, where he distinguished him-
self as a scholar and prizeman.
While studying at the University he
was assistant to the Chief Inspector
of Explosives at Melbourne, holding
this office for about five years, when
he was specially engaged by Sir
John Forrest (1895) to supervise the
control of explosives in Western
Australia in consequenec of a fatal
explosion which occurred at Fre-
mantle. Toward the end of the
same year he was appointed Govern-
ment Analyst, the duties of Agri-
cultural Chemist being added about
seven or eight years later. In con-
nection with these two offices he per-
forms ail chemical analyses for the
Government with the excep-
tion of the examination of
minerals, and is referee in all dis-
puted cases under the Health Act.
lie is also a member of the Advisory
Committee under that Act. He was
responsible for the planning and fit-
ting of the Government Laboratory
in Perth, which is recognized as one
of the best in Australia. The large
Magazine Depot at Fremantle, which
is unique in Australia and cost
about £25,000, was also arranged by
him. Mr. Mann has frequently
been engaged upon special work for
the Government of Western Austra-
lia, and in 1904 he was appointed a
member of the Royal Commission to
inquire into the ventilation and
sanitation of mines, and respecting
which he made searching investiga-
tion and performed a number of
scientific experiments to ascertain
the composition of gases emanating
from explosives. After an exhaus-
tive study of the subject he issued
a special report to the Government
in 1910. In the year 1911
he was appointed a member of the
Royal Commission to inquire into
the occurrence in Western Australia
of that decimating disease, miner's
phthisis, and to propose methods
of combating the evil and deal-
ing with persons suffering there-
from. Since 1905 he has issued an
imjDortant series of reports from his
laboratory dealing with the chemis-
try of potable spirits and the con-
trol of the liquor trade, and all of
these have been embodied in a work
which is looked upon as one of the
most valuable of its kind in the
world. During 1906-7 he carried
out important investigations in con-
nection with the poison contained
in various indigenous plants found
in Western Australia, discovered
several principles unknown to
science, and prepared an antidote
which, when brought into use, led to
a large diminution in the loss of
stock throughout the country. The
cause of the corrosion of the huge
goldfields water supply main was the
subject of another important in-
quiry, which led to the suggestion of
a method of treatment now being
applied to the pipes. It has been
estimated that by this means a
saving of £60,000 per annum will be
effected. Mr. Mann is keenly inte-
rested in charitable and educational
matters and is a member of the
University Extension Committee. He
married in 1901 a daughter of the
late Mr. Joseph Hicks, of Mel-
M. 7
bourne, and has three children.
CHARLES JAMES MATHEWS,
M.lnst.C.E., M.l.Mech.E., Chief
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. CHARLES JAMES MATHEWS.
Inspector of Machinery and Chair-
man of the Board of Examiners,
Inspection of Machinery Depart-
ment, Perth, is an Englishman,
having been born at the important
shipping port of Southampton. As
a youngster he was taken by his
parents to New Zealand, and it was
in the Dominion that he received his
education, first at Wellington College
and later at the School of Engineer-
ing, Canterbury College, Christ-
church, which is affiliated with the
University of New Zealand. His
scholastic training at an end, he was
articled to the Railways Department
of New Zealand, his indentures being
served over a period of six years at
the Petone workshops at Wellington.
Mr. Mathews was then transferred


to the Addington workshops, where
he had charge of the marking-off
table when the first five locomotives
were built by the Railways Depart-
ment of New Zealand. He next
entered the offices of the then Chief
Mechanical Engineer, the late Mr.
T. F. Rotheram, M.1.C.E., and for
nearly three years gained experience
in the drawing office and in general
routine work, occasionally perform-
ing relief duties in the construction
and other branches of the Service.
The prospects of promotion appear-
ing to be very remote, he decided to
sever his connection with the railways
and came to try his fortunes in
Western Australia, where he arrived
in 1893. Soon after he joined the
Public Works Department of the
State as engineering draughtsman,
and was engaged in preparing designs
for a variety of works, including
bucket hopper dredger, jetties,
wharves, and concrete and puddled
tanks in connection with the Gold-
fields Water Supply. During his
association with this Department he
served under the late Mr. C. Y.
O’Connor, C.M.G., M.1.C.E., and
eventually received promotion to the
post of Assistant Mechanical Engi-
neer to the Water Supply Branch,
being placed in charge of boring
operations and other work connected
with the supply of water in the
coastal and other districts. This
appointment he relinquished in
August, 1899, to take over the duties
of his present office, on the recom-
mendation of his former chief, Mr.
O’Connor. Mr. Mathews is a
member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers, London, the Institute
of Mechanical Engineers, London,
and of the Western Australian
Institute of Engineers.
GEORGE EMERY was born in
Suffolk, England, on July 10, 1868,
and received his education at
Beccles, in the same county. In
1891 he crossed the seas, landing at
Adelaide, South Australia, and
shortly afterwards was employed on
accountancy work for several well-
known firms. Proceeding to Mil-
dura Mr. Emery joined the
accountancy branch of Messrs.
Chaffey Brothers' irrigation settle-
ment. Twelve months later he came
to Western Australia, in January,
1893, and accepted an appointment
in the Audit Department under the
Western Australian Government, in
1895 transferring to the Treasury
Department, in connection with
which he was the first Treasury
officer appointed to the .goldfields.
Leaving Coolgardie, the scene of his
administration, in 1899 Mr. Emery
joined the Mines Department as
accountant and collector of mining
revenue, which post he continued to
hold until July 1, 1912, when he was
appointed manager and inspector of
State hotels, inspector of Liquor
Branch, and officer in control of the
Tourist Branch. He is Returning
Officer for East Perth and is a
member of the Society of Ac-
countants and Auditors of Western
Australia.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
Our account of the Geological Survey of Western
Australia is extracted by permission from a comprehen-
sive account prepared by the Government Geologist
(Mr. A. Gibb Maitland) for the Western Australian
Natural History Society:
The fundamental object of the geological survey
of any country, when viewed from the scientific stand-
point, is by a more or less systematic investigation of its
structural geology, organic remains, and its mineral
resources to arrive at a true understanding of its geo-
logical history.
These objects are carried out in a partially settled
country such as our own by means of:
(a) Reconnaissance surveys of those portions of the
State about the structure and resources of
which little is known.
(h) Detailed geological surveys of mining centres
under active development, etc.
(c) Chemical and mineralogical examinations of
soils, rocks, minerals, and natural waters
collected by the field staff, and under certain
specified conditions by prospectors and
others.
(d) Palaeontological investigations.
((') The maintenance of a geological museum ; and
(f) The publication of data amassed.
HISTORY.
It may, perhaps, have been forgotten that the in-
ception of active mining operations in Australia dates
from the year 1842, when lead and copper mines were
first discovered and worked at Waneranooka, in the
Northampton district of Western Australia; hence it is
not surprising that this State was one of the first to
employ a geologist as part of the official staff.
The position seems to have been first occupied by
Dr. Ferdinand van Sommer. This gentleman travelled
extensively during the years 1847 to 1851 throughout
the State. He geologically examined the Victoria,
Toodyay, and York districts, and extended his obser-
vations to the country lying between the latter and
Mount Barren, on the south coast. Neither the maps
nor the reports of this observer appear to have ever
been published, although three articles from his pen
bearing upon the geology of Western Australia have
appeared in the current literature during the years 1848
and 1849. The original drawings of Dr. van Sommer's
maps have now been discovered, and are preserved by
the department along with the historical collection
showing the progress of geological mapping in Western
Australia, which is now on view in the Geological Gal-
lery of the Museum.
After an interval of twenty-one years, during which
much excellent geological work was accomplished by


Messrs. A. C. and F. T. Gregory, Mr. H. Y. Lyell Brown
was appointed to the post of Government Geologist.
This gentleman, during the years 1870 to 1873, prepared
three geological maps and issued ten reports (now out
of print), which referred principally to the southern
and coastal portions of the State. One important map
“Showing the Progress of the Geological Survey” on a
scale of about 18 miles to the inch indicates with a con-
siderable amount of detail the geology of the coastline
from Doubtful Bay to a little north of Geraldton. It
is interesting to note that the first supply of artesian
water in Western Australia was obtained in a bore near
the Canning River, a few miles south-east of Perth and
close to the foot of the Darling Range, put down under
the advice of Mr. Brown. His Excellency Governor
Weld, in a despatch to the Earl of Carnarvon, dated
September 30, 1874, reported:
It was with much regret that in 1872, owing to the
disinclination evinced by the Legislature in the then
straitened circumstances of the colony to expend money on a
scientific department, that I was obliged to forego my
desire of making it (a geological department) a permanent
part of the establishment.
In the same despatch the Governor, basing his
information on the data contained in and the deductions
to be drawn from Mr. Brown’s reports, informed the
British Government as follows :
The mineral riches of the colony are very great. I have
never doubted but that they would ultimately become a
main source of its advancement. All different kinds of
auriferous quartz known in other colonies are abundantly
found in various parts of this. The question of payable gold
is, as I have long since reported, simply a question of time.
. . The colony is extraordinarily rich in lead, silver,
copper, iron, plumbago, and many other minerals are found
in various localities, and indications of coal and petroleum
are not wanting—what is wanted is energy and enterprise
to develop these riches.
In 1882, nine years after Mr. Brown’s retirement,
Mr. E. T. Hardman, of the Geological Survey of Ire-
land, was appointed to the post of Government Geolo-
gist. His labours were chiefly confined to the Kimberley
district, upon which he issued two voluminous reports
illustrated by a series of geological maps. Mr. Hard-
man was the pioneer geological observer in the far north
of Western Australia, and his field work carried out
during the years 1882-84 laid the foundation of our
knowledge of the geology of the Kimberley district, and
played an important part in the opening of the State’s
first declared goldfield. His two maps and reports
greatly stimulated prospecting, as his predictions as to
localities where gold would be found were afterwards
justified. Mr. Hardman on returning to the north
examined the neighbourhood of Bunbury, Blackwood,
etc., which ultimately resulted in the discovery of the
Greenbushes tinfield. Later on he investigated the
geology of the metropolitan area with reference to the
question of its water supply from underground sources.
On the termination of Mr. Hardman’s engagement with
the Western Australian Government he returned to
Ireland and resumed his duties on the Geological Sur-
vey in 1885, having the assurance that he would cer-
tainly be appointed if a permanent post of Government
Geologist was created.
Mr. Hardman, to whom Western Australian geolo-
gists owe a debt of gratitude which it is difficult to
repay, died after a few days’ illness brought on by the
inclemency of the weather and exposure to snow and
rain on April 30, 1887.
It is all the more sad to think that had he lived the
long-desired post of Government Geologist of Western Aus-
tralia would have been offered to Mr. Hardman, the finan-
cial difficulties in the way of his appointment having been
removed just before he died.
Very shortly after Mr. Hardman’s term of service
in Western Australia came to an end a motion was
brought forward in the Legislative Council in 1885
having for its object:
The establishment of a permanent geological department
for the colony, the geologist in charge of such department
to combine with the duties of his primary office those of
public analyst.
The hon. member who moved the resolution stated that
in doing so
he trusted and believed he was moving in a matter
that would do much good to the colony, and he had con-
fidence it would do no harm.
Ultimately this motion to establish a Geological
Department was lost, but, in justice to those who voted
against it, it must be said that the difficulty of pro-
viding ways and means weighed heavily with them in
arriving at that decision.
The late Rev. C. G. Nicolay in many ways con-
tributed largely to our knowledge of the geology of the
State and was in charge of the Geological Museum at
Fremantle, founded by Mr. Hardman, which became
ultimately merged into the National Museum.
It was not, however, until 1887 that the Govern-
ment found itself able to provide the necessary funds
for the post of Government Geologist. The appointment
was conferred upon Mr. IT. P. Woodward, who had
previously served for more than three years under Mr.
H. Y. Lyell Brown as the Assistant Government Geolo-
gist of South Australia. Mr. Woodward held the
appointment of Government Geologist from 1888 to
1895. During Mr. Woodward’s tenure of office he had
for his associates Mr. B. H. Woodward, who acted as
Curator of the Geological Museum and Assayer to the
department, whilst at a later date (1894) Mr. S. Goczel
was added to the staff as Field Geologist and Mining
Engineer; hence it became possible to divide the work
and make a beginning on more or less systematic lines.
It was at this period that the paramount necessity for
the publication of reliable geographical knowledge relating
to the nature and extent of useful mineral deposits supple-
mented by geological maps and plans
and geological investigation of the important question of
the underground water supply of the goldfields was
impressed upon the Government by its scientific advisers.
The work of the department during this period extended


from Albany to Kimberley, though the issue of geologi-
cal maps in illustration of the various reports seems to
have been confined to the later years of the survey,
they include the Collie and Irwin coalfields, the tin-
fields of Greenbushes, the country between Naniline and
Esperance Bay, Goongarrie, Cue, Yalgoo, and the Mur-
chison goldfields. In 1894 Mr. Woodward issued what
is still perhaps the most recent geological map of the
State. This was published in London, on the scale of
50 miles to an inch. At the date of its publication
this map added very materially to our knowledge of the
geology of the State as far east as the 120th meridian.
A\ ith such a limited staff, still more limited appropria-
tion, the difficulties presented by the vast area of the
State, and the practical absence of railway communica-
tion, the Survey under Mr. Woodward was able to
issue twenty-one voluminous reports and six geological
maps.
Upon the resignation of Mr. Woodward to take
up private work the present Government Geologist, Mr.
Andrew Gibb Maitland, F.G.S., was appointed after
applications had been called for the position.
The Geological Survey as at present constituted was
created in 1896 for the purpose of the investigation of
the geological structure, mineral resources, mining in-
dustries, and underground water supplies of the State,
and to this end it became necessary to prepare geological
maps and reports such as might be used by the Govern-
ment and the public in dealing with all general ques-
tions which arise from time to time. In such a country
as this, the progress of which depends so much upon its
mineral wealth, the Survey has, naturally, endeavoured
to devote itself to the investigation of those problems
in economic geology which it is essential should be
solved—if that be possible, without, however, neglecting
23urely scientific questions ; for, of course, the economic
and scientific aspects cannot be readily separated.
It was pointed out to the Government that if the
work of the staff was to be of that service to the country
which the public had a right to expect, the officers of
the department should not be sent touring the State
on every wild-goose chase suggested or become parts of
a mere prospecting machine; but, so far as consistent
with the resources available, an attempt should be made
to carry out the operations as an organized whole.
Should, however, any important discovery be made or
new interests rise into prominence, about which it
becomes necessary for the Government to have some
early information, a member of the staff could always
be instructed to make a special report thereon.
It will thus be seen that the department was not
established for the purpose of purely scientific research
for its own sake, but with the hope that scientific in-
vestigation might be made of some material benefit to
the proper utilization of the State’s natural resources.
In such an enormous country as Western Aus-
tralia it is obviously impossible to carry on the field
work even by making use of the most modern methods
in a strictly uniform manner, especially as financial
considerations necessitate a staff somewhat limited in
numbers.
In young, partially-developed countries, such as
our own, there are two totally distinct classes of geologi-
cal survey work necessary to meet public requirements.
The first is the detailed examination of the more im-
portant mining centres which are under active develop-
ment, the accumulation of information relating to the
occurrence of the various ore deposits and their mode
of formation. The second is the preliminary examina-
tion of comparatively unknown tracts of country with
the view to ascertaining how far its geological charac-
teristics are likely to affect its economic possibilities.
Theoretically, the latter class of work should, as far
as possible, be carried out in advance of the occupation
of the country for mining or other purposes. Investiga-
tion of this latter nature involves the tracing out of
the distribution of various formations that rise from
beneath one another and occupy the surface of the
country, and representing these by means of a carefully
designed scheme of colours on a map on a scale suffi-
ciently large to show all the geological and geographical
details necessary. When viewed from the economic
standpoint this is neither more nor less than a classifi-
cation of the surface into parts, each of which may have
useful minerals or other materials peculiar to itself.
While, of course, such may be a true conception of what
are theoretically the correct methods to employ, those of
us who are charged with administrative duties are par-
ticularly well aware that it is not what ought to be done
but what is possible to do with the resources at com-
mand and the conditions prevailing a t the time which
govern the situation.
The work of the department in its relation to. the
mineral industry is a complicated and delicate task,
affecting as it does such a multitude of financial and prac-
tical interests. Legislative provision has been made
whereby the members of the field staff have access to
mines at all reasonable times.
Experience in most mineral fields of the globe has
shown that many mining failures have been due rather
to a want of knowledge of structural geology than from
any lack of engineering training. Hence there has
arisen the necessity for the detailed investigation of
mines under active development. To this end geological
plans and sections of mines have been from time to time
prepared. These supply records of established facts in
the disposition and changes in the country rock, the
position of the ore bodies, their productiveness under
various conditions, and thus afford data otherwise un-
obtainable by which operations can be directed into the


most useful channels. Detailed surveys on a large scale
of many ore deposits have been made in the hope that
they might in some measure furnish a guide as to the
general behaviour of the lodes.
Prospecting, when it takes the form of the equip-
ment of a party for the investigation of a particular
tract of country, if it is to be intelligently undertaken,
must be carried out in a rational manner. One of the
first requisites for this purpose is a properly executed
geological sketch map, which ought, amongst other
things, to indicate those areas within which the strata
possess economic potentialities. The knowledge thus
acquired, when properly presented, tends to prevent the
useless expenditure of time and money.
In the course of its work the department has by
means of reconnaissance surveys prepared several maps
of fairly large areas for the purpose of meeting the
demand for geological information of outside and lesser-
known mining districts and directing prospecting into
legitimate channels.
Surveys of this kind designed to serve a special
purpose pretend, of course, to nothing more than broad
generalized field work of a nature sufficient to furnish
a sketch of the main geological outlines, the details of
and scientific problems connected with which having, of
necessity, to be deferred to an often remote future. The
demands for such a class of geological investigation
have increased somewhat more rapidly than can at pre-
sent be met.
In relation to the pastoral and agricultural in-
dustry, the main importance centres upon the question
of subterranean water supply, which is, without doubt,
one of Western Australia’s most valuable assets. If
underground water supplies are to be intelligently
sought for and utilized, it is quite clear that the
first step must be the determination of their extent and
character. In addition, the question of the permanence
of present supplies and the extent to which such
may be increased are of vital importance to the
community.
Western Australia possesses a large tract of country
in which artesian water has been found. It occurs in
the following of those divisions into which the State is
divided for administrative purposes, viz., the Eucla,
South-Western, Western, and Kimberley divisions. The
area occupied by the artesian water-carrying beds have
been defined, with as near an approach to accuracy as
the present condition of our knowledge admits, upon
geological maps, which have been prepared after a more
or less careful investigation of the structural geology of
large tracts of country. Boring operations have demon-
strated the accuracy of the geological deductions, and
land that hitherto could not be made effective use of
has been taken up and stocked, thus increasing the wool
clip and the stock-carrying capacity of Western Australia.
Up to the present time observations in the agricul-
tural districts have been confined to the mapping of the
rock formations, which constitute the true subsoil, but
as yet no attempt has ever been made to represent in
detail the distribution of the superficial deposits upon
which it is the function of the agriculturist to operate
and which constitute a great national asset.
In addition to the investigations carried out in
connection with surface geology, the exploration of what
may be called the subterranean geology of the State has
been, perhaps unconsciously, recognized by the Govern-
ment as being of scientific and practical importance, as
may be seen by the policy adopted in connection with
the use of its boring plants.
There are three distinct objects for which the boring
plants have been usefully and actively employed as a
direct aid to the development of the States’ natural
resources:
(1) The search for artesian water in pastoral and
other districts, and subterranean supplies
elsewhere;
(2) Proving the coal- and oil-bearing formations;
and
(3) Testing the metalliferous deposits.
Many investigations are materially assisted by and
are to a large extent dependent upon the results of such
boring as has been carried out, when interpreted in the
light of the local geological conditions, hence a good deal
of work has been carried out by the Survey in connec-
tion therewith.
All the foregoing relates to what may be termed
the field work of the department. There are, however,
other equally important spheres in which interesting
and valuable work is being performed. Microscopic
inquiry now forms part of the geologist’s operations,
and the study of petrology has raised many practical
problems requiring investigation in connection with the
rocks of the auriferous formations.
Another very necessary and important part of the
organization for carrying out the geological work which
has been outlined is the laboratory, in which such
chemical, mineralogical, and other researches essential
for the proper discharge of the duties of the Survey are
performed. The laboratory is under the charge of a
specially trained officer, Mr. Simpson, associated with a
staff of assistants. By means of the laboratory con-
siderable assistance is rendered to and the time of the
field staff greatly economized, for it is upon field work
that the time of the staff can always be most profitably
employed.
To carry on the primary functions of the work in
the laboratory certain plant and accommodation are,
of course, essential, and this is of such a nature as may
be utilized for making the necessary assays, etc., for
the State batteries, that it has been found best in the


interests of economy and efficiency to have this work car-
ried out by the Survey.
Part of the policy of the Government consists in
the making of free assays and other determinations in
the interests of bona-fide prospectors, and most of this
work is carried out in the Survey laboratory. This class
of work naturally takes up a good deal of time, but by
its means much valuable information as to the occurrence
and distribution of minerals (which it is the function of
the department to secure) would probably be otherwise
unobtainable, or, at any rate, take many years to
acquire. Since the present department was instituted
there have been over 6,000 free assays made, in addition
to a number for which payment has been received.
A further development of the work of the Geological
Survey is the classification and elaboration of the fossils
found in the various strata throughout the State, with-
out the satisfactory delineation of which much of the
value of the Survey results would be lost.
Geology is more or less dependent upon palaeonto-
logical research, for without the specific determination
of fossils, reports involving a wide range of stratigraphy
could not be written, nor geological maps of large areas
be properly completed, though, of course, those
acquainted with geological field work and the running
of geological boundary lines are aware that palaeontology
only plays an insignificant part in the actual construc-
tion of the maps. Palaeontology constitutes the time-
piece of geology, serving the same purpose as do watches
and clocks for the ordinary engagements of life.
GEOLOGICAL MUSEUM.
One of the most essential instructional portions of
the equipment of the Geological Survey is its museum,
in which the various rocks, minerals, and fossils col-
lected by the staff in the ordinary course of its duties,
or acquired by purchase or donation, are exhibited for
the convenience of the staff and for the benefit and
instruction of the general public. The Survey collec-
tion at present numbers about 11,000 specimens.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE SURVEY.
The results obtained by the Geological Survey are
made available to the general public in a useful, prac-
tical, and creditable style in three distinctf forms, viz.,
annual reports, bulletins, and maps.
The annual reports, which are presented every year
to Parliament, contain a brief statement of the work
of the department for the period by which each is
covered, and in addition a good deal of miscellaneous
information which it is deemed desirable should be
issued in advance of the more detailed reports.
It was very soon found that a good deal of the
value attaching to special reports upon the economic
aspects of geology was discounted by delay in publica-
tion, which must necessarily happen when detailed
descriptions are included in the report presented annu-
ally to Parliament, and it was ultimately determined in
1899 that when reports and maps upon any special sub-
ject or district were prepared, they should be printed in
a convenient form, styled bulletins, and made available
for distribution to the public as soon as they could pos-
sibly be issued from the Government Printing Office.
These separate reports or bulletins, which number
forty, deal with a great variety of subjects, as may be
noticed by an inspection of the published catalogue
and table of contents. Of the bulletins already pub-
lished, one is a Bibliography of the Geology of the
State, three contain valuable palaeontological contribu-
tions to Western Australian geology, three deal with
artesian water supplies, three on such general questions
as the mineral wealth of the State, the occurrence and
distribution of base metals, minerals of economic value
(really a valuable hand-book on commercial mineralogy
for prospectors and others), and the statistical account of
the mineral productions of the State; two refer solely
to general geology, whilst twenty-eight give more or
less detailed accounts of the geological structure, ore
occurrences, and future mining prospects of pretty
nearly every field in Western Australia.
SCIENTIFIC RESULTS.
The work which has already been completed has
achieved certain valuable results. Whatever new facts
may have been contributed to science as a result of the
Survey’s operations have been solely arrived at in the
prosecution of economic inquiries carried out in what
is conceived to be a scientific manner. It is, of course,
almost impossible to estimate the indirect usefulness of
the work of the Survey, which is to be looked for both
in the State and out of it: in Western Australia in the
economic development of the State, and out of it in the
influence it has on the advancement of geological
science. The effect of its work upon the various indus-
tries and upon the wealth and prosperity of Western
Australia is naturally that to which the Government
attaches the greater importance.
The scientific staff of the Geological Survey con-
sists of the following officers:—Government Geologist,
Andrew Gibb Maitland; Assistant Government
Geologist, IT. P. Woodward; Mineralogist and
Assayer, E. S. Simpson; Assistant Mineralogist and
Assayer, A. J. Robertson; Petrologist, R. A. Far-
quharson; Field Geologists, T. Blatchford, E. C.
Saint-Smith, and J. T. Jutson; Assistants, H. W. B.
Talbot and F. R. Feldtmann; Draftsmen, R. H.
Irwin and C. B. Kidson ; Topographical Surveyor, C.
S. Honman ; Laboratory Assistant, H. Bowley.
ANDREW GIBB MAITLAND,
the Government Geologist of Wes-
tern Australia, was born of Scottish
parents on St. Andrew’s Day (Nov-
ember 30), 1864, and received his
baptismal name in honour of the


patron saint of the “Land o' Cakes."
He was educated first at Hudders-
field in Yorkshire and afterwards at
the Yorkshire College of Science,
now known as Leeds University,
where he studied engineering and
geology for five years, gaining con-
siderable distinction in these sub-
jects. In order to enlarge his know-
ledge of geological matters and to
gain practical experience he travelled
largely in Great Britain, and in 1888
came to Australia, landing in
Queensland. In the northern State
his qualifications early secured for
him the appointment of Assistant
Government Geologist, and there-
after he spent the whole of his time
in geological and mining survey
work, travelling on foot and horse-
back to the far corners of the State.
He prepared voluminous reports on
the geological formations of the
States and gave particular attention
to coal, gold, and tin fields. The
British Government in 1891 re-
quested the Queensland authorities
to place Mr. Maitland’s services at
its disposal to carry out a geological
and mineralogical survey of British
New Guinea, and during his opera-
tions in the interior regions of that
island he had to do a great deal of
difficult exploring work, necessitating
not only skill and caution, but call-
ing forth all his energy and capacity
for endurance. He subsequently pro-
duced an important and valuable
contribution to the knowledge of the
geology and geography of the island
in a comprehensive ' Report on Brit-
ish New Guinea,” a pamphlet con-
sisting of 33 closely-printed pages
and illustrated by three large maps.
After this expedition Mr. Maitland
returned to his official duties in
Queensland until 1896, when he
accepted an offer from the Western
Australian Government to occupy
the position of Government Geologist
to the State, an office he still holds.
On his arrival in Perth he found the
Geological Survey Department in a
very embryo condition, and lost no
time in urging upon the Govern-
ment the advisability of investigating
systematically the various mining
fields of the State. This comprehen-
sive task ultimately led to the estab-
lishment of a well-equipped labora-
tory since largely availed of by the
general public, and the suitable
housing of the Geological Survey
Department in a fine building ad-
jacent to the Museum. Mr. Mait-
land was chosen by the Government
to represent Western Australian
mining interests at the great Franco-
British Exhibition of 1908, and in
that capacity was absent from the
State for about twelve months. He
is President of the Natural History
and Science Society of Western Aus-
tralia, is a Fellow of the Geological
Society of London, member of the
Museums Association, and of the
Western Australian Institute of
Engineers, besides being local Secre-
tarv of the Australasian Association
for the Advancement of Science.
He is a recognized authority on
mining geology, and has often been
called upon to give evidence in
important mining lawsuits. lie is
credited with a wide knowledge of
artesian water supplies and subter-
ranean waters generally, is the
author of many geological reports
and maps published by the Geologi-
cal Survey Departments of Queens-
Bartletto Perth.
MR. ANDREW GIBB MAITLAND.
land and Western Australia and the
Government of British New Guinea,
and has made valued additions to
the geological literature of the day,
some of the subjects dealt with by
him being "Extra-Australian Artes-
ian Water Basins,” published by the
Royal Society of Queensland; "The
Salient Geological Features of Brit-
ish New Guinea,” published by the
Natural History Society of Western
Australia ; and "Recent Advances in
the Knowledge of the Geology of
Western Australia,” published in
1908 by the Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of
Science, Adelaide. Although an
earnest student of his profession he
does not devote the whole of his
time to scientific research, but finds
relaxation in the study of Scottish
history, more especially of the time
of Queen Mary, and is particularly
interested in the Works of Sir
Walter Scott, whose poems accom-
pany him on all his travels and
scientific expeditions. Mr. Maitland
married in 1895 Alice Maud, a
daughter of the late Mr. Oldfield
Brumfitt, of Richmond, Victoria,
and has four children. His private
address is ‘‘Bon Accord/’ King’s
Park Road, Perth.
HARRY PAGE WOODWARD,
J.P., F.G.S., Assoc.M.lnst.C.E.,
Assistant Government Geologist to
the State of Western Australia, was
born at Norwich, England, on May
16, 1858, and is the son of
Dr. Henry Woodward, F.R.S.,
V.P.G.S., late Keeper of the
Geological Department in the
British Museum (Natural History),
and grandson of Mr. Samuel Wood-
ward, of Norwich, the well-known
geologist and antiquary. He was
educated at University College
School, London, and subsequently
studied geology with Professor
Judd in the Royal School of
Mines, South Kensington, and field
work with Mr. Horace B. Wood-
ward, F.R.S., late Acting Direc-
tor - General of the Geological
Survey of England and Wales.
In 1883 he was appointed
Assistant Government Geologist to
the State of South Australia and
did good work in this capacity for
over three years. He served for
some time as geologist on the Boun-
dary Commission between Queens-
land and South Australia, and
visited Melbourne and inspected
the principal mines at Ballarat,
Bendigo, and other Victorian
centres. Returning to London in
1886 he spent a year in the metal-
lurgical laboratory of the Royal
College of Science, and in January,
1888, arrived at Perth, having been
appointed to the post of Government
Geologist for Western Australia.
He visited and made reports upon
the vast line of proclaimed gold-
fields, from Kimberley, Pilbara,
and Ashburton in the north to
Murchison, Yilgarn, Dundas, and
Coolgardie in the south; reported
upon the Irwin River and Collie
goldfields and the Greenbushes tin-
field ; and advised on matters of
water supply for all parts of the
State. ITis annual report for 1890,
containing a general geological
description of the country, ran so


Minister of Railways.
From
To
Harry Whiitall Venn
Dec.
29,
1890
Mar. 10, 1896
Frederick Henry Piesse ...
Mar
10,
1896
Aug. 23, 1900
Barrington Charles Wood
Aug
23,
1900
May 27, 1901
John Joseph Holmes
M ay
27,
1901
Nov. 21, 1901
Frank Wilson
Nov.
21.
1901
Dec. 23, 1901
Walter Kingsmill
Dec
23,
1901
June 24, 1902
Sir Cornihwaite Hector Rason
June 24,
1902
Aug. 10, 1904
John Barkell Holman
... Aug.
10,
1904
June 7, 1905
William Hartnell Johnson
June
7,
1905
Aug. 25, 1905
Henry Gregory
Aug.
25,
1905
Oct. 7, 1911
Philip Collier
Oct.
7,
1911
Still in office
rapidly out of print that in 1894
Mr. Woodward published a “Mining
Handbook to the Colony of Western
Australia, which has had a pheno-
menal circulation, and a sketch
map, geologically coloured. In 1893
he was made first warden of the
Dundas goldfield, and two years
later upon his resignation of the
post of Government Geologist, the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HARRY PAGE WOODWARD.
Ministry conferred upon him the title
of Honorary Consulting Geologist
and Mining Engineer to the State of
Western Australia. To him this
State is indebted for the discovery
of its splendid artesian water sup-
plies, since he with very great diffi-
culty induced the Government of
the day to put down the first bore
near Guildford in 1894. In this
matter he was opposed not only by
local men, but by the consensus of
opinion of the recognized authorities
upon artesian supplies. Results,
however, proved that his contentions
were justified. He also, about the
same period, in his Plandbook of
1894 foreshadowed all the areas in
which artesian supplies have since
been obtained. In 1896 Mr. Wood-
ward joined the firm of Messrs.
Bewick, Moreing, & Co., of London
and Coolgardie, as local partner and
manager of their business at the
Eastern goldfields. After eighteen
months in this connection he began
practice on his own account as
mining engineer, visiting the various
mining centres, and was specially
identified with the Collie district,
where he became owner of a coal
mine, and discovered what is now
known as the Co-operative Coal Mine.
On April 1, 1905, he rejoined the
Government Service as Assistant
Government Geologist, and has con-
tinued in the office ever since.
Some years ago Mr. Woodward
planted a vineyard of 120 acres at
Cooringa, which proved eminently
successful, and has since been taken
over by a Company. In 1883 he was
made a Justice of the Peace, was
elected a Fellow of the Geological
Society in 1884, and is an Associate
of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
He is also a contributor to the pages
of the Geological Magazine. On
December 31, 1890, Mr. Woodward
married a daughter of Mr. J.
F. T. Hassell, of Albany, and has
three sons.
EDWARD SYDNEY SIMPSON,
8.E., F.C.S., Government mineralo-
gist and assayer, Perth, was born
at Sydney, New South Wales, in
1875. Pie ha I a brilliant scholastic
career, first at the Sydney Grammar
School and subsequently at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, being admitted
finally to the degree of Bachelor of
Engineering in the branches of
mining and metallurgy in 1895. He
entered upon active professional life
as chemist to the Russell Process
Silver Mill at Rivertree, on the
Clarence River, New South Wales.
After filling this position for about
four months he entered the service
of the Mount Morgan Gold-mining
Company, Queensland, remaining ir
its service over a year in the capa-
cities of assistant assay er, acting
chemist, and junior engineer. In
1897 Mr. Simpson was appointed by
the Western Australian Government
fco his present position. He was
elected a Fellow of the Chemical
Society of London in 1897, and is a
member of several other learned
societies, in whose journals will be
found the results of the many re-
searches of scientific and economic
importance carried out by him. Mr,
Simpson has been a member of the
Advisory Board of the School of
Mines and examiner to that School
and the affiliated Technical Schools
since their inception.
The Railways of Western Australia.
Since the introduction of responsible government,
Ministerial administration of the railways of AVestern
Australia has been vested in the following Ministers of
State:
As a great State enterprise the railways are under
the control of the Commissioner (Mr. John T. Short),
who is assisted by the following departmental and
branch heads: —Mr. C. B. Rushton (Secretary for Rail-
ways), Mr. Neil Douglas (General Traffic Manager), Mr.
E. E. Light (Chief Engineer of Existing Lines), Mr.
E. S. Hume (Chief Mechanical Engineer), Mr. C. S.
Gallagher (Comptroller of Stores), Mr. G. AV. Stead
(Superintendent of Transportation), Mr. L. H. Gwynne
(Chief Accountant), Mr. C. H. Higgs (Auditor of Re-
ceipts), and the following District Superintendents:
Mr. J. V. Shillington (Eastern and Great Southern
line), Mr. AV. Lord (Eastern Goldfields), Mr. H. C.
Davies (South-Western line), Mr. J. AVakeling


(Northern line), and Mr. O. Selden (Hopetoun-
Ravensthorpe line).
The story of the initiation and development of rail-
way construction in the State has already been fully dis-
cussed in the historical section of this publication. It
is, therefore, unnecessary to do more than give here a
brief resume, showing in chronological order the growth
of the network of lines which now covers the main
divisions of the country.
HISTORY.
The history of railway construction in Western Aus-
tralia dates only from the early seventies, and the first
efforts were the outcome of a desire on the part of timber
companies operating in the colony to facilitate the trans-
port of timber to the coast. Towards the end of 1871 the
Western Australian Timber Company built a line to
connect the jetty at Vasse with the mills, situated about
about £4,300 per mile. The gauge adopted, which has
since been adhered to in railway construction through-
out the State, was 3 ft. 6 in., and the rails were as light
as 35 lbs. per yard.
The suggestion to connect Perth with Fremantle and
oo
Guildford, which one would have expected to be the first
proposal, was not made until 1873, and even then was
abortive, probably because those interested in the carry-
ing trade on the river were afraid of injury to vested
interests. Two or three years later the matter was again
raised and a proposal made that the line should be built
by a private company, the Government guaranteeing 6
per cent, on the capital for a term of years. The Secre-
tary of State declined to agree to the proposal, but
intimated that he would be prepared to assent under
certain conditions to a loan for the purpose of Govern-
ment construction. This course was adopted, and after
a battle of routes, ultimately decided in favour of that
RAILWAY STATION, PERTH.
12 miles away, and shortly afterwards Messrs. Mason,
Bird, & Co,, who had a concession in the Darling Ranges,
established a railway from the Canning to Rockingham
and a tramway from the Jarrah Forests to the Canning.
This movement on the part of private firms seems to have
spurred the Government on to take action, and in 1871
a Legislative Council Committee was appointed to report
upon the question of a railway from Guildford to York.
This, as well as one from Geraldton to Northampton,
was strongly urged by both the settlers and the Press.
After survey and consideration it was decided to go on
with the line from Geraldton to Northampton, estimated
to cost £50,000. Want of funds, however, delayed the
commencement until after the loan of 1874 had been
floated. On October 22 of that year the first sod was
turned, and the work of construction proceeded. For
various reasons the work was considerably delayed, and
it was not until July 26, 1879, that the line was opened
for traffic, having cost as a going concern £147,217, or
along the north bank of the river, a contract was let
to Mr. John Robb for £74,591 and a commencement
made on June 3, 1879. The line was opened to traffic
in March, 1881, and almost at once the question of con-
tinuing it to York was raised. The upshot of this was
the opening of a line from Guildford to Chidlow’s
Well, via Smith's Mill, in March, 1884, and of the whole
length from Fremantle to York in June, 1885. Branch
lines from Spencer’s Brook to Northam and from Clack
line to Newcastle were then approved, and these became
available for traffic in October, 1886, and January, 1888,
respectivel} 7 , while the Geraldton system was extended
by a branch to Walkaway, thus tapping the rich wheat
district known as Greenough Flats, in July, 1887.
Meanwhile the idea of a railway connecting York
with Albany, to be built on the land-grant system, was
mooted. Further consideration proved that so far as the
portion from York to Beverley was concerned, it could
not with advantage be constructed on such terms. Tt


was therefore agreed that the Government should under-
take the work. The contract was let in 1885 to Mr.
Edward Keene, and the line was opened in August, 1886.
This left the way clear for a land-grant railway from
Beverley to Albany. Several proposals were received by
the authorities, and due consideration given to all of
them. In the result that of Mr. Anthony Hordern was
accepted. The main provision was that in return for
building the railway, Mr. Hordern was to receive 12,000
acres for every mile of line constructed, the location of
the land to be in alternate blocks along the route. The
concession was transferred to the Western Australian
Land Company in 1888, and the line, built by Millar
Brothers, of Melbourne, was opened for traffic in June,
1889. The Great Southern Railway, as the line was
called, re-
mained under
the Land
Company un-
til 1896, when
all the assets
of the com-
pany were
purchased by
the Govern-
ment, and the
railway was
formally taken
over by the de-
partment on
January 8 ,
1897.
The advan-
tages of rail-
way communi-
cation in the
Northern and
middle por-
tions of the
agricultural
districts of
the colony soon led to an agitation among the
farmers of the South-West, with the result that on
March 12, 1891, a third separate system, for similar
benefits, was added to the two previously mentioned by
the opening of a line running 16 miles inland from Bun-
bury, through a rich agricultural district, to Boyanup.
The inconvenience of such a system, isolated as it was
from the capital, however, quickly gave rise to further
agitation, of which the practical effect was seen in the
opening during 1893 of 110 miles of connecting line in
two sections, namely, from East Perth Junction to Pin-
jarra, on May 2, and from Pinjarra to Picton Junction,
near Bunbury, on August 22. To keep pace with in-
creased settlement and production, extensions of the
TWO 30-TON ELECTRIC OVERHEAD TRAVELLING CRANES, LIFTING NEW ENGINE, WEIGHING 68 TONS.
FROM ONE SET OF RAILS TO ANOTHER GOVERNMENT RAILWAY' WORKSHOPS,
MIDLAN D JUNCTION.
original Bunbury-Boyanup line were constructed and
opened at intervals, viz,, from Boyanup to Donnybrook,
November 16, 1893; a branch from Boyanup to the coast
at Busselton, on December 26, 1895 ; and an extension
Donnybrook through magnificent timber country
to the old-established agricultural town of Bridgetown,
on November 1, 1898.
During the period just prior to and immediately
following the institution of responsible government, on
October 21, 1890, prospecting for gold was energetically
and successfully pursued, and resulted in rapid additions
to the discoveries of the Murchison and Yilgarn districts.
To assist the development of the resources so discovered
naturally became the main object of the Government,
and Bills were speedily passed for the construction of
lines towards
these two gold-
fields. From
Northam to
Southern
Cross —a dis-
tance of 170
miles, the lat-
ter then being
the principal
gold - produc-
ing centre of
the colony —
the rails were
quickly laid,
the extension
being opened
on July 1 ,
1894. Mean-
whi 1 e, th e
Northam sys-
tem had been
connected
with the East-
ern and South-
Western sys-
terns by means of the Midland Railway, built, after
various vicissitudes, by a private corporation under a
land-grant concession; and on November 21, 1894, a line
leaving a point about nine miles from Geraldton, known
as the Mullewa Junction, was constructed towards the
Murchison fields for a distance of about 57 miles, passing
principally through pastoral country. The numerous
further discoveries of auriferous country, however, pre-
vented the possibility of these places remaining as ter-
mini for any long period. Even while they were under
construction, their extension was being discussed, and
it soon became evident that the connection of the mining
centres of Coolgardie and Cue with their respective
ports must be effected as quickly as possible. Parlia-


merit at once, when applied to, passed the necessary
enabling legislation without difficulty in regard to both
projects. The extension to the Coolgardie goldfield and
thence northwards, inclining to an ultimate junction
with the Murchison system, was subsequently carried out
LATEST TYPE OF BUNKER ENGINE FOR SUBURBAN PASSENGER TRAFFIC
as circumstances permitted, the sections being completed
in the following order :
Southern Cross to Boorabbin, opened July 1, 1896.
Boorabbin to Kalgoorlie, opened January 1, 1897.
Kalgoorlie to Menzies, opened February 13, 1899.
Menzies to Leonora, opened January 12, 1903.
Meanwhile a branch line from Kalgoorlie
to Kanowna —then at the height of its allu-
vial fame —had been opened in June, 1898.
In the Murchison district the extension
of the line from Mullewa inland, 196 miles
further to Cue, was completed and opened
on July 1, 1898, an additional extension
of 46 miles to Nannine being opened on
June 1, 1903. July 1, 1898, also saw the
opening of a branch line leaving the Perth-
Bunbury Railway at Brunswick Junction,
and running through the Darling Ranges
for a distance of about 26 miles to Collie,
at which place coal had been discovered
and mines had been opened out, giving
sufficient prospect of solidity to justify Par-
liament in authorizing the construction of
a railway for the assistance of their deve-
lopment. This industry has since progressed
to such an extent that the railways now draw
nearly the whole of their supplies of coal from Collie,
while, at the same time, a large private trade has
also been developed. On November 2, 1903, there-
fore, a six-mile extension of the line to the Collie-
Boulder leases was opened for general traffic.
Since 1904 there have been further extensions of
the two main goldfields trunk lines. On the Eastern line
a branch from Malcolm to Laverton, a distance of 64
miles was opened in 1905, and in 1910 the Northern line
was extended from Nannine to Meekatharra, some 23
miles, and a branch was thrown out from
Mount Margaret to Sandstone, 93 miles
away, where mining developments justified
rapid and improved communication. A
railway was also built in 1909 from Hope-
toun, a port on the south coast, to the
mining field at Ravensthorpe, some 30 miles
inland, by means of which, with the help
of a steamer from Hopetoun to Albany, the
Phillips River field is made much more
accessible than formerly.
For many years one of the burning
questions on the eastern goldfields has been
the construction of a line from Coolgardie
to Esperance in order to provide all the
residents on those fields with a shorter
outlet to the sea. Political reasons, and pos-
sibly metropolitan vested interests, seemed
an insuperable barrier, but the decision
to construct the first 110 miles of that line—from Cool-
gardie to Norseman —which was opened in 1909, allayed
the agitation for the time. It has since been revived
with even greater force, and the present Government
showed its desire to accede to the request by introducing
into Parliament in 1911 a Bill for the construction of
GARRETT TYPE OF ENGINE FOR NEGOTIATING HEAVY GRADES AND SHARP CURVES
the Norseman-Esperance portion. The Bill was, how-
ever, unsuccessful, being rejected by the Legislative
Council. It is the intention of the Government to again
take up the matter during the present session (1912).
Perhaps the most important phase of Government
policy in regard to railway development during the past


five or six years has been the decision to build light lines
into all the agricultural areas as part of the general
policy of agricultural development and settlement.
Many of these lines have been built, and others are from
time to time authorized. Their success has been proved
by the great demand for land which has followed them,
and by the rapid increase of production which they have
helped to make more profitable. The aim of the authori-
ties is to bring the whole of the agricultural areas within
the sphere of the railways, and though it may take years
to complete the scheme sufficient has even now been car-
ried out to give the South-Western portion of the State
the appearance of a railway network. The lines are
being built with one object in view—to ensure safe and
speedy transport at the lowest possible cost and with the
barest equipment, leaving the district itself to justify
by its progress any further equipment. There are at the
present time nearly 500 miles of these railways in course
of construction, and the Government is being continually
approached by new settlers for further extensions.
The railway most recently opened for public traffic
is that from Port Hedland to Marble Bar, which after
passing through various difficulties of construction and
contract, was finally completed and entered upon its
existence as a going concern in July of this year.
The total length of railways open for traffic at pre-
sent is about 2,754 miles, as compared with 188 miles
at the establishment of responsible government; the
revenue derived for the year 1911-12 was £1,884,604,
and the expenditure £1,343,977; while the capital cost
of the whole system to June 30, 1912, was £12,641,213.
ADMINISTRATION.
From the time of their inception until the inaugura-
tion of responsible government, the construction, main-
tenance, and control of all railways within the State were
vested by Act in an official holding the title of Com-
missioner of Railways, and having a seat in the Executive
Council of the then Government. Very extensive powers
for all purposes connected with railways were conferred
upon this office, though in the earlier Acts private rail-
way construction does not appear to have been con-
templated. Subsequently, however, the Commissioner
was called upon to exercise supervision over the safety of
working and charges levied by private railway owners in
a degree somewhat analogous to that for which in Great
Britain the Board of Trade is responsible, whilst at the
same time he was placed in a similar position as regards
the Government railways, with the management of which
he was himself charged.
The first definite proposal with regard to State rail-
way construction in Western Australia is found in a
report of a Select Committee of the Legislative Council
on Public Works, printed in 1871, when several lines
starting from Fremantle were proposed. At the time
nothing appears to have resulted from this inquiry, but
in August, 1872, another Select Committee of the Legis-
lative Council inquired into the practicability of making
a railway to the Eastern districts. This Committee sub-
mitted to the Legislature estimates of the cost of con-
structing, maintaining, and working a line of 80 miles
in length, together with an estimate (£9,700 per annum)
of the probable traffic returns of such a line.
The question of a railway to the Eastern districts,
however, was superseded about this time by the necessity
for providing rail communication between Geraldton and
Northampton, and the Loan Act of 1872, finally assented
to on August 15, 1872, after considerable correspondence
between the Governor and the Colonial Office in London,
authorized the raising of a sum of £1,675 for “pre-
liminary railway surveys in the Champion Bay and min-
ing districts.”
These questions appear to have come under the
general administration of the Surveyor-General, the
Hon. Malcolm Fraser, who at that period controlled all
public works. In 1874, the Governor proposed to the
Colonial Office the establishment of a separate Depart-
ment of Public Works. Considerable correspondence on
the subject followed until the appointment of the
Honourable J. H. Thomas, C.E., as “the Government
Engineer,” who reported direct to the Governor under
that title in July, 1876, as Director of Public Works in
May, 1877, as Director of Public Works and Engineer of
Railways in May, 1878, and as Commissioner of Railways
in July, 1881. Under this title the principal executive
and administrative authority of the department has since
been carried on. On the death of Mr. Thomas, in July,
1884, Mr. Clayton T. Mason, M.1.C.E., filled the posi-
tion temporarily until the arrival of the Honourable J.
Arthur Wright, C.E., from England in the following
year. Mr. Wright carried on the several duties of Com-
missioner of Railways, Director of Public Works, and
Engineer-in-Chief until the close of 1889, when he re-
signed his appointments to undertake the general
management of the affairs of the Western Australian
Land Company at Albany. It was then decided to
separate the railways from the Works Department, and
Mr. Clayton T. Mason, M.1.C.E., who had meantime held
the appointment of General Manager of Railways, be-
came Commissioner of Railways again on January 1,
1890.
On the institution of responsible government, the
office was converted into a Ministerial one, and the
Honourable H. W. Venn, M.L.A., was appointed to the
dual portfolio of Commissioner of Railways and Director
of Public Works. He took over the duties of Mr.
Clayton T. Mason, on December 29, 1890, who, however,
continued in the service of the department under the title
of General Manager and Engineer for Existing Lines.
That portion of those duties relating to the supervision


of private railways—of which by this time there was con-
siderable mileage—fell practically into disuse (if, indeed,
it had at any time been actively exercised), and the Com-
missioner of Railways thenceforward devoted his atten-
tion almost exclusively to the Government lines. In
1891 Mr. Mason was offered and accepted the position of
TYPE OF DINING CAR IN USE. GOLDFIELDS EXPRESS.
Collector of Customs, and thereupon the Engineer-in-
Chief (the late Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, C.M.G.), took over
the general management, in addition to the performance
of his other arduous and numerous duties. This step
appears to have been prompted by the fact that the Com-
missioner carried out all works of construction through
the medium of the Public Works Department —even to
improvements and additions to lines open for traffic, and
the purchase of rolling-stock therefor. The development
of the business, however, progressed to such extent that
the necessity for further skilled supervision almost
immediately became apparent, and, the
Government deciding to follow the example
set by New South Wales in similar circum-
stances, the Agent-General was instructed
to obtain the services of an experienced
officer from one of the leading British com-
panies. The selection fell on Mr. John
Davies, then occupying a position on the
staff of the London and North-Western
Railway —the railway which had given Mr.
Eddy to New South Wales —and Mr. Davies
accordingly took up the duties of General
Traffic Manager of the Western Australian
Government Railways on January 9, 1892.
The almost unprecedented rush of immi-
gration which followed upon the gold discov-
eries of the nineties so enlarged the respon-
sibilities of every Government department
that the Engineer-in-Chief requested to be
relieved of the duties of Acting-General Manager of
Railways. On January 1, 1897, therefore, Mr. Davies
was promoted to be General Manager, the position of
Chief Traffic Manager being filled by the appointment
of Mr. John T. Short, who had occupied a corresponding
EE
post on the Land Company’s Great Southern Railway,
then recently purchased by the Government.
Up to the time of the accession to office of the Leake
Government in June, 1901, the Ministerial positions of
Commissioner of Railways and Director of Public Works
had been combined, but Mr. Leake considered that the
time was now ripe for their separation, and
Mr. J. J. Holmes, M.L.A., whose criticisms
of the railway administration under the
Forrest and Throssell regimes had attracted
considerable attention, was appointed the
first Minister in charge of the Railways
Department. The strong views he held led
to a disagreement of opinion with his Gen-
eral Manager, and the rupture ended with
the suspension of the latter gentleman from
office, which extreme step was taken on
August 23, 1901. After some delay, the
charges leading up to this measure were
investigated by an independent board of
inquiry, of which Mr. Pendleton, Commissioner of Rail-
ways for South Australia, was President, and although
Mr. Davies was exonerated of all but one or two minor
errors of judgment, the effect left on his mind was
such that he preferred not to resume his position, but
resigned the service on his reinstatement, being allowed
leave until June 30, 1902, with a retiring honorarium of
£l,OOO, in recognition of his services to the State.
When Mr. Kingsmill, the Minister for Railways in
the second Leake Government, came to consider the ques-
tion of filling the vacancy, the view was gradually forced
25 TONS BREAKDOWN CRANE.
upon his mind that the detailed control of the depart-
ment and its now enormous ramifications could not be
efficiently performed by Ministers of the Crown, who
came and went with the swing of the pendulum of public
opinion, and who also had their own private business


interests to attend to in addition. Having come to this
conclusion, and feeling that continuity in the administra-
tion of the department was an essential to its success,
the Government (of which Mr. Walter James, K.C., had
become Premier, on the death of Mr. Leake in June,
1902), on the recommendation of Mr. Kingsmill, decided
to revert to the position contemplated when the office of
Commissioner of Railways was instituted by the Railway
Act of 1878, that is to say, to fill it by the appointment
of a gentleman who should be an officer of the Civil
Service, and whose qualification should rest rather on
broad commercial experience than on close intimacy with
the details of railway life and work, on which points it
was considered that the advice of two co-commissioners
or of the officers responsible for the respective branches
of the department should suffice. Acting on the policy
suggested by these considerations, the Government
offered the position to Mr. W. J. George, at that time
representing the Murray constituency in the Legislative
Assembly. Mr. George accepted the offer, and com-
menced the duties of the position on July 2, 1902. On
the same date a rearrangement of the Cabinet took place,
whereby the Minister for Works, Mr. C. H. Rason, took
over the duties of Minister for Railways, and Mr. Kings-
mill became Colonial Secretary. The latter, on the first
opportunity, introduced a Bill into Parliament providing
for the appointment, for five years, of a board of three
railway commissioners, to be free from political influence,
and of whom Mr. George was to be chairman. The
powers, duties, and conditions of tenure of office were
defined on the basis of the agreement which had been
made between Mr. George and the Government.
The proposal for three commissioners did not meet
with the approbation of members, however, and it was
therefore dropped, the Bill being altered to provide for
one commissioner only, in which form it received the
Vice-regal assent on December 20, 1902. The old-
time Acts, of which the Act in question (2 Ed. VII., No.
35) was an amendment, continued to remain in force,
with the exception that the powers which the latter did
not specially confer upon the Commissioner were trans-
ferred to the Minister for Works and Railways, and con-
sequently certain anomalies and ambiguities were con-
tinued, until assent was given on January 16, 1904, to
the consolidating Government Railways Act, 1904. This
Act definitely placed the administration of all Govern-
ment Railways open for traffic in the hands of the Com-
missioner, defining his responsibilities and powers in re-
lation thereto, removing the administration from the
control of politicians, and relieving him of the super-
vision of private railways.
Mr. George's tenure of office was completed in 1907,
and the position of Acting-Commissioner was conferred
upon Mr. John Tregerthen Short, who was afterwards
appointed Commissioner as from July 1, 1908.
The total number of employes of the department
for the year ending June 30, 1911 (the latest figures
available) was 6,513, and the amount spent in salaries
and wages <£986,979. The proportion of working ex-
penses to earnings for the four years ending on that date
was about 66 per cent. For the year just closed it may
possibly be somewhat higher, as the high cost of living
and other causes have brought about a distinct increase
in the rate of wages paid.
ORGANIZATION.
The department is divided, for purposes of organiza-
tion, into five main divisions or branches on the lines
usual with railways throughout the British Empire; that
is to say, into the Administrative or General, Traffic,
Locomotive, Way and Works, and Railway Stores
Branches.
The Administrative Branch comprises the Commis-
sioner's office, the Accountancy, and the Audit Branches.
In the first named, all matters of administrative policy
or particular importance beyond the ordinary routine
work are dealt with, and subjects affecting more than
one branch of the service are also usually decided. Under
the supervision of the Chief Accountant the
Accountancy Branch deals with all financial matters,
revenue, expenditure, and accounts, while by means of
the Audit Branch, under the control of the Auditor of
Receipts, a more systematic check is kept upon all
accounts.
The Traffic Branch, that is to say, the branch which
controls the operation of traffic, thus realizing the object
for which the railways were brought into existence, is
presided over by the Chief Traffic Manager. There is
not, as is frequently the case elsewhere, any distinct
separate control of the passenger or coaching traffic and
that of the goods traffic, so large a number of mixed trains
and other arrangements wherein passengers and goods
are combined in one service being necessary for
economical working in a sparsely-populated country that
it has not been considered of advantage to bring about
such separation. The Chief Traffic Manager has the
assistance of a Superintendent of Transportation, and
for convenience of working the branch is divided into five
districts, each of which is in charge of a responsible
officer, known as a District Superintendent.
The Locomotive Branch, under the control of the
Chief Mechanical Engineer, and embracing the extensive
railway workshops, is responsible for the manufacture
and repair of rolling stock and also for running. The
workshops were originally at Fremantle, but the growth
of the department and the consequent necessity for hav-
ing a more convenient location, caused their removal
some ten years ago to Midland Junction. Large sheds
have been erected and fitted with the most modern
appliances for dealing with the construction of every


kind of rolling stock, thus enabling work of that nature
to be carried out locally. Previously everything of the
kind had to be imported from Great Britain, or in cases
of urgency from the other States, but since 1902 all
additional stock in the way of carriages, waggons, trucks,
and so forth has been manufactured by the department.
During the past twelve months an order for fifty-eight
locomotives has been sent out of the State, owing partly
to the fact that the appliances necessary for an under-
taking of such magnitude are not all immediately avail-
able, but more especially to the rapid development of
traffic caused by agricultural settlement, which has fully
taxed the resources of the Commissioner to cope with.
The workshops are under the direct control of a Work-
shops Manager, who acts under the direction of the Chief
Mechanical Engineer.
The Way and Works Branch is under the control
of the Chief Engineer for Existing Lines, who is
responsible to the Commissioner for the proper and
efficient maintenance of the railways and all buildings,
bridges, and other works connected therewith. All con-
struction works are also carried out by this branch so
far as lines open for traffic are concerned. The construc-
tion of new lines has been usually a matter of con-
tract, but from time to time the question of the
advisability of the department building its own lines has
been raised. Experiments made in that direction have
been considered so successful that the present Adminis-
tration has practically decided to adopt that principle
for the future. Speaking in Parliament recently upon
this subject, the Minister for Works (Mr. W. D. John-
son) said: —“Taking the railways, they had experi-
mented with them in the matter of construction by con-
tract and departmental work. The result had been con-
clusive in showing that the departmental construction
was undoubtedly the best. In each case the work had
been completed departmentally with a saving to the State
of thousands of pounds. In the case of the Mount
Magnet-Black Range the tender had been £86,979, and
the actual cost £71,460, making a saving of £15,519.
In regard to the same railway a net profit of
JOHN TREGERTHEN SHORT,
Commissioner of Railways for the
State of Western Australia, was
born at St. Ives, Cornwall, England,
on July 27, 1858. He is a son of
the late Captain T. T. Short, of Ply-
mouth, and received his education at
Plymouth and Pridham’s Grammar
School, Shaldon. He left England
for Australia in 1877, and it was in
the sister State, not long after his
arrival, that his long and honourable
connection with the railways of Aus-
tralasia commenced, he having
joined the South Australian Rail-
ways Department in February, 1878.
ee2
He continued in that service
altogether for eleven years, and for
a considerable part of the
time held the responsible posi-
tion of stationmaster at the import-
ant junction station of Petersburg,
on the narrow-gauge line linking the
Barrier mines of New South Wales
with Port Pirie and Adelaide.
During the time he occupied this
post the great Broken Hill silver
boom took place, which led to an
abnormal increase in the goods and
passenger traffic, and to Mr. Short
as district stationmaster fell the
onerous task of organizing the
£6,500 had been made in the matter of freights. The
tender price of the Bridgetown-Wilgarup line had been
£52,765, and the actual cost £31,734, making a saving of
£20,031. After such experiments he thought any
Ministry would be disloyal if it did not follow these
examples in the future.” The interlocking and
signalling arrangements, the first of which was installed
in Western Australia in June, 1898, are also under the
control of the Works and Ways Branch, which in addi-
tion embraces the various electrical and telegraphic re-
quirements of the Railway Service.
The Railway Stores Branch, which until 1903 was
part of the General Government Stores, was separated in
March of that year, as it was found inconvenient to have
railway stores under the control of another department.
Under the Comptroller of Stores this branch buys, sells,
and distributes all stores and material required by any
section of the department. The departure made in 1903
has proved amply justified by the convenience and
economy secured.
In any general survey of a State-owned railway
system, such as that in operation in Western Australia,
it should be borne in mind that its operations differ from
those of a private concern. While the latter, if it is to
be a success from the shareholder’s point of view, must
not only pay working expenses but pay handsome divi-
dends, the former is satisfied to secure working expenses
and interest. Its value to the community lies in the
facilities given to communication and in the impetus
given to the expansion of industry and commerce. The
private railway considers the payment of immediate divi-
dends the standard of success, and therefore only runs
where settlement is permanent; the Government railway
is often the forerunner of settlement, and its justification
lies in the fact that it lays the foundations for future
increased national prosperity. As a national asset it
represents, therefore, a value far greater than the actual
money expended upon its construction, and as a country
which has “tried both” Western Australia should never
again even consider the question of granting concessions
over national utilities.
arrangements for the expeditious
handling and dispatch of the
enormous traffic which passed
through this important centre. In
1899 he was offered the position of
inspector directly under the S.A.
Railway Commissioners, but he re-
signed from the Service and assumed
the management of the Great
Southern Railway built in 1886 by
the Western Australian Land Corn-
The Great Southern Railway
was purchased by the Government
in December, 1896, and Mr. Short
was offered the important appoint-
ment of Chief Traffic Manager of


the Government Railways, the then
holder of the position (Mr. John
Davies) having been promoted to the
office of General Manager. In 1902
the management of the railway
system was by Act of Parliament
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN TREGERTHEN SHORT.
vested in a Commissioner of Rail-
ways, and in 1907 Mr. Short was
appointed Acting Commissioner,
which appointment was confirmed
for a period of five years in July of
the following year. Since Mr. Short
has been connected with the Western
Australian Railways they have deve-
loped enormously. The area open
for traffic has been added to by some
1,350 miles and the revenue has
nearly doubled. The system is still
being extended in every direction,
and each year sees further responsi-
lities devolving on the management
in order to maintain efficiency and
cope with the ever-increasing needs
of the public. Mr. Short is a
Justice of the Peace for the State of
Western Australia. He has a
charming residence and orchard on
the banks of the Swan River at
Guildford, and has extensive farm-
ing interests near Pingelly. JTe was
married in 1881 to Miss L. C. Allen,
a daughter of Mr. R. H. Allen, of
Adelaide, and has a son and three
daughters.
CHARLES BERKELEY RUSLT-
TON, J.P., Secretary for Railways,
Perth, was born at Wimborne, Dor-
setshire, England, in June of 1868.
As a boy he was a chorister of the
Manchester Cathedral, and it was
there that he gained his early
educational training in the school
attached to that institution. He
was next a member of the St.
George's Chapel Choir at Windsor,
where his educational studies were
continued, and at a later stage he
received a finishing course of in-
struction in a Continental school in
Switzerland. His schooldays at an
end he entered the service of a Bank
at London, but owing to ill-health
was compelled to resign his post. At
the suggestion of his medical ad-
visers he sought the warmer climate
of Australia, and arrived in Mel-
bourne in 1889, where he soon
secured an appointment in the Com-
mercial Bank of Australia, which
he retained for six years. In 1895
he was transferred by the Bank to
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES BERKELEY RUSHTON.
Western Australia, then becoming
the cynosure of every eye owing to
the wonderful discoveries of gold at
Coolgardie and vicinity. The year
following his arrival in the State
witnessed his entry into the Civil
Service as a clerk in the office of the
Under-Secretary for Railways. Five
years later he was appointed Acting
Secretary, and in December, 1901,
he assumed the full responsibilities
of the position he now holds. Mr.
Rushton is President of the Rail-
ways Institute, Chairman of the
Staff Selection Board, and a Justice
of the Peace for the Perth magis-
terial district. For recreation he
invades the realms of music, devot-
ing most of his leisure to choral
work. In 1897 he married Alice,
a daughter of the late Mr. A. C.
Akehurst, solicitor, Victoria, and
has three children. Mr. Rushton
resides at Claremont.
EDWARD SHOTTON HUME,
M.1.M.E., Chief Mechanical Engin-
eer, Western Australian Government
Railways, Midland Junction, was
born at Droughty Ferry, Scotland,
in 1857, and received his education
at the High School at Dundee. For
a time he studied in a lawyer’s
office, but finding the work uncon-
genial entered the Tay Foundry as
an apprentice to the engineering
trade and obtained a good general
training in the different branches,
including drawing, with some office
experience when he had charge of the
wages book, etc. While here he
introduced a number of innovations,
finding quicker methods of work,
and was allowed special privileges
by the master of the workshops.
Leaving the foundry he went to sea
as an engineer, and acting in this
capacity to the Gippsland Steam
Navigation Company of Melbourne
in 1877 brought out and handed
over to the Company the vessel
“Rosedale,” whose first trip was
made from Circular Head to Tas-
mania. In 1877 Mr. Hume joined
the staff of the Honourable John A.
Bartletto , Perth.
Mr. E DWARD SHOTTON HUME.
Wallace as engineer to the Chiltern
Valley Gold-mining Company, and
two years later obtained employment
under the New South Wales Govern-
ment in the erection of locomotives,
being one of three selected for per-
manent positions upon the com


pletion of the work. Shortly after
he was sent to North Wagga as the
only mechanic in charge of loco-
motives, turntables, etc., in the
whole district, and was on the first
locomotive to cross the Murrum-
bidgee Bridge, witnessing the open-
ing of the line to Albury on the
overland route, at which period
he was first officer in charge at
Junee Junction. In 1884 he left
the Service and connected himself
with the firm of Messrs. McSharry
and Co., railway contractors,who had
promised him a post as manager of
one of their contracts. Two very
large lawsuits in which the Com-
pany were concerned intervened,
however, to prevent the fulfilment
of this promise at an early date, and
their request that he would under-
take work in the office and await
results of the arbitration was de-
clined by Mr. Hume, who accepted
a post with Messrs. Logan & Co.,
contractors, in the Illawarra dis-
trict. Ultimately he was induced
by Messrs. C. & E. Millar, Aus-
tralian railway contractors, to join
their staff in the construction of the
railway between Albany and Bever-
ley, and the clackline to Newcastle
in 1886, and when this was nearing
completion he returned once more to
Junee, New South Wales, and
launched out in business on his own
account, being successful in gaining
first prize for the first locally-built
plough and for a horse-waggon, at
Junee Show in 1888. Responding
to an invitation from Messrs. Millar
to rejoin them, he sold out and
assisted in the construction of the
railway between Palmerston and
Pine Creek, in the Northern Terri-
tory, also of bond stores, workshops,
and bridges; finally, upon the pur-
chase of the rolling-stock by the
Government, handing it over in
first-class condition. In 1890 he
entered the employ of a British loco-
motive firm at Sydney and erected
fifty-five locomotives, acting at in-
tervals as consulting engineer for
various firms. Six years later he
again became associated with the
Millar Brothers in the timber indus-
try at Denmark, Western Australia,
where he supervised the workshops,
the erection of mills, rolling-stock,
and plant, etc., and standardized
drawings for the erection of various
machines. In 1900 Mr. Hume was
offered and accepted the post ot
Workshops Manager for the Western
Australian Railways at Fremantle.
Upon the death of the late Chief
Mechancial Engineer (Mr. T. F.
Rotherham) he was promoted to Act-
ing Chief Mechanical Engineer,
which post was confirmed in 1904.
Mr. Hume is a member of the Insti-
tute of Mechanical Engineers of
Great Britain and a member of the
American Railway Master Mechanics’
Association, Incorporated, and of
the American Bridge and Building
Association. He is also a member
and on the Council of the Western
Australian Institute of Engineers.
ERNEST EDWARD LIGHT,
M.1.C.E., Chief Engineer of Exist-
ing Lines, Western Australian Rail-
ways, Perth, was born in 1859 at
Adelaide, South Australia, where
he received his scholastic education
at Jeter’s College. Upon
leaving school, he served Tor a term
Greenham & Evans , Perth.
MR. ERNEST EDWARD LIGHT.
in the State Railways Department,
and during the five years passed in
this connection became thoroughly
conversant with the details of the
workshops and railway construction.
He resigned from the Service to take
the post of engineer to a firm of con-
tractors in South Australia, ana
remained in this employ from 1882
to 1884. In the latter year he came
to Western Australia and joined the
Government Service, being engaged
on railway surveys and superintend-
ing railway construction as Resident
Engineer until the beginning of
1888. He afterwards proceeded to
Victoria and for a year became
associated with the firm of Messrs.
David Munro & Co., railway con-
tractors, for a time and spending a
short period in the service of the
Victorian Railways Department.
In 1890 Mr. Light joined the staff of
the New South Wales railways,
where for three years he held the
position of Assistant Engineer to the
Divisional Engineer. Returning to
Western Australia, shortly after his
arrival he rejoined the Railway
Service in this State and engaged in
various works then in construction.
In 1895 he was appointed Assistant
Engineer in the Existing Lines
Branch and in 1897 Resident
Engineer of the Metropolitan Dis-
trict, three years later becoming
assistant Chief Engineer until the
retirement of Mr. W. W. Dartnall
in 1908, when he received promotion
to the present post. Mr. Light is a
member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers, London, also a foreign
member of the Society of Engineers,
England, and a member of the
Western Australian Institute of
Engineers, of which he is a Vice-
President. He has been President
of the Western Australian Railways
Institute and is now a life member
of that body.
NEIL DOUGLAS, Chief Traffic
Manager, Western Australian Rail-
ways, Perth, was born at Dunolly,
Victoria, in 1863. He received his
scholastic training at the public and
high schools in Dunedin, New Zea-
land, and upon its conclusion, spent
a year in seafaring pursuits. In 1880
he became connected with the New
Zealand Railway Service, and
during the eight years spent in this
employ passed through the various
grades of junior porter, shunter,
guard, signalman, until he reached
promotion to stationmaster. In
1889 he transferred his residence to
New South Wales and spent five
years in the office of the Superinten-
dent of Lines in Sydney. At the
end of this period Mr. Douglas came
to Western Australia, where he
entered the Railways Department as
chief clerk in the Traffic Branch of
the Service, and after three years in
this department served about twelve
months as piermaster at Fremantle.
Ten years as District Superinten-
dent on the goldfields and five years
in his present position of Chief
Traffic Manager at Perth complete
eighteen years spent by Mr.
Douglas in the service of the
Western Australian Railways
Department.


JOHN PIDGEON, M.1.C.E.,
District Engineer for the Metropoli-
tan district of Western Australian
Railways, was born at County Kil-
dare, Ireland, in October, 1859. He
received his education at the Gram-
mar School, Tuam, Ireland, and
after leaving school turned his atten-
tion to engineering as a profession.
As pupil to Mr. James Price, M.A.,
M.1.C.E., in 1882 he went to South
Africa and there joined the Govern-
ment Railways Department as
draughtsman, subsequently being
appointed Assistant Engineer on
Construction, and continued in this
service until 1886, when he returned
to Ireland. In the middle of the
same year Mr. Pidgeon sailed for
the Antipodes and became associated
with the Western Australian Land
Company as Assistant Engineer on
the railway under construction from
Albany to Beverley. Five years
later he accepted a post as engineer
in the Public Works Department,
and in this capacity took charge of
the construction of the Geraldton to
Mullewa railway line, fulfilling the
duties of executive engineer in this
and other works. In 1897 Mr.
Pidgeon settled at Albany as Resi-
dent Engineer in the Railway
Department, and subsequently re-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN PIDEON.
moved to Coolgardie in the same
capacity. This service he relinquished
to take over the duties of his present
appointment, that of District Engi-
neer at Perth. He was an officer
for two years of the Australian In-
telligence Corps in Perth, and after-
wards received transfer to the Corps
of Australian Engineers, in com-
mand of No. 4 Half Field Company.
He is a member of the Institute of
Civil Engineers and of the Western
Australian Institute of Engineers.
ERNEST ALFRED EVANS,
Workshops Manager, Western Aus-
tralian Government Railways, Mid-
land Junction, was born in 1865 at
Worcester, England, and was
educated at the Queen Elizabeth
Grammar School in the same town.
Subsequently he was articled for
seven years to the firm of Messrs.
McKenzie & Holland, engineers,
of Worcester, and upon the comple-
tion of his indentures continued with
these gentlemen as draughtsman and
assistant engineer for another four
years. After a further term as
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ERNEST ALFRED EVANS.
assistant in the London office of this
firm, in 1890 Mr. Evans came out
to Australia to the Railways Com-
missioners of New South Wales to
fill an appointment as assistant
interlocking engineer in connection
with the State railways. Resigning
from the Service, he re-entered the
employ of Messrs. McKenzie & Hol-
land, acting as their representative
in Western Australia for about two
years. In 1897 he joined the Wes-
tern Australian Government Service
as interlocking engineer, and held
that post until August, 1893, when
he received the appointment of
Workshops Manager at Fremantle,
which office was transferred to Mid-
land Junction upon the removal of
the works to that centre. Mr.
Evans is an Associate of the Institute
of Mechanical Engineers, London,
and a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Engineering Institute.
HENRY RIGG, Superintendent
of Locomotive Running, Western
Australian Government Railways,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HENRY RIGG.
Midland Junction, is a Victorian by
birth, having been born at Echuca,
in that State, on November 1, 1866.
He received his scholastic training at
St. Francis' College in Melbourne,
and subsequently turned his atten-
tion to the engineering trade.
Coming to Western Australia while
still quite a lad he spent two years
in the fitting-shop of the Jarrahdale
Timber Company, and at the age of
seventeen became associated with the
engineer-in-charge of the locomotive
works on the construction of the rail-
way from Chidlow's Well to Bever-
ley. Upon the completion of this
enterprise in 1886 he joined the
Government Service in April of that
year, and working upwards from the
grade of engine-cleaner to that of
fireman and driver, he won his way
to the post of locomotive inspector in
1895. He was then placed in charge
of a district and finally received the
appointment of locomotive inspector
for the whole of the Service, includ-
ing the outdoor running work and
car and waggon supervision; in July,
1908, being further promoted to his
present position. Mr. Rigg is an
associate-member of the Western
Australian Institute of Engineers
and a life member of the Railways
Institute.


GEORGE MAGNUS YOUNG,
Chief Draughtsman of the Loco-
motive Branch, Western Australian
Government Railways, Midland
Junction, was born at Angaston,
South Australia, in 1867. Upon the
conclusion of his scholastic career, at
sixteen years of age, he entered the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE MAGNUS YOUNG.
engineering firm of Messrs. James
Martin & Co., Gawler, as an appren-
tice to the fitting trade, and was
identified with the staff of the draw-
ing office for some time. He re-
mained there until 1891, when he
came to Western Australia and
joined the Government railway ser-
vice as a draughtsman, in which
department he received steady pro-
motion until his appointment as
chief draughtsman on August 1,
1907. In addition to controlling the
work in the drawing office he super-
vises the testing section of the Rail-
ways Department and the chemical
laboratory.
Lieutenant HAROLD DOWSON,
M.1.E.E., Officer Commanding No.
4, Electric Company Corps of Aus-
tralian Engineers, is a son of Pro-
fessor John Dowson, of Royal Staff
College, Sandhurst, England. He
was born at Wokingham, Berks,
England, on October 22, 1861, and
received his education at Wellington
College, Berkshire. When eighteen
years of age he joined the Bell Tele-
phone Company in London and spent
about ten years in this and other
companies, being identified with their
service in Scotland, London, on the
Continent, and abroad. In 1889
Mr. Dowson came to Australia, and
settling in Melbourne joined the
Postal Department, also finding
employment with various electric
companies until 1892, when he left
Victoria and became a member of
the staff of the Railways Department
of Western Australia in the capacity
of inspector of railway telephones.
The great value of the telephone
service had hardly been grasped by
the greater portion of the commu-
nity in those days, and it fell to the
gentleman under review to bring it
more prominently before the notice
not only of those in authority over
him but of the general public. For
the past fourteen years he has held
the position of Electrical Engineer
of Railways in Western Australia,
Bartletto, Perth.
LIEUTENANT HAROLD DOWSON.
the whole of the electrical staff and
appliances being under his super-
vision. Upon the formation of his
Company, attached to the Fremantle
defences, Lieutenant Dowson was
appointed the first militia engineer
officer in the State. Having little
time to spare for anything outside
his profession he has few hobbies,
even having to devote part of his
holidays to his military duties. He
was married in December, 1897, to a
daughter of the late Mr. M. Hum-
mer ston, well known both in Western
and South Australia, and has two
sons and a daughter.
Lieutenant ROBERT BLEAZBY,
B.A. & 8.A.1., Associate M.1.C.E.,
Australian Intelligence Corps. The
subject of our review is a son
of the late Mr. William Bleazby,
of Kingsale, County Cork, Ire-
land, where he was born on
July 22, 1870. He was educated at
King's School, Sherbourne, Dorset,
England, and at Trinity College,
Dublin. Leaving the University he
spent a couple of years in the service
of the Tralee and Dingle Light Rail-
way Company, and in 1895 took his
departure for the land of the
Southern Cross, his destination being
Western Australia, where he arrived
in April, 1895. Almost immediately
he entered the Engineering Branch
of the Railways Department at Perth
as a draughtsman, and he now occu-
pies the post of Assistant Engineer.
He joined the military forces of Aus-
tralia in February, 1911, becoming
attached to the Australian Intelli-
gence Corps, in which he holds the
rank of Lieutenant. During his col-
lege days ho won honours as an oars
man, and was a member of the senior
University Four which cleared the
boards in Ireland in 1889. Until
recently Lieutenant Bleazby devoted
much of his leisure to gardening pur-
suits, but he has now put aside this
pleasant pastime for the more serious
work of a military career. In 1902
he married at Coolgardie a daughter
of Mr. C. E. Stokes, of Narrogin,
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT ROBERT BLEAZBY.
and granddaughter of the late
General Sir John Stokes, K.C.8.,
R.E. His family consists of a son
and three daughters.
WILLIAM HERBERT HOPE,
Chief Clerk in the Railway Commis-
sioner’s Office, Perth, and the Oom


missioner’s representative on the
Appeal Board constituted under the
Government Railways Act, is a
native of this State, having been
born at Fremantle in March, 1860.
He received his education at the
Government school and by private
tuition, and at the conclusion of his
schooldays began his official career as
a teacher in the Education Depart-
ment, where he continued for twelve
months. At the close of this period
he was transferred to the Colonial
Secretary’s Office, and thence, in
1881, to the Railway Department in
the capacity of clerk to the Traffic
Manager and Locomotive Superin-
tendent. Mr. Hope’s connection
with the railways has thus dated al-
most from their inception in Wes-
tern Australia, his appointment tak-
ing place only two months after the
department was opened, and only
recently he completed his thirty
years’ service in this connection,
having gradually received promotion
until the attainment of his present
position, making in all thirty-nine
years spent in the Public Service—
an honourable record surpassed by
few in the State. Mr. Hope has in-
terested himself in the progress of
the Anglican Church, and is a mem-
ber of the Cathedral Chapter in
Perth and one of the
tives of the Cathedral at Synod. He
is a Freemason and has passed
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLOAM HERBERT HOPE.
through all the chairs of his Lodge,
having also in the past filled one of
the offices in the Royal Arch Chap-
ter. In 1888 he married a daughter
of the late Mr. T. L. Cottrell, of
Perth, his wife being a cousin of the
late Honourable George Throssell.
He has one daughter.
LEWIS HOWARD GWYNNE,
Chief Accountant to the Western
Australian Government Railways,
was born in 1867 at Liverpool, Eng-
land. At the close of his scholastic
career, which he pursued in the city
of his birth, he became engaged in
mercantile life in the office of Messrs.
John Bewley & Son, a well-known
firm of chartered accountants. After
twelve months’ experience with this
firm he transferred his services to
the Royal Liverpool Friendly So-
ciety, and in 1890 was engaged in
London by the Western Australian
Land Company to come to this
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. LEWIS HOWARD GWUNNE.
State as bookkeeper in the offices of
the Great Southern Railway. This
post he retained until the purchase
of the railway by the Western Aus-
tralian Government, who also took
over the working staff of the Com-
pany and gave to Mr. Gwynne the
appointment of senior clerk of the
expenditure section of the Chief
Accountant’s Branch. Upon a
reorganization of this Branch Mr.
Gwynne was appointed chief clerk
and later to the joint offices of pay-
master and receiver. Ultimately he
received promotion to his present
office. Mr. Gwynne is General Trea-
surer of the Railways Institute,
Chairman of the Railway Employes’
Death Benefit Fund, and Chairman
of the Railway Employes Provident
Fund. He is keenly interested in
athletic sport.
WALTER CHARLES ROBIN-
SON, Chief Clerk to the Traffic
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WALTER CHARLES ROBINSON.
Department, Perth, is a son of
the late Mr. Keyran Robinson,
of Wellington, New South Wales.
He is an Englishman by birth,
having been born at Winslow,
Buckinghamshire, on July 20, 1869;
but at an early age was brought to
Australia by his parents, who settled
in the Mother State. His scholastic
training at a superior public school
in Wellington concluded, in 1884 he
joined the Government Railways De-
partment as telegraph probationer,
and after various promotions was ap-
pointed first clerk in the District
Superintendent’s Office, Goulburn.
Mr. Robinson at subsequent periods
was employed in offices in most of
the large towns of New South
Wales, and at one time acted in the
dual capacity of post and telegraph
master and stationmaster at Spring-
wood. On March 3, 1893, he arrived
in Western Australia and began his
official career as clerk in the General
Manager’s Office at Perth, a year
later being created goods agent,
this appointment being the first of
its kind in the State. In 1897 he
was appointed district stationmaster
at Bunbury, haviiig charge of an
entire section in addition to his other
duties. Owing to the rapid increase
of trade, by which Bunbury rose


from merely a small town to rank
as the second seaport in Western
Australia, it became necessary to add
the duties of piermaster to those of
stationmaster, and Mr. Robinson
was duly appointed to the new
office. In September, 1908, he was
promoted to the post of goods agent
at Fremantle, where he continued
until June 1, 1912, when he
was appointed to his present office.
Mr. Robinson has received fre-
quent recognition of his services
in the various centres where he
has resided. When he resigned
from the New South Wales Depart-
ment he was the recipient of two
illuminated addresses and several
valuable presentations, and since
coming to Western Australia has
received several other presenta-
tions, including illuminated ad-
dresses from the citizens of Bunbury,
accompanied by a purse of sover-
eigns, a mounted sword from the
railway officials at the same town,
and a very valuable gold hunting-
watch from the railway employes at
Perth. He is a member of the
Executive Committee of the Railways
Institute and Commissioner's repre-
sentative on the Ambulance Execu-
tive. He holds a commission of Lieu-
tenant in the Light Horse, and at
the present time is in command of
the Metropolitan Squadron. Mr.
Robinson is a great lover of horses
and spends all his spare time in the
saddle during the hunting season.
In 1891 he married a daughter of
Mr. Thomas J. Willis, of Parra-
matta, New South Wales, and has a
son and a daughter.
MICHAEL FRANCIS
O’REILLY, Chief Clerk in the Way
and Works Branch, Railways De-
partment, Perth, was born in Sep-
tember, 1865, at Port Fairy, Vic-
toria. He received his educational
training at the model schools and at
the Christian Brothers' and King's
Colleges, Melbourne, and at the close
of his scholastic career entered the
Railways Department of Victoria as
a junior clerk in 1882. Being first
engaged in the Secretary’s office Mr.
O’Reilly afterwards received transfer
to the Audit Department, passing
from there to the Way and Works
Department, in which latterly he
filled the position of staff and statis-
tical clerk, working under Commis-
sioners Speight, Greene, Francis,
and Matheson. About the end of
1896 he was offered the post of chief
clerk in the Way and Works Branch
of the Western Australian Govern-
ment Railways, which he accepted,
and has filled this appointment ever
since. Mr. O'Reilly has identified
himself with keen interest in the
Ba rtletto, Perth
MR. MICHAEL FRANCIS O’REILLY.
Railways Institute, and in the past
has occupied the position of Chair-
man to the Council. He is a mem-
ber of the Railway Board for the
selection of employes.
EDWARD SAMUEL EVANS,
Stationmaster at Fremantle, is a son
of Mr. Samuel Evans, of Aber-
dovey, North Wales, where he was
born on February 17, 1867. Edu-
cated in his native town, at the age
of thirteen he went to sea, and for
the following five years was engaged
in seafaring pursuits. In 1885 he
joined the permanent-way staff of
the Cambrian Railway Company in
Wales, and remained in that employ
for about four years. In his twenty-
second year he entered the service
of the Central Wales and Caermar-
then Junction Railway as clerk, and
when that line was absorbed into the
London and North-Western Rail-
way system he transferred his ser-
vices to the new company. Two
years later he emigrated to Western
Australia, drawn thither by the
glowing accounts of the gold disco-
veries, and arriving in 1894 shortly
afterwards obtained a position as
goods clerk at Fremantle. Eight
years later he became acting pier-
master and goods agent at that sta-
tion, and from 1902 to 1904 was
goods agent at Kalgoorlie, transfer-
ring to Albany, where he filled the
post of stationmaster until May,
1910, when he removed to take a
similar appointment at North Fre-
mantle. In the following January
Mr. Evans was promoted to the posi-
tion he now holds. He was one of
the originators of the annual rail-
way picnic, which has since grown to
be looked upon as an institution.
He is Secretary of the Presbyterian
Church, Fremantle, and has acted
as Superintendent of the Sunday-
school. His leisure time is devoted
to the study of literary works of
merit, and he is an inveterate
reader. In 1899 he married a
bartletto , Perth.
MR. EDWARD SAMUEL EVANS.
daughter of the late Mr. William
Pettmann, of South Australia, and
has three sons and two daughters.
CHARLES AUGUSTUS SMITH,
Stationmaster, Kalgoorlie, is a
New Zealander, having been born
at Christchurch, South Island, in
1862. At the close of his scholastic
education he joined the Traffic
Department of the New Zealand rail-
ways and gradually rose to the posi-
tion of stationmaster during the
seven years spent in this connection.
Proceeding to New South Wales at
the end of this period, in 1884 he
entered the Railways Service in that
State as telegraph operator, again
attaining promotion to station-
master as the years went by. In


1897 Mr. Smith came to Western
Australia under engagement to the
Government Railways Department in
this State, and was given the
appointment of stationmaster in the
first instance at Mullewa, subse-
quently being transferred to Cue.
Southern Cross, and Albany suc-
cessively, and after a period, during
which he acted as goods agent at
Kalgoorlie, was appointed station-
master at Midland Junction in Sep-
tember, 1908. In June, 1912, he
was transferred to take up similar
duties at Kalgoorlie.
JOHN SHILLINGTON, District
Superintendent at Narrogin, Wes-
tern Australian Railways, received
his education principally in Sydney,
New South Wales. Upon the
ruination of his studies he became
connected with the Railways Depart-
ment of that State for about five
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN SHILLINGTON.
years, and in 1895 came to Western
Australia, where he joined the Goods
Manager's Department in Perth as
chief clerk, a position he held till
1899. He was then sent to Kal-
goorlie as goods manager for the
goldfields for four years, at the end
of that period being given charge of
the goods department in the Metro-
politan division. Early in 1911 Mr.
Shillington was promoted to chief
clerk in the’ Traffic Department at
Perth, an appointment he continued
to hold until June 1, 1912, when he
was transferred to Narrogin as Dis-
trict Superintendent. He has always
taken an interest in the Society for
the Prevention of Cruelty to Ani-
mals, and occupies the office of Hon.
Treasurer of the Board. He was a
foundation member of the Railways
Institute, and has in the past ful-
filled the duties of councillor in that
body.
Midland Railway Company.
The only private concession of note remaining in
Western Australia is that known as the Midland Rail-
way Company, operating between Midland Junction and
Walkaway, near Geraldton, a distance of 277 miles. It
was the outcome of a proposal made by Mr. John Wad-
dington in 1884 to construct a line from York to Gerald-
ton by way of Newcastle and Northam, the terms being
based upon those in the agreement made with Mr.
Anthony Hordern in regard to the Great Southern Rail-
way. A Committee of the Legislative Council, to which
the proposal was referred, advised that the line should
start from Guildford and run via the Victoria Plains
to Walkaway, the southern terminus of the Government
line from Geraldton, and that a grant of 12,000 acres,
to be selected within 40 miles of either side of the line,
be made for each mile of line constructed. On that basis
an agreement with Mr. Waddington was signed early in
1886. Included in it was a provision that the contractor
should, within seven years, introduce 5,000 immigrants,
being granted in consideration an area of 50 acres for
each statute adult. This provision was, however, prac-
tically a dead letter from the start, and was never
enforced. Mr. Waddington’s concession was afterwards
transferred to a company called the Midland Railway
Company of Western Australia. A contract for the con-
struction of the line, which with rolling stock and appur-
tenances was estimated to cost £1,000,000, was let to Mr.
Edward Keane and a start made with the work. Want
of success in obtaining the necessary capital caused a
suspension of the work in 1887. With the help of Eng-
lisli capitalists a new start was made in 1888, but for
some years progress was very slow, continual delays
occurring from various causes, most of which were in
some way connected with finance. The time allowed for
construction was extended from time to time by diflerent
agreements, the most important of which was one entered
into in 1893. Under this the Government agreed to
guarantee 4 per cent, interest on £500,000 worth of
debentures to be issued by the company, in return for
which the Government received a mortgage over the com-
pany’s lands, and an agreement that the proceeds of any
sales of such lands should be held by the Government
towards payment of principal and interest of the deben-
tures. There was also a further proviso that should the
company at any time owe the Government under the
guarantee £20,000 for interest over and above the
amount held from the proceeds of sales, the Government
could enter upon and take possession of the railway and
the unsold lands. Under this agreement the railway was
completed and opened for traffic in 1894. From time to
time the question of Government purchase has been
raised, the last occasion being in August, 1905, when the
Premier (Mr. IT. Daglish) unsuccessfully endeavoured to
procure the authority of Parliament to purchase the
whole of the assets for £1,500,000.
In the lands granted to the company in return for
constructing the line are some of the finest agricultural
and pastoral lands of the State. For the first few years
little or no attempt was made to dispose of them, but
since Mr. Jas. Gardiner became interested in their dis


posal there lias been much more activity displayed,
especially as he has shown a desire to assist the policy of
agricultural settlement, which has for the past six or
seven years been practically the principal item in the
policy of whatever Government happened to be in power.
WILLIAM HENRY MORRIS,
Engineer and General Manager of
the Midland Railway Company of
Western Australia, Midland Junc-
tion, is an Englishman by birth,
having been born at Oswestry, in
Shropshire. He served a pupilage
in civil engineering under the late
Mr. George Owen, Engineer of the
Cambrian Railway from 1874 to
1877, afterwards remaining with
that Company as Assistant En-
gineer. In 1885 he relinquished
this service to join the Belfast and
County Down Railway Company as
Resident Engineer, where he re-
mained several years, during which
time he reconstructed the entire line
and doubled a large portion of it,
besides carrying out several exten-
sions. In 1906 Mr. Morris was
offered and accepted the position of
Engineer to the Londonderry and
Lough Swilly Railway, and while
resident in Ireland rendered import-
ant service as a lecturer on railway
working and safety appliances to the
bBartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM HENRY MORRIS.
combined railway companies of the
North of Ireland. In 1910 he left
the Old Country for Western Aus-
tralia to accept the appointment of
Engineer and Traffic Manager to the
Midland Railway Company, and at
present (1912) is acting as the
General Manager. Mr. Morris is a
member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers of Ireland.
WILLIAM BROWN, Locomotive
Superintendent, Midland Railway
Company of Western Australia,
Limited, was born on Scottish soil,
at Ardrie, Lanarkshire, in 1858. At
Bartletto, Perth.
Mr. William Brown.
the close of his educational studies,
which he pursued at Glasgow, he
served as an apprentice in the draw-
ing office and workshops of a marine
engineering firm until he was twenty-
one years of age. He then obtained
a useful and varied experience in
different iron- and steel-works in
Lanarkshire, and was identified with
the Steel Company of Scotland as
patternmaker and fitter, being en-
gaged in general engineering with
these companies for about fifteen
years. In 1883 he went to London
and joined the firm of Messrs. James
Simpson & Co., relinquishing this
connection in 1891, when he came to
Western Australia under engagement
to Mr. E. Keane, contractor for the
Midland Railway Company, and
subsequently entered the service of
At the present time Mr. J. G. Drake is acting as
General Manager of the company, Mr. George Smith,
who for some years occupied that office, having resigned
some little time ago to accept a responsible position in
another State of the Commonwealth.
the Company as Works Manager for
two and a half years. In 1902 he
was appointed Locomotive Superin-
tendent, which position he has held
ever since. Mr. Brown is a member
of the Western Australian Institute
of Engineers.
HAROLD DAGLEY GIBBS,
Accountant to the Railways Branch
of the Midland Railway Company of
Western Australia, Midland Junc-
tion, is a native of this State, having
been born at Bunbury in 1878. He
received his education at the local
State school, and afterwards was
identified with the Western Austra-
lian Railways Department in a
clerical capacity for five and a half
years. In February, 1898, he
joined the goods branch of the Mid-
land Railway Company as assistant
goods agent, subsequently acting as
relief officer, relieving stationmas-
ter, etc., until in 1902 he was given
charge of the accountant’s branch of
bBartletto , Perth.
MR. HAROLD DAGLEY GIBBS.
the concern, under Mr. George
Smith, and since then gradually the
full control of the department has
fallen into his hands. Mr. Gibbs in-
terests himself warmly in the various
public functions of the neighbour


hood and has been a councillor of
the Midland Junction municipality
for the past three years. He is pro-
minently associated with friendly
society work, and since 1898 has
held membership in the Independent
Order of Oddfellows, passing through
all the chairs of the order and at
present holding the office of Grand
Trustee. He is also a Trustee and
a Past District President of the
Hibernian Society, and is a founder
of the Swan District Friendly Socie-
ties’ Association. He is a warm advo-
cate of all manly outdoor sports, and
a member of the Midland Junction
Club.
WALTER BLAND BROWN,
Traffic Inspector, the Midland Rail-
bBartletto , Perth.
MR. WALTER BLAND BROWN.
way Company of Western Australia,
Midland Junction, was born at
Tumut, New South Wales, in 1864
and received his educational training
in his native town. At the close of
his schooldays he was engaged in the
New South Wales Government Ser-
vice for some years, and after his
resignation came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1904. He joined the
clerical staff in the Railways Depart-
ment of the Midland Company and
continued in this capacity until
1910, when he received the appoint-
ment to his present position.
FRANCIS HORNER, Goods
Agent, Midland Railway Company of
Western Australia, Midland Junc-
tion, was born at Gladstone, South
Australia, in 1878, and received his
education in his native town. At the
close of his schooldays he assisted his
father in farming pursuits until
1900, when, coming to Western Aus-
tralia, he obtained employment with
Mr. G. C. Hoskins in connection
with the testing of the pipes for the
Coolgardie water scheme, occupying
about fifteen months. After a period
of four years, during which he was
engaged with the Temperance and
General Life Assurance Society, in
1905 he joined the Midland Railway
Company as porter, subsequently
being promoted to shunter and
guard, and finally from assistant
goods agent to his present position in
October, 1910. Mr. Horner has
taken a keen interest in friendly
society work at Midland Junction
and has passed through all the chairs
of the Ancient Order of Foresters,
being also a member of the Scottish
Branch of the Masonic Lodge, No.
972, Midland Junction. He is an
enthusiast in rifle-shooting, having
joined the Perth Rifle Club in 1902,
and in a very short time was firing
from the scratch mark. In 1903 he
was chosen as a member of the team
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. FRANCIS HORNER.
to represent Western Australia in
the Commonwealth match in New
South Wales, and in the years 1905
and 1908 he was included in the
teams competing for the same prize
in Victoria and South Australia
respectively. In 1904, when the
Commonwealth match was contested
in Western Australia, he rendered
invaluable assistance in coaching the
home team for this important rifle
event. Mr. Horner has a fine collec-
tion of medals, badges, and trophies,
and is well known to most of the
riflemen in the different States of the
Commonwealth.
The Trans=Australian Railway.
The advantages of a railway connecting the western
and eastern sides of the continent has long been recog-
nized, but until the advent of Federation it was con-
sidered to be beyond the sphere of practical politics.
The earliest suggestion was made in 1883, when Colonel
McMurdo offered, under certain conditions, to construct
a line from Beverley to Albany, and thence to the border
of South Australia. The terms, however, did not com-
mend themselves to the authorities. A more ambitious
scheme was put forward by Sir Julius Vogel and Mr.
Aubrey Coote later in the same year. They offered to
build a railway from Beverley to Eetakup, and thence
easterly and northerly to Eucla, skirting the coast as far
as possible, in return for a land grant of 12,000 acres per
mile of line. A similar proposal to build a line across
South Australia to connect with the Western Australian
line at Eucla was made to the Government of the sister
colony. The South Australian Government declared
itself opposed to a transcontinental line on the land-
grant system, and consequently that portion of the Vogel
and Coote scheme was dropped. It was not again raised
until after the discovery of the goldfields, when the wave
of prosperity and the rush to secure the precious metal
had drawn a large population into the far eastern por


tions of Western Australia. As the question of Federa-
tion was then in the air, and the colony's adherence to
the proposal earnestly desired, it was thought by the
local authorities that the building of the transcontinental
line —from Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta —ought to be set
out in the Commonwealth Bill as an inducement to Wes-
tern Australia to become one of the federating States.
Negotiations towards this end were entered into, but for
various reasons the other colonies declined to make the
railway a feature of the Bill. The utmost secured was
a promise from the Government of South Australia to
assist in securing the railway and an “honourable under-
standing” on the part of the other colonies that the line
should be undertaken as soon as possible after the
Federation. But the result proved disappointing. So
far from being willing to construct the railway, the
Federal Parliament would not even seriously think about
it. Western Australia would then have joined with
South Australia in constructing it as a State affair, but
that Government urged that it was a Federal matter, and
so far forgot the pre-federation promises as to decline to
give the Federal Parliament consent to construct the line
through that State until the Commonwealth had agreed
to take over the Northern Territory.
To keep the question alive, and believing in the
genuineness of political promises, the Western Australian
Government in 1901 ordered its Engineer-in-Chief (Mr.
C. Y. O'Connor) to prepare a statement of the probable
cost of the line. His estimate, which was laid before the
Commonwealth Parliament, was about <£4,400,000.
Later on Mr. Muir, the Inspector of Engineering Sur-
veys, made a personal inspection of the whole country
from Kalgoorlie to Eucla, and reported that for 250 miles
westward of the South Australian border the stretch of
country was one of the finest he had seen in Australia.
The Commonwealth Parliament then asked for a general
report from the Engineers-in-Chief of all the States, as
to the probable cost of construction, the probable annual
revenue, the cost of maintenance, the route recom-
mended, the gauge proposed, the probable time which
would be occupied in construction, the probable present
and future effect of the railway if constructed, the
advisability of constructing it, and any other matters
regarding the proposal which they deemed worthy of
being brought under notice. The final report of these
officers, dated August 27, 1903, estimated the cost of
construction at <£4,559,000, the revenue at <£205,860, and
the expenses and interest at <£273,966.
In conclusion, the report summarizes the benefits
likely to accrue from the realization of the scheme in the
following words:
“The chief effect of the construction of the Trans-
continental Railway would be to draw the Eastern and
Western States into closer relationship politically, com-
mercially, and socially.
“The feeling of the community of interests engen-
dered by the establishment of the Commonwealth would
be more steadily and satisfactorily maintained, and in
case of foreign attack, when communication by sea, if
not cut off altogether, might be precarious, a safe and
rapid means of conveying men, arms, and ammunition
from one side of the continent to the other would be in-
valuable.
“There would be a saving of time of two days in the
delivery of mails between East and West. The railway
would enable despatches and communications to be ex-
pedited, which is a matter of immense importance both
from a business and social point of view. It would
greatly induce travel, and many people who shun the dis-
comforts of the sea trip, or cannot afford the extra time
involved, would readily take advantage of the railway.
“The saving of time would be more than doubled
when return mails between Europe and the Eastern
States are considered.
“The saving of time between Fremantle or Perth
and the Eastern States is small compared with that be-
tween Kalgoorlie and the Eastern States. The journey
from Kalgoorlie to Adelaide now requires five days,
whereas it would then be done in thirty-six hours by the
railway.
“It may be expected that the food supply of the
goldfields would be better and cheaper, as the result of
the construction of the railway. The cost of living is now
very high in that district, and, in consequence, miners
and others do not reap that benefit from their high wages
which might be expected. On the other hand, were the
cost of living reduced, wages might come down without
any hardship to the men, and enterprise would be stimu-
lated.
“The present telegraph line runs for the greater part
of its length through uninhabited country, and its main-
tenance is carried on under great difficulties. Were the
railway constructed, a better, more accessible, and more
easily maintained line could be made available, which
could be duplicated as required, and payment for the use
of the submarine cable, in consequence of interruption
or inadequacy of the land line, would be obviated.
“New tracts of country would be opened up for pas-
toral settlement both in South Australian and Western
Australian territory, the chief difficulty at present lying
not so much in the want of fertility of the country and
the absence of water as in its inaccessibility.
“The same may be said as regards mineral develop-
ment. Recent discoveries show that the country for 175
miles east of Kalgoorlie, which is auriferous, may turn
out to be highly productive, and a source of revenue to
the railway. Tarcoola, and other mining centres in
South Australia, if rendered more accessible, may come
to enjoy prosperity after they have been more thoroughly


and systematically prospected. The reports of the
Government Geologist are not unfavourable.”
Having reached that stage the next step was the
introduction into Parliament in 1904 of a Bill to
authorize the survey of the route. The opponents of the
railway were, however, too strong in the Senate, and the
Bill was talked out. On its being reintroduced in 1905
it was voted upon and defeated in the Senate by one vote.
The measure finally succeeded in becoming law in 1907.
After the survey a revised estimate of the cost, amount-
ing to £3,988,000, was submitted by Mr. Henry Deane,
Consulting Engineer to the Commonwealth. On these
figures a Bill for the construction of the railway was
introduced into the Federal Parliament in September,
1911, and the fact that it succeeded in safely passing
the two Houses is evidence of the change of opinion that
has taken place during recent years. The length of the
line between Kalgoorlie and Port Augusta is set down
as 1,063 miles, and the gauge is to be 4 ft. 8J in.
Thus, after nearly twelve years of weary waiting,
sometimes almost without hope, Western Australia is to
receive that consideration which she was promised as an
inducement to enter the Federation. That even apart
from defence it will be of national advantage there is
little doubt. To quote the words of the Prime Minister :
This line will, I venture to predict, open up avenues
of industry and development which generally are little
dreamt of. One honourable member on this side spoke
of the impossibility of much of the land growing this or
that. . . . We have heard a similar denunciation
of various lands in Australia, and it has remained
for the opening up of those areas to disprove such
assertions. ”
To quote, in conclusion, from an article in a recent
number of The World’s Work: — u From whatever aspect
it is viewed—as a measure for defence, or for commercial
or economic development, or simply as a constructive work
alone —it excites admiration and awakens the keenest
interest. Australian statesmen have laid stress on the
point that if the railway does nothing else it will at least
arouse throughout Australia a truly national sentiment.
Old shibboleths will disperse and old barriers go down
before it. It will wipe away old prejudices. It will bind
Australia together humanly as well as actually K
HENRY CHINN, civil engineer
and licensed surveyor, Supervising
Engineer in charge of the Western
Australian section of the Trans-
Australian Railway, was born near
Preston, Victoria, on January 2,
1860. He is a son of the late Mr.
John Mitchell Chinn, and is
descended from the well-known
Cornish family of that name, who
carried on the Hale Foundry in the
County of Cornwall. Educated first
at the Turrett House Academy in
Melbourne, and later at the Mel-
bourne Model High School, at the
conclusion of his studies he served a
term under the well-known engineer,
the late Mr. Charles John Taylor.
This gentleman—who was responsible
for the institution and construction
of the Yan Yean water-supply works
for the city and suburbs of Mel-
bourne gave him a first-class
grounding in the principles of
engineering, and with this founda-
tional knowledge he proceeded to
Sydney at the inception of the water-
supply scheme for that city. Mr.
Chinn here served for five years
under the direction of the late Mr.
E. O. Moriarty, one of the ablest men
in his profession practising under the
Southern Cross, and at the termina-
tion of the work in which he was
engaged established himself in New
South Wales for a time as a licensed
surveyor and engineer. Subse-
quently he removed to Melbourne,
and in a short time formed a very
large connection in both branches of
his profession. For fourteen years
onward from the late eighties no
name was better known in engineer-
ing circles in Victoria and elsewhere,
and many important works through-
out the Commonwealth were placed
J. J. Dwyer , Perth ,
MR. HENRY CHINN.
to his credit. Among these were the
constructional works of the sewerage
system of Melbourne and the whole
of the plans for the construction of
the railway line and bridges in con-
nection with the North Mount Lyell
Railway —one of the heaviest pieces
of work ever brought to a success-
ful conclusion in Australia. In the
sewerage scheme he acted as contrac-
tor and engineer for much of the
work in conjunction with the late
Mr. Falkingham, his partner, and
with the same gentleman constructed
one of the first agricultural railways
in the State of New South Wales,
viz., from Parkes to Condobolin. He
made all the engineering surveys on
the upper Brisbane River for the
Brisbane water-supply scheme, and
at the conclusion of this work was
engaged by a large English company
to report upon the proposition to
construct a railway from the Gulf of
Carpentaria to Cloncurry in Queens-
land. Having completed this report,
Mr. Chinn came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1904, and started in private
practice in Perth. He made a special
study of the railways of this State,
and wrote a series of reports point-
ing out various reforms which might
be made to the advantage of the
people, which became the subject of
much debate in both Houses of Par-
liament. As a result, leading mem-
bers from both sides of the Legisla-
ture have accorded to Mr. Chinn the
credit of saving over £IOO,OOO per
annum of public funds, the sugges-
tions contained in these articles
having been carried out with great
success, and high eulogiums were
passed on his valuable and disinter-
ested service in this respect. He has


Office.
From
To
ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
Septimus Burt
Dec.
29,
1890
Oct.
27,
1897
Richard William Pennefather
Oct.
27,
1897
Mar.
25,
1901
William Frederic Sayer ...
Mar.
25,
1901
May
27,
1901
George Leake
May
27,
1901
Nov.
21,
1901
Frederick William Moorhead
Nov.
21,
1901
Dec.
23,
1901
George Leake
Dec.
23,
1901
June
24,
1902
Sir Walter Hartwell James
June
24,
1902
Aug.
10,
1904
MINISTER OF JUSTICE.
Robert Hastie
Aug.
10,
1904
Aug-
25,
1905
Sir Cornthwaite Hector Rason
Aug.
25,
3905
May
7;
1906
ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
Norbert Keenan
May
7,
1906
June
30,
1910
John Leighton Nanson
June
30,
1910
Oct.
7,
1911
Thomas Walker
Oct.
7,
1911
Still
in office
made a special and life-long study of
steel and iron, and is the inventor
of the Kalipsite Welding Process,
which is intended to do away with
fish plates and copper bonding on
electric tramways, and by which iron
and steel rails may be joined to make
them any length desired consistent
with allowance for expansion. This
system has the advantage of allowing
the use of native iron ore in lieu of
artificial oxide of iron, and was sue-
cessfully introduced by Mr. Chinn
in the construction of the Adelaide
electric tramways in 1908, on which
work he filled the post of engineer for
a firm of contractors, on whose behalf
he had obtained the tender. In 1912
Mr. Chinn was chosen by the Federal
Administration to assume charge of
the construction of the Western Aus-
tralian section of the Trans-
Australian Railway extending from
Kalgoorlie to the border of South
Australia, and his special fitness for
this office was quickly manifested by
the alterations he made both in the
site selected for the erection of work-
shops and in the railway route,
resulting in the saving to the Austra-
lian Commonwealth of many thou-
sands of pounds. Mr. Chinn was
married in Western Australia to
Helen, the daughter of the late Mr.
William Crossley, of Yorkshire, Eng-
land.
Crown Law Department
The following is the list of Ministers of the Crown
who have held office as Attorney-General or Minister of
Justice since the introduction of responsible govern-
ment ;
The Attorney-General is the principal Law Officer
of the Crown, and as such is charged with the administra-
tion of the Crown Law Department, the Electoral Office,
the Land Titles Office, the Stipendiary Magistracy, and
HENRY GEORGE HAMPTON,
Under-Secretary for Law, is a son
of the late Mr. G. E. Hampton,
Comptroller-General, Perth, and
grandson of Mr. J. S. Hampton, a
former Governor of Western Aus-
tralia. Born at Tunbridge Wells,
England, on May 10, 1870, the sub-
ject of this review received his early
education at Rose Hill School, in his
native town, and at Brighton
College, completing his scholastic
career on the Continent at the
College Gaillard, Lausanne, and at
the Lausanne Academy. Returning
to England, Mr. Hampton became
engaged in agricultural pursuits for
two years, and having acquired a
practical knowledge of farming came
to Western Australia, where almost
immediately he entered into pastoral
pursuits. In 1892 he received the
appointment of Associate to His
Honor Sir Edward Stone, and was
subsequently transferred to the per-
manent staff of the Civil Service, in
which he has risen to the attainment
of his present position. Mr. Hamp-
ton has been a member of the
Government Tender Board since its
inception. He is a great advocate of
outdoor recreation, being a keen
sportsman, an enthusiastic golfer,
and a lover of fishing and motoring,
He married a daughter of Mr. R. D.
Hardy, and has one son.
the Supreme Court, which in addition to the Central
Office, embraces the Sheriff's Office, the office of the
Official Receiver in Bankruptcy, and the office of the
Curator of Intestate Estates. Matters relating to Police
and Local Courts, Licensing Courts, Coronial Inquiries,
and Justices of the Peace also come within his jurisdic-
tion. He is also responsible to Parliament for the correct
drafting of Bills, though the actual work devolves upon
a public officer specially qualified for that task. The
various branches of the Crown Law Department are, sub-
ject to the control of the Attorney-General, administered
by the following officers: —Under-Secretary for Law
(Mr. H. G. Hampton), Solicitor-General and Parlia-
mentary Draughtsman and Commissioner of Titles (Mr.
W.F. Sayer,K.C.), Crown Solicitor and Assistant Parlia-
mentary Draftsman (Dr. F. L. Stow), Crown Prosecutor
(Mr. F. M. W. Parker), Master of the Supreme Court
and Registrar in Bankruptcy (Mr. F. A. Moseley),
Deputy-Registrar and Taxing Master (Mr. C. A.
Sherard), Official Receiver in Bankruptcy (Mr. M. M.
Moss), Curator of Intestate Estates (Mr. G. Clifton),
Chief Electoral Officer (Mr. E. G. Stenberg), Registrar
of Titles (Mr. A. E. Burt), and Assistant-Registrar (Mr.
A. Y. Glyde).
WILLIAM FREDERIC SAYER,
K.C., was born in London,
Educated at University College
School, he was admitted as a solid -
tor (Law Society Prizeman) in 1879,
and practised in London for ten
years. He came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1890 to fill an appointment
as legal adviser to the Midland Rail-
way Company. Seven years later
he entered the Public Service as
Secretary to the Law Department,
and was appointed Commissioner of
Titles in 1898. In March, 1901, he
resigned the latter office to accept
the portfolio of Attorney-General in
the Throssell Ministry, when he was
elected member for the Claremont


constituency, and remained in office
until the retirement of the Ministry
two months later. In 1902 he re-
tired from a Parliamentary career,
resuming his connection with the
Government Service as Parlia-
mentary draughtsman. In Decem-
ber of the same year he received the
appointment of Crown Solicitor, and
subsequently, in August, 1904, be-
came Acting Attorney-General and
King’s Counsel. Mr. Sayer now
holds the office of Solicitor-General.
FRANCIS ARNOLD MOSELEY
is a son of the late Mr. Edwin C.
Moseley, who emigrated from Eng-
land to the West Indies in 1835. He
was born at Nassau, the capital of
the Bahama Islands, on August 16,
1852, and received his education at
King's College School, London.
Upon the completion of his scholastic
career Mr. Moseley entered upon the
study of law, and was called to the
Bahamas Bar in January, 1874.
Just prior to this event —in
November, 1873 —he had received
the appointment of Private Secretary
to the then Governor, the late Sir
John Pope Hennessy, and afterwards
served in a similar capacity during
successive Administrations until the
end of the year 1880, when he left
%/ '
the colony to take up the duties of
Registrar of Titles and Deeds in
Western Australia, at that time a
Colonial Office appointment. Lie was
admitted to the Western Australian
Bar shortly after his arrival in 1881,
and after discharging the duties of
his office until July, 1889, during
which period he acted on three
occasions as Commissioner of Titles,
Mr. Moseley was appointed Master
and Registrar of the Supreme Court,
and has continued to act as such
ever since. The appointment
embraces the control virtually of six
separate departments and includes
the responsible duties of Master in
Equity, Master in Lunacy, Registrar
of Probates, Registrar in Bank-
ruptcy, and Registrar of Companies.
Mr. Moseley has held a Commission
of the Peace for this State since
1883. Since his arrival in Western
Australia he has been identified with
the progress of the Presbyterian
Church, holding office on nearly all
the Committees of the General
Assembly, for a long period acting as
General Treasurer. The missionary
enterprise of the Church with which
he is connected occupies much of his
attention, and he was the first Pre-
sident of the Presbyterian Branch of
the Laymen's Missionary Movement.
He also took a leading part in the
foundation of the Scotch College in
1896, since when he has served as a
member of the Council controlling
its affairs. Lie is President of the
Western Australian Deaf and Dumb
Institution, having been associated
with its Committee since its incep-
tion in 1896; and has been a member
of the Committee of the local
Auxiliary of the British and Foreign
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. FRANCIS ARNOLD MOSELEY.
Bible Society since its establishment
over a quarter of a century ago. Mr.
Moseley was married at Nassau,
Bahamas, in 1880 to a daughter of
the late Honourable S. O. Johnson,
of that place, the issue of the mar-
riage being five sons.
FRANCIS LESLIE STOW,
LL.D., Assistant Parliamentary
Draughtsman, is a son of the late
M.r. Justice Stow, who came to
South Australia from Suffolk, Eng-
land, in 1839. The late gentleman
took a prominent part in the public
affairs of South Australia and was
a member of Parliament for many
years. He held office as Attorney-
General during three Administra-
tions and in 1876 was appointed
third Judge of the Supreme Court,
a position he filled with great dig-
nity up to the time of his death in
1878. Mr. Stow was born at North
Adelaide on October 16, 1869, and
at the close of his scholastic career
was articled to the law with Mr.
Leonard Bakewell, of that city. He
was called to the Bar in 1892 and
continued in the practice of his pro-
fession at Adelaide for eleven years.
At the end of that period he came
to Western Australia and was ad-
mitted to the Western Australian
Bar in 1903. In June, 1910, he was
appointed to his present position of
Assistant Parliamentary Draughts-
man. He is a Doctor of Laws of
the University of Adelaide, having
first taken the degree of LL.B. at
that institution in 1892.
CHARLES ALLAN SHERARD,
Taxing Master, Deputy-Master and
Deputy-Registrar of the Supreme
Court, is the eldest son of the late Mr.
Charles Wale Sherard, of Ballarat,
one of the first wardens of the gold-
fields appointed in Victoria. He was
educated at the Church of England
Grammar School, Geelong, and at
the Melbourne University. Serving
his articles in the office of Messrs.
S. F. & Thomas Mann, solicitors,
Ballarat, and with the late Mr.
Henry Field Gurner, Crown Soli-
citor of Victoria, he was admitted
in 1880 as a Solicitor of the
Supreme Court of Victoria. He
continued to practise in that
State at Ballarat, Horsham, and
Charlton until 1896. Coming to
Western Australia he held appoint-
ments in the offices of Messrs. James
and Darbyshire and Messrs. Moor-
head and Northmore, solicitors, of
Perth, until July 1, 1898, when he
entered the Government Service as
Taxing Master of the Supreme Court.
For twelve months (1902 to 1903)
he was Acting Master of the
Supreme Court in the absence of the
Master (Mr. F. A. Moseley), and in
1909 filled the same position for five
months. He has been District
Registrar of the High Court of Aus-
tralia at Perth since the inception of
the Court in 1903, and is a barrister
and solicitor of Victoria and
Western Australia and of the High
Court, of Australia.
GER VASE CLIFTON, Curator
of Intestate Estates, is a son of the
late Mr. William Carmault Clifton,
and was born at Albany, Western
Australia, on April 24, 1863. In
1874, having received a nomination
for the Royal Navy from Sir
William F. C. Robinson, the Gover-
nor of Western Australia, Mr. Clif-
ton was sent to St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, to be educated, but owing


to continued ill-health he was unable
to present himself for examination
in Sydney in July, 1875. His nomi-
nation therefore lapsed. In 1876
he proceeded to Tasmania and com-
pleted his education at the Hutchins
School, Hobart, returning to his
native town in 1880. At the age of
seventeen he turned his attention to
surveying work, and obtained his
first experience in a survey camp at
Albany under the direction of Mr.
Charles D. Price. In 1882 Mr.
Clifton proceeded to England with
his parents and joined the London
office of the Peninsular and Orient
Steam Navigation Company, where
he continued for ten years, holding
various positions in the service. Re-
signing at the end of that time he
returned to Western Australia in
1892, and in March of the following
year accepted a clerical appointment
in the office of the Curator of In-
testate Estates and Official Receiver.
During the temporary absence of the
head of the department in 1897 Mr.
Clifton assumed control of his duties
as Curator of Intestate Estates for
several months, and in 1898 was per-
manently appointed to the post
which he still holds. While in
London he became a member of the
volunteer corps, in which he served
seven years, and was for two years
associated with the military forces
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GERVASE CLIFTON.
of Western Australia, having joined
the Civil Service Corps with the
rank of Lieutenant and Acting
Quartermaster. Although Mr. Clif-
ton at the present time finds his chief
recreation in piscatorial pursuits, he
FF
has always taken a keen interest in
cricket, and filled the position of
Vice-President of the Perth Cricket
Club for many years. During the
visit to Albany in May, 1881, of the
Royal Princes on board H.M.S.
“Bacchante” he was a member of the
Albany cricket team, and had the
honour of bowling the first ball to
His Majesty King George V. Mr.
Clifton married in February, 1898,
Elizabeth C., daughter of the late
Mr. Geo. M. Oldenbourg, of Colima,
Mexico. His second wife, to whom
he was united in 1905, is the only
daughter of the late Mr. W. Shakes-
peare Hall, of Cossack, Western
Australia. He has a son and three
daughters.
AI. FRED EARLE BURT,
Registrar of Titles in the Land
Titles Department of the Govern-
ment Service, was born at St. Kitts,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALFRED EARLE BURT.
West Indies, on August 13, 1852,
and is the son of the late Chief
Justice, Sir Archibald Pauli Burt.
He was brought to Western Austra-
lia in 1861 and educated at the
Anglican Bishops’ Collegiate School,
Perth. He entered the Civil Service
in June. 1871, as clerk to the Chief
Justice, was transferred to the
Colonial Secretary’s Office in 1873,
and during the following year acted
as clerk to Governor Weld. In 1875
he was employed in the Audit Office,
at the end of that year being trans-
ferred to the Marine Survey Depart-
ment filling the position as
draughtsman there for three years.
He was next connected with the
Crown Lands Department, and from
January, 1880, to the middle of 1881
acted as Registrar of Titles and
Deeds. He was then retransferred to
his former post in the Lands Depart-
ment, which he retained until 1890,
when he received appointment to his
present position, having previously
held the position of Acting
Registrar for two years, with the
exception of a short interval.
WILLIAM ALLNUTT SAW,
Inspector of Plans and Surveys and
Assistant Registrar of Titles, is a
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM ALLNUTT SAW.
son of the late Mr. Henry Saw,
merchant, of Perth, where the sub-
ject of this notice was born on
October 28, 1860. At the termina-
tion of his scholastic studies in 1876
he was articled to Mr. J. S. Brook-
ing, staff surveyor in the Survey
Department. Upon the completion
of his indentures he was engaged in
the department under Sir John For-
rest, then Deputy Surveyor-General,
and accompanied him as assistant
surveyor on two survey expeditions—
one in 1881 to ascertain the nature of
the country for the proposed Great
Southern Railway, and the other in
%/ 7
1882 to survey the country traversed
by the Gascoyne, Lyndon, and
Minilya Rivers. In 1883 he was
assistant surveyor to Mr. J. S.
Brooking, who was in charge of the
survey expedition to the Fitzroy
River, West Kimberley, and in 1884
Mr. Saw started on his own account,
undertaking contract surveys for the
department. In January, 1893, he


Minister of Education.
From
To
Sir Edward Horne Wittenoom ...
Dec. 4, 1894
May, 1897
Henry Bruce Lefroy
May, 1897
May 27, 1901
Walter Kingsmill ...
June 24, 1902
Aug. 10, 1904
Henry Daglish
Aug. 10, 1904
June 7, 1905
Thomas Henry Bath
June 7, 1905
Aug. 25. 1905
Walter Kingsmill ...
Aug. 25, 1905
May, 1900
John Leighton Nanson
June 30, 1909
Oct. 7, 1911
Thomas Walker
Oct. 7, 1911
Still in office
was offered and accepted a position
in the Land Titles Office which he
still holds. He has made a special
study of the administration of offices
similar to his own, visiting person-
ally the Titles Offices in Sydney and
Melbourne and the Lands Registry
Office in London in order to avail
himself of any methods by which the
workings of his office may be made
more advantageous. In 1906 he
was elected by the professional divi-
sion of the Public Service to repre-
sent them on the Appeal Board com
stituted under the Public Service
Act, receiving re-election on two
subsequent occasions. When the
municipality was created at North
Fremantle he was elected as a coun-
cillor and retained the seat for six
years. His chief hobby is the culti-
vation of a small orchard and farm
which he owns at Darlington, where
he spends his week-ends and gains
recreation in this healthful pursuit;
but he is also a well-known figure on
the King’s Park Bowling Green
when in town. He is a life member
and one of the Vice-Presidents o
the King s Park Bowling Club, an
one of the councillors of the Insti-
tute of Surveyors, Western Austra-
lia, of which body he is also Hon.
Treasurer. He is fond of travel,
having been twice round the world
on pleasure bent. In 1897 he
became a Fellow of the Royal Col-
onial Institute, London. In the
same year he married a daughtei
of the late Dr. Staples, of Lon-
don, and has a family of three sons
and five daughters.
Education Department.
In this list there are, it will be noticed, several
breaks in time. During the periods of these gaps there
was not a Minister of the Crown holding either alone or
in conjunction the portfolio of Education.
The following are the principal members of the
official staff of the department:
Inspector-General of Schools —Mr. C. R. P. An-
drews, M.A.
Chief Inspector of Schools —Mr. R. Hope Robert-
son, M.A.
Director of Technical Education —Mr. F. B. Allen,
M.A., B.Sc.
Principal of the Training College —Mr. W. J.
Rooney, B.A.
Principal of the Modern School —Mr. F. G. Brown,
B. A., B.Sc. (Mr. Brown is on the point of leaving Wes-
tern Australia, having been appointed Director of the
Commonwealth Naval College).
Inspectors —Messrs. R. Gamble, Wallace Clubb,
8.A., J. A. Klein, M.A., PI. W. Wheeler, J. Parsons,
M.A., J. A. Miles, 8.A., and P. PI. Gladman, M.A.
Organizer of Manual Training—Mr. J. Plart.
Organizer of Plousehold Management —Miss M.
Jordan.
Inspectress of Needlework —Miss J. A. Nisbet.
Advisory Teacher in Nature Study —Mr. C. G.
Hamilton.
Chief Compulsory Officer —Mr. W. E. Wray.
The following general information, including statis-
tics, is taken from the Annual Report of the Department
for the year 1911.
11 Enrolment and Attendance. —The year 1911 was
one of rapid growth in the Government Primary Schools.
The number of scholars on the rolls at the end of the year
exceeded that for 1910 by 2,922. This is a larger addi-
tion than has been recorded for any year since 1897.
The growth was maintained throughout the year. For
some years past the enrolment on the last school day has
been lower than the average enrolment for the year,
owing to the fact that many children who have reached
the age of fourteen leave school before the end of the
year, while comparatively few begin their school life at
this period. In 1911, however, the rolls on the last school
day showed an excess of 378 over the average enrolment
for the year. The increase corresponds to the rapid
growth of population during the year, and is largely due
to immigration.
“The average enrolment for the year showed an in-
crease of 2,305, and the average attendance an increase
of 2,006. The percentage of attendance to enrolment was
84*21, which is very slightly above the average of the
last seven years, and is higher than that recorded for
any year before that period. It is worthy of note that
while the population increased by about 57 per cent, in
the period of ten years between the last two censuses,
the average attendance in the State Primary Schools in-
creased by nearly 80 per cent. The rush to the goldfields
at the end of the last century brought us a large number
of young unmarried men and also many married men
who had left their wives and families behind them.
During the last ten years the population has been steadily
approaching more normal and settled conditions.
'The following table gives the figures for the last
five years:—


Year.
Average
Enrolment.
Average
Attendance.
Percentage of
Attendance to
Enrolment.
N umbers on
Rolls at end
of Year.
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
29,679
30,176
31,341
32,664
34,969
24,950
25,141
26,673
27,442
29,448
84*07
83*31
8511
84*01
84*21
29,074
29,921
31,305
32,425
35,347
“Schools in Operation. — The numbers of Govern-
ment Primary Schools open for the last five years are
shown in the following table : —
Year.
Schools open at
some time during
the Year.
Schools open at
end of Year.
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
395
423
445
468
504
381
414
434
455
495
Year.
Cost per Head on
Average
Attendance.
Cost per Head on
Average
Enrolment.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
1907-8 ...
5 9 1
4 10 11
1908-9 ...
5 6 IJ
4 9 14
1909-10 ...
5 6 11J
4 10 5
1910-11 ...
5 10 6 h
4 13 Of
"The number of schools open in 1902 was 250 : it
has thus been more than doubled in nine years.
"Forty-two new schools were opened in 1911, and
nine which had previously been closed were reopened.
Two schools that were open in 1910 were not opened
in 1911, and nine others were closed during the year.
"Of the forty-two new schools one was in the metro-
politan district, two were in mining districts, seven were
at timber mills, and thirty-two were in agricultural or
pastoral districts. Of the schools closed or not re-
opened during the year three were in mining districts,
one was at a timber mill, one at a North-West port, and
six were in agricultural districts.
“ Expenditure . —The cost per head, calculated on the
number of children in the Primary Schools, has risen
for the financial year 1910-11, as shown in the following
table :
“The increase is mainly due to the greater number
of small country schools, and to the fact that the salaries
of teachers in such schools have been improved. The
lower figures in the two previous financial years were
largely the result of the stoppage of teachers' increments
in 1909.
'The expenses included in this calculation are the
salaries and allowances of teachers, and the cost of stock,
apparatus, and upkeep of schools. The cost of the train-
ff2
ing of teachers, of manual training and cookery (for
which a special vote is provided), of inspection, and of
departmental administration, is not included. The cost
of furniture and buildings, which are assets not consumed
during the year, is also excluded. If all these are in-
cluded with the exception of the Public Works Depart-
ment's votes for buildings and initial equipment, the cost
per head on the average attendance is <£6 10s. 3d., and
on the average enrolment <£s 9s. Bd.
"The mean population of the State for the financial
year 1910-11 was 277,928. The total expenditure of the
Education Department was £202,176, or about 14s. 6|d.
per head of the population.
“Teachers. —The number of teachers employed at
the end of the year was 1,109, showing an increase of
seventy-eight for the year. Of this number sixty-six were
sewing mistresses, employed, for three hours a week only,
in schools where there were no female teachers. One
hundred and six were monitors: about one-third of these
had been through the Normal School and were teaching
in the schools for one year before entering the Training
College; the remainder were for the most part employed
in country schools where the attendance did not warrant
the appointment of an assistant.
"Of the 937 regular adult teachers, 485 were head
teachers and 452 were assistants. The percentage of
male teachers has again fallen —from 41‘6 to 39*5. Our
experience is this matter resembles that of other countries
in the decreasing proportion of men, but the discrepancy
here is not nearly so great as in many other parts of the
world.
"The percentage of unclassified teachers shows a
slight rise—from 30*2 to 32*4. This is mainly accounted
for by the increase in the number of small country
schools, which are generally held by unclassified teachers.
Among the assistants over 79 per cent, were classified
teachers. Of the 304 unclassified teachers 142 have
passed some part of their examinations for classification.
"The classified teachers are divided into the A, B,
and C classes. The numbers in Class A fell from 49 to
46; this decrease is mainly due to the appoint-
ment of inspectors and the transfer of a teacher to the
Modern School. The numbers in Class B have risen
from 241 to 261, and those in Class C from 306 to 327.
The numbers in the highest grade of Class A fell from
22 to 21 ; those in the higher grade of Class B rose from
149 to 153, and those in the higher grade of Class C fell
from 269 to 267.
"Medical Inspection . —Many of the large schools in
the principal towns have had medical inspections during
the last few years. In 1911 an attempt was made, for
the first time, to organize a fairly complete system of
medical inspection throughout the State.
"The Health Act of 1911 provides that the Medical
Officer of Health in any district shall be the Medical


Officer for Schools. In those parts of the State where
there are no local health authorities, the District Medical
Officer becomes the Medical Officer for Schools. For the
principal centres (the Metropolitan and Kalgoorlie-
Boulder districts) two full-time Medical Officers for
Schools have been engaged. Each of these is assisted by
a nurse. The intention is that every child shall be
examined at least twice during his school life—for the
first time shortly after he enters the school, and for the
second time shortly before he leaves. At the first inspec-
tion under the new system every child will be examined.
At subsequent inspections those who have not been
examined before, those who are nearing the leaving age,
and those whom the teacher considers to be in any way
defective or abnormal will be examined, as well as any
others whom the Medical Officer thinks it advisable to re-
examine. Where
the attention of
the parents has
been called to
anv defect in a
•/
child, a re-ex-
amination is to
be made within
three months. It
is hoped that
practically every
school will be
inspected at
least once a
year. These pro-
visions apply to
private schools
as well as to
State schools.”
Information
concerning the
beginnings of
the educational
system of the State is somewhat scanty, but from
the fact that we find one Lancelot T. Cooke school-
master at Perth in the early thirties, paid partly by fees
and partly by Government grant, there is evidence that
the need for some measure of elementary instruction was
recognized by the authorities of the little colony. In
the organization of the Civil Service which took place
after Sir James Stirling’s return from England in July,
1834, we find that £250 —£50 each —was set down for
the salaries of schoolmasters at Perth, Fremantle,
Guildford, King George Sound, and Augusta. So far
as can be ascertained, the curriculum was practically
limited to the three R’s. These teachers were under
the control of Boards.
The system was carried on in this way until 1856,
when Governor Kennedy, who was a warm admirer of
the Irish National Schools, remodelled it along those
lines. The result was far from satisfactory to the
Roman Catholic portion of the community, and for
years they agitated for a Government grant towards the
upkeep of their denominational schools. Addresses were
presented to the Legislative Council in 1869 asking for
a separate grant apart from a share in the general grant
controlled by the Board of Education. The Governor,
in compliance with the request, asked the Council to
consider a motion to grant to the Roman Catholic
Church the sum of <£soo annually for educational pur-
poses. This proposal the Council rejected. Appeal was
then had to the Secretary of State, but he declined to
interfere, considering it to be a matter which the
colonists should settle for themselves, and that it might
well be taken into consideration by the newly-established
Representative
Council. That
body, however,
also declined
during the first-
session to make
any alteration
in the existing
system ; but dur-
ing the recess
the position be-
came so acute
that at the
second session
an Elementary
Education Act
was passed and a
satisfactory set-
tlement arrived
at.
Under the
Act the control
of education was
vested in a Central Board of Education consisting of the
Colonial Secretary (as Chairman) and four laymen of
different denominations appointed by the Governor for
three years. This Board had control of all schools
receiving Government aid, but only so far as secular
instruction was concerned. District Boards for the
various centres were also established ; these consisted of
five members elected for three years by the people of the
district. Schools were divided into two classes—Govern-
ment schools and denominational schools receiving State
assistance. The first class was entitled to an annual
capitation grant of £2 15s. per scholar, and the second
to £1 7s. 6d. In Government schools teaching was con-
fined to purely secular subjects, while in those founded
by the various religious denominations it was not.
Religious teachers could also give instruction in Govern-
TECHNICAL SCHOOL, ST. GEORGE’S TERRACE, PERTH


ment schools for one hour either before or after the
ordinary day's work, but the attendance of children was
not compulsory. Inspectors could not examine in reli-
gious subjects. All children between the ages of six and
fourteen and residing within three miles of a school
were compelled to attend. Parents had to pay a small
weekly fee for their children.
The Act thus established a system which was com-
pulsory, but not purely secular nor altogether free. As
a practical measure, however, it was entirely satisfac-
tory, and did not call for amendment until 1893, when,
through the establishment of responsible government, a
desire was evinced to bring the various institutions of
the colony more into line with the advancement of
thought.
By the amending Act of that year the Central
Board of Education was abolished and the department
within any district; requiring children of compulsory
age to attend every school day; making age, and not
“standard passed,” the ground of exemption from
attendance at school. Under this Act the Minister is
empowered to grant exemption from attendance to
children between twelve and fourteen years of age in
case of poverty or sickness of parents.
Since 1899 amendments have been made —in 1905
and 1907 —but they do not affect the principles of the
Act. Elementary education in Western Australia is now
both free and compulsory, but scarcely secular, as minis-
ters of religion are permitted, under certain regula-
tions, to teach the children of their own denomination
for half an hour each week during school hours, and
non-sectarian moral teaching is allowed.
With regard to the organization, schools are divided
into three classes—State, Provisional, and Sparsely-
MODERN SCHOOL, SUBIACO
constituted under a Minister of Education, who is
assisted in different districts by various committees, who
act largely as Boards of Advice. Two years later State
aid to assisted schools was abolished by the Assisted
Schools Abolition Act, each of the four participating
denominations —Anglican, Roman Catholic, Wesleyan,
and Presbyterian —receiving a lump sum in commuta-
tion to their claims under the Act of 1871.
The year 1899 was marked by the passing of an
entirely new measure, ‘The Public Education Act,
1899.” School fees were abolished and the compulsory
provisions made more stringent than in previous Acts.
Among these may be mentioned: —The forbidding of
employment of children of school age during school
hours, except by special permission of the Minister;
providing for the registration and efficiency of private
schools; empowering a census to be taken of all children
peopled Districts Schools. All those with an average
attendance of twenty or over are classed as State schools;
below that they fall into one or other of the remaining
divisions which are designed to meet the wants of the
settler outback in the sparsely populated areas. The
Provisional Schools are divided into two sections —those
with an attendance of from fifteen to twenty, and those
with from ten to fifteen. Ten is practically the smallest
number upon which the Government can establish a
school. To provide, however, for cases where less than
ten children have to be catered for, the sparsely-peopled
districts regulations have been framed. Under these the
Government makes a grant at the rate of £7 (or on the
goldfields £8 10s.) per head per annum on the average
attendance, on condition that the settlers served agree
to contribute an additional amount, so as to give the
teacher a salary of at least £6O a year. In these cases


the settlers have also to provide a room for the school.
There is still another arrangement for the benefit of
the settler—the half-time school, where two small com-
munities are sufficiently close to enable a school to be
established at each centre, with a teacher who divides
his time between the two. In these smaller schools the
standard of teaching is, so far as ordinary subjects are
concerned, practically the same as in the larger estab-
lishments.
Attendance, it will be remembered, is not compulsory
beyond the three-mile limit, but to encourage the settlers
living outside that radius to send their children to school
a riding or driving allowance of 6d. a day is made by the
Government to parents of children who attend regularly,
such allowance being in the nature of compensation for
the withdrawal of a horse from active work on the farm.
So far as the general school work is concerned the
department takes advantage of every assistance that
modern scholastic equipment is able to render. The class-
rooms are well designed, and the children are encouraged
to make them bright and cheerful. Extensive recreation
grounds surround the school, and in one corner there is
generally to be found a plot devoted to experiments in
horticulture. The teaching syllabus aims at awakening
the child’s intelligence and at giving him that broad
general knowledge that will enable him to meet the wider
outlook of life. Many subjects outside the old-established
three R’s are included in the curriculum. In the
advanced classes especially courses of instruction are
undertaken which but a very few years ago were looked
upon as “extra” and charged for accordingly. Admir-
able as the curriculum is, however, it is not considered
perfect, and conferences have recently been held by the
various members of the inspectorial and teaching staff
with the idea of making considerable alteration. The
revised programme, it is expected, will be ready for use
at the beginning of 1913.
No review of the curriculum would be complete
without mention of those modern adjuncts of the educa-
tional system —manual training, household economy, and
Nature study. The first two are as yet only possible in
centres of population where the necessary rooms and
other facilities are obtainable, but the opportunities for
Nature study are unrestricted. Quoting from the An-
nual Report: —“Manual training in woodwork was given
in 1911 to 3,427 boys: the corresponding figures in 1910
were 2,889. New centres were opened at Collie, Cue,
Greenbushes, Kanowna, Pingelly, Smith’s Mill, Welling-
ton Mill, and Thomas Street (Perth). At the end of the
year there were thirty-six distinct centres equipped for
this work. No school with an average attendance of 150
children is now without provision for woodwork, either
at the school itself or in a neighbouring centre, while at
least ten schools in which the average attendance is less
than a hundred are equipped for the purpose.
“The provision of a special room for woodwork with
its equipment of benches and tools is necessarily ex-
pensive. While it is obviously impossible to provide in
this way for very small country schools, it is evident that
such work is of great value to the children in the sparsely-
peopled parts of the State. A start has been made during
the year in the direction of meeting their needs. A class
of instruction for male teachers of small country schools
was held in Sejffiember, and a further class of the same
kind during the Christmas holidays. An inexpensive
bench-top was devised which can be fitted on to the
ordinary school desk, and courses of work were suggested
which can be carried out with a very modest outfit of
tools. The work undertaken will have special bearing
upon the environment of the school, more particularly
in the agricultural districts. Provision is made for the
necessary equipment in 1912 of the schools in which there
are qualified teachers, and it is hoped that the movement
thus begun will be considerably extended in future years.
“Instruction in household management —cookery,
laundry-work, and housewifery —was given to 2,372 girls.
The corresponding figures for 1910 were 1,998. New
centres were opened at Geraldton and Bunbury, and the
centre at Midland Junction, which was open for a few
weeks only in 1910, was in full work throughout the year.
“In some towns where the number of pupils is in-
sufficient to occupy the time of the special teacher
throughout the year, the centre is opened for six months
only. During this period the girls attend for a whole day
in each week instead of for a half-day, and during this
period they drop their needlework. During the other
half of the year they give additional time to the latter
subject.”
During 1911 Continuation Classes were established
in fourteen different centres, and were attended by nearly
1,000 pupils. These classes are intended to provide for
those who leave school on attaining the age of fourteen,
but are desirous of continuing their studies. Though
they are not a complete substitute for the day classes,
they are of great advantage to those whom stress of cir-
cumstances compels to seek employment at the earliest
possible age. The classes are free to those who attend
regularly for three evenings a week. Though as yet to
some extent tentative, the scheme is being developed on
systematic lines, and after attaining a certain standard
pupils will be enabled to specialize in those directions
likely to be of most value to them in after life.
“The question of agricultural education has also,”
says the report, “received consideration, and it is hoped
that special schools for the purpose will be established
on some of the State Farms, where buildings that can be
adapted for the purpose are already existing. The
schools will combine practical instruction in farm work
with some further general education and special attention
to those subjects which bear upon the work of the farmer.


The Agricultural Department will co-operate with the
Education Department in the organization of the schools.
The provision of suitable teachers will be a source of diffi-
culty at first, but the establishment of the University,
with endowment for a Chair of Agriculture, will soon
enable us to meet our needs in this direction."
As an inducement to continue at school beyond the
statutory age of fourteen, a number of bursaries of the
value of £lO each are annually given by the Government.
The exact number depends upon the degree of com-
petency shown by the candidates, but ranges in the neigh-
bourhood of thirty. The holder of a bursary must remain
at school for an additional year, must be regular and
punctual for three-fourths of the time, and be of good
conduct.
To reward merit and encourage the brighter pupils
various exhibitions are offered. These are divided into
two grades —jun-
ior and senior—
and are each ten-
able for one year.
The value of the
junior—of which
there are twelve
—is £l5 each,
and of the senior
—seven in num-
ber—£2s. Like
the bursaries,
they are condi-
tional upon
good conduct and
regular attend-
ance.
Further, fifty
Secondary School
scholarships are
offered for com-
petition, the winners of which may attend the Modern
School or any other recognized Secondary School in
the State. They are tenable for three years, and
are valued at £lO per year. Should a successful student
come from a country district, and therefore be obliged to
board in the metropolis, an additional allowance of £3O
per annum is made.
Beyond these the State offers three University
exhibitions of the value of £l5O each per year for three
years, the successful candidates being required to enter
into residence at some recognized British University.
Doubtless these will become attached to the University
of Western Australia as soon as that institution is in a
position to afford the requisite instruction.
Recognizing the great advantages to be gained by
the department in being able to train its own teachers, the
idea of a Training College was mooted some twelve years
ago, and in 1902 the college was formally opened. It
has a large number of non-residential students, and is
able to accommodate about sixty with residence. En-
trance is gained by competitive examination, the success-
ful competitor receiving a three years course of fiee
training. By means of the college the staff of the depart-
ment is increased by about thirty trained teachers
annually.
A very important phase of departmental activity is
to be found in the Technical Schools' Branch, which
enables those who have passed beyond the age of ordinary
primary education, and are for the most part employed
in one way or another, to secure special training in sub-
jects of value to them in industrial, commercial, or pro-
fessional life. The value of a properly-equipped system
of technical education to a community has long been
recognized, and in many countries has either been estab-
lished by local
authority or as
the result of pri-
vate benefaction
such as the
Working Men's
College in Mel-
bourne. In Wes-
tern Australia,
however, the
work has been
left to the State,
which, though
late in starting,
has made up in
the interest ex-
hibited.
Starting in
1900 with the
Perth Technical
School this
branch of the department has made rapid progress,
and its work is no longer confined to the metropolis.
Advanced work is being taken also at Boulder and Fre-
mantle, and at Kalgoorlie by the School of Mines.
Branches in other centres deal almost wholly with pre-
paratory work, mostly in Continuation Classes. The
Perth School is affiliated to Adelaide University, and
provides for the full course for the degree of Bachelor
of Science and for parts of the courses in music and arts
also. The enrolments at the Technical Schools through-
out the State of Western Australia during the year
1911 reached nearly 2,500, about 900 of whom were
in Continuation Classes. Nearly two-thirds attended
the main centres: —Perth, 960; Fremantle, 300; Kal-
goorlie, 260; and Boulder, 320; and are sufficient
to show that given the facilities the youth of
our towns are anxious to take advantage of them.
JAMES STREET PUBLIC SCHOOLS.


The most recent departure in State education has
been the establishment of the Perth Modern School —the
first incursion of the State into the realms of secondary
education. Housed in a building of most modern design
and situated in one of the finest positions in the metro-
politan area, this school was opened in February, 1911.
Its scope and the progress made during the first year are
admirably summarized in the Annual Report:
"The Modern School is intended to give a four years’
course to children from about the age of thirteen. The
first two years’ work is to a great extent common to all;
the work of the two final years is to a considerable degree
specialized. As far as possible, the school attempts to
meet the needs of the future University students, of the
future teachers, of those who wish to enter upon commer-
cial, agricultural, or other scientific careers, and of girls
who wish to be prepared for domestic life. Provision is
made for thoroughly practical work in the laboratories
and workshops. The school was opened at the beginning
of the year with 226 pupils. There is a wide demand
for further accommodation, and the two wings which will
complete the original plan are to be added during the
present year. The school will then provide for an attend-
ance of about 400.
"The organization of a school of this kind presents
many difficulties, and the initial work in starting the new
institution was very heavy. Great credit is due to the
headmaster and his staff for the success with which the
school has passed through its opening year.
“This is the first High School with a four years’
course provided by the State. It affords a connecting
link between the Primary School and the University, and
an opportunity of higher education to those who are un-
able to pay the fees of the older non-State Secondary
Schools. It is hoped that advantages of the same kind
will be extended to other parts of the State. In the
smaller towns the needs of the districts will be met, as
far as possible, by the establishment of upper classes con-
nected with the Primary Schools, but specially staffed.
As the numbers grow and the demand increases, distinct
High Schools may be formed. Opportunities of this kind
are now being widely provided in other parts of Aus-
tralia, and the Commonwealth is rapidly wiping away the
reproach that, while much was done by the States for
primary education, they gave little attention or assistance
to secondary education. New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, and South Australia are all developing fast
in this direction; we ought not to be behind-hand. Such
an extension of Secondary School work will do much in
the way of providing students for our new University,
and will render it accessible to residents of other parts of
the State besides the metropolitan district.”
The coping-stone of the whole State system of educa-
tion —the University—is now in course of erection.
CECIL ROLLO PAYTON AN-
DREWS, M.A., Inspector-General
of Schools, Western Australia, was
born at London on February 2, 1870.
He is a son of the Rev. J. M. An-
drews, Vicar of St. Jude’s, Gray’s
Inn Road, London, and received his
education at the Merchant Tailors’
School, where he won a scholarship
and an exhibition. Proceeding to St.
John’s College, Oxford, he obtained
Ist Class Honours in Classical
Moderations and 2nd Class Honours
in Literae Humaniores, graduated
Bachelor of Arts in 1892, and re-
ceived his M.A. degree five years
later. In 1893 he became assistant
master of Highgate School, and in
the following year transferred his
services to Forest School in the capa-
city of sixth form master. Subse-
quently Mr. Andrews spent four
years as resident tutor in the Batter-
sea Training College, London, and
leaving this institution in 1900 came
to Western Australia, where his first
appointment was that of principal of
the Training College at Claremont.
In 1903 he was appointed Inspector-
General of Schools for Western Aus-
tralia, and has retained this post ever
since. He was a member of the
Royal Commission appointed in 1909
to consider the question of establish-
ing a University in Western Aus-
tralia, and assisted in framing the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CECIL ROLLO PAYTON ANDREWS.
report upon which the University
was founded. He is a member of the
first Senate of the University, and at
the inaugural meeting of that body
was unanimously elected Pro-Chan-
cellor. In 1911, on behalf of the
Government of the State, Mr. An-
drews attended an Educational Con-
gress held in London, and afterwards
prosecuted his inquiries in the in-
terests of education in various
countries of Europe, securing infor-
mation likely to prove of considerable
service to his department. Mr. An-
drews is also a member of the Gov-
ernment Tender Board. He is fond
of outdoor sport, his favourite re-
creations being rowing, tennis, and
golf.
FRANCIS BOWEN ALLEN,
M.A., B.Sc., Director of Technical
Education, Perth, is a native of Nel-
son, New Zealand, where he was
born in 1867. In the early stages
of his educational career he was
awarded a University scholarship,
and proceeding to the University of
Otago undertook the course for the
degree of Master of Arts, which he
obtained with first-class honours in
mathematics and mathematical phy-
sics. Subsequently he added to his


scholastic attainments the degree of
B.Sc., besides taking a full course of
study for the associateship of the
School of Mines. After leaving the
School of Mines he was engaged in
connection with mining properties
on the west coast of New Zealand.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANCIS BOWEN ALLEN.
In 1892 he was appointed Instructor
to the Thames School of Mines, New
Zealand, and subsequently assumed
and retained the direction of that
institution for several years. Mr.
Allen came to Western Australia in
1902, under engagement to the
Government, to establish a School of
Mines at Kalgoorlie. His respon-
sibilities were further added to in
1906, when he was given control of
the technical schools throughout the
State.
WILLIAM J. ROONEY, 8.A.,
Principal of the Training College,
Claremont, is a son of Mr. J. P.
Rooney, District Inspector of Schools,
New South Wales. He was born in
the Mother State in June, 1863,
where also he received his education
in her public and secondary schools,
subsequently graduating at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, where he took
honours in the School of Philo-
sophy. He was educated for the
teaching profession at the Sydney
Training College, and afterwards
filled various positions as assistant
master in different schools, his first
appointment being at Wickham,
near Newcastle. At a later date he
was transferred to Crown Street,
Sydney, then the largest school in
Australia, as first assistant, an
appointment he resigned in 1895, and
leaving the service of the Education
Department became connected with
several secondary schools as visiting
master and also acted as private
coach for the University examina-
tions. In 1896 Mr. Rooney was
offered by the Government of
Western Australia his choice be-
tween two appointments —an in-
spectorship or to open the Perth
Boys’ School at James Street. The
latter task was undertaken by the
subject of our notice, but four years
later he accepted the post of in-
spector, and filled it for three
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM J. ROONEY .
years, when he was appointed Prin-
cipal of the Training College, suc-
ceeding the present Inspector-
General, Mr. C. R. Andrews. In 1909
Mr. Rooney was offered and accepted
the appointment of Director of
Education in Tasmania, but family
reasons intervened which prevented
him from entering upon the duties
of this position. With the Chief
Inspector of Schools and the
Director of Technical Education, he
continues to act as one of the three
sub-heads of the Education Depart-
ment in Western Australia. Out-
side his professional duties Mr.
Rooney devotes much time to
literary and historical subjects, on
which he is well known as a local
lecturer. He finds recreation in
amateur gardening and tennis. He
has always been a general advocate
of athletics and while at the Uni-
versity won the championship for
running in middle distances.
ROBERT HOPE ROBERTSON,
M.A., Chief Inspector of Schools,
Education Department, Perth, is a
Victorian by birth, having been
born at Melbourne in 1863. At the
close of his educational course at the
Hawthorn Grammar School he be-
came a student at the University of
Melbourne and graduated with the
degree of Master of Arts in 1885
with final honours in natural science.
After leaving the University he was
appointed classical master at Gee-
long Grammar School, and subse-
quently received the appointment of
assistant master at the Melbourne
Grammar School, in which institu-
tion he continued for eleven years,
being promoted to the post of second
master, which he filled for seven
years, and one year acting head-
master. In 1895 Mr. Robertson re-
signed his position, and in the fol-
lowing year came to Western Aus-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ROBERT HOPE ROBERTSON.
tralia, where he accepted the
appointment of Inspector of Schools.
In 1912 he was promoted to be Chief
Inspector of Schools in Western Aus-
tralia, and has since discharged the
duties of this office.


Minister.
From
To
Harry Whittall Venn ...
Hec.
29,
1890
Mar.
10,
1896
Frederick Henry Piesse
Mar.
10,
1896
Aug.
23,
1900
Barrington Charles Wood
Aug.
'.23,
1900
May
27,
1901
Walter Kingsmill
May
27,
1901
Nov.
21,
1901
Timothy Francis Quinlan
Nov.
21,
1901
Hec.
23,
1901
Sir Cornthvvaite Hector Rason . .
Hec.
23,
1901
April 20,
1904
John Leighton Nans on ...
April 20,
1904
Aug.
10,
1904
William Hartnell Johnson
Aug.
10,
1904
J une
7.
1905
Patrick J oseph Lynch ...
June
-7,
1905
Aug.
25,
1905
Frank Wilson
Aug.
25,
1905
May
7,
1906
James Price
May
7,
1906
June
30,
1909
Frank Wilson
June
30,
1909
Sept.
16,
1910
Henry Uaglish
Sept.
16,
1910
Oct.
rr
7,
1911
William Hartnell Johnson
Oct.
7,
1911
Still
n othce
From
Revenue.
From
Loan.
From
Govern-
ment
Property
Sales
Fund.
Total.
£
£
£
£
Departmental
9,467
55,880
3,186
68,533
Railways and Tramways ...
7,203
496,678
—
503,881
Harbours and Rivers
16,973
113,515
—
130,488
Fremantle Dock and Slip ..
—
45,319
45,319
Public Buildings ...
64,776
50,133
25,043
139,952
Water Supply, etc.
5,5*26
14,929
117
20,572
Sewerage
—
89,097
—
89,097
Roads and Bridges
52,794
51,138
6,510
110,442
Development of Agriculture
Miscellaneous Works and
—
59,392
—
59,392
Services
4,728
26,688
31,416
Abattoirs Cold Storage
—
7,128
—
7,128
Total
161,467
1,009,897
34,856
1,206,220
Public Works Department.
\\ hen the newly-established Representative Council
decided, during the early seventies, that progress lay at
any rate partly along the line of a vigorous public works
policy, made possible by loan money, the office of Com-
missioner of Railways and Director of Public Works was
created to administer the new order of things. This
office was continued as a Ministerial appointment after
the establishment of responsible government, and it was
not until 1901 that two distinct positions were created
with the titles “Minister for Works” and “Minister for
Railways. The one Minister has on occasion since that
time held the two portfolios, but the departments have
been regarded as entirely separate.
Ministerial control since 1890 has been vested as
under:
Under the reorganization of the various depart-
ments necessary to meet the altered conditions after
autonomy was granted, the office of Under-Secretary for
Railways and Public Works was conferred upon Mr.
Alpin F. Thompson. The abnormal expansion which
followed upon the gold discoveries, however, soon made
it impossible for one officer to fulfil the requirements of
both Works and Railways, and Mr. Thompson became
Under-Secretary for Railways, while the position of
Under-Secretary for Works was conferred upon Mr.
Martin Edward dull. This officer retained it until April,
1905, when he resigned to take up the duties of Public
Service Commissioner. He was succeeded by Mr. F. L.
Stronach, who resigned only recently, his place being
taken by the present occupant of the position, Mr. C. A.
Munt.
The department, which controls the votes for all con-
structive works whether built from revenue or loan funds,
is generally recognized as the spending department of
the Government. For administrative purposes it is split
up into three branches—the Head Office, Engineering
Division, and Architectural Division. Under the Head
Office are included the Minister’s Office, Under-
secretary’s Office, Correspondence Branch, Accountant’s
Branch, Lands Resumption and Estate Branch, and
Roads Boards Office. The Engineering Division is
further divided into Railway Construction, Harbours
and Rivers, and Roads and Bridges Branches; while the
Architectural Division confines itself to the erection and
maintenance of all jmblic buildings throughout the State.
Until recently the Engineering Division also comprised
the Goldfields Water Supply, Water Supply generally,
Metropolitan Water Supply and Drainage, and Boring.
These have now, with the Mines Water Sujrply Branch
of the Department of Mines, been amalgamated and
organized as a new department as the Water Supply and
Sewerage Department, the administrative control of
which also rests in the Minister of Works, and over
which the Engineer-in-Chief still exercises executive
control.
According to the most recent report issued, for the
year ending June 30, 1911, the total expenditure on
public works was :
From Revenue ... ... ... ... ... £161,467
From Loan ... ... ... ... ... 1,009,825
From Government Property Sales Fund ... 34,856
Total ... £1,206,148
This amount was distributed over the following
classes of work :
The total expenditure from loan funds on public
works up to the present has been about £23,000,000, of
which nearly £13,000,000 have been invested in railways
and nearly £7,000,000 in harbours and rivers and water
supply, showing that the stockholders’ money has been
put to good uses.
One section of the Head Office administration which
perhaps requires a little explanation is that dealing with
Lands Resumption and Estate. This branch, of which


Mr. T. S. J. Hall is in charge, deals with all resumptions
of land required for public purposes, as well as with rents
and other matters pertaining to properties let by the
Government to private individuals. It has assumed a
somewhat important position of late owing to the ex-
tensive areas that have been resumed by the Government
for railway, market, and cool storage facilities. All ques-
tions dealing with the price to be paid and negotiations
connected therewith pass in the first instance through
the Lands Resumption Branch, which is therefore re-
quired to exhibit the secrecy of a legal office, combined
with the business acumen of an estate agency.
ARCHITECTURAL DIVISION.
The Architectural Division is under the control of
the Chief Architect, Mr. Hillson Beasley, who is assisted
include all matters dealing with railway construction,
harbour works, jetties, river improvements, roads and
bridges, water supply, sewerage, drainage, and boring.
The Engineer-in-Chief is Mr. James Thompson, 8.E.,
M.1.C.E., who succeeded to the position in 1904. Mr.
Thompson is also Consulting Engineer to the Fremantle
Harbour Trust. He is assisted by Mr. John Muir, In-
spector of Engineering Surveys; Mr. H. Oldham,
Engineer for Water Supply and Drainage; and a large
staff of qualified engineers in various branches of the
work.
It is impossible to enter into anything like details
of the valuable services rendered to the community by
the Engineering Division of the Works Department. It
is intimately concerned with all that makes for quick,
safe, and easy communication within the State, and be-
FREMANTLE HARBOUR.
by Mr. W. B. Hardwick (the Chief Draftsman) and Mr.
George Allen (the Inspector of Construction and Main-
tenance). A large staff of draftsmen and supervisors is
employed, all of whom find ample scope for their energies
in this new country, which is continually calling for
additional public buildings. The division is not only
responsible for the erection and maintenance of all State
edifices, but by arrangement with the Commonwealth
Government is entrusted with the erection of such build-
ings as the Federal authorities may from time to time
require in Western Australia.
ENGINEERING DIVISION.
The works under the control of the Engineer-in-
Chief are necessarily both varied and important. They
tween the State and the outside world. The water supply
throughout the country depends upon its knowledge and
despatch, and the health of the people is its immediate
work in the direction of sewerage.
In railway construction alone the division has been
responsible for the expenditure of nearly £13,000,000 of
money; over £1,000,000 has been spent on the Fre-
mantle Harbour; £2,500,000 were expended on the Cool-
gardie Water Scheme; and proper sewerage and drain-
age for Perth and Fremantle is at present requiring
large sums.
The railways have already been dealt with in a
previous article, and in the general historical section will


be found an account of the Coolgardie Water Scheme
and the Harbour Works at Fremantle. Both of these,
started by the late Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. C. Y.
O’Connor, in the face of adverse professional reports,
have justified both his expert knowledge and his faith.
The goldfields are amply supplied with fresh water from
Mundaring Weir, and ships of almost any size can find
safe and convenient harbourage within the mouth of the
Swan and Fremantle.
FHEMANTLE HARBOILft WOHKS.j
The Fremantle Harbour Works, one of the most
important works ever undertaken in Western Australia,
were commenced in 1892, Lady Robinson, the wife of
the late Sir W. C. F. Robinson, G.C.M.G., then Governor
of the colony, tipping the first truck of stone into the
North Mole, in the presence of a large and representative
gathering, on November 16 in that year.
The scheme of works, which has since been in active
progress, was designed by, and until his death, in 1902,
carried out under the direction of the Engineer-in-Chief
for the State, the late Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, M.lnst.C.E.,
C.M.G., and since under his successors in that office, Mr.
C. S. R. Palmer, M.lnst.C.E., and Mr. James Thomp-
son, 8.E., M.lnst.C.E. It has aimed at forming a safe
and commodious harbour within the mouth of the Swan
River, which will admit vessels of any burthen at all
states of the tide, and thus transfer the work of the port
from the roadstead and its jetties to quays and goods
sheds on the river banks.
The following principal features have characterized
the scheme :
(a) The throwing out of two ocean moles from
the north and south heads, respectively, of the
River Estuary, to protect the entrance:
(b) The blasting and dredging of a channel 450 ft.
wide, and having a depth of 30 ft. at low
water, through the rock bar which formerly
crossed the whole width of the Estuary, and
which, when the works were commenced, was
mostly awash at low water :
(c) The dredging out, to a depth of 30 ft. at low
water, of an inner basin, about three-quarters
of a mile in length and 1,400 ft. in width,
between timber quays constructed along both
sides :
(d) The quay on the north side has a spur jetty
running obliquely from its face, a distance
of 400 ft., into the inner basin. The length
of quayage provided for within the basin is
about 10,800 ft., of which 5,475 ft. is on
north side and 5,325 ft. on south side. There
is also a wharf along north mole 1,000 ft. and
along south mole 300 ft:
(t) The reclamation of about 54 acres of quay
and warehouse space on the south side of the
river, and of about 20 acres on the north side,
making about 74 acres in all :
(}) The levelling down of Arthur s Head, over
most of its extent, to form additional space
for railway sidings and good sheds, etc.
The moles have been built on the “Pierres Perdues”
system, the stone used being limestone, sandstone, and
granite. The limestone and sandstone, with the excep-
tion of a comparatively small quantity of similar stone
from Arthur’s Head, was brought from the quarries at
Rocky Bay, about two and a half miles up the Swan
River from its mouth. The quarries are connected by
railway lines to both moles. The line to the
south mole crosses the river by a bridge
built alongside the previously existing railway bridge,
which, while in the first instance it served for
passage of the stone trains, was designed to ultimately
form part of the intended duplication of the main line
from Fremantle to Perth, to which use it is now applied,
the mole having been completed.
The granite was used in the last 200 ft. at the ex-
treme end of the north mole, and as a coating for the
northern slope of the extension, and was brought from
the Collie and Darlington Quarries. This mole was com-
menced in November, 1892. It was originally intended
that it should extend out from Rous Head for 2,934 ft.;
but in January, 1895, when that length had been at-
tained, it was decided to further extend it to a total
length of 3,450 ft., terminating there in a rounded head,
faced with selected stone, which length was attained in
November, 1895. Here the top of the mole stands about
12 ft. above the highest recorded or observed tide, the
height above same at shore end being 10 ft. The depth
of water alongside, at the ocean end, is 28 ft. at low water.
The width of the mole on top, at the shore end, is
about 30 ft., and at the ocean end, exclusive of the
rounded head, about 52 ft.
The slope on the north, or exposed side, throughout
is protected with the largest and heaviest stone obtain-
able from the quarries, varying from about 12 to 20 tons
in weight, having a batter at present of about 2to 1; the
slope on the south side having a batter of about 1£ to 1.
A parapet, in the shape of a rubble mound, has been
put along the north side of this mole, increasing in height
and width from the shore end to the ocean end.
As regards the north mole and its present top widths
and batters, the original design was for a uniform top
width of 30 ft., and this will probably result in due
course by the gradual flattening out of the north slope
(through the wave action induced by the winter seas from
north to north-west), proportionately as the depth of
water increases; so that ultimately the mole will probably
assume the uniform top width of 30 ft., the slope at the


ocean end flattening out to an average of about 3 to 1,
and at shore end remaining at about 2 to 1 as at present.
About 575,277 cubic yards of rubble stone, measured
in situ , were deposited up to December 31, 1898, at an
average total cost per cubic yard of 3s. the original
estimate being 4s. per cubic yard.
A further extension of 1,350 ft. having been
authorized, a commencement was made in July, 1899, to
tip the stone beyond the 3,450-ft. length; and this sec-
tion, together with a parapet 12 ft. high around the bulb
head, at the extreme end, was completed in December,
1902, making a total length of mole of 4,800 ft.
In the construction of this extension 476,753 tons of
stone were tipped; and of this quantity 377,135 tons were
obtained from the Rocky Bay Quarries and tipped for a
total cost of £92,312, or an average cost of 58*75 pence
north mole, known as Rous Head, for a length of 2,200 ft.
to a height of 30 ft. above low-water mark. On the top
of this has been erected an open picket fence, 15 ft. in
height, as a further protection to the inner harbour from
the north-westerly gales. As the North Beach, which
is a narrow neck of sand dunes resting upon a rock shelf
at about low-water level, and connecting with the main-
land Rous Head, also all composed of rock, showed signs
of weakness, it has been protected from the sea by an
embankment faced with rubble stone.
The south mole was commenced in August, 1894,
and extends out from Arthur's Head for 2,040 ft., ter-
minating in about 24 ft. of water at low tide. It was
at first slowly pushed out with the material obtained
from the levelling down of Arthur's Head. In Novem-
ber, 1895, however, on the completion of the north mole,
SHIPPING AT FREMANTLE WHARVES.
per ton. It being found necessary to utilize a heavier
class of stone for protecting the mole from the winter
gales, a supply of this material, sufficient for immediate
requirements, was obtained from the Collie Quarry. The
total quantity of Collie stone tipped at the mole was
2,880 tons, for a cost of £1,736, an average price of
144*67 pence per ton.
New granite quarries at Darlington having been
opened up, the additional stone necessary to complete the
extension was obtained from that place. The total
quantity of Darlington stone tipped at the mole was
99,618 tons for a cost of £29,579, an average price of
71*26 pence per ton. A breakwind, in the form of an
onbankment, composed of 20,202 cubic yards of quarry
refuse, faced with stone on both sides, has been con-
structed along the low-lying headland at the base of the
stone trains from the Rocky Bay Quarries commenced
running to this mole, which then advanced much more
rapidly, and reached its ultimate length of 2,040 ft. on
August 19, 1897. The width on top is about 25 ft. for
the first 1,100 ft. of its length, and thence it increases
gradually to a width of 40 ft. at the commencement of
the rounded head. The slopes on both sides are about
11, to 1. The islands to the south and south-west form
a natural breakwater against storms from those quarters,
and the north mole serves as a protection from the north
and north-west gales; so that less resisting power is re-
quired than in the case of the north mole; and although
it has been subjected to very severe gales, no settlement
has taken place, nor has any expenditure been necessary
for maintenance. During 1902 the extreme end and
about 150 ft. back on each side were topped and faced


with granite in preparation for a cast-iron lighthouse,
which was erected during June, 1903.
The bar originally was a long rolling ridge of rock,
principally coralline limestone and sandstone, which,
across the mouth of the river, showed a broad crest rising
to low-water level. Blasting operations were commenced
upon this in July, 1894, and were carried on successfully
from temporary removable stages. The bar having been
removed and the basin of the river dredged as in the
scheme, wharfage accommodation extending over some
thousands of feet was built along both banks of the river,
which, though large enough for the State’s present re-
quirements, is likely to prove far too small for the
future. After nearly twelve years’ actual use there is no
doubt left that Mr. O’Connor’s judgment far exceeded
that of those who described Fremantle Harbour as one
bounded on the north by Ceylon, on the west by the
coast of Africa, and on the south by the Polar regions.
The first vessel to berth in the new harbour was the
“Sultan,” belonging to the W.A. Steam Navigation
Company, in May, 1897; this was followed by the
N.D.L. s.s. “Gera” in August and the “Friedrich der
Grosse” in October. The year 1900 saw the P. & O.
and Orient Company following suit, and since then Fre-
mantle has been the port of call for nearly all vessels
trading to Western Australia.
There still remained the question of a dock, which
was necessary in order to complete the harbour facilities.
For some time the advantages of various kinds were dis-
cussed, and ultimately it was decided to build a graving
dock on the north side of the harbour. In the settle-
ment of the question the best expert advice —that of Sir
Whately Eliot—was sought, and the decision arrived at
was largely based upon his opinion. Work was com-
menced by the Government, and for some time was con-
tinued under the direction of the Engineer-in-Chief, but
it was then found that the services of a skilled engineer
used to dock construction, who could give all his time
and energy to the construction, was necessary. On the
advice, therefore, of Sir Whately Eliot, Mr. Rams-
botham was appointed engineer to the work, and took
up his duties in November, 1910. The dock basin was
practically dredged out and considerable material
ordered for construction, when the came to
an abrupt stop through the discovery of a lime-
stone cave of such dimensions that it was impossible
to go on. Nearly £200,000 has been spent up to the
present, and so far as a dock is concerned spent use-
lessly. A new scheme will probably have to be planned,
leaving the old workings to be adapted for other uses.
The failure is one to be regretted; at the same time, it
CHARLES ARTHUR MUNT,
Under-Secretary for Public Works,
was born at Norwood, South Aus-
tralia, on May 17, 1872, and was
educated privately at Robe, com-
pleting at the Norwood Model
School. At the age of fifteen he
joined the Post and Telegraph He-
is not due to any want of skill or knowledge on the
part of the department, but to one of those unforeseen
circumstances which are beyond the ken of human know-
ledge. It may be that in constructing the new work,
the fact that the Commonwealth naval authorities are
constructing a naval base at Cockburn Sound will be
taken into consideration. Another idea has been put
forward by Mr. G. A. Lefroy, based upon the extension
of the present harbourage and the construction of a
large floating dock. The whole question is now being
debated, and no doubt the Government will use every
endeavour to secure a scheme from the details of which
possible failure is excluded.
The history of the other great departmental
triumph —the Coolgardie Water Scheme —has been
detailed elsewhere. From an engineering point of view
it stands second to none of its kind, and it has been
sufficiently long in operation to prove the wisdom of its
progenitor and to confer the greatest benefit on the
State. The main reservoir is a wall of solid concrete,
carried straight across the Helena River bed at a point
where the width between the banks is 760 ft., and the
surplus water flows directly over the weir crest and down
the face of the wall 100 ft. to the river below. It is
the highest overflow weir in the world, and has a capa-
city of 4,600,000,000 gallons, and a daily output
capacity throughout the year of 5,000,000 gallons. The
scheme also stands unique in regard to the distance over
which the water is pumped, viz., 351 miles.
There are twelve smaller reservoirs and receiving
tanks, with a total storage capacity of 31,500,000 gallons.
The goldfields towns and districts are supplied from a
main service reservoir at Bulla Bulling, about 1,200 ft.
higher than the Mundaring Reservoir. The water is
raised by pumping installations at eight stations along
the principal main, which is 30 in. in diameter.
The water area within which the trading opera-
tions of the scheme are confined extends continuously
from Guildford to Kanowna, and the water is supplied
not only to the goldfields, but to all the agricultural
areas along the line of route.
These are the big feats of the department, but they
by no means exhaust the list of public utilities for which
it is responsible. Harbour facilities at all ports from
Wyndham to Esperance have been constructed by it ;
roads and bridges are to be found throughout the State ;
as well as the hundred and one structures in which engi-
neering skill is required. Until recently the engineering
division controlled water supply and sewerage and drain-
age as a branch of its work, but these have recently been
amalgamated and a new department established.
partment of the sister State as a
clerk and gained experience in
several branches of that department,
In January, 1891, he was trans


ferred to the Audit Department and
later on in the same year became
Bookkeeper in the Works and Build-
ings Department. He resigned from
the South Australian service in 1896
upon receiving the offer of an ap-
pointment to the clerical staff of the
Public Works Department in this
State. Three years later his ability
was recognized by promotion to the
position of Head Clerk in the
Accountant’s Office, further promo-
tion following in July, 1903, when
he was made assistant accountant,
and finally in September, 1905, he
became Accountant in the depart-
ment. When Mr. F. L. Stronach
resigned the position of Under-
secretary for Works early in 1912
Mr. Munt was first appointed
Acting - Under - Secretary, and in
March was confirmed in his position
as the permanent head of the
Department.
JAMES THOMPSON, 8.E.,
M.1.C.E., Engineer-in-Chief for the
State of Western Australia, and
Chairman of the Fremantle Har-
bour Trust, was born at Drog-
heda, County Louth, in Ireland,
on August 22, 1863, his father
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES THOMPSON.
being a supervising officer in the
Excise Branch of the Imperial Civil
Service. In 1870 the family removed
to Cork, and the subject of this
sketch received his early education
at Carmichael's school in that city.
Proceeding from there to the Queen's
University of Ireland, he took up
the study of engineering and gradu-
ated as Bachelor of Engineering in
1882. Entering at once upon the
practice of his profession, Mr.
Thompson became a pupil of Dr.
Stoney, M.1.C.E., Engineer to the
Dublin Port and Docks Board, and
from that time until 1889 was
engaged in the capacity of Assistant
and Resident Engineer on various
railway and harbour works in Eng-
land and Ireland, involving in the
aggregate an expenditure of over half
a million of money. Arriving in
Victoria in 1889 he became Assistant
Engineer in the Survey Branch of
the Railways Department and worked
on the surveys of various railways in
that State, including those from
Dunolly to Bradford, Clunes to
Campbelltown, Wendouree to Miners’
Rest, and Glen Thompson to Lin-
tons, as well as water supply surveys
at Nyora and Leongatha. In 1891
Mr. Thompson came to Western Aus-
tralia and entered the Public Works
Department as Assistant Engineer.
For a couple of years he was em-
ployed under the late Engineer-in-
Chief, Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, in the
designs of works and preparation of
contracts for various railway lines,
prominent among which were those
from Perth to Bunbury and Nor-
tham to Southern Cross. He then
became Executive Engineer on the
construction of the Northam to
Southern Cross and Southern Cross
to Kalgoorlie railways, and in 1895
was appointed as District Engineer
in the head office at Perth, becoming
Engineer in charge of Railway Con-
struction in 1896, and received the
additional appointment in 1898
of Engineer in charge of Har-
bours and Rivers. These positions
he held until 1902, when he
became Inspecting Engineer. Early
in the year 1904 he acted as
Engineer-in-Chief, and in September
of the same year was appointed per-
manently to that position, becoming
at the same time Consulting Engineer
to the Fremantle Harbour Works.
It is worthy of note that there is no
similar position in the Eastern States
as Engineer-in-Chief for the whole
of the State. In addition to his
other duties Mr. Thompson was
appointed Chairman of the Metro-
politan Board of Water Supply
and Sewerage, and also Consulting
Engineer to the Bunbury Harbour
Board in 1909 and Engineer-in-Chief
of the Metropolitan Water Supply,
Drainage, and Sewerage Department
in 1910. From this brief sketch it
will be seen that the present
Engineer-in-Chief has been engaged
in one capacity or another on most
of the great engineering works car-
ried out by the State during the
past twenty years, the most strenuous
period from the point of view of
development and constructive work
in the history of Western Australia.
Mr. Thompson was elected Asso-
ciate M.lnst.C.E. in 1891, and
was transferred to full membership
(M.lnst.C.E.) in 1899. In 1910 he
was appointed a Justice of the Peace
for the State. In 1888 he married
Sarah, second daughter of the late
John Highet, of Cork, and has issue
a son, at present (1912) studying
medicine at Trinity College, Dublin.
Mrs. Thompson died at Cottesloe
in the year 1900.
CHARLES YELVERTON
O’CONNOR, C. M. G. Centuries
hence the most enduring monu-
mental records of man in the nine-
teenth and twentieth century will
be his engineering achievements.
One has only to allude to the Suez
Canal, Mount Cenis tunnel, the
Forth bridge and the Nile dam at
Assouan with other great engineer-
ing feats in support of the state-
ment. As regards this State one can
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES YELVERTON O'CONNOR.
mention two great triumphs of its
former Engineer-in-Chief, the late
Mr. C. Y. O’Connor—the Fremantle
Harbour works and the Coolgardie
water scheme. The subject of this
sketch was born at Gravemouth,
Ireland, in 1843. He was educated
at the Waterford Endowed School
and in 1859 was apprenticed to Mr.


John Chaloner Smith, M.1.C.E.,
then resident engineer to the Water-
ford and Limerick railway. On the
termination of his articles in 1862
Mr. O'Connor served on the Rose-
neath to Birdhill, the Bambridge to
Drumballyrooney, and other Irish
railways. In 1865 lie decided to emi-
grate to New Zealand, and his first
appointment there was as assistant
engineer on the construction of the
coach road from Christchurch
through the famous Otira Gorge to
Hokitika, on the west coast. The
young engineer's promotion—he was
only twenty-three years of age at the
time—was rapid, and among the
positions he successfully occupied
from time to time were Assistant
Engineer in the province of Canter-
bury from 1863 to 1870; Engineer
for the west portion of Canterbury,
then a separate county; and Dis-
trict Engineer under the central
government of New Zealand for
Westland and later for the Can-
terbury provincial district. After
being appointed to several other
important positions he, in 1883,
became Under-Secretary for Pub-
lic Works. He retained this
office for seven years, when he was
appointed marine engineer for the
whole of the Dominion. In April,
1891, Mr. O'Connor accepted the
combined appointments of Engin-
eer-in-Chief and Acting Manager of
railways for Western Australia. For
five years he successfully carried out
the dual duties of these positions,
when at his own request he was re-
lieved of the latter office in order
that he might devote his energies to
the vast engineering enterprises then
in contemplation. He first pub-
lished his scheme for the con-
struction of the Fremantle Har-
bour Works in 1891. His ideas
met with considerable opposition
from the great English engi-
neer, Sir John Coode, and other
prominent experts, on the ground
that the harbour would have to be
constructed outside the bar. The
State's engineer was, however, no-
thing daunted, and he eventually
succeeded in convincing the Govern-
ment of the day of the practicabilitv
of his views. The successful result
of his great constructive genius
needs dilating upon here. A start
was made in March, 1892, to pro-
cure the stone for the moles from
the Rocky Bay quarry. A sum of
<£B,ooo alone was spent in opening up
the quarry and securing machinery
and rolling-stock. Nearly six years
were expended in the construction of
the harbour, and in March, 1898,
the G.M.S. “Gera” had the proud
distinction of showing the way
through the entrance of the harbour
and anchoring off Victoria Quay,
proving that Fremantle was capable
of accommodating the largest vessels
that visited Australia. The last but
undoubtedly crowning achievement
of the great engineer was the Coolgar-
die water scheme. It was his ori-
ginal conception, and though he did
not live to see the consummation of
his great work it stands as a lasting
monument to his memory. At the
same time due credit should be
given to the foresight of the State's
then Premier, Sir John Forrest,
who saw the absolute necessity of
such work and lost no time sanc-
tioning a loan of two and a half
millions sterling to cover the cost of
construction. Some idea of the mag-
nitude of the work may be gauged
from the fact that it was proposed
to convey water from the storage
reservoir on the Helena River, 340 ft.
above sea-level, 325 miles through
eight pumping-stations to its ulti-
mate destination on the elevated
tablelands of the goldfields,
when the gross lift including
friction would be 2,632 ft.
The actual work of construction was
commenced in 1898 with the build-
ing of the Mundaring weir, but for
years previously the scheme had
occupied the attention of the late
Engineer - in - Chief when he was
superintending the construction of
the Fremantle Harbour works. The
operations went on with great rapid-
ity, and on Saturday, March 8,
1902, a test was made of seven
miles of pipe-track. This proved
very successful, but one defect
was discovered. The Engineer-
in charge reported this to Mr.
O’Connor on his return to
Perth. It was arranged that
they should both proceed by the 9
o’clock train on the Monday
morning to Chidlow’s Well, in
the vicinity of which place
the defect had been observed.
Unfortunately by that time the
great engineer had breathed his last.
Mr. O’Connor had been associated
with many other important public
works in the State. In 1880 he was
admitted as a member of the Insti-
tute of Civil Engineers and in 1897
he was decorated by her late
Majesty, Queen Victoria, with a
Companionship of the Order of St.
Michael and St. George. In the
same year he was commissioned by
the Government to visit London in
connection with the Coolgardie
water scheme and confer with the
leading engineering experts in refer-
ence to the matter. He also was in-
structed to visit the principal
engineering establishments, docks,
light railway systems, etc., in Eng-
land and on the Continent with a
view to supplying the State Govern-
ment with the latest information on
these subjects. His services had
been lent in 1902 by the State's
Ministry to the South Australian
Government to confer with its en-
gineering experts on the then pro-
posed Outer Harbour scheme, an
undertaking which is now an accom-
plished fact. Only a few days before
his death he had returned to Perth
from a visit to Adelaide in connec-
tion with these conferences. In the
past many of Mr. O’Connor's views
and actions were severely criticized
but time has proved that these were
not only right in theory, but in
practice. A grateful State has, how-
ever, since vindicated his memory
and shown its appreciation of his
many and great works by placing a
bust of the celebrated engineer on
the wall of the great dam of Mun-
daring weir, and also by the erection
of a colossal statue on the north
mole of Fremantle Harbour. This
it may be remarked is the second
largest bronze statue in the Com-
monwealth. His memory is, how-
ever, best perpetuated by his engin-
eering enterprises, and to slightly
paraphrase the dictum associated
with the name of Sir Chrisopher
Wren it may well be said "Si
monumenta quaeris, circumspice."
JOHN MUIR, A.M.1.C.E., is
descended from a family distin-
guished for its love of adventure.
His greatgrandfather was mixed up
in the Jacobite risings of 1745, and
was forced to leave Scotland for
Canada, his property in Ayrshire
being confiscated by the Crown. His
grandfather fought under Nelson at
Trafalgar and Copenhagen. His
father as a young man was in the
employ of the Hudson's Bay Com-
pany, North America, and in the
early fifties with four or five other
adventurers fitted out a three-
masted schooner (the "Sybil") and
sailed for Australia, bringing with
them cattle, horses, and sheep. They
arrived at Geelong in 1852, and upon
the discovery of gold at Buninyong
in the following year Mr. Muir,
senior, proceeded to the fields, sub


sequently being present at Ballarat
during the Eureka Stockade, where
his mate was shot. The subject of
this review was born at Fiery Creek
Diggings on March 13, 1857, and re-
ceived his education at the Grammar
School, Ballarat, afterwards attend-
ing Scotch College in the same town.
Bartletto, Perth.
Mr. John Muir.
From there he went to Melbourne
and studied for two years under the
private tuition of Arnold Lily, 8.A.,
Clare Scholar of Trinity College,
Dublin. At the age of eighteen he
joined the staff of the Engineer-in-
Chief of Victoria, and was connected
with railway location and construc-
tion in that State for fifteen years.
In 1878 he was appointed Assistant
Engineer, and twenty years later was
elected an Associate of the Institute
of Civil Engineers. In 1891 his ser-
vices were temporarily transferred
by the Victorian Government to the
authorities of Western Australia as
a railway expert to locate the line
through the Darling Ranges. After
again taking up his duties in Vic-
toria, upon the then Engineer-in-
Chief’s recommendation he returned
to Western Australia, where he re-
ceived the appointment of Inspector
of Enginering Surveys, since which
period he has had charge of the loca-
tion of all goldfields railways, the
preparation of plans and estimates,
and, later, the charge of location of
all railways in the agricultural areas.
In 1901 Mr. Muir made the first pre-
liminary survey of the Trans-Aus-
tralian Railway, taking a direct
route from Kalgoorlie to Eucla and
returning on the 31st parallel of lati-
GG
tude, some sixty miles north of
Eucla. Upon this return trip the
party took twelve days to traverse
200 miles, failing to discover any
water during the whole of this time.
Mr. Muir was appointed at a later
period to supervise the recent survey
of the Trans-Australian line on be-
half of the Government of Western
Australia. In addition to the works
mentioned he prepared plans and
estimates for the late Mr. C. Y.
O’Connor for an outer harbour
scheme, providing for the bringing
of intercolonial boats to Perth water,
for a scheme of subways for railways
through Perth City, a bridge over
the Narrows connecting Perth and
South Perth, a railway from
Perth across the Narrows and
thence to Fremantle on the south
side of the river, and designs and
estimates of cost for high-level
bridges across the Swan estuary. He
was appointed a member of the Ad-
visory Board on Agricultural Rail-
ways by the Wilson Administration,
and a member of the Advisory Board
on Mining Railways, and still retains
the position of Inspector of En-
gineering Surveys, being responsible
for the location of all railways. Mr.
Muir married in October, 1885,
Mary, daughter of the Rev. J.
Hollis, Victoria, and has one son and
two daughters.
HUGH OLDHAM, M.I.C.E.
(Lond.), Engineer for Water Supply
and Sewerage Public Works Depart-
ment, Perth, is a South Australian,
having been born at Kapunda, in
the Central State, in 1864. He re-
ceived his education at the Glenelg
Grammar School, and at the close of
his schooldays, after passim? the
Civil Service examination in 1882, en-
tered as a cadet in the Public Works
Department of South Australia, and
continued in this connection for
about six years. In 1887 he pro-
ceeded to Renmark to take charge of
the engineering work in connection
with the Mildura and Renmark
irrigation scheme inaugurated by
Messrs. Chaffey Brothers. About
nine years later Mr. Oldham came to
Western Australia and entered upon
an appointment in the Public Works
Department as District Engineer for
the Goldfields Water Supply. Sub-
sequently he was appointed Engi-
neer in charge of the General Water
Supply and Engineer for the Metro-
politan Water Supply and Sewage,
these positions being amalgamated
under his present appointment at a
later date. This office embraces the
control of all State water supplies
(exclusive of the mines and goldfields
water supplies), and includes the
South-Western and Southern Dis-
tricts Drainage Works, in addition to
the Metropolitan Water Supply and
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HUGH OLDHAM.
Sewerage Schemes, the main work
in connection with the latter being
now in full swing. Mr. Oldham is
Chairman of the Board of Examiners
of Licensed Plumbers and a member
of the Royal Sanitary Institute, in
oonection with which he is also a
lecturer and examiner.
FREDERICK WASLINGTON
LAWSON, Assistant Engineer for
Sewerage, Water Supply, Sewerage,
and Drainage branch, Public Works
Department, Perth, was born at
Launceston, Tasmania, in 1869 and
received his education at Melbourne,
Victoria. At the close of his school-
days he served his apprenticeship to
Messrs. John Bund© & Co., a well-
known Victorian firm of engineers,
and was afterwards engaged upon
the detail survey of Sydney and its
suburbs. On the reorganization of
the New South Wales Public Service
in 1896 he was transferred to the
Department of Public Works, Sewer-
age Construction Branch, where he
served in various capacities under
Mr. Joseph Davis, M.1.C.E., con-
sulting engineer for New South
Wales (London), and Mr. L. A. B.
Wade, M.1.C.E., when he was in
charge of the Rivers, Water Supply,


and Drainage Branches. During the
time Mr. Lawson was connected with
the Public Works Department of
New South Wales many important
works such as the western suburbs
and the low level sewerage schemes
were carried out, also the construc-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FREDERICK WASLINGTON LAWSON.
tion of Cataract Dam and other
works in connection with the Sydney
Water Supply. Mr. Lawson came
to Western Australia in 1906, hav-
ing accepted a position in the Public
Works Department in connection
with the sewerage scheme for the
metropolitan area, and upon the
formation of the Metropolitan
Sewerage and Water Supply Depart-
ment in 1910 was appointed Assist-
ant Engineer for Sewerage. He is
an Associate Member of the Insti-
tute of Civil Engineers of England,
an Associate of the Institute of
Mechanical Engineers, England, a
member of the Council of the In-
stitute of Western Australian En-
gineers, and a member of the Council
of the local branch of the Royal
Sanitary Institute of England. He
is also a qualified engineer under
the Local Government Act of New
South Wales, and has recently been
elected an Associate Member of the
American Society of Engineers.
GEORGE EDWARD FARRAR.
Engineer for Roads and Bridges and
Acting Engineer for Harbour and
River Works, is a Yorkshireman.
having been born at Huddersfield in
1848. He attended King’s College
classes, and at the termination of his
schooldays entered the service of an
engineering and iron firm, with
which he remained for two years.
He then became associated with Mr.
J. M. Toler, engineer, of West-
minster, and was engaged in
engineering work in connection with
the Milford Docks and railways for
two years, afterwards accepting
employment with Messrs. Easton,
Amos, & Anderson, mechanical
engineers, and assisted in the con-
struction of various important
works. Removing to Melbourne in
1871 Mr. Farrar became identified
with the staff of the Mines Depart-
ment and the Lands and Surveys
Office for about six months, and in
September, 1874, received an
appointment under the South Aus-
tralian Government as assistant in
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE EDWARD FARRAR.
the Engineer-in-Chief’s Department,
Adelaide. After remaining there for
five years Mr. Farrar engaged in
private practice until the middle of
1884, when he was appointed
engineer for the North Midland
Roads Board. He relinquished the
post in 1889, being the last of the
Roads Engineers under Government
control. After spending six months
in the Railway Construction Branch
of the Victorian railways the South
Australian Government offered him
the post of Assistant Engineer for
Roads and Bridges, which occupied
his energies between 1889 and 1893,
and in February, 1894, he came to
Western Australia to fill the
appointment of Engineering Sur-
veyor in the Public Works Depart-
ment, chiefly in connection with
roads and bridges construction.
Eight years later he was appointed
Principal Engineer for Roads and
Bridges, and has filled that post ever
since, also the position of Acting
Engineer for Harbours and Rivers,
to which he was appointed in 1907.
Mr. Farrar is a Fellow of the Society
of Engineers of London and a
member of the Western Australian
Society of Engineers, of which latter
body he is Honorary Treasurer.
ROBERT A. ROLLAND, assist-
ant to the Engineer-in-Chief, Public
Works Department, Perth, is of
Scottish descent, having in 1857
been born in Edinburgh, where
he received his education. Sub-
sequently he came to Australia and
served a term at Langland’s foundry
in Melbourne, at a later period
serving his apprenticeship with
Messrs. Barr & Oliver, civil
engineers, of Dunedin, New Zea-
land, with whom he remained for
five and a half years. He then
entered the Government Service of
Victoria, being appointed to the
railway construction branch, in
which he remained seven years,
when, turning his attention in
another direction, he became
engaged in the fruitgrowing indus-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ROBERT A. ROLLAND.
try at Mildura, Victoria, for about
three years. In 1896 Mr. Holland
came to Western Australia and was
engaged as engineering surveyor in
the Public Works Department, sub-
sequently as Assistant Engineer,


taking charge of construction works
on the north-west coast, and which
occupied his energies for about five
years. Returning to the head office
he received the appointment of Resi-
dent Engineer, and after filling a
subsequent position of District
Engineer was appointed to the post
he now holds. Mr. Rolland is a
member of the Institute of
Surveyors of Victoria and a member
of the Institute of Engineers of
Western Australia, and holds a seat
on the Board of Examiners for
Licensed Surveyors. He is also a
member of the Royal Sanitary Insti-
tute of England.
JOHN WILLIAM DARKER,
Assistant Engineer for the Railway
Construction Branch, Public Works
Department, Perth, was born at Ips-
wich, Queensland, on November 15,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN WILLIAM DARKER.
1867, and was educated at the Ips-
wich Grammar School. After three
and a half years in the railway
workshops in his native town he
transferred to the Railway Construc-
tion Office at Brisbane, and after
two years there spent a similar
period in construction work on the
North Coast Railway. This was fol-
lowed by twelve months in the office
of the Chief Mechanical Engineer
at Brisbane, and in 1893 he under-
took control of the erection of a
working suction dredging plant for
mining purposes on the border of
New South Wales and Queensland,
this being a private enterprise; and
while here he also took charge of the
sluicing plant in connection with the
same work. Subsequently he turned
his attention to the coal-mining in-
dustry in Purgah, near Ipswich, for
a time, and in 1894 came to Western
Australia, where he spent six
months in the Fremantle locomotive
workshops. After mastering the
practical work of this department he
entered the drawing office of the
Railways Construction Branch as
draughtsman, and five years later re-
ceived the appointment of chief
draughtsman, in the discharge of
which office he supervised the plans
for the Midland Junction Railway
Workshops, and various other rail-
ways then under construction. In
1905 Mr. Darker was appointed to
his present office of Assistant En-
gineer, which he has filled ever since.
He is a member of the Western
Australia Institute of Civil Engin-
eers and is on the Council of that
body.
GEORGE FORSTER HICKSON,
A.M.1.C.E., Resident Engineer
Main Sewerage Construction, Public
Works Department, Perth, is a son
of Mr. R. R. P. Hickson, M.1.C.E.,
and was born in 1870 at Carlingford,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE FORSTER HICKSON.
Ireland. He came to Australia at
an early age, receiving his scholastic
education at the Newcastle Grammar
School, New South Wales. At the
close of his schooldays he joined the
Government Service of New South
Wales and served his articles in the
office of the Engineer-in-Chief, Mr.
E. O. Moriarty, M.I.C.E. He was
engaged on the Newcastle Harbours,
Rivers, and Water Supply and
Sydney Sewerage Works for
a time, then, relinquishing Govern-
ment employ, was identified
with the firm of Messrs. Carter,
Gummow, & Co., as engineer in con-
nection with sewerage construction in
Sydney and water supply works at
Adelaide. In 1896 Mr. Hickson
received an appointment by the
Western Australian Government as
assistant engineer and was engaged
on the Coolgardie and Goldfields
water supplies, and for two years
filled the post of District Engineer
for Water Supply on the north-west
coast of Western Australia. Since
1903 he has discharged the office of
Resident Engineer on the Metropoli-
tan Sewerage Works.
HILLSON BEASLEY,
A.R.V.1.A., Chief Architect of the
Public Works Department, Perth,
was born at Canterbury, England,
in 1855 and received his education
at Wesley College, Sheffield. At the
close of his scholastic career he was
articled to a firm of architects in
Dover, and gained valuable subse-
quent experience in similar offices at
London, Carlisle, and Oxford. At
a later date Mr. Beasley proceeded
to South Africa, and spent three
years in the architectural branch of
the Public Works Department at the
Cape. In 1886 he came to Australia
and practised on his own account at
Melbourne, also filling the office of
Lecturer to the Working Men’s Col-
lege and in connection with the
Melbourne University extension
classes. During this period he
gained the diploma of Associate of
the Royal Victorian Institute of
Architects. In 1896 he left Victoria,
and arriving in Western Australia
joined the Public Works Depart-
ment as draughtsman. In that
capacity he proved his ability so well
that when Mr. John F. Grainger
was appointed principal architect
Mr. Beasley became Chief Draughts-
man, ultimately in 1905 succeeding
Mr. Grainger in the leading position
in the architectural branch of the
Public Works Department.
gg2


WATER SUPPLY DEPARTMENT.
This department, which is also administered by the
Minister for Works, is at present under the general con-
trol of the Engineer-in-Chief, though arrangements are
under consideration to relieve him from the actual
working responsibility.
The department is responsible for all matters con-
nected with the Metropolitan Water Supply, Sewerage,
and Drainage; Mines Water Supply; Goldfields Water
Supply, including the Coolgardie Water Scheme; Water
Supply and Drainage generally; and all matters relat-
ing to boring. The Metropolitan Water Supply and
Sewerage was formerly a branch to itself, while Mines
Water Supply was part of the administration of the
Mines Department, which also controlled boring opera-
tions. The new departure has the advantage of bring-
ing cognate matters together, and in that way counts for
both economy and efficiency.
The Metropolitan Water Supply is derived primarily
from a reservoir built on the Canning River, whence
the water is conducted to a subsidiary reservoir in
King's Park, from which it is reticulated. For years
it has been recognized that the service is quite inade-
quate to meet present demands, let alone future require-
ments. It has been reinforced from time to time by
bores in different parts of the metropolitan area, the
water from which is pumped into the mains, but the
amount of water gained by these expedients is still
insufficient to provide a proper supply. From time to
time the question of tapping the Mundaring Weir has
been raised, but the Government has steadily opposed
it. A scheme which meets with greater favour and has
professional recommendation behind it is the construc-
HUBERT CHARLES TRETHO-
WAN, A.1.A., W.A., Under Secre-
tary for Water Supply, was born at
Plymouth, Devonshire, England, on
April 4, 1868. He was brought to
Victoria by his parents at an early
age, and received his education in
that State, afterwards turning his
attention to agriculture under the
direction of his father until his
twenty-first year. He then entered
the service of the Bank of Austral-
asia at their head office in Collins
Street, Melbourne, and remained
with that institution seven years
(1889-96), the last six months of
which were served in the Perth
Branch, to which he had been trans-
ferred. He resigned his position in
1896 in order to enter the Public
Works Department of Western Aus-
tralia. He has been connected with
the undertaking for supply of water
to the goldfields since the initiation
of construction work in 1898, and
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HUBERT CHARLES TRETHOWAN.
tion of larger storage facilities on the Canning River.
Whatever course is adopted, it is generally conceded
that it should be constructed as quickly as possible, as
each succeeding summer brings a greater strain upon
the present resources.
The department is also charged with the under-
ground sewerage and drainage of the metropolitan area.
The system adopted is the septic tank system, the sewer-
age reaching the tanks mainly by gravitation, though
pumping stations are necessary along the low-lying lands
of the river foreshore. The filter-beds for Perth are
situated on Burswood Island, and have been the sub-
ject of considerable discussion. That the location is
unsuitable from a professional standpoint can scarcely
be denied, as sufficient foundation to support the weight
of the filters does not exist. The result has been that
they constitute a source of annoyance not only to the
department, but to the residents of the surrounding
localities, and whether they are going to be sufficient to
stand the strain of the system when completed and in
full operation is open to considerable doubt. A separate
system is being provided for the Fremantle area, and
another for the suburbs west of Perth. The work has
been going on for some years, and though sections of
it are now in operation, it will be some time before
the metropolis of Western Australia can claim to be
up to date in the matter of sanitation. The storm-
water drainage is being provided for by a separate set
of pipes connected with main drains, which empty them-
selves into the river at various points. This work is in
charge of Mr. Hugh Oldham, who is assisted by Mr.
F. W. Lawson, the Assistant Engineer for Sewerage.
when, early in 1903, the revenue-
producing stage having been reached ?
the concern was transferred from
the control of the Public Works De-
partment Mr. Trethowan was selected
for the important post of accountant
in the new administration. In this
capacity he designed and inaugurated
the system of accounts, and also
acted as principal assistant to the
Secretary in establishing the Branch
offices and instituting the procedure
for rating and water sales through-
out the water area. He remained in
charge of this work until June, 1909,
when he was appointed to the posi-
tion of Secretary of the Goldfields
Water Supply Administration,
which he held until 1912, when he
was promoted to the office he now
fills. Whilst holding the former post
he was responsible to the Minister
for the business management of this
huge trading concern, which has a
capital of over £3,000,000 and a


yearly revenue amounting to
£230,000, and of which the reticu-
lation system radiates throughout a
water area nearly 400 miles in
length. Mr. Trethowan qualified for
admission as an Associate of the
Institute of Accountants and
Auditors of Western Australia by
passing the interstate examinations
prescribed by the Australasian
poration of Public Accountants. In
the three examinations comprising
the course open to candidates from
all the States, he secured second
place in order of merit on two
occasions and premier honours in the
final examination.
JAMES VERNON HAWTIN,
J.P., Secretary to the Metropolitan
Water Supply, Sewerage, and Drain-
age Departments, Perth, was born
at London in 1872. Lie received his
education by private tuition and at
King’s College, London, and upon
its completion was for a time asso-
ciated with his father in business.
In 1891 he came to Western Aus-
tralia, where he entered into mer-
cantile pursuits in Perth for some
two years. Subsequently he joined
the service of the Midland Railway
Company under Mr. Edward Keane,
and five years later, in 1898, his
connection with the Metropolitan
Waterworks began. Mr. Hawtin
first filled the positions of cashier
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES VERNON HAW TIN.
and chief clerk for six years, when
he was appointed accountant in 1904
and Secretary in the same year. In
1909 the secretaryship of the
Sewerage Board was added to his
duties, and in 1910 he was appointed
Secretary to the Department, which
post he now holds. Mr. Hawtin re-
ceived a commission of Justice of the
Peace in 1910.
GEORGE RICHARD WILLIAM
HAWKE, Machinery Superinten-
dent, Goldfields Water Supply, is a
native of England, having been born
at Devon on June 20, 1868. He
received his scholastic training in
the county of Cornwall and at the
Tennyson School in London, also
attending the Polytechnic School,
Regent Street. When fourteen
years of age he was apprenticed to
the firm of J. Simpson & Co.,
Limited, engineers, of Pimlico,
London, and spent altogether
twenty-two years in their employ.
During this time he gained experi-
ence not only in the Old Country,
Bartletto. Perth.
MR. GEORGE RICHARD WILLIAM HAWKE.
but in Singapore and other parts of
India, Japan, and the West Indies,
spending six months at Demerara,
in British Guiana. He came to
Western Australia in the year 1898
on behalf of the same firm, and was
engaged in the construction of the
Fremantle water works, on the com-
pletion of which he returned to
England, where he was appointed
general foreman of the erecting and
fitting-shops at Pimlico, a position
he continued to hold for about two
years. At the end of this period he
returned to Western Australia in
the capacity of supervising and
erecting engineer in connection with
the Goldfields Water Supply still on
behalf of the same Company. Upon
the completion of this work Mr.
Hawke's services were secured by the
Western Australian Government as
machinery superintendent of the
Goldfields Water Supply, an office
he still holds. He is a member of
the Institute of Mechanical Engi-
neers, England.
JAMES FAULKNER, formerly
Assistant Engineer, Water Sup-
ply, Perth, was born at Bow-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES FAULKNER.
don, Cheshire, England, in 1853
and received his education at
schools in connection with the Con-
gregational Church of Great Britain.
At the conclusion of his studies he
served his articles to the engineering
profession, giving special attention
to the branches dealing with water-
works, steam, gas, and sanitary
improvements, and gained consider-
able experience, being employed on
the states of the Earl of Stamford
and Warrington and Sir William
o
Cunliffe Brooks, a well-known
banker who held various trusts, the
engineering work in connection with
which was placed in the hands of the
gentleman under review. This know-
ledge was augmented by Mr.
Faulkner in the United Status,
Canada, Tasmania, and New South
Wales, where he was engaged in
various engineering projects, and in
1889 he came to Western Australia
as engineer to the Perth Gas Com-
pany. After eight months in this
service he obtained the appointment


Colonial Secretary.
From
To
Sir George Shenton
Dec.
29, 1890
Oct.
11, 1892
Sir Stephen Henry Parker
Oct.
11, 1892
Dec.
4, 1894
Sir John Forrest
Dec.
4, 1894
April 28, 1898
George Randell
April 28, 1898
May
27, 1901
Frederick Illingworth ...
May
27, 1901
Nov.
21, 1901
M atthew Lewis Moss ...
Nov.
21, 1901
Dec.
23, 1901
Frederick Illingworth ...
Dec.
23, 1901
June
24, 1902
Walter Kingsmill
June
24, 1902
Aug.
10, 1904
George Taylor
Aug.
10, 1904
June
7, 1905
John Michael Drew
June
7, 1905
Aug.
25, 1905
Walter Kingsmill
Aug.
25, 1905
May
7, 1906
James Daniel Connolly
May
7, 1906
Oct.
7, 1911
John Michael Drew
Oct.
7, 1911
Still
in office
of Superintendent of the Perth
Water Supply Company, Limited,
and when this enterprise was taken
over by the Government he was
given the post of Superintending
Engineer in connection with the ex-
tension and maintenance works.
This was in 1896, and a second
Board appointed two years later
confirmed the appointment, a con-
firmation repeated in 1904, when
the Minister for Works took over
the concern and acted as admini-
strator. In 1909 another Board was
appointed to enable the Minister to
proclaim the new Act, and in the
following year the amalgamation
with the Public Works Department
took place and IMr Faulkner was
appointed Assistant Engineer, which
office he held until January, 1912,
when he resigned. He is a member
of the Engineers' Association of New
South Wales and of the Western
Australian Institute of Engineers.
WILLIAM COATES REY-
NOLDSON, M.1.C.E., Chief Engi-
neer, Coolgardie Goldfields Water
Supply, Perth, is a native of Vic-
toria, where he was born in the year
1870. Educated at Melbourne, at
the termination of his schooldays he
was apprenticed to Mhssrs. Tlodgson
and Smith, hydraulic engineers, for
four years, subsequently being asso-
ciated with that firm in the carry-
mg out of extensive hydraulic and
sanitary works, the supply of water
to various towns, and in irrigation
projects at various centres. Coming
to Western Australia he joined the
Public Works Department in 1895
as assistant engineer, and found
immediate occupation in surveying a
location for the main impounding
reservoir for the Coolgardi© and
Kalgoorlie water supply scheme an
i n defining the tract for the con-
struction of the aqueduct over the
390 odd miles which lay between
the starting and the finishing point
of this gigantic undertaking. Hay-
ing satisfactorily completed this
exacting work, he proceeded to the
head office and set about the pre
paration and drawing of the plans,
which took up his time until about
1900. He was next engaged in the
supervision of the construction
work, and with its completion in
August, 1902, was appointed to his
present position. Mr. Reynoldson
is a member of the Institute of Civil
Engineers, Vice-President of the
Western Australian Institute of
Engineers, and a member of the
American Water Works Association.
Colonial Secretary’s Department.
The following is the list of the gentlemen who have
held the position of Colonial Secretary:
It is not too much to say that almost ever since
the establishment of the State there has been something
in the way of organization for the care and protection
of the natives. Wherever the British Government has
planted colonies it has recognized that the aboriginal
inhabitants had certain rights and were entitled to the
protection of those who had dispossessed them of their
country. Western Australia was no exception to this
rule, and though the early colonists suffered severely at
the hands of the natives, and though incidents occurred
that called for stern repressive measures, every oppor-
tunity of conciliating the wild tribes was taken, and by
the appointment of protectors and the distribution of
food and clothing they were gradually induced to under-
stand that though the white men would not allow them
The present Under-Secretary is Mr. Frederic Dud-
ley North, C.M.6., who succeeded Mr. Octavius Burt
upon the latter's appointment to the offices of Sheriff
and Comptroller of Prisons. Mr. Joseph Robert Camp-
bell is the Accountant, and Mr. George Dibdin Clerk-
in-charge.
In addition to the ordinary secretarial work of the
office, the Colonial Secretary administers the following
very important branches of the Public Service:
Aborigines, Charities, Fisheries, Friendly Societies and
Industrial Arbitration, Gaols, Harbour and Light,
Immigration, Lunacy, Medical and Public Health,
Observatory, Police, Public Gardens, Registry, Rott-
nest Island.
to pillage indiscriminately, they would treat them with
consideration and justice. Grants for the protection
and care of the aborigines appeared regularly upon the
Estimates of expenditure, and when responsible govern-
ment was granted in 1890 it was one of the conditions
that £5,000 a year should be paid out of the consoli-
dated revenue annually to an independent Aborigines
Protection Board. When the revenue exceeded half a
million, then the £5,000 was to give way to 1 per cent,
of the revenue. The phenomenal expansion of the
colony during the nineties made 1 per cent, of the
revenue a fairly large amount, and steps were taken
which after some years were successful to have an
amount of £lO,OOO annually fixed by Act of Parliament
and disbursed in the same way as other revenue moneys.
ABORIGINES.


A Chief Protector of Aborigines was appointed, with
charge of a sub-department of the Colonial Secretary’s
Department, and he was made responsible for all mat-
ters pertaining to the Aborigines. Recognizing that
£lO,OOO was far too small a sum to provide satisfac-
torily for the proper protection and care of the natives,
Parliament annually grants an additional amount from
the revenue. This in 1911-12 reached the sum of
£17,995, and when to it is added the £lO,OOO statutory
grant, it is evident that Western Australia cannot be
accused of any lack of interest in her aboriginal popula-
tion. The present Chief Protector is Mr. Charles P.
Gale, and a study of his annual reports perhaps reveals
best the work that is being done. These we have already
quoted from in the general article on the aborigines, and
only desire to say here that they are an ample reply to
those who speak of aboriginal ill-treatment in Western
Australia.
PUBLIC CHARITIES.
lii no State is the administration of public charity
—and that in the widest and best sense of the term —
better organized than in Western Australia, where, to
quote The British Medical Journal , ‘‘charity has become
a subsidiary agent, and the State is the relief authority
for the whole State.” This does not mean that the
fount of private charity has dried up through absence
of need for it; in fact, Government assistance has
stimulated private endeavour, and it may truly be said
that the poor, the sick, and the infirm and aged are ever
held in remembrance by their brethren and fellows in
this great Western State.
In addition to his work as the Superintendent of
Charities, Mr. James Longmore is also Superintendent
of the Government Labour Bureau and Secretary of the
State Children's Department, and is therefore in the
best position to know not only the poverty and sickness
that exists, but also the best and wisest means of com-
bating it. The general work of his department, he tells
us, is divided into two branches —the Home Assistance
Branch, by means of which assistance is given from State
funds to those in destitute circumstances, but not in
need of actual institution assistance; and the Institu-
tion Assistance Branch, which means the control and
supervision of the institutions established for the care
and maintenance of the aged and infirm and those in
need of a home as well as of rations.
Realizing how prone charity is to be imposed upon,
the task of its distribution entails constant care and
watchfulness. Cases are therefore dealt with individu-
ally, and each is subjected to strict examination, the aim
being to relieve all genuinely necessitous cases and to
prevent undeserving persons from receiving help. To
carry out this principle regulations have been drawn up
which briefly provide that in Perth applications must
be made at the office of the Superintendent, and in coun-
try districts to the Resident Magistrate, who acts as
agent for the department. Genuine cases are then helped
by a grant of rations on a prescribed scale, or, in cases
approved by the Colonial Secretary, of money in lieu
of rations.
During the year ending June 30, 1911, the total
number assisted in one way or another was 1,783
281 men, 468 women, and 1,034 children. Of these 188
—lll men and 77 women —were aged and infirm
recipients, and therefore may be regarded as permanent
cases; the remainder comprised those who required tem-
porary help to tide them over periods of temporary dis-
tress. The number of those to whom permanent assist-
ance was given showed a striking reduction when com-
pared with previous years, due, no doubt, to the effect
of the Commonwealth old-age and invalid pensions
scheme. The “temporary class” was largely made up
of women and children —widows left destitute, ox wives
whose husbands were sick and unable to work or had
cruelly left them, often with families of little children,
to face the world alone. Widows, deserted wives, or
wives with husbands in prison or in the asylum are
entitled to rations for the support of their children, but
in various cases money is given in lieu of rations, and
thus the children become, without being made State
children, practically boarded-out to their mothers, and
are then subject to inspection by the authorities to
ensure proper care being given to them. The beneficial
effects of such a procedure may easily be appreciated, as
it gives the needed assistance without removing the
children from the fostering care of a mother s influence.
For the aged, infirm, and practically destitute of
both sexes institutions are provided and maintained by
the State. There were originally three of these homes
for men, situated at Perth, Fremantle, and Geraldton.
Some years ago the Government recognized the necessity
of building new quarters for those in Perth, and a large
area of land on the river at Claremont was secured for
the purpose. Upon this a large and well-appointed in-
stitution, capable of holding some 500 men, was erected,
and the Geraldton home closed. Recently the Fre-
mantle home has also been closed and the inmates trans-
ferred to Claremont institution, which now forms the
only State institution for destitute men. Situated amid
surroundings of great natural beauty, with open access
to the river, this home, erected upon the most modern
plans, and administered as a home rather than as a
place of detention or even a mere shelter, is a standing
monument to the interest which the State shows in its
aged and infirm destitute men. A library and read


ing-room, recreation-rooms, and a common meeting-room
for entertainments are provided, and no stone is left
unturned by the Master (Mr. A. C. Rust) and the
Matron (Miss Speers) to try and make the lives of their
charges happy and comfortable.
Through the munificence of the late Mr. Walter
Padbury this task has been much lightened. Under the
will of that gentleman the Old Men's Home received an
endowment of something like £30,000, the interest of
which is to be used in providing luxuries and additional
comforts for the men. This bequest is administered by
three Trustees —Sir Edward Stone, Hon. J. D. Connolly,
M.L.C., and Mr. J. S. Battye—appointed by the Court.
By its means moving-picture entertainments are regu-
larly provided, a large gramaphone has been installed,
bath chairs have been purchased, additional reading
As Secretary to the State Children’s Department,
Mr. Longmore is charged with the carrying out of the
State Children’s Act passed in 1907. This is based
largely on the Act in force in South Australia, and it is
doubtful whether any better pattern could have been
selected. The
scope .of the
department is
comprehen-
sive. It aims
at providing
for the waifs
and strays
who may pro-
perly be called
the children
of the State.
Wherever pos-
sible it fastens
r es ponsibility
on the par-
ents, and does
not sunder
natural ties.
It cares for
juvenile offen-
ders, and seeks
to prevent, so
far as pos-
sible, the development of criminal inclinations in them.
Those children who do wrong are charged in a separate
Court from which all but those actually engaged in the
case are excluded, and thus the demoralizing effects of a
public exhibition are avoided.
There are according to the latest returns issued
nearly 800 children under the control of the State, about
700 of whom are in State or State-subsidized institu-
STATE CHILDREN’S DEPARTMENT.
GIRLS; ORPHANAGE, ADELAIDE TERRACE, PERTH
matter secured, and the tobacco allowance increased.
No institution of the kind in Australia is so well catered
for, and possibly few in the world. It is only right to
say that the men fully appreciate their good fortune.
The aged and infirm women are provided with a home
at Fremantle, and though they have not the advantages
of a Padbury bequest, are carefully tended by the State.
There are about sixty women in permanent residence,
while others remain there only for a time. In connec-
tion with it there is a maternity home, where destitute
expectant mothers receive freely every possible care and
attention, and part of the function of which is to pro-
vide a training school for midwifery nurses. The
Matron (Mrs. Fraser), with her assistants, is’kept busily
employed in sympathetic attendance upon the inmates
of the home, many of whom are practically bedridden.
tions, and the remainder boarded out. For those
boarded out there are two kinds of foster-mothers under
the Act —those to whom children committed to the care
of the department by the Children’s Court are sent, and
those who are licensed under the Act to receive children
under the age
of three years.
Both these
classes are
under the con-
stant super-
vision of de-
partmental in-
spectors, who
are greatly
assisted by a
committee of
ladies appoint-
ed by the Gov-
ernment for
that purpose.
The members
of the Chil-
dren's Protec-
tion Society—
a public char-
ity—also visit
those children
in whom they
J
aie inter ested. It is thus seen that foster children
are receiving every care and attention. Where possible
arrangements are made for the adoption of children, as
it is felt that that course ensures to them the advantages
of a real home.
For children committed to an institution there are
schools subsidized by the department, in addition to
the Government Receiving Depot at Subiaco.


We extract the following information regarding
these various institutions from Mr. Longrnore's
report:
“There are six subsidized orphanages under the Act.
These institutions were previously known as Industrial
Schools, and although called orphanages are practically
Industrial Schools, in the sense that they are meant to
give the boys and girls committed to them some indus-
trial and technical training in addition to the usual
school instruction. They have been established prin-
cipally for the reception and maintenance of destitute
and neglected children sentenced under the State Chil-
dren Act. Truants are also sent to these institutions
under the Education Act.
“The orphanages may also receive, in addition to
those sent under the Act, private cases, for which no
State payment is made. Children committed by a Chil-
dren’s Court, and technically known as State children,
are paid for as a rule Bs. weekly until fourteen years of
age. In those institutions where the children are taught
in the ordinary State schools the payment is 7s. weekly.
“The following are the six orphanages: —(1) St.
Joseph's Girls’ Orphanage, Subiaco ; (2) Girls’ Orphan-
age, Adelaide Terrace, Perth; (3) Swan Boys' Orphan-
age, Midland Junction; (4) Clontarf Orphanage for
Boys, Victoria Park ; (5) Salvation Army Boys' Orphan-
age, Collie; (6) Parkerville Orphanage for Infants,
Parkerville.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
“Industrial Schools have been established for the
detention, maintenance, and training of children found
guilty of an offence punishable by imprisonment. In-
dustrial Schools can also receive children transferred
from orphanages for absconding or serious misconduct.
“The children admitted to Industrial Schools are
paid for by the State, if over the age of fourteen years,
10s. per week for one year. This amount may be con-
tinued for a longer period if it is shown that the interests
of the child will benefit by a longer detention. Children
committed to an Industrial School, if under fourteen
years of age, are paid for at the rate of 9s. per week.
“The five Industrial Schools are: —“(1) St. Kevin’s
Industrial School, Leederville; (2) Salvation Army
Boys' Industrial School, Collie; (3) Salvation Army
Girls’ Industrial School, Collie; (4) Redhill Boys’ Indus-
trial School, Midland Junction; (5) Home of the Good
Shepherd Industrial School, Leederville.
“The subsidized institutions are under the control
and supervision of a governing authority, which is
defined in the Act as ‘the Manager or Committee of
Management.' Five of the institutions have the official
manager resident at the institution ; the others have a
superintendent in charge, who acts under the authority
of the official manager. Four of the institutions are
governed by committees. It would be an advantage if
all orphanages and Industrial Schools had such com-
mittees. Committees are expected to be regular in their
visitations and vigilant in their inspection. The assist-
ance of women as members of committee or visitors
should be enlisted where at all possible. The success,
however, of institutions depends largely on the trust-
worthiness and capability of the resident officials in
charge. Institute work is difficult and trying, and a
superintendent to be successful must combine firmness
with kindness and practical skill. He must exercise
his authority with a due sense of responsibility. An
inspector paying his or her visit to-day sees what is going
on to-day but not what took place yesterday. The visits
of members of committee, living perhaps in the neigh-
bourhood of the institution and looking in at odd times,
is a far more effective check. No amount of inspection,
however, will prevent abuses at times if the officials are
not men and women of the highest character, with a full
sense of their responsibilities.
“In all the institutions attention is being given to
the industrial training of the inmates ; this is as it ought
to be. In the orphanages the children are young and
require to have their ordinary education looked after,
and not much time can be devoted to industrial work.
An excellent workshop has recently been erected at the
Swan Boys' Orphanage. Here some twenty lads are being
trained in carpentry, under the supervision of one of the
instructors in connection with the State schools.
“The industrial training at the Collie Institution is
very practical, and includes almost everything that is
necessary for an agricultural worker to know.
“The industries principally taught in the schools
are farming and gardening. Some instruction is also
given in shoe-making, tailoring, carpentry, and baking.
None of the institutions give 3 anything like a special
training in any of these industries; what they really aim
at is to impart a general handiness to the lads. The
girls are receiving good practical instruction. They leave
the institutions well equipped for domestic work.
Needlework is well taught, so are cooking and laundry
work. In several of the institutions where cows are
kept, the girls are taught milking.
“St. Joseph’s Girls' Orphanage, Subiaco (Estab-
lished 1868). —Manager: The Right Reverend Bishop
Clune. This institution is situated about a mile from the
Subiaco Railway Station. Number on the Government
list, June 30, 1910, 102; admitted during the year ended
June 30, 1911, 30; left during the same period, 17; re-
maining on the Government list, June 30, 1911, 115 ;
private list, 30. The orphanage is managed by the Sisters


ot Mercy, the responsible liead being the Reverend the
Mother Superior, Sister M. Brigid. The Resident Sister
in charge of the orphanage is Sister M. Ursula, with
eight assistants. The Sister in charge of the school in-
struction is Sister M. Clare, with four assistants. There
are four out-of-door assistants.
"Church of England Orphanage (Established
1868). —Manager: Very Rev. Dean Mercer. Lady
Superintendent: Miss Birt. This institution for Pro-
testant girls is situated in Adelaide Terrace, Perth.
Number of girls on June 30, 1910, 89; admitted during
the year ended June 30, 1911, 37; left during the same
period, 16; remaining on the Government list, June 30,
1911, 110; number on the private list, 28.
"Swan Boys’ Orphanage (Established 1871). —
Manager: The Reverend J. W. Armstrong. This in-
stitution is situated about three miles from Midland
Junction, in an excellent position. Number of boys on
the roll, June 30, 1910, 98; admitted during the year
ended June 30, 1911, 36; left during the same period,
37; remaining on Government list, June 30, 1911, 97;
number on private list, 6. The official in charge is the
manager, who is now resident, and exercises full control
over the institution; he is assisted by six other officials.
“Clontarf Orphanage (Established 1872). —
Manager: The Right Reverend Bishop Clune. The
institution is situated about three miles from the ter-
minus of the Victoria Park tramline, on the banks of
the Canning River. Since March 22, 1897, it has been
conducted by the Christian Brothers. Number of boys
on June 30, 1910, 112; admitted during year ended
June 30, 1911, 51; left during the same period, 28; re-
maining on Government list, June 30, 1911, 135; number
on private list, 5.
"Salvation Army Boys’ Orphanage and Indus-
trial School, Collie (Established 1901). —Manager:
Major John Blake. These institutions are situated some
six miles from Collie and about 130 miles from Perth.
Number of inmates in the combined institutions on June
30, 1910, 64; admitted during the year ended June 30,
1911, 19; left during the same period, 22; remaining on
the Government list, June 30, 1911, 19; private list, 23.
“Parkerville Orphanage (Established October,
1909). —Manageress: Sister Kate Clutterbuck. This
institution is situated at Parkerville, nineteen miles by
rail from Perth. It has been established principally to
receive infants under the age of six years who belong
to the Church of England. It consists of five cottages,
as follows: —A. —Padbury, two wards; B.—Babyland,
two wards; C. —Nicholas, two wards; D. —Guildford;
E.—The Infirmary. Each cottage is specially supervised
by a resident officer, and is arranged to receive children
in accordance to age and sex. Number of children on
June 30, 1910, 55; admitted during the year ended June
30, 1911, 6; left during the same period, 3; remaining
on Government list, June 30, 1911, 58; number on
private list, 40.
‘‘St. Kevin’s Industrial School (Established
1897). —Manager ; The Reverend Charles Cox. This in-
stitution occupies an elevated and commanding position
on the shores of Monger’s Lake, some two miles from
Leederville. Number of boys on June 30, 1910, 19;
admitted during the year ended June 30, 1911, 6; left
during same period, 16; remaining on Government list
June 30, 1911, 9; private list, 16.
“Salvation Army Girls’ Industrial School,
Collie (Established 1901). —Manager: Major E. I.
Gowan. This home is situated three miles from the
Collie township. It occupies a very healthy position.
The buildings are very suitable, and are kept in first-
class order. Number of inmates on June 30, 1910, 30;
admitted during the year ended June 30, 1911, 6; left
during the same period, 9; remaining on the Govern-
ment list, June 30, 1911, 30; private list, 22.
“Redhill Industrial School for Boys (Estab-
lished 1903). —Manager; The Rev. J. W. Armstrong.
This institution occupies a healthy position among the
hills on the Newcastle Road, some four miles from Mid-
land Junction. Number of boys on the roll on June 30,
1910, 17; admitted during the year ending June 30,
1911, 10; left during the same period, 15; remaining on
Government list on June 30, 1911, 12.
“Home of the Good Shepherd Industrial School
(Established 1908). —Manager: The Reverend Mother
of the Convent. This institution is situated at Leeder-
ville, a mile or so from the railway station. Number of
girls on June 30, 1910, 13; admitted during the year
ending June 30, 1911, 3; left during the same jmriod,
9; remaining on Government list on June 30, 1911, 7;
remaining on private list, 3.
"The Government Receiving Depot, Subiaco
(Established 1894). —This institution, situated near the
Subiaco Railway Station, receives temporarily all classes
of State children, or any other who are destitute or neg-
lected it may be necessary to deal with. Number of in-
mates on June 30, 1910, 15 boys, 13 girls, total 28; ad-
mitted during the year ending June 30, 1911, 186 boys,
104 girls, total 290; left during the same period, 152
boys, 97 girls, total 249; remaining on Government
list on June 30, 1911, 49 boys, 20 girls, total 69.
It will be seen from this return that a large number of
children have passed through this institution during the
past twelve months. Subject to departmental control,
the institution is managed by Mr. and Mrs. Shipton as
manager and matron respectively.”
On the question of homes for infants Mr. Longmore
makes the following remarks concerning that difficult
problem of modern life—the illegitimate child :
"The establishing of a home for infants opens up
another important phase, the treatment of the infant


born out of wedlock. For the sake of the infant itself
it is decidedly advisable that such infants should be
cared for by their own mothers for as long a period as
possible. To do this it is, of course, necessary to adopt
some means whereby mothers may be encouraged to care
for the children during the first few months, at least, of
the child's life. The Home of Mercy, Perth, does this
to some extent, and in several cases the Government
Home at Fremantle has also helped in the same direction.
There is, however, a very strong desire on the part of
the great bulk of mothers of such children to get out
of their responsibility at the very earliest moment. In
many cases within a month or so of the child's birth
a request is made to have the child cared for by the
State. I must say my experience goes to show that even
if the child is sent to a foster-mother and paid for by
the mother, the payments only continue for a short
period, and ultimately the child, owing to the mother
having failed in her payments, and, may be, having re-
moved to some other address which is very difficult to
trace, has to be dealt with through a Children’s Court,
and become a State child. It is often better to face the
position at the outset and have the child dealt with by
the Court from the first, and an order made against the
mother for a small payment. It is almost impossible for
a girl without help to continue her payments regularly
to foster-mothers. To prove the parentage in the great
bulk of cases is also practically an impossibility.”
STATE LABOUR BUREAU.
This branch of the work of the Charities Depart-
ment, for which Mr. Longmore is also responsible, was
established in order to afford a means of bringing em-
ployers into touch with those desiring employment. It
is particularly useful in making known the requirements
of farmers and orchardists, and with the ever-increasing
area of land under cultivation there is a similar increase
in the number of workers for whom openings are
available.
During the year ending June 30, 1911, there were
in Perth alone, according to the report, 2,400 employers
who made application to the bureau for men, the number
applied for being 5,287. In the Women’s Branch there
were 1,439 applications for 2,374 women to act in various
domestic capacities. There were also 7,431 direct
applications for work from men and 1,183 from women.
Positions were found for 6,476 men and 1,577 women.
These figures, which relate to Perth alone, are repeated
in, of course, smaller degree throughout the State, and
give more than sufficient proof of the usefulness of the
bureau and the assistance it renders in preventing the
growth of those difficult unemployed problems that are
so prominent a factor in the life of the larger communi-
ties of the Eastern States.
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT.
The Chief Inspector of Fisheries is Mr. Frederick
Aldrich, who is charged with all matters relating to
fisheries and fishing generally, and also with the adminis-
tration of the Acts relating to the pearl fisheries, which
form one of the most important sources of the Western
Australian export trade. He is assisted by inspectors
stationed at Bunbury, Fremantle, Mandurah, Swan,
and Albany, whilst the police officers in various districts
are also expected to give whatever assistance they may
be able to render.
The average quantity of fish caught for sale during
any year is about 1,500 tons, but this gives little or no
indication of what could be done under favourable cir-
cumstances. In addition to this quantity we find that
some £70,000 is sent away from the State to pay for
imported fish. It is evident, therefore, that with the
opportunities available there is a large field in the direc-
tion of fish-preserving works open to the investment of
capital. The department, however, is not so much con-
cerned with that question as with taking every pre-
caution for the protection of young fish and for prevent-
ing unsound or unsuitable fish from being foisted upon
the market. Doubtless it is doing all that can be done
in those directions, but when the great profusion of fish
with which Western Australian waters are teeming is
considered, there certainly ought to be some means avail-
able for assuring to the general public a cheap and
satisfactory supply. In this direction alone the industry
is worth fostering, and the Fisheries Department can
render yeoman service to the people of the State. The
value of fish as a food has been repeatedly demonstrated,
and no combination should be allowed to control the
public supply.
The important work performed by the department
in regard to the pearl-shell fisheries may be gauged from
the fact that during the past decade shell to the value
of over £1,000,000 has been exported from the State.
This means the existence of a large industry, but one
which, if not placed under proper restrictions, may
easily be worked out. In the interests of the future,
therefore, the Chief Inspector is called upon to exercise
supervision, and when the character of some of those
engaged in pearling is taken into consideration, the task
is by no means a light one.


One phase that is causing some anxiety is the
restriction placed by the Commonwealth upon the
employment of coloured labour. While concerned only
with carrying out the law, the Chief Inspector cannot
help expressing the fear that it may lead to the transfer-
ence of a great number of workers to some port outside
territorial waters, and so deprive the State of one of
its industries.
REGISTRAR OF FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
The Registrar of Friendly Societies (Mr. S. Bennett,
A.1.A.) is charged with the administration and control
of matters relating to societies registered under The
Friendly Societies Act 1894, The Benefit Building So-
cieties Act 1863, The Co-operative and Provident Socie-
ties Act 1903, The Workers’ Compensation Act 1902, and
The Truck Act 1899. In addition Mr. Bennett fills the
office of Government Actuary, and is entrusted with the
registration of industrial unions, under the Industrial
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1902.
From the annual returns issued from the office we
learn that there are seventeen Friendly Societies, having
amongst them 262 branches existing in the State. The
number of benefit members stands at 16,397, their annual
payments being £47,219, whilst during the latest year
for which accurate figures are at present available
£29,627 was expended in relief to members. The total
funds amount to £158,567, of which £155,759 stands to
the credit of the Sick and Funeral Fund.
At the end of June, 1911, there were twelve Building
Societies—six permanent and six terminating —in opera-
tion in Western Australia, with assets amounting in
the aggregate to £128,957. The oldest of these societies
is the Perth Benefit, Building, Investment, and Loan
Society, which was established in 1862, and remained
alone until 1875, when the Fremantle Society was
formed. Of the terminating societies the whole six are
established on the Starr-Bowkett plan, and all are
operating within the metropolitan area.
The Co-operative and Provident Societies Act 1903
has not so far been greatly availed of in Western Aus-
tralia. It provides for the registration of societies carry-
ing on any lawful industries, businesses, or trades, speci-
fied in or authorized by the rules, whether wholesale or
retail, and including dealings of any description in land,
but no member may have claim or interest in the shares
of any society beyond the amount of £2OO. Only eight
societies, according to Mr. Bennett’s report, remained
upon the register, and of these two were in liquidation
and two were in process of being wound up by order
of the Court.
Under the Workers’ Compensation Act 1902, the
Registrar may, after taking steps to ascertain the views
of the employers and workers, certify that any scheme of
compensation, benefit, or insurance for the workers,
whether or not any such scheme includes other employers
and their workers, is on the whole not less favourable to
the general body of workers and their dependents than
the provisions of the Act. Since the commencement of
the Act only two schemes have required to be certified.
For conciliation and arbitration matters a special
officer, Mr. T. F. Davies, Clerk of the Arbitration Court,
has been appointed. This officer, whose special duty it
is to see to all matters relating to the proper placing
of disputes between employers and employes before the
Court, acts under the general direction of the Registrar,
to whom all matters relating to the registration of unions
are referred.
GAOLS.
From time to time we read of historic Old World
buildings, which after having for hundreds of years
served the purpose of prisons, have been turned into
museums and places for sightseers. Though lacking the
hoariness of age, Western Australia’s first large prison
has been turned to the same peaceful purpose. The large
gaol erected in Beaufort Street, Perth, during the fifties
has been turned into a museum, and by alteration has
lost many of its prison-like features. Where so recently
ago as the early seventies public executions took place,
now a lordly pile of buildings to house the Public Library
and Museum of the State are to be found.
The only large prison existing in Western Australia
is that at Fremantle, which was erected by the convicts
themselves in the old convict days, and which though far
from being a thing of beauty exhibits every indication
of that great strength necessary to hold the type of
criminal popularly supposed to be embraced by the term
convict. From time to time the gaol has been added to
and old parts modernized. It is capable of holding some
700 prisoners, but for the credit of Western Australia
it may be said is rarely filled. All prisoners sentenced to
long terms of imprisonment are incarcerated there, the
other gaols existing in various centres of the State being
more in the nature of detention houses.
The prison system is under the control of the
Comptroller-General of Prisons, an office at present
vacant through the retirement of Mr. Oct. Burt. Some
time ago the question of prison administration generally
was raised, and the Government of the day decided to
secure the services of a recognized expert to report fully
upon it.
The action taken and the results that have followed
are admirably summed up in the report of the Deputy-


Comptroller which has just been issued, which we reprint
almost in full:
“Captain Pennefather, Comptroller-General of
Prisons of Queensland, was appointed a Royal Commis-
sioner to inquire into the administration of Fremantle
Prison, and submitted his report in April, 1911, which
was dealt with by the then Colonial Secretary (Hon.
J. D. Connolly), by whom instructions were issued to
give effect to the majority of the recommendations. These
you have since confirmed.
“Simultaneously Mr. H. Hann, an officer of much
experience, was appointed as Superintendent, vice Mr.
W. A. George, retired —and, it is regretted, now de-
ceased.
“The Royal Commissioner’s report provided an ex-
cellent basis for reform, and the advent of a new Super-
intendent offered favourable opportunity for effecting
those recommendations. The change of Ministry, and
later the retirement of Mr. Burt, involved of necessity
some temporary delay.
“The first reform instigated by the present Adminis-
tration was in the direction of constituting ‘Boards of
Inquiry’ to deal with charges against officers. The first
case dealt with—an appeal against a decision under the
old regime—has confirmed the wisdom of providing such
a board.
'“Under the new regulation any officer-in-charge has
power to inflict punishment, not exceeding <£l fine for
breach of Prison Regulations—with right of appeal to
the Comptroller-General—but if in the opinion of the
Comptroller-General the charge merits heavier punish-
ment, the case is referred to a board of three, one each
being nominated by the Minister and the Comptroller-
General and the third being an elected representative
from the staff —the latter not being a party interested in
the case.
'‘The regulations have also been amended to provide
for a code of procedure in making charges against officers,
which must result in greater satisfaction both to the
administration and the officer.
'‘An eight-hour day has been conceded to the Fre-
mantle Prison Staff. It is believed that this is the first
State in Australia to adopt this principle, and its in-
auguration is the more satisfactory in view of the Royal
Commissioner’s statement: T fail to see how it can be
put into operation unless additional officers are ap-
pointed.’ The staff will be reduced.
“The eight-hour day excludes 'reserve duty,’ which
requires one warder’s attendance nightly in case of an
emergent call —but before this report is in print the
necessity of the reserve warder being in nightly attend-
ance will probably not exist. Taking into consideration
warders’ privileges—such as long service leave —which
are not adopted in an eight-hour day principle, the staff
does not work for eight hours a day in a six-day week.
“There have been other recent alterations respecting
the staff which should make for contentment —such as
liberalizing the scale of uniform, making warders’quarters
more habitable, the revolving among the staff (below the
rank of senior warder) of all duties (this, however, does
not apply to the hospital and cook-house warders), the
adoption of an annual leave roster, allowance for time
travelling to and from out-station when taking leave,
and other concessions of a minor, though necessary,
character.
“The staff has not overlooked the prevailing
demand for increased remuneration on account of
the change in the cost of living. A Departmental
Board or Committee of Advice has been deputed
to investigate and make recommendations in this
regard. When this work is completed, the staff should
be thoroughly contented and the Government should re-
ceive a maximum of efficiency.
“ ‘Mark System .’ —Principal among the reforms in
respect to the treatment of prisoners is the adoption of
the ‘Mark System.’ This is by no means a novel treat-
ment, and therefore not experimental.
“Hitherto remissions were granted on a system
graded on sentence, with provision for extraordinary re-
mission, such as saving life or property, assisting gaol
officers, chorister, noxious or dangerous work. Remis-
sions were subject to forfeiture by a visiting Justice on a
prisoner being found guilty of an offence.
“The ‘Mark System’ removes any semblance of
favouritism or anomaly in adjudication, features which
prisoners are prone to ponder and foster imaginary
grievances. Under the ‘Mark System’ each prisoner
daily works out his own remission automatically. He
realizes that good conduct is not alone a factor in his
early discharge, but industry is a primary feature, so
the system tends to inculcate habits of industry, which,
when rooted, form an excellent basis of reformation.
“The supervising warders who are charged with the
withholding of marks are necessarily compelled to watch
their charges closely, and any prisoner failing to secure
full marks for three successive days is brought before the
Superintendent. It will thus be seen that the system
has also the effect of bringing the administration into
very close touch with prisoners.
“Under this system prisoners may earn a maximum
remission equalling one-quarter of their sentence, which
is more liberal than before to the short-sentenced pri-
soner —but not so favourable to the very long sentenced.
“Prisoners earning full marks in any one week are
accorded other privileges, such as the purchase of fruit,
eggs, butter, tobacco, etc.
“Each prisoner is supplied with a card in his cell,
showing daily his marks earned towards remission, and
also the amount of gratuity earned and the disburse-
ments made on his behalf.


“Separate Treatment. —Hitherto prisoners (not be-
ing first offenders) sentenced to six months’ hard labour
and upwards were required to undergo separate treat-
ment for three months. This treatment has now been
applied to all prisoners (excepting inebriates) and graded
on the number of the prisoner’s convictions, and ranging
from one to a maximum of three months. The daily
hours of exercise have been considerably increased, and
the barbarous ‘cage’ treatment of exercise abolished.
“Female Section of Prison. —It is difficult indeed
to expect any reformative result —even if the class of
habitue permitted—under prevailing conditions. The
structural environment is harsh to a degree, and there
is little, if anything, to tend to the moral elevation of
the prisoners.
“The females have now been provided with work
more in keeping with their sex, such as sock-knitting,
dressmaking, and laundry work. They dine (if well be-
haved) at a common table, are provided with more com-
fortable and suitable clothing, and are permitted suit-
able games during recreation time.
“It is proposed to prepare a series of garden plots
wherein female prisoners may take an interest, and which
will also tend to improve the environment of the estab-
lishment.
“Visits to the Female Prison exemplify the inutility
of imprisoning the inebriate for short sentences. Ex-
perience suggests that the system is worse than useless —
it is harmful. The short sentence merely affords a means
of recuperation, and the prisoner goes out of the prison
gate physically fortified for further depredation. The
Home of the Good Shepherd and the Salvation Army
authorities, which have done much to assist the adminis-
tration, have been approached with a view of accepting
for treatment this unfortuate class of women, and it
is hoped shortly to declare certain portions of those
institutions as prisons, where female inebriates can
be given reformative opportunities.
“Glassification of Prisoners . —It is most difficult to
adopt an efficient scheme of classification where there is
practically only one ‘general’ prison in the State —and
the prisoners are comparatively few. This difficulty will
be largely overcome by the proposal to utilize prison
labour for reafforestation purposes, and also by utiliza-
tion of such at Rottnest Island during the winter months.
“General. —Much good work is being done in a quiet
way for prisoners on discharge, particularly by the chap-
lains, the Home of the Good Shepherd, and the Salvation
Army. Successful measures have also been adopted
departmentally in this direction.
“The religious services have been extended to permit
the Salvation Army holding a weekly meeting.
“Endeavour will be made to provide a monthly form
of entertainment, such as lectures, for well-behaved
prisoners.
“The Home Secretary only recently adopted a
system of technical education by correspondence in the
English prisons for long-sentenced prisoners. The ex-
periment is of too recent origin to judge its actual re-
sults, but if for no other reason than its tendency to in-
culcate studious and industrious habits it must result in
moral gain. The Minister’s approval in a similar direc-
tion has been obtained.
“Efforts are being made to reduce the cost of main-
tenance at outstation gaols. In certain localities the
whole-time services of a gaoler are unwarranted. The
Acting-Commissioner of Police has given his assurance
of co-operation in the direction of working such gaols
with the assistance of his constabulary.”
The foregoing shows clearly the advances being made
in prison administration and the treatment of prisoners,
and though the gaol is not yet that happy home which
some humanitarians appear to think it should be, it is
now a place where punishment is tempered with mercy
and inducements are held out to reform.
HARBOUR AND LIGHT.
The Superintendent of Harbours and Lights and
Chief Harbourmaster is Captain C. J. Irvine, while
Captain A. C. Butcher is Shippingmaster at Fremantle,
and Captain Butcher Engineering Surveyor under the
Navigation Act as well as an Inspector under the
Machinery Act. Captain F. Winzar is Harbour-
master at Albany, and Captain J. G. Abrahamson
at Bunbury. As the name implies, this sub-depart-
ment is charged with the oversight of harbours and
lights round the coast and with the pilot service.
At Fremantle and Bunbury, both of which are busy
ports, the task of controlling the shipping is no
sinecure, but one which demands tact almost as much
as expert knowledge.
IMMIGRATION OFFICE AND TOURIST AGENCY.
When the marvellous caves of the South-West were
first opened to the public, the management and control
of them was vested in a Caves Board appointed by the
Government, of which Mr. E. Robinson was Secretary.
This Board spent a great deal of time and money in
making the caves easily accessible and in providing
means by which they could be visited with the least
possible waste of time. It remained in existence until
some three years ago, when the Government decided to
combine with the caves the question of tourist require


merits generally, and bring the whole under the Colonial
Secretary as a branch of his department. As immigra-
tion was at that time also demanding greater attention
than had previously been paid to it, and the necessity
for organizing a branch to deal with it was becoming
apparent, the Government arranged to constitute an
Immigration, Tourist, and General Information Office,
which should take charge of these various matters. The
branch was placed in the charge of Mr. A. O. Neville,
one of the senior officers of the department, and the
area of influence considerably extended. Recently a
further change has been made by the creation of a new
branch of the Treasury to deal with State hotels, etc.
The tourist side of the Immigration Office has been
transferred to this new branch, which has been placed
under the charge of Mr. Geo. Emery, formerly Account-
ant in the Mines Department. All matters relating to
immigration still remain under Mr. Neville, and
judging by the active policy being pursued by the
Government in that direction, they will give sufficient
occupation for a very progressive branch of the Public
Service of Western Australia.
The beginnings of observatory work in Western
Australia date back to the close of 1875, when the
Surveyor-General of that time, Sir Malcolm Fraser,
established a meteorological station, fitted with first-class
instruments, in connection with his department. Other
stations were from time to time added, and gradually
something in the direction of complete meteorological
data began to be collected throughout the colony.
It was not until 1896 that steps were taken to build
an astronomical observatory. By that year the expan-
sion of the col -
ony had reached
such a stage that
the Premier of
the day, Sir
John Forrest,
felt the time had
arrived when
Western Aus-
tralia should look
beyond the mere
utilitarian and
make some small
contribution to-
wards the scien-
tific knowledge of
the world.
A Government
Astronomer, Mr.
William Ernest
Cooke, M. A.,
was chosen, and an eminently suitable site for the
Observatory selected on Mount Eliza. Whilst the
buildings were in course of construction Mr. Cooke was
sent to Europe to select equipment of the latest pattern.
This consists of an astrographic equatorial of 13-in. aper-
ture, with a 10-in. visual, by Sir Howard Grubb ; 6-in.
transit circle, by Troughton & Sims; coelostat and BJ-in.
reflecting telescope; spectroscope; chronograph, fitted
with Grubb’s control; sidereal and mean time clocks
and chronometers; seismograph (Milne’s pattern), etc.
OBSERVATORY.
THE OBSERVATORY, PERTH
The transit-room is of a new pattern, designed by Sir
David Gill, Astronomer Royal at the Cape of Good
Hope, and constructed by Sir Howard Grubb.
In astronomy the main work consists of this State’s
contribution to the International Photographic Durch-
musterung. The zone of the sky allotted to Perth lies
between the parallels of 32 and 40" South declination.
The astrograph is used for obtaining two series of photo-
graphs, each plate covering a celestial area of 2° square.
For the first series three exposures of six minutes,
three minutes,
and twenty sec-
onds respectively
are given on the
same plate, the
telescope being
moved very
slightly in de-
clination between
successive im-
pressions.
The positions
of all the stars
which give satis-
factory images
will be measured
and published.
This publication,
i n conjunction
with a similar
one to be issued
by seventeen other co-operating observatories, will contain
the positions, reduced to January 1, 1900, of all objects
in the sky as bright as a star of the 11th magnitude.
The second series of plates receive three exposures of
half an hour apiece, the telescope being slightly moved
between successive impressions, so that the image of each
star, when closely examined, consists of three dots form-
ing the points of an equilateral triangle. These plates
will not be measured, but it is hoped that they may in
time be printed in an enlarged form for distribution


The positions obtainable from these photographs will,
of course, be only relative, and in order to make them
absolute it is necessary to observe a few stars in each
area and obtain their positions by means of the transit
circle. For this purpose three stars of a magnitude not
less than the ninth are selected in each degree square,
and the right ascensions and the declinations of these
standard stars are being obtained by observations with
the transit circle.
This work has been carried on with a marked degree
of success during the past few years, and it is ample
refutation of the statements of those who deem the
State's money to be ill-invested in astronomical work.
In addition to the purely scientific side, the obser-
vatory undertakes a very practical feature in maintain-
ing correct time. The standard clock is regulated to
keep true time of the 120th meridian (eight hours ahead
of Greenwich), and by means of electric currents per-
forms the following functions:
1. It drops a time ball at 1 p.m. daily at Fre-
mantle, and at such other hours as may be
asked for by commanders of mail steamers.
2. It drops a time ball in Hay Street, not far from
the Town Hall clock, which now keeps good
time.
3. It controls a public clock at the front gates of
the Observatory, immediately opposite the
gates of the King's Park.
4. It controls a parent clock at the principal Rail-
way Station, Perth, whence signals are trans-
mitted once a day throughout the Railway
Department of the State.
5. It controls two clocks in the telegraph operating-
room, Perth, whence signals are daily trans-
mitted to every telegraph station throughout
the State.
6. It fires time guns at 1 p.m. daily at Perth and
Fremantle.
It has also been Mr. Cooke's custom to publish each
month in the newspapers an account, written in popular
style, of the astronomical events of the month, and so
cater for that large section of the public who, though
not possessing accurate scientific knowledge, are anxious
to have the various heavenly phenomena explained in
language devoid of technicality.
As in all observatories, visitors are admitted on cer-
tain nights during the month in order to view those of
the heavenly bodies as may be favourably situated for
observation. Opportunities are also given for visitation
of day parties who desire to view the instruments and
have their various uses explained.
Until the Commonwealth decided to take over all
meteorological work throughout Australia, meteorology,
in the eyes of the general populace, at any rate, formed
one of the most useful and interesting features of the
work of the Observatory.
Readings of barometer, thermometers, wind, rain,
weather, and state of the sea were telegraphed daily
not only from all the stations in this State, but from a
selected number in other States, and from these a gen-
eral weather report, a special rainfall report, an isobar
map, and a forecast of the probable weather for the next
twenty-four hours were prepared. These were all ex-
hibited at several places in both Perth and Fremantle,
and the forecast was, in addition, telegraphed to several
seaports. A copy of the map and forecast was also pre-
sented to the commander of any mailboat which might
happen to be in Fremantle at the time of issue.
At present the office of Government Astronomer is
vacant, Mr. Cooke having just left Western Australia
to take up the duties of Government Astronomer of
New South Wales and Professor of Astronomy in Sydney
University. The matter of appointing a successor is
still under consideration, the position of Acting
Astronomer being meanwhile held by Mr. H. B.
Curlewis.
REGISTRAR GENERAL’S OFFICE.
The Registrar-General (Mr. M. A. C. Fraser), who
is also Government Statistician, is practically respon-
sible not only for the proper registration of all births,
marriages, and deaths, but also for the compilation of
all those different statistics that are necessary in the
complex life of a modern State.
For the purpose of registering births, marriages,
and deaths the State is divided into districts, for each
of which there is a District Registrar. These officials
forward their returns to the Registrar-General's office,
and all records are kept there. The Registrar-General
also administers the vaccination regulations, notice of
the responsibility of parents in this direction being given
when the birth of a child is registered.
Vital statistics are most carefully kept. The popu-
lation, during the periods between census returns, is
computed upon a plan agreed upon at a conference of
the Government Statisticians of all the States. The
number of arrivals and departures by sea are ascer-
tained, and a percentage added for unrecorded emigra-
tion. In the case of immigration and emigration by
land, little of which takes place as yet so far as Western
Australia is concerned, 10 per cent, is added to each to
allow for unrecorded arrivals and departures. To the
returns thus secured is added the excess of births over
deaths, and a fair approximation of the actual popula-
tion thus secured. In the case of the Commonwealth
Census of 1911 the result was considerably below the


computed population, but in a State where the people
are scattered over a large area, as in Western Aus-
tralia, it is difficult to say which figures are the more
accurate, although, of course, the Census returns are
treated as official.
As Government Statistician Mr. Fraser is respon-
sible for the collection of all statistics relating to agri-
culture, trade, and commerce. In the last case, since
Another branch of the Colonial Secretary’s Depart-
ment is that dealing with the upkeep of the gardens and
grounds connected with public buildings, such as Govern-
FREDERIC DUDLEY
NORTH, C.M.G., J.P., the Under-
secretary and Permanent Head of
the Colonial Secretary’s Department
of Western Australia, was born at
Earl’s Court, Kensington, London,
on November 9, 1866, and is a son
BBartletto, Perth.
MR. FREDERIC DUDLEY NORTH.
of Mr. Charles Augustus North. He
was educated at Rugby, and while
at that famous institution played for
the Rugby eleven during two sea-
sons. Leaving the Old Country he
took passage for Western Australia,
where he arrived in 1886. Joining
the Public Service in that year as
a clerk in the Lands Department, he
soon impressed his superior officers,
and after an interval of five years
was appointed Clerk to the Executive
Council. While carrying out the
duties of this office he came favour-
ably under the notice of Sir John
Forrest, and shortly afterwards was
installed as Secretary to the Hon-
ourable the Premier. Mr. North
HH
PUBLIC GARDENS.
continued to act as Secretary for ten
years (1891-1901), and in 1902 re-
ceived promotion to the important
post he now occupies. He acted as
Aide-de-Camp to Sir W. C. Robin-
son in 1894 and accompanied Sir
John Forrest to England in 1897,
when that gentleman represented
the State at the celebrations held in
connection with Queen Victoria’s
Diamond Jubilee. At the opening
of the first Federal Parliament by
His Royal Highness the Duke of
Cornwall and York he represented
Western Australia in Melbourne as
a member of the Royal Reception
Committee, which arranged and car-
ried out the innumerable social func
tions and hospitalities associated
with this great national event. While
the Commonwealth was still in its
swaddling clothes Mr. North had
conferred upon him the distinctive
honour of C.M.G. (1902). He was
elected President of the Civil Ser-
vice Association four years in suc-
cession, and during his leadership
(which he resigned only at the begin-
ning of the year) the Association
made wonderful strides. He was the
first Permanent Head to actively
identify himself with the Associa-
tion. In the realms of sport his
name has always occupied a promin-
ent place, and it is recorded that he
was the organizer of the first Wes-
tern Australian Cricket Eleven that
visited the Eastern States in 1898.
He finds congenial recreation in the
pursuit of the royal and ancient
game of golf, and the new Cottesloe
golf links owe their origin to him.
In music he also finds welcome relax-
ation after the heat and burden of
the day. Mr. North was married in
1887 to Flora Frances, daughter of
the late Mr. Edward Hammersley,
of “Pyrton,” Guildford, and has sur-
viving' two sons and two daughters.
His private residence is "Catlidge,”
Cottesloe.
the end of the bookkeeping period of the Commonwealth,
he deals more particularly with interstate trade con-
cerning which no records are kept by the Federal
authorities.
To the average reader statistics are, as a rule, dry
and uninteresting ; but to the economist, sociologist, and
politician no department of State supplies more useful
information than that of the Registrar-General,
ment House, the Public Hospital, the Observatory, the
Modern School, the Stirling Gardens, and so on. This
work is under the direction of Mr. D. Feakes.
FREDERICK ALDRICH, Chief
Inspector of Fisheries, Perth, was
born at La Perouse, near Sydney, in
1873, and received his preliminary
education at local schools, with a
finishing course at Lake Macquarie
and Kogarah. Upon starting in life
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. FREDERICK ALDRICH.
he took charge of the oyster culti-
vation leases on St. George River,
and subsequently had control of the
Redfern fish markets for two years.
In March, 1900, he was appointed
Inspector of Fisheries in New South
Wales, his duties extending over the
waters of the southern portion of
the State from the Shoalhaven
River to the Victorian border. After
two years he was transferred to the
Port Hacking waters, and twelve
months later, when the marine fish
hatchery was constructed under the
supervision of Mr. H. C. Dannevig,
who occupied the post of superin-
tendent of scientific investigations
to the New South Wales Fisheries


Department, he was appointed as-
sistant in that branch of the Service,
and held this office for three years.
At the end of that period Mr. Dan-
nevig received the appointment of
Director of the Commonwealth Fish-
eries and Mr. Aldrich was given
charge of the hatching operations, a
position he held until taking over
the duties of his present appoint-
ment in Western Australia.
SAMUEL BENNETT, Registrar,
of Friendly Societies and Govern- 4
ment Actuary, Perth, was born on
July 19, 1878, at Dronfield, Derby-
shire, England. For five years he
was educated at the Workington
Academy in Cumberland, England,
and kept at the head of his section
for three years of that time,
finally carrying off the honours from
the rest of the students. After
leaving school he was engaged for
six years in the offices of an
insurance broker and estate agent,
at the end of that time (1900) going
to London to take an appointment
with a large friendly society as head
of the insurance department, where
he had control of the investments
and insurance work besides the
management of accounts. Retaining
this post until June, 1909, he came
to Western Australia to assume the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. SAMUEL BENNETT.
duties of Government Registrar of
Friendly Societies and Government
Actuary, a position he still holds.
Mr. Bennett is an Associate of the
Institute of Actuaries and a Fellow
of the Royal Statistical Society. He
is also a member of the Masonic
craft, being Secretary to the St.
George Lodge of Freemasons, No. 6,
W. A. C., Perth.
OCTAVIUS BURT, I S 0., J.P.,
is the eighth son of the late
Sir Archibald Pauli Burt, first Chief
Justice of Western Australia. He
was born at St. Kitts, in the West
Indies, on December 14, 1849, and
at the age of eleven years came to
Western Australia with his father,
who settled in Perth. His scholastic
training was carried on at Bishops
College, now the High School,
Perth, and at the age of twenty he
joined the Imperial service in a
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. OCTAVIUS BURT.
clerical capacity. A few months
later, in December, 1869, he became
an officer of the National Bank, and
continued in this connection for over
two years, at the end of which
period he was appointed clerk in the
office of Mr. (afterwards Sir)
Frederick Weld, at that time
Governor of Western Australia.
Subsequently Mr. Burt occupied the
post of Private Secretary to the
Governor and clerk to the Executive
Council, which offices he also held
under Sir William Robinson and
in other administrations. He was
appointed in June, 1877, a member
of a Central Commission in connec-
tion with the Paris Universal
Exhibition of 1878, and in the latter
year accepted an appointment as
chief clerk in the Lands and Survey
Office, two years later being
appointed Resident Magistrate in
Toodyay district. While still occupy-
ing this office he was recalled to
Perth to act as Assistant Colonial
Secretary in 1885, and in the follow-
ing year returned to Toodyay. In
1887, after a brief period spent at
York as Resident Magistrate, Mr.
Burt was reappointed Assistant
Colonial Secretary, and in 1890 was
Acting Colonial Secretary, and
served as a member of the Executive
Council, with a seat in the Legisla-
tive Council. Upon the introduc-
tion of responsible government he
became Under-Secretary for the
State. In February, 1898, he pro-
. ceeded to London to relieve the
secretary engaged in the Agent-
General's office, and after an absence
of 16 months returned to Western
Australia and resumed the duties
of Under-Secretary. In 1901 he
accepted the position of Sheriff and
Comptroller of Prisons, and con-
tinued to hold this post until his re-
tirement from the service, early in
1912. He also filled the office of
Deputy-Marshal of the High Court
of Australia. Mr. Burt, who in
1903 was created a Companion of
the Imperial Service Order, for
fifteen years held the position of
Chief Electoral Officer of the
State in addition to his other
offices. He had charge of the
arrangements in connection with the
referendum relating to Federation,
and the first Federal elections. He
is a member of the Synod, the
Diocesan Council, and the Cathedral
Chapter of the Church of England.
As a volunteer he passed through
the various branches of service in
connection with the Imperial Army
in this State. He has always been
an advocate of all forms of outdoor
sport, and has especially interested
himself in aquatics. In 1877 Mr.
Burt married a daughter of the late
Mr. Gustavus E. C. Hare, then
Government Resident at Albany,
and has two daughters.
JOSEPH ROBERT CAMPBELL,
accountant in the Colonial Secre-
tary's Department of Western Aus-
tralia, is the second son of Lieuten-
ant-Colonel J. A. Campbell, late of
the Queen's Own Cameron High-
landers and of the Commonwealth
defence forces. He was born at
Newport, Isle of Wight, on December
7, 1874, and was educated at his
native town, Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Gibraltar, and at the Perth High


School, after which he followed
banking and mercantile pursuits for
thirteen years, including two years
on the Coolgardie goldfields in the
“early nineties.” He was the first
Secretary to the Health Department
1900-4, and was transferred to the
Colonial Secretary’s Department to
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOSEPH EGBERT CAMPBELL.
institute a system of centralization
of the accounting of its various
sub-departments, including abori-
ginies, charities, electoral, fisheries,
friendly societies, gaols, harboui
and light, immigration, lunacy,
medical, observatory, police, public
health, public gardens, and registry.
He was appointed a special officer
under the Treasury in 1904 to un-
ravel the accounts connected with
the Western Australian contingents
in South Africa, and was subse-
quently sent in 1907 to the War
Office, London, to effect a settle-
ment with the Imperial Govern-
ment, which was satisfactorily con-
cluded within six months. For this
service he received the congratula-
tions of the Agent-General and sub-
stantial recognition from the Govern-
ment. In 1906 he was appointed a
member of a special board to advise
the Government as to an effective
system of accounting in the Lands
Department. Mr. Campbell is an
Associate of the Institute of
Accountants and Auditors of West-
ern Australia and for a number of
years was a member of its Council.
He was married at Colombo in 1908
to a daughter of Mr. James War-
man, the issue being two sons.
hh2
MALCOLM ALEXANDER
CLEMENT FRASER, F.R.G.S.,
F.S.S., J.P., Registrar-General and
Government Statistician, was born
at Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, Eng-
land, on February 3, 1857, and is
a son of the late Rev. William
Fraser, D.C.L., Vicar of Alton, and
a grandson of Clement John Sneyd-
Kynnersley, of Loxley Park, Staf-
fordshire. Educated at King Ed-
ward’s School, Bromsgrove, Wor-
cestershire, he emigrated to Western
Australia in 1876, and joined the
Civil Service as probation clerk in
the Colonial Secretary’s Department
in April of that year. Two months
later he entered the Lands and Sur-
vey Department as second clerk, and
was also placed in charge of the
meteorological observations and re-
cords, which latter work he retained
until 1896. On promotion he re-
turned to his former department in
August, 1877. He next filled the
appointment of clerk and Assistant
Private Secretary to His Excellency
the Governor, Major-General Sir
H. St. George Ord, R.E., K.C.M.G.,
C. 8., in July, 1878, and was also
Assistant clerk to the Executive
Council. In April, 1880, he was
appointed clerk to Governor Sir
W. C. F. Robinson, K.C.M.G., and
in January, 1881, corresponding
clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s
Office. Mr. Fraser became Regis-
trar-General in 1891, and he was
also given charge of the departments
controlling brands, patents, and
trade - marks. At Sydney in
January, 1900, he represented the
Government of Western Australia
at the Conference held to arrange
for a uniform census of Australia,
having previously (October, 1899)
been appointed Superintendent of
Census for Western Australia, and
in 1901 the duties of Government
Statistician were added to his
responsibilities. Pie represented
Western Australia at a Conference
of Statisticians convened at Hobart
in January, 1902, to arrange for
uniformity in the collection and com-
pilation of statistics throughout the
Commonwealth. He holds a com-
mission from the Governor-General
as Royal Commissioner for Common-
wealth electoral distribution for the
State of Western Australia. He is
the author of the “Official Year-
Book of Western Australia,”
“Natural History Notes of Western
Australia,” and of various other
official publications, and holds the
commission of Justice of the Peace
for the whole State. In December,
1883, he married Mina Eliza, daugh-
ter of the late Sir Archibald Pauli
Burt, some - time Chief Justice of
Western Australia. He resides at
“Strath-Errick,” South Perth.
CHARLES FREDERICK GALE,
Chief Inspector of Fisheries and
Chief Protector of Aborigines, is a
well-known figure in the Civil Ser-
vice of the State. He is a native
of Western Australia, having been
born at Geraldton in November,
1860. While yet a lad he was
taken to the Old Country, and
received his early education at the
Bedford Commercial School, and
finished his scholastic career at
Bishops College, Perth, Western
Australia. In the early eighties he
entered into squatting pursuits on
the Gascoyne River, being one of the
pioneers of the pastoral industry in
that district. His initiative in this
direction, however, was doomed to
failure owing in large measure to
dry seasons, and about the time of
the discoveries of the Pilbara gold-
fields he disposed of his pastoral
interests and set out in quest of the
precious metal. Eventually, in
June, 1893, he joined the Govern-
ment Service as Inspector of Stock,
and after filling this position for a
number of years he was appointed
Bartletto, Perth .
MR. CHARLES FREDERICK GALE.
Inspector of Pearl Shell Fisheries at
Shark Bay. This was in 1897, and
two years later he was transferred
to Perth as Chief Inspector of
Fisheries. In 1908 the offices of the
Aborigines and Fisheries were


amalgamated and Mr. Gale was
appointed chief of the combined
departments, a post he has held
ever since. He is a Justice of the
Peace for Western Australia, was
for several years a committee-man
of the Western Australian Turf
Club, and is an active supporter of
all forms of sport.
HUGH HANN, J.P., Superin-
tendent of Fremantle Gaol, is a son
of the late Mr. Hugh Hann, artist,
of Somerset, England, in which
county he was born on February 14,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HUGH HANN.
1862. He received his education in
the world's metropolis, and upon
the conclusion of his studies for
several years was identified with
various walks of life. Eventually, in
1881, he joined the Royal Artillery
Regiment and proceeded with his
battery to India, where he was sta-
tioned in various parts of the coun-
try for eight years, returning to
England in 1890. Mr. Hann retired
from the service in the following
year, and shortly afterwards became
connected with the penal service of
the Imperial Government at Worm-
wood Scrubs, London. He was en-
gaged in the clerical department in
the Manchester and Ruthin Prisons,
and having qualified for the gover-
norship accepted an appointment at
Sierra Leone, where he remained
from 1900 to 1906 as head of the
Prison Department. While filling
this post he was granted a commis-
sion of Justice of the Peace for the
colony, and also held the position of
acting head of the police force and
sheriff. He was responsible for the
formation of the Sierra Leone Fire
Brigade, and acted in the capacity
of captain of this body. In 1906 he
was offered the appointment of Sup-
erintendent of Prisons at Ceylon,
and entered upon his duties at the
close of that year. During his term
of service he was resident at Kandy
for two years as Superintendent of
Prison there, and subsequently pro-
ceeded to Colombo to fill the office of
Inspector-General of Prisons for
Ceylon, in the absence of Major de
Wilton, Superintendent of Convict
Establishments at Mutwal, Maharra,
and Colombo. In 1911 Mr. Hann
was appointed Superintendent of
Prisons at Fremantle and Rottnest,
which post he still retains. He is
chief adviser in all matters pertain-
ing to prison management, and since
his arrival has been gazetted Justice
of the Peace for the Fremantle
magisterial district. Mr. Hann is
a member of the Fremantle Club
and is an adherent of the Order of
Freemasonry. He married Nalder,
daughter of Mr. E. Osborn, of
Berks, England, and has three sons.
JAMES LONGMORE, J.P.,
Superintendent of Public Charities,
Secretary of State Children's Depart-
ment, and Superintendent of Govern-
ment Labour Bureau, was born in
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES LONGMORE.
November, 1856, at Aberdeen, Scot-
land. He was educated in the public
and high schools, Aberden, and was
trained to the scholastic profession.
He had charge in his early life of
the education of the well-known Old
Mile Reformatory at Aberdeen and
also a somewhat similar institution at
Newcastle-on-Tyne. For five years
he was Superintendent of the Certi-
fied Industrial School at Dumfries,
Scotland, and while there was
selected by the Tasmanian Govern-
ment as Superintendent of a newly*
established Training School for boys
at Hobart. Here he remained for
twelve years, and at the end of this
time returned to London, where
shortly afterwards he was appointed
by the late Dr. Barnardo in charge
of his Central Homes, Stepney,
London. In the following year the
Agent-General of Western Australia,
Sir Malcolm Fraser, selected him to
fill the position of Superintendent of
Charities and Inspector of Charitable
Institutions and Industrial Schools
of Western Australia. Accordingly
he set out for the Antipodes in the
latter part of the same year, and
was formally installed in the position
which he now holds. The various
literary societies of Perth have
always received his heartiest support,
and for some years he has been
President of the Perth Literary
Institute, until lately known by the
name of the Swan River Mechanics’
Institute, an institution which pro-
vides facilities for those of limited
means to have access to all the best
classical as well as modern literature.
Mr. Longmore is possessed of the
Scotch faculty of economic manage-
ment, so necessary in connection
with benevolent institutions, and at
the same time has that rare quality
of sympathy with the unfortunate
which makes him particularly well
fitted to fill the position he occupies.
In Western Australia the obligation
to provide for the helpless indigent,
both young and old, is fully recog-
nized, and the State is to be con-
gratulated on securing the services
of a gentleman with the necessary
experience and qualities of character
which make him pre-eminently the
“right man in the right place.” In
connection with the Labour Bureau
Mr. Longmore is, in his own unosten-
tatious way, doing good work for
the State, bringing together those
seeking employment and those hav-
ing employment to offer, without
cost to either side. Two years ago
he was gazetted a Justice of the
Peace for Western Australia.
DUNCAN BERESFORD ORD,
formerly Chief Clerk to the Colonial
Secretary's Department, is a son


of the late Captain A. R. Ord
(who earned distinction during
the Indian mutiny and the New
Zealand war), and a nephew of
Major-General Sir Harry St. George
Ord, R.E., G.C.M.G., C. 8., a
former Governor of Western Aus-
tralia. Born at Aldershot, the
military centre of England, on
July 27, 1860, he was educated at
the Brentwood and Bury St. Ed-
munds Grammar Schools. Having
come to the decision to go abroad
he took passage for Western Aus-
tralia, where he arrived in Decem-
ber of 1881. The beginning of the
new year saw him installed as a
junior in the Crown Lands Depart-
ment, and before twelve months had
elapsed he was promoted to a post
in the Treasury, where he con-
tinued until early in 1883. About
that time large areas of land were
taken up which had been discovered
by the late Mr. Alexander Forrest
in the Kimberley district. This
led to a big influx of settlers, and
the Government deeming it advis-
able to appoint a Government Resi-
dent selected Mr. R. Fairbairn,
until recently Resident Magistrate
at Fremantle, to fill the position,
and Mr. Ord accompanied that
gentleman to the newly-formed
centre as clerk to magistrates, etc.
After twelve months he received pro-
motion which necessitated his return
to Perth, and in 1887 was chosen
as clerk to the Governor, Sir
Frederick Napier Broome, with
whom he continued for three years.
He acted as Private Secretary to Sir
W. C. F. Robinson during his ad-
ministration (1890-5), and for two
years was clerk to his successor,
Sir Gerard Smith, K.C.M.G., sub-
sequently becoming Private Secre-
tary to that gentleman until the
time of his return to England to-
ward the end of 1900. Mr. Ord
was then appointed to the position
of Chief Clerk in the Colonial Secre-
tary's Department, from which office
he retired early in 1912. Mr. Ord
is a well-known figure in sporting
circles, and during his lifetime he
has taken part in almost every
known form of athletics, among
them being football, lawn tennis,
yachting, rowing, and golf. He
revels in those strenuous sports
which demand both pluck and
muscle, and during his association
with Government House he was pro-
Bartletto, Perth,
MR. DUNCAN BERESFORD ORD.
minently to the fore in paperchases
on horseback, and from its inception
was an enthusiastic member of the
Polo Club. Mr. Ord is a member of
the Masonic craft and of the Weld
Club.
WILHELM SIEBENHAAR,
Deputy Registrar - General and
Deputy Government Statistician,
Perth, was born on July 28, 1863,
at the Hague, Holland, and educated
in his native place, matriculating at
the Delft University in 1882. He
then took up the study of philology
and literature for two years, and in
1884 went to England, where he
became engaged in teaching in
various private schools for the next
six years. In the year 1891, when
the attention of the world was
directed toward the West by the
wonderful gold discoveries, Mr.
Siebenhaar migrated to Western
Australia, believing that there would
be greater scope for his ambition in
a new land. For a year after land-
ing in the State he was occupied in
teaching at the Perth Grammar
School, afterwards entering the
Government Service as clerk in the
Land Titles Office, where he re-
mained until 1895, when he was
transferred to the Registrar-
GeneraTs Department as statistical
clerk and sub-editor of the
"Western Australian Year-Book.”
Mr. Siebenhaar fulfilled the duties
appertaining to this position until
October, 1906, when he was ap-
pointed to the post of compiler of
statistics, receiving promotion to his
present office in 1908. He has
always been a devoted student of
the best literature, and derives keen
pleasure from the perusal of the
works of the masters of the pen, both
past and present. Quite recently
Mr. Siebenhaar caused a consider-
able stir in literary circles by the
publication in book form of a finely-
worded poem described as a lyrical
romance in verse, and entitled
“Dorothea,” a work of great merit.
He has also contributed to various
English, French, Dutch, and local
papers, and is well known as the
translator of that portion of Pelsart s
journal relating to the wreck of the
“Batavia” on the Abrolhos, a revised
edition of which work he has but
recently prepared. In the near
future it is his intention to publish
a novel from his own pen, which
has already received the favourable
commendation of the reader of the
Authors' Society to whom it had
been submitted. In 1899 he mar-
ried Lydia Bruce Everard, third
daughter of Mr. Nathaniel Dixon,
F.S.A.A. (since deceased), of
London.
HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE.
Of recent years the treatment of mental diseases
has undergone considerable change. More enlightened
methods have been adopted and greater care paid to
sufferers. In this, one of the most difficult problems of
modern life, Western Australia can claim to be well in
the forefront, and to possess an institution which evokes
the admiration of those qualified to express an opinion.
The original lunatic asylum, as it was then called,
was erected at Fremantle in the old convict days to
accommodate those unfortunates whose mental balance
penal methods, debauchery, or other causes had
destroyed. With the growth of the colony under respon-
sible government it was felt that better quarters should
be secured for the inmates, so that under more pleasant


surroundings they might have every opportunity of
recovery. A large area of land at Whitby Falls was
secured and some of the patients removed there. The
next step was to get rid of the old habitat at Fremantle
and secure a more suitable location. The place chosen
was Claremont. There some 400 acres of ground were
set aside for the purpose, and on the site has been
erected an institution on the most approved medical
lines. The plans were prepared by the Government
Architect, under the instructions and with the advice of
Dr. S. H. Montgomery, the Inspector-General of the
Insane, an authority of more than local fame in the
treatment of insanity. The cost of the buildings, which
works out at about £2OO per bed, compares very favour-
ably with that of similar structures in other parts of
the world. Our description of the Hospital is taken
from a recent issue of The IVestern Mail , which gives
this building is the store, with a large arcade between.
Immediately behind the store is the kitchen, and on one
side of the kitchen are the attendants’ quarters and on
the other the nurses’ quarters. Behind the kitchen is
the main dining hall, which is capable of seating about
350 patients for meals. All entertainments are given in
this hall, and for this purpose a large stage has been
provided. There are five male and three female wards,
and at present a fourth female ward is in course of
erection. The wards are arranged in a half-moon shape
with the main dining hall as the centre of the half-moon.
The male patients are classified according to their men-
tal condition, and are placed in one or other of the
following wards: —(1) Quiet and chronic, (2) recent and
acute, (3) sick and infirm, (4) epileptics, (5) noisy and
violent. A similar system obtains on the female side.
“About half a mile away from the main hospital is
HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE, CLAREMONT
an excellent idea not only of the actual buildings them-
selves, but also of the manner in which they are adapted
for the treatment of various classes of patients:
‘‘The buildings are substantially built of brick and
sandstone with slate roofs, and are connected with each
other by covered ways. Their exterior is plain, no
money having been spent in unnecessary ornamentation,
but no expense has been spared in |3roviding for the
comfort of the patients, more especially as regards up-
to-date baths, lavatories, etc. The sewage system is self-
contained, and is carried out by means of two septic
tanks with automatic distributers.
“After passing through the main gates the visitor
ascends by a steady gradient till he reaches the adminis-
trative block. In this building are the doctors’ offices,
dispensary, male and female visiting-rooms, etc. Behind
another large block of four wards with its own kitchen,
dining-room, etc., capable of holding 150 patients, and
in this are housed quiet and harmless patients who work
in the farm and gardens. The whole of the institution
is lit with electric light, generated by two internal com-
bustion suction gas-engines and accumulators. Two large
locally-built boilers produce the steam required for bath-
ing, cooking, and the laundry, but the steam is not used
as a motive power, as all machines are driven electrically.
All bread consumed at the Hospital is baked on the pre-
mises. The laundry has all the latest washing machines,
and the kitchen is equally well equipped with a modern
plant.
‘‘The Hospital draws its water supply from its own
artesian bore, which has been sunk 1,800 ft., and which
gives a water supply of 750,000 gallons per day with a


40-ft. pressure at the bore head. This pressure serves
to irrigate the various fodders grown on the farm and
the lower-lying portions of the ground, but is insufficient
to supply water to the Hospital, so two electrically-driven
pumps force the water into tanks in the water-tower,
which is such a prominent feature of the institution
when viewed from a distance. The Hospital grounds
have an extent of 400 acres, the greater portion of which
is devoted to farming. At present sixty-five cows are
milked daily, and the Hospital is supplying the various
hospitals of Perth and Fremantle with milk. The
grounds have been laid out in lawns, flower-beds,
orchards, etc., and practically all this work is being done
by the patients. The system in vogue of employing
patients in outside work is not only profitable to the
institution, but acts beneficially on the patients them-
selves towards their recovery. At the present time about
130 male patients are employed on the farm grounds
and also on the cricket oval, which is now nearing com-
pletion.
“One feature of the administration is the establish-
ment of what is called the detached ward,’ where about
thirty patients, who are good farm workers, are located.
The doors of this ward are not locked day or night, and
the patients can go in and out as freely as if they were in a
private house, the only restrictions being that they must
be inside by 10 p.m. and must give their word not to
leave the grounds without permission. This idea is a
considerable advance on what obtains in most places,
and has been found to work admirably.
“In the wards themselves all appearances of restraint
which are so prominent in old institutions have been
abolished. There are no such things as iron bars, etc.,
over the windows, and seclusion, etc., have been cut down
to a minimum. The airing courts have been nicely laid
out with paths, lawns, etc., and a prominent feature is the
SYDNEY HAMILTON ROWAN
MONTGOMERY MB., Ch.B.,
Royal University of Ireland,
Inspector-General for the Insane,
was born at Belfast on October 25,
1870 and is a son of the late Rev.
Robert Montgomery, of that city.
He received his early education at
the Royal Academical Institution,
Belfast and at Queen’s College in
the same town, subsequently gradu-
ating in medicine at the Royal Uni-
versity of Ireland. After receiving
his’ diploma he went as medical
officer on board the “City of Agra,”
a vessel running to Calcutta, and
and continued for two years on this
boat which subsequently was lost
with’ all her living freight. Upon
relinquishing this post Dr. Montgo-
merv spent a year in Dorset as
medical assistant to Dr. Robinson,
when, desiring to gain experience in
the subject in which he has
specialized, he joined the staff of the
Nottingham City Asylum for the
Insane, under Dr. Powell. While
there he had on many occasions the
privilege of meeting the celebrated
architect, Mr. Hine, who designed
many noted asylums, and who at
present is consulting architect to the
Lunacy Commissioners in England,
and of gaining from him much valu-
able information with regard to the
planning of hospitals for the insane.
Rising to the position of Deputy-
Superintendent and Senior Assistant
in this Institution Dr. Montgomery
in 1901 was offered the appointment
of Superintendent of the old Fre-
mantle Asylum, Western Australia,
by the Lunacy Commissioners who
had been asked by the Western Aus-
sinking of the end wall of all airing courts so that the
patients have an unrestricted view of the surrounding
country, and the impression that they are being con-
fined by four walls is considerably minimized.
“Through the beneficence of the late Mr. Padbury a
sum of money was left for the benefit of the patients.
This sum has been invested, and the interest is being
used for providing amusements for the patients. As an
example, music is dispensed during the patients’ meal
in the main dining hall by means of a large electrically-
driven auxetephone.
“The staff at present numbers eighty-three attend-
ants and thirty-six nurses, to which must be added
cooks, laundresses, gardeners, engineers, farm labourers,
etc., and the present patient population is 850, composed
of 600 males and 250 females. The latter figures are
somewhat alarming at first sight, but the ratio of insane
per thousand in Western Australia is the lowest in Aus-
tralasia, with the exception of South Australia. The
popular idea that when a person goes insane his recovery
is hopeless should be corrected, as the figures at Clare-
mont show that about 40 per cent, of admissions
recover.”
The proportion of insane to the total population has
steadily increased every year since 1901, with the one ex-
ception —1910. This is only to be expected as the State
steadies down. It is still, however, lower than in any
Australasian State with the exception of South Australia,
and is much lower than the general average throughout
the world. Unfortunately insanity, due perhaps to
some degree to the complex conditions of modern life, is
increasing, notwithstanding the improved methods of
treatment. Western Australia cannot hope to avoid
the operation of general principles, but it can and does
do everything that human skill can suggest to bring
about the largest possible percentage of cures.
tralian Government of the day to
choose a man with special knowledge
of the most approved designs for
asylums, as the building at Fre-
mantle was out of date, and it had
been decided to reconstruct it on
the most modern lines. This offer
was accepted by Dr. Montgomery,
who spent the first twelve months
after his arrival in a much-needed
reorganization of the service under
Dr. Loyegrove who was then
Principal Medical Officer of Western
Australia, and in drawing out plans
for the present fine building au Clare-
mont in conjunction with Mr. Grain-
ger, Government Chief Architect,
now in practice in Meloourne, and
who has some nations works to his
credit. In order to equip himself the
more efficiently for his task Dr. Mont-
gomery travelled with Mr. Grainger


throughout the Australian States,
visiting the various institutions, and
shortly after his return assisted in
drafting the new Lunacy Act, which
was passed in 1903, and in the same
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. S. H. R. MONTGOMERY.
year the Lunacy Branch was sepa-
rated from the Medical Department,
and Dr. Montgomery was appointed
its head and Inspector-General. In
1905 a commencement was made
with the new building, which stands
at tne present day as a monument to
the painstaking care and expert
knowledge of the gentleman under
review, who was responsible in large
measure for its design. Since enter-
ing upon his important duties he has
never relaxed a vigilant supervision
of the whole establishment and has
proved himself eminently fitted for
the task of thus ministering to
afflicted humanity. One feature of
the institution to be remarked upon
is that the block built for infectious
cases, of which there is none at the
present time, is occupied by about
twenty patients who are practically
not under supervision, but who
attend to their own needs and com-
fort and are employed in work on
the farm, which is a department well
worthy of mention, and is included
in the 400 acres on which the
Asylum is built. Special attention
is given to the breeding of prize
shorthorn milch cattle, and of Tam-
worth, Berkshire, and other breeds
of pigs, and at the last Royal Show
exhibits from this farm were awarded
three gold medals, as well as a silver
and a bronze medal, while during
the past year a profit of nearly
£l,OOO was made. The manufacture
of electric light is carried on on the
premises and during meal-times
music is discoursed for the enjoy-
ment of the inmates by means of a
large electric-driven gramaphone.
Dr. Montgomery is a member of the
British Medical Association, and in
1910 was President of the Western
Australian Branch of that body. He
is a member of the Masonic craft and
of the Weld Club. Golf and tennis
are his favourite recreations, and he
is also fond of a game of billiards. In
1900 he married a daughter of Mr.
Percy Callaghan, of Liverpool, Eng-
land (a Director of the famous
tobacco firm o-f Ogden’s), and has
four sons.
JOHN THEODORE ANDER-
SON, L.R.C.S. and L.R.C.P.
(Edin.), L.F.P.S. (Glas.), Senior
Assistant Medical Officer and Deputy
Bartletto, Perth.
DR. JOHN THEODORE ANDERSON.
Inspector-General of the Hospital for
the Insane, Claremont, and member
of the Medico-Psychological Associa-
tion of Great Britain and Ireland, is
a son of the late Rev. John Ander-
son, of Warrnambool, Victoria,
where he was born on August 10,
1879. His scholastic career was begun
at Toorak College, Melbourne, and
continued at Scotch College, of the
same city. After matriculation he
became a student at Ormond College,
University of Melbourne, and three
years later proceeded to Edinburgh,
where he qualified for the medical
profession at the Royal College of
Physicians and Surgeons. Dr. Ander-
son then accepted an appointment as
Assistant Medical Officer at the
Stirling District Asylum at Larbert,
Scotland, under the superintendence
of Dr. George M. Robertson, now
connected with the Royal Asylum at
Morningside, Edinburgh. lie speaks
highly of the system adopted and
advocated at this hospital of the
nursing of male patients by women,
which is now being copied by many
similar institutions in Scotland,
England, and America. While resi-
dent at this asylum he made a special
study of the bacteriological causes of
general paralysis in the insane. In
July, 1908, the Agent-General for
Western Australia appointed Dr.
Anderson to his present position,
which he entered upon in September
of the same year, remaining in
charge of the old Fremantle Asylum
until it was closed and the patients
transferred to Claremont. While at
Melbourne the subject of this review
won his blue at rowing, cricket, and
lacrosse, and made his name at Edin-
burgh in cricket, which is his forte
in tiie world of sport. In 1903 he
played for All Scotland against the
Philadelphian Representative Team,
and also wielded the willow against
the Australian Eleven and various
county teams at a later date. Since
his arrival at Perth he has repre-
sented Western Australia in inter-
state cricket contests on two occa-
sions, and although also fond of golf,
cricket is his favourite recreation.
JAMES BENTLEY, M. 8., Ch.B.
(Edin.), Assistant Medical Officer,
DR. JAMES BENTLEY.
Hospital for the Insane, Claremont,
is a son of Mr. James Bentley, of
Partecn, County Clare, Ireland, and
received his early scholastic training


at a private school in Limerick. He
graduated in the faculty of medicine
at Edinburgh University in 1904,
and in August of that year was
appointed house surgeon in the
Royal Infirmary at Preston,
Lancashire, which position he
occupied for over two years. A sub-
sequent period was spent by Dr.
Bentley as medical officer on board
the Royal mail steamer “Oronsa,”
one of the Pacific Steamship Naviga-
tion Fleet, and at the termination of
this engagement, with the object of
obtaining experience in lunacy cases,
he joined the staff of the Leicester-
shire and Rutland County Asylum,
England. After continuing there for
some considerable time and improv-
ing every opportunity for enlarging
his knowledge of the subject which
he has made his specialty, he was
offered by the Government of
Western Australia his present
appointment under Dr. Montgomery,
which he accepted and began his
professional duties at Claremont
in September, 1908. Dr. Bentley
specializes in epilepsy and has made
many original observations in con-
nection with this form of disease, in
the treatment of which he has been
notably successful. The manly game
of football has won his chief allegi-
ance in the world of sport, and he
played the Rugby game with distinc-
tion for his University in Scotland.
He was also a member of the Edin-
burgh Institute Rugby Football
Club, and later played for several
others, including the Lancashire
County Club.
MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH.
These two important sections of the public service
are under the control of Dr. J. W. Hope, who fills the
combined offices of Principal Medical Officer and Com-
missioner of Public Health. Mr. P. H. Milner is Secre-
tary to the medical side of the department, and Mr. F. J
Huelin to the Health Branch.
As Principal Medical Officer Dr. Hope has general
control over all medical matters within the State. He
is assisted by Dr. R. C. E. Atkinson as Medical Officer
of Plealth and Dr. S. A. McClintock as Pathologist and
Bacteriologist, while there are fifty-four district medical
officers throughout the State who have immediate charge
of matters within their districts, those at the various
ports acting also as quarantine officers.
The hospitals of the State, which are largely or
partly financed by the Medical Department, consist of
the Perth and Fremantle Public Hospitals, Government
departmental hospitals, hospitals controlled by local com-
mittees, hospitals at timber mills, and the Consumptive
Sanatorium at Coolgardie.
The Perth and Fremantle Hospitals are adminis-
tered by boards appointed by the Governor-in-Council,
and are therefore practically outside the scope of the
department, except that certain rights are reserved in
return for the annual subsidies towards maintenance.
With the departmental hospitals the Medical Depart-
ment is primarily concerned, as it is responsible for their
administration and maintenance. The same may be said
of the Consumptive Sanatorium at Coolgardie. So far
as the hospitals controlled by local boards and those
established at timber mills are concerned, the depart-
ment has no control beyond demanding financial returns
in order to ensure proper conduct of the institutions and
satisfactory provision for indigent patients.
The department has also instituted a system of dis-
trict nursing, with the intention of providing nursing
facilities in remote districts, and so remove, in part at
least, one of the difficulties that new settlers in hitherto
virgin country have to face.
As Commissioner of Public Health Dr. Hope’s
duties are fully set out in the Health Act, 1911, a com-
prehensive measure which came into operation on J une 1
last year, and under which the functions exercised
up to that date by the Central Board of Health were
merged in those of the Commissioner, who must, of
course, be a qualified medical practitioner. Perhaps no
better idea of the system now in operation can be given
than a resume of the Act itself. The first alteration
noted is the abolition of the Central Board of Health,
which for the past twenty-five years has constituted the
main health authority in the State, and the substitution
for this body of a ' Commissioner of Public Health,” to
which position Dr. J. W. Hope, who was president of
the now defunct Central Board of Health, has been ap-
pointed. The Act provides that the Commissioner shall
be a legally-qualified medical practitioner.
The Central Board composed of members who
had special professional qualifications, and were thus
enabled to materially assist in administrative affairs.
Although the department is thus deprived of the pro-
fessional services, technical advice, and administrative
functions that have been in the past rendered by the
Central Board, the Commissioner is assisted by the advice
of the departmental officers, and of the technical advisers
in the service of the Government in other departments.
The Commissioner exercises all the functions that were
previously in the hands of the Central Board of Health.
The principal responsibility attaching to the Commis-
sioner is, under the authority of the Minister for Public
Health, to supervise the work of the local authorities
and see that these bodies properly enforce the provisions
of the Act and assume their own particular duties.
Under the old Act local administration was in the
hands of municipal councils and of local boards of health
composed of gentlemen appointed by the Governor. Of
these local authorities there were about 118 scattered
throughout the State. The new legislation contains a
new departure in that, in addition to utilizing municipal
councils, roads boards, where considered advisable, may
be given the powers of local health authorities. In this
way the prestige of the local health authority generally
is increased, as a larger number of them are responsible


statutory bodies, the members of which are elected by
the ratepayers. It is still found necessary, however, to
utilize local boards of health where neither municipal
councils nor roads boards are available, but the number
of these nominee boards under the new Act is reduced
to forty-seven. The total number of local authorities
operating on June 1 under the new Act was 117.
The powers of the Commissioner are more extensive
than those that were enjoyed by the Central Board of
Health. He is, for instance, placed in the position of
a Court of Appeal against decisions of local authorities,
and as such has the power to review their actions. He
further has the power to specify the duties that shall be
performed by the officers of local authorities. There are
many functions which he has power to compel local
authorities to undertake which under the old Act were
only exercisable by local authorities at their own dis-
cretion.
The local authorities and their officers also are en-
dowed with very much more extensive powers. It is
absolutely essential in various circumstances that there
should be almost no limit to these powers, and it may
be stated that the provisions of the new Act contain all
that, in the light of present knowledge, should be re-
garded as necessary. The extension of powers is particu-
larly noticeable on reference to parts of the Act dealing
with control of food and infectious diseases. Whereas
the old Act made very little reference to drain-
age and sewerage work, the new Act contains very
extensive provisions under this heading. The Act pro-
vides that the provisions of the Metropolitan Sewerage
Act shall have jDrecedence over the provisions of the
Health Act, and therefore the sections of the latter
measure regarding sewers and drains will not apply
where the Sewerage Act is in operation. Apart from
this question, however, there are many much-needed im-
provements and new provisions which will be of
advantage to local authorities and to public health in
general. For instance, special provision is made for the
cleanliness and sanitation of hairdressers’ premises, for
the sanitation of camps, for the construction of morgues
and septic tanks, for prescribing the sanitary fitments
to be used, and numerous other matters.
The 1898 Act provides for the registration of “com-
mon lodging-houses,” such premises including houses
wherein six or more persons are harboured or lodged for
a single night, or less than a week at a time. The term
“common lodging-house” is one that has been taken from
English legislation, and the common lodging-house as
found in London and other large cities is unknown here.
The term in the new Act is now altered to that of
“lodging-houses,” and includes all places where more
than three persons are lodged. The powers regarding
this class of premises are much extended compared to
those contained in the 1898 Act. The new Act contains
an entirely new feature in that it provides for the regis-
tration of ‘‘hoarding-house/’ this term including all pre-
mises where more than six persons, exclusive of the
family of the keeper, are boarded from week to week.
Provisions regarding this class of premises are, of course,
less stringent than those connected with lodging-houses,
but the object of their registration is to ensure more
rigid supervision in connection with cleanliness and pos-
sible overcrowding.
The present Act is the same as the 1898 Act, in that
it gives local authorities power to condemn any house
as being unfit for human habitation. The old Act
stopped short of that, and gave no power for the demoli-
tion or alteration of a condemned house being insisted
upon by a local authority. The new Act now remedies
this, so that it will no longer be necessary for a con-
demned and deserted house to remain an eyesore and
nuisance to people.
The provisions under the new Act in relation to
public buildings are very similar to those in the 1898
Act. The Commissioner has all the powers of the Central
Board in relation to plans. He has power to close pre-
mises in respect to which his requirements are not obeyed,
or to close any unsafe building. In regard to the regula-
tions for overcrowding, power to make which is con-
tinued, the penalty for a breach may be fixed at £IOO in
lieu of £2O, the maximum amount under the old Act.
The provisions of Part VIII. of the Health Act are
equivalent to the Pure Food Act, and contains much
of the machinery that has been enforced in the Eastern
States of Australia for the last two or three years. The
provisions of the 1898 Act regarding food were, firstly,
that unwholesome food was not to be sold, and, secondly,
that adulteration of food must not take place. With
regard to the latter item, there was no specification as to
what constituted adulteration.
The new Act, however, following the principle laid
down in the Eastern States, provides for the appointment
of an advisory committee, composed of the Commissioner
of Public Health, the Government Analyst, a bac-
teriologist, and two persons conversant with trade re-
quirements. Ibis committee has power to recommend
to the Governor standards to be adopted for the com-
position of foods and drugs; the standard having been
adopted, the question whether or not a particular food
or drug is adulterated resolves itself into a comparison
of the particular article with the standard which has
been prescribed. If the sample does not comply with the
standard then the person who has sold or offered for sale
the goods from which the sample was taken commits a
breach of the Act. The definitions of foods and drugs
respectively are very wide, and standards for all branches
of these may be set up by the Foods Standard Com-
mittee. Unwholesome food in the new Act, as in the
old, may be seized by officers of the health authorities,


and the owner or vendor be prosecuted. The new Act,
however, makes provision for the inspection of all im-
ported food, which may be dealt with in the same way
as that sold locally.
“Hygiene" is a scientific subject, and in no branch of
the work is the application of scientific knowledge and
research more utilized than in coping with infectious
diseases. Since the 1898 Act came into operation, a con-
siderable amount of fresh knowledge has been brought to
bear upon infectious diseases, so that the provisions of
that Act were out of date, and in many respects faulty
and unworkable. These defects were remedied in the
new Act, and as far as possible the provisions brought
up to date and into line with the latest knowledge of
the methods of spread and prevention of these diseases.
For the last few years the prevention of tuber-
culosis has been the subject of much discussion, not only
among health authorities but the general public, and
this fact finds recognition in the special provisions that
are contained in the new Health Act to deal with this
particular disease. Not only is pulmonary tuberculosis
made a notifiable disease, as it was in one of the amend-
ments of the old Act, but deaths from tuberculosis have
now also to be reported, and in addition medical prac-
titioners are to report annually to the Commissioner on
all cases that have come under their care during the
previous year. It is hoped by this means to keep a check
upon the movements of cases, and after a period of years
be able to say with reasonable exactness the number of
cases of this disease existing in the State. Power is also
given to make regulations for the prevention of tuber-
culosis.
The portion of the 1911 Act dealing with the regis-
tration of midwives is entirely new to this State. It
provided that after the beginning of 1912 no unregis-
tered woman shall practice as a midwife unless more
than five miles from the residence of a medical practi-
tioner, or in special circumstances. A midwives' regis-
tration board, consisting of the Commissioner, two medi-
cal practitioners, and two nurses is the body responsible
for the registration of midwives, and has power to pre-
scribe the examination and conditions under which regis-
tration shall be effected, and also to prescribe the condi-
tions of the practice of midwifery by registered women.
The unnecessary loss of life, both in infants and mothers,
in the past is more than sufficient warranty for the intro-
duction of this new departure.
In relation to maternity, there are two other pro-
visions in the Act, firstly, that deaths from puerperal
JAMES WILLIAM HOPE,
F.R.C.P., J.P., Commissioner for
Health, Western Australia, is a
Welshman, having been born at
Hay in the year 1851. He received
his education in his native town,
and at the close of his scholastic
career passed the necessary examina-
tions for his medical course and
entered Westminster Hospital, where
he remained for twelve months. He
proceeded to Bartholomew's Medical
fever must be reported both to the local authority and
to a magistrate, the latter to determine whether an in-
quest shall be held or not; and, secondly, that the
occupier of any house at which a woman not usually
resident in such house is attended in maternity shall
notify the medical officer of the fact. These two pro-
visions are designed to minimize the possibility of illegal
practice.
There are many minor matters in which the 1911
Act contains new provisions, or provisions which on com-
parison with the old Act are found to be much improved.
The coming into operation of this new Act it is hoped
will inaugurate a fresh era in health administration in
Western Australia. By those competent to judge the
Act is regarded as a good one —not perfect, perhaps,
but certainly containing powers which are needed by the
health authorities to maintain a high standard of all-
round public health. The possession of a good Act, how-
ever, does not in itself achieve anything, and wise, sound,
and earnest administration is necessary to enable those
objects, which Parliament had before it in passing the
measure, to be achieved.
The alteration in the system of central control is
something in the nature of an experiment in this State,
although it is one which has been in vogue in some of
the Eastern States for many years. It is confidently
expected that the new system will be a success, and that
with the new and enlarged powers both central and local
authorities now possess that a higher standard of public
health will be secured in the future throughout the State.
This lengthy, and yet brief, precis of an Act which
contains 300 clauses is sufficient to show that the Health
Department has sufficient power to control every phase of
the public health. After a year's operation it has been
found to fulfil practically all that was expected of it, and
proves that in all matters relating to hygiene Western
Australia is fully alive to its responsibility.
One special work being undertaken by the depart-
ment is the systematic medical examination of school
children. This was commenced in 1906, and though it
has not been continued systematically during the whole
period since that date, sufficient has been done to prove
how highly necessary it is and what good results may be
expected from it. By the courtesy of the Dental Asso-
ciation, the examination of the teeth of the school
children in the metropolitan area is now being under-
taken, and arrangements are being made for a permanent
surgery where the children of indigent parents may re-
ceive attention free of expense.
School to complete his curriculum,
and in 1874 was received as a
Licentiate of the Royal College of
Physicians in Edinburgh. Four
years later he was made a member,
and in 1885 took his degree as a


Fellow of this institution. In 1874,
having gained some experience in
one of the large hospitals, Dr. Hope
was offered an appointment under
the Imperial Government as District
Medical Officer at York, Western
Australia. He accepted the post,
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. JAMES WILLIAM HOPE.
and embarking by the ship “Eulie”
arrived at Fremantle and proceeded
direct to the scene of his appoint-
ment. Here, in addition to his
official duties, he interested himself
in many other matters, and soon
became recognized as one of the pro-
gressive spirits of the time. His
capital, invested in agricultural and
pastoral enterprises, brought him in
satisfactory returns, and when the
discovery of gold was made at Kim-
berley, at his own expense he
organized and dispatched a pros-
pecting party to visit and examine
the new field. Three years after his
promotion as Medical Officer to the
Fremantle Prison and Convict Estab-
lishment at Rottnest Island, and
Health Officer to the port and town
of Fremantle in 1882, Ur. Hope
equipped a second prospecting party
to travel through the interior. This
party crossed the plains in the
direction of Southern Cross and dis-
covered the Hope’s Hill Mine (named
after the doctor), which was worked
for some time and proved so rich
that it was purchased by an English
Syndicate for a considerable sum,
Dr. Hope retaining a large interest
in the property. After discharging
the onerous and responsible duties
of his Fremantle appointment with
the utmost tact, skill, and con-
scientious recognition of their diffi-
culties for a lengthy period, Dr.
Hope received well-merited promo-
tion. When in 1911 the Central
Board of Health was abolished and
the Government Medical Health
Department was established in its
place he was appointed Commissoner
of Public Health for Western Aus-
tralia, which office he still holds.
He was gazetted a Justice of the
Peace in 1881. In 1878 he was ap-
pointed a Captain in the York Rifles
then forming. He resigned during
the following year, and in 1884 joined
the medical staff as a Surgeon-
Major, relinquishing his connection
with that department in 1886. In
1892 he received a commission as
Captain in the Artillery Corps at
Fremantle, and retained the com-
mand until transferred to the un-
attached list in November, 1903.
He was promoted to the rank of
Major on May 24, 1897. In 1878
he married the daughter of the
Honourable J. H. Monger, of York,
and has six children.
REGINALD CYRIL EVERITT
ATKINSON, M.A., M. 8., Ch.B.
(Edin.), D. P. H. (Cantab.),
F.R.1.P.H., Government Bacteriolo-
gist and Pathologist, etc., is a son
of Mr. Reginald Atkinson, of the
New Zealand Civil Service, and was
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. R. C. E. ATKINSON.
born at Christchurch, New Zealand,
on’ December 4, 1879. He pursued
his studies at the High School in his
native town, subsequently entering
Canterbury College, the Christ-
church branch of the University of
New Zealand, where he graduated
B.A. in 1901 and took his degree of
Master of Arts a year later, with
honours in chemistry. In 1902 he
proceeded to Edinburgh, and tak-
ing a live years' course graduated in
medicine and surgery in 1907, in his
final year carrying off the prize
awarded for work in connection with
skin diseases. He was granted his
diploma of public health at Cam-
bridge in the following year, and
shortly afterwards returned to his
native soil and was successful in
obtaining the appointment of referee
to the New Zealand Government
Life Department of Assurance, In
the discharge of the duties pertaining
to this office Dr. Atkinson travelled
over the whole of the northern por-
tion of the North Island of New
Zealand, and after resigning the post
established himself for a time in
private practice in Auckland. He
has always made a special study of
the subject of bacteriology, and in
1911 was offered the appointment of
Government Bacteriologist by the
Western Australian authorities, a
position he accepted and still holds.
Dr. Atkinson while in Scotland made
frequent trips to the Highlands, and
also travelled on the European Con-
tinent. His chief form of recreation
is swimming, and in the waters of
New Zealand he won various tro-
phies in connection with amateur
swimming events. He is also fond
of sculling, and is a warm advocate
of hockey and other outdoor sports,
in February, 1911, Dr. Atkinson
married a daughter of Mr. Michael
Gallery, of Mercer, Waikato, New
Zealand.
DAVID ERNEST WILLIAMS,
J.P., L.R.C.S., and P. (Irel.) is a
son of the late Mr. David Mark
A illiams, M.D., of Liverpool, a
noted specialist in chest diseases and
founder of the Liverpool Hospital
loi Diseases of the Chest. He was
born at Liverpool on January 6,
1868, and received his educational
training at the Liverpool College,
subsequently gaining his medical
diplomas in the College of Surgery,
Dublin University. His first ap-
pointment was on the staff of the
Liverpool Northern Hospital, where
he devoted the whole of his time to
the practice of surgery, resigning the
post to accept that of Medical Officer
for the Elder Dempster Shipping
Company, in connection with which


he proceeded to the west coast of
Africa. Upon returning to Liver-
pool he completed his post-graduate
course at the Royal Infirmary and
was advised by a retired medical
friend to emigrate to Perth, then
the newest of the British possessions.
He discovered the whereabouts of
this remote region with considerable
difficulty, but eventually arrived in
Western Australia in 1893, imme-
diately joining the Government
medical staff and being appointed to
Carnarvon. Here he was instru-
mental in having the local hospital
built, and two years later was trans-
ferred to Bunbury, where he at once
set a similar movement afoot with
like satisfactory results. In 1909
Dr. Williams received appointment
to Fremantle, where he has ever
since discharged the duties of dis-
trict medical officer and quarantine
officer, embracing the offices of pub-
lic vaccinator, medical officer to the
Fremantle Prison, and Federal
quarantine officer. In his exten-
sive private practice he prefers to
specialize in surgery, and keeps well
in touch with all the more modern
methods obtaining in this important
branch of medical science. In 1904
he visited England for the purpose
of taking the post-graduate course
in surgery at the Royal University,
Liverpool, and in skin diseases at
the Liverpool Hospital for Diseases
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. DAVID ERNEST WILLIAMS.
of the Skin. He also attended Dr.
Stopford Taylor's clinical lectures on
the use of the X-rays, etc., in skin
diseases, and has become thoroughly
proficient in the application of this
system, having all the most up-to-
date appliances for skin treatment by
X-rays ionic and high-frequency
methods in use in his surgery.
Apart from his profession he is an
enthusiastic orchardist, and nine
years ago took up seventy acres of
land in the heart of the heavily-tim-
bered virgin bush country, the
development of which he has carried
on with such vigour that to-day he
has thirty acres of the seventy under
close cultivation of the finest quality
oranges, over 3,000 cases of choice
fruit having been produced during
the present season. This orchard,
“Eden Bower,” is situated at Har-
vey, on the south-western railway
line, and is credited with being the
best orangery in the State. A man
of very versatile abilities, Dr.
Williams has never confined his
interests to one department of life,
and his military career is worthy of
mention. He passed the necessary
examination and was gazetted
Lieutenant in 1901, two years later
being promoted to the rank of Cap-
tain in command of the Bunbury
Volunteer Company, and retains
that rank on the unattached list at
the present time. In July, 1912, he
was promoted to the rank of Staff-
Surgeon of the Naval Reserve Forces
and appointed District Naval Medi-
cal Officer at Fremantle. In sporting
circles he is well known, being a
good rifle shot, an adept with the
rod, and a plucky rider, and for
many years he acted as judge in con-
nection with the Bunbury Race
Club. In his youth he was a Rugby
player, and was one of the team
chosen to play the famous Maori
visitors to the Old Country in 1887.
He is a very fair amateur photo-
grapher and a motorist, and is a
member of the Automobile Club of
Western Australia. He is also a
member of the Weld Club and of the
South-Western Club of Bunbury,
and is a life member of the Yacht
Club of that seaport. In 1895 Dr.
Williams was gazetted a Justice of
the Peace for the whole of
Western Australia. He married
Mary Caroline, daughter of the late
Mr. Thomas Ryves, of Litherland
Park, Liverpool, and has three
daughters. It is interesting to note
that he is a brother of the famous
R. S. Williams, Lecturer on Bac-
teriology and Hygiene at the Uni-
versity of Liverpool, and connected
with the Tropical School of Medicine,
while two of his sisters have taken the
M.A. degrees at Victoria University,
Liverpool, and at Oxford.
DAVID FRANCIS BLAN-
CHARD, L.R.C.P. & S. (Edin.),
L.F.P.S. (Glas.), Government Dis-
trict Medical Officer for Perth, was
born at Armagh, Ireland, on June
14, 1866, and is a son of the late Mr.
Robert J. Blanchard, of Yorkshire,
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. DAVID FRANCIS BLANCHARD.
England. Educated privately, he
subsequently attended Queen's Col-
lege, Cork, Ireland, and courses of
lectures at Dublin, Edinburgh, Lon-
don, and Paris. He graduated at
the University of Edinburgh and
practised for a time in the South of
Ireland, coming to Western Austra-
lia in 1895. Joining the Govern-
ment Service Dr. Blanchard received
the appointment of Medical Officer
at Beverley, where he also engaged in
private practice. Four years later
he was transferred to Cue, where he
acted in a similar capacity, remain-
ing until June, 1909, in which month
he was appointed to the post he now
occupies. In addition to his duties
as District Medical Officer he acts as
police medical officer, medical referee
for the various State departments,
particularly the Education Depart-
ment and the railways, and is referee
to three of the leading insurance
offices. As District Medical Officer
his duties include attendance on State
children and visiting physician to
the Subiaco Industrial School and to
the Destitute Home at Claremont,
one of the largest institutions of its
kind in Australasia. He also has
an extensive private practice at
Perth and makes a special study of
subjects peculiarly modern, including
the treatment of disease by electric


light and radium, and it is his inten-
tion to proceed in the near future to
Europe and the various centres of
progressive medical science to pur-
sue his investigations on these sub-
jects so vital to the well-being of the
community. Dr. Blanchard is, how-
ever, by no means onesided, and has
the welfare of his adopted country
at heart in more directions than that
indicated by his profession. He is
keenly interested in the development
of the mining industry in Western
Australia and has been associated as
an investor in most of the great min-
ing ventures. In the progress of
agriculture he also has a personal
stake, being the owner of 6,000 acres
of land in different parts of the State,
including 2,000 at that rising wheat
centre, Kellerberrin, devoted to the
growth of the golden grain. While
an advocate of all healthy outdoor
recreation. Dr. Blanchard's official
duties preclude an active participa-
tion in the various forms of sport,
but in the brief moments of his
leisure he is wont to obtain enjoy-
ment in the execution of a wide
range of musical works. He married
in September, 1911, Pearl, daughter
of Mr. John Bosworth, of Adelaide,
South Australia.
PHILIP HENRY MILNER,
Secretary to the Medical and Health
Department, is a native of South
Australia, where he was born on
It is the boast of Great Britain that its police force,
like its judiciary, is free from corrupt influences, and
the sense of honour that that tradition implants in the
minds of the guardians of the public peace has been trans-
mitted in turn to each colony and dependency of the
Empire. In this Western Australia does not differ from
other British States. Throughout its history the police
force has maintained a highly creditable record. During
the early history of the settlement one of the principal
duties of the force was to protect the colonists from
the depredations and attacks of the natives, a duty
which they carried out with severity, but at all times
with justice. How great the aboriginal menace became,
and how it was finally crushed by the police under Cap-
tain Ellis, who lost his life from injuries received, are
told in the historical section of this work. Even now
the police in the Nor’-West find the control of the
natives part of their duty, and, notwithstanding occa-
sional corcqilaints of harshness from those who do not
realize the danger to be apprehended, they carry out
that duty in a commendable spirit of conciliation.
September 15, 1874. He is a son of
the late Mr. William Milner, of
Prospect, near Adelaide, and received
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PHILIP HENRY MILNER.
his education at various scholastic
institutions in the sister State. When
sixteen years of age he entered the
office of a sharebroker at Adelaide,
and for the next five or six years
gained valuable experience in several
of the commercial houses of that city.
He was attracted to Western Aus-
tralia in the year 1896, and shortly
after his arrival joined the Civil
POLICE.
Service as a shorthand writer in the
office of the Surveyor - General, in
which capacity he continued until
March, 1907, when he received
transfer to the Medical Department
as chief clerk, subsequently becom-
ing Secretary to the Medical and
Health Department, which post he
still continues to hold. The duties
connected with this office are varied
and of great responsibility, embracing
as they do the control of the hos-
pitals of the State, quarantine, the
administration of the Acts relating
to early closing, supervision of fac-
tories, and the consideration of the
health of the community in general.
Apart from his official functions Mr.
Milner makes a hobby of horticul-
ture, particularly as regard the cul-
tivation of orange-trees, and he has
a fine orchard of this luscious fruit
in the south-western district. In the
local yachting world he is a well-
known and popular figure, and has
been for many years Hon. Secretary
to the Royal Perth Yacht Club. He
is a very keen yachtsman, and a
great deal of his leisure goes to the
pursuit of this delightful pastime.
The royal and ancient game of golf
also claims him as a devotee during
the winter months, and he pursues
the game with great ardour in storm
and sunshine alike. In October,
1907, Mr. Milner wedded a daughter
of the late Mr. R. Grainger, of
Exeter, England, and has a son and
a daughter.
During the years that the convict establishment
existed in Western Australia a pensioner guard was
enrolled as additional protection to the citizens, but
these were only called upon to act in emergency; the
duty of controlling the ticket-of-leave and conditional-
pardon men formed part of ordinary police work, and
though the horrors of Norfolk Island and Tasmania had
no counterpart in this Western State, there were moments
of wild excitement and occasions of serious crime when
the abilities of the police were taxed to the utmost.
Strenuous exertion also fell to their lot during the
early days of the goldfields, when a cosmopolitan and
not always honest population rushed to try its luck at
the new Eldorado. Even in these days of capable
administration the policeman's lot is not always “a happy
one." The wide expanse of territory over which super-
vision has to be exercised, and the multifarious calls on
the representatives of law and order, often impose ex-
tremely arduous duties upon them in outlying stations.
Journeys of hundreds of miles are taken as all in the
day's work, and they are often required to undertake


much genuine exploratory work. There is also a ten-
dency to employ them on duties that differ widely from
those of guardians of the public safety. Often they
are called upon to act as inspectors of this and that,
registrars, Census collectors, collectors of crop forecasts
and returns, and such like. Commenting upon this
matter, the Commissioner in his latest report remarks,
“Every new department that is established causes addi-
tional work to the members of the force.”
From that report, dated June 30 of last year, we
learn that the police force numbered 481 of all ranks,
Captain FREDERICK ARTHUR
HARE, formerly Commissioner of
Police for Western Australia, was
born at Exmouth, Devonshire, on
January 20, 1852, and is a son of Mr.
Gustavus G. C. Hare, of Herstmon-
ceaux Castle, England. Lie was
educated at St. Columba's College,
Wicklow, Ireland, and came to Aus-
tralia in 1870. He entered the
Government Service and served in
BartlettOy Perth.
CAPTAIN FREDERICK ARTHUR HARE.
various departments for four years
as a junior, then resigning to try
his fortune in the pearling industry
of the Nor'-West. Twelve months'
association with the industry was
sufficient for Mr. Hare, who after-
wards turned his attention to station
life, gaining practical experience on
a station in the Murchison district,
where ultimately he became a sheep-
farmer and pastoralist as a pioneer
on the Murchison. His next field
of labour was at the opposite end of
the State, and at Vasse (now known
as Busselton), in the South-West, he
accepted a Government appointment
as clerk to the magistrates. At vari
ous times during the years 1880-1-4
he acted as clerk and Private Secre-
tary to His Excellency the late Sir
William Robinson, and in the last-
mentioned year was selected for the
post of Inspector of Police for the
southern districts, retaining this
position until 1886, when he was ap-
pointed Private Secretary and Aide-
de-Camp to His Excellency the late
Sir Frederick Broome. He was sent
to Wyndham, Cambridge Gulf, to
fill the office of Acting Government
Resident in June, 1886, and held
similar office at Albany, where he
was transferred in 1887. From 1888
to 1896 he was Resident Magis-
trate at York, and so ably fulfilled
the duties of his position in that
important farming district that the
Government recognized his services
by appointing him to the responsible
post of Warden of the East Cool-
gardie goldfields, which office he re-
tained for four years, when on the
death of Colonel Phillips in 1900 he
was selected for the position of Com-
missioner of Police, from which office
he retired in 1912. Captain Flare is
a member of the Weld Club, and re-
sides at “Forrest House/' St.
George's Terrace, Perth.
ROBERT CONNELL, Acting-
Commissioner of Police for Western
Australia, was born at Waterville, a
cable station in County Kerry, Ire-
land, on December 19, 1867. Lie is
the youngest son of the late Mr. L.
Connell, an officer of the coastguard,
Ireland, and after concluding his
education at the National School was
apprenticed by his father to the
grocery trade. Dissatisfied with the
confinement incident to his calling,
after two years he took to the sea
and came to Western Australia in
the barque “Helena Mena" in Sep-
tember, 1886. Almost immediately
upon his arrival he joined the police
and comprised 1 commissioner, 1 superintendent, 6
inspectors, 5 sub-inspectors, 29 sergeants, 27 corporals,
4 first-class detectives, 12 second-class detectives, and
396 constables of all grades. At the close of the finan-
cial year 1911-12 the Commissioner (Captain Fred A.
Hare) and the Superintendent (Mr. W. C. Lawrence)
were placed on the retired list. So far the vacant posi-
tions have not been permanently filled ; in the mean-
time Chief Inspector Connell, the head of the Criminal
Investigation Branch, is acting as Commissioner, his
place being taken by Inspector Walsh.
force and three months later was
transferred to the Criminal Investi-
gation Department as a detective.
Passing through the various grades
of the Service, in September, 1899,
he was promoted to the position of
Sub-Inspector of Police, and sent to
Kalgoorlie to assist in dealing with
the unsettled condition of things at
that centre brought about by the
troubles that had arisen in connec-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ROBERT CONNEL.
tion with alluvial mining. In the
carrying out of his official duties
here Mr. Connell was severely in-
jured, and after a few months
received transfer to Albany, where
he continued twelve months in
charge of the Plantagenet district.
He was next appointed by the pre-
sent Commissioner to the control of
the Central Police Station, which
office he held until February, 1904,
and during this period, in 1902,
while on a trip to England, made a
study of the system of the London
police and Scotland Yard, introduc-
ing to the notice of the Commis


sioner on his return the finger-print
system of identification, which
shortly after was adopted in this
State. In February, 1904, Mr. Con-
nell was appointed to the charge of
the C.LD. as Sub-Inspector, pro-
moted to the rank of Inspector on
August 1 of the same year, and to
the rank of Chief Inspector on July
1, 1911. Early in the year 1912 he
was appointed Acting-Commissioner
of Police on the retirement of Cap-
tain Hare, a few weeks previous to
which he had conferred upon him the
King’s Medal, in recognition of his
valuable services to the State. He
is interested in yachting, and is a
member and committee-man of the
Royal Perth Yacht Club.
Sub-Inspector JOHN JOSEPH
WALSH, Chief Officer in the Crim-
inal Investigation Department,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr.
James Walsh, of Limerick, Ireland,
where he was born on February 14,
1862. He received his elementary
education in his native place, and
subsequently matriculated at Queen’s
College, Cork, in 1879. Two years
later he left his native land for Aus-
tralia, and after a short sojourn at
Sydney continued his travels to
Queensland, where he was associated
with station life for a couple of
Bartletto, Perth .
SUB-INSPECTOR J. J. WALSH.
years. At the end of this period he
joined the Queensland police force as
mounted trooper, and served in this
department until 1887, when he re-
signed and spent a year or two in
travelling through the different
States. Ultimately he settled at
Sydney, where he filled a position in
a commercial office for a time, and in
1891, just after the declaration of
responsible government for Western
Australia, he came to this State,
and on March 16 of that year joined
the Western Australian police force.
Until 1894 Mr. Walsh acted as
mounted trooper, and was stationed
at York and Beverley, whence he
discharged the duties of gold escort
from Southern Cross. Early in 1894
he was transferred to Coolgardie,
where he opened and took control of
the first police station in that dis-
trict, which was then known as Han-
nans, remaining there from June to
November, when lie became inspec-
tor’s clerk on the same field. This
position he held until 1897, when ill-
health compelled him to remove to
Perth, and he entered the Criminal
Investigation Department as second-
class detective. He was chiefly con-
nected with office work until 1900,
when he was promoted to first-class
detective, and was in charge of the
Fremantle Detective Office until
1901, when he was sent to Kalgoorlie
as officer in charge of the Criminal
Investigation Department at that
centre and Boulder, which position
he held until 1905. While here he
received promotion to detective
sergeant, which was the first appoint-
ment of the kind ever made in the
State, and was retransferred to Fre-
mantle. In January, 1908, he re-
turned to Kalgoorlie, and in addition
to his former duties performed the
responsible work of organizing and
establishing the gold-stealing detec-
tive staff for that district. Three
years later, in July, 1911, Mr.
Walsh was promoted to sub-inspec-
tor, and continued to hold this
position until June, 1912, when he
was appointed Chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department at Perth.
It is interesting to note that Mr.
Walsh gives a high testimony to the
law-abiding character of the pioneer
prospectors on the goldfields, and
states that it was only when the
influx of population from other coun-
tries occurred that the police had
onerous duties to fulfil. In earlier
life the gentleman under review was
a great sportsman and athlete, and
still takes an interest in the progress
of the various organizations for the
promotion of outdoor recreation. In
1900 he married Mary, daughter of
the late Mr. Stephen Newell, of the
Imperial army, and an early arrival
in Western Australia, and has three
sons and a daughter.
MICHAEL HARVEY BROPHY,
Inspector of Police, in charge of the
Eastern goldfields, was born at
Auckland, New Zealand, on April
15, 1859, and is a son of the late
Michael IT. Brophy, who settled in
New Zealand in the early days upon
J. J. Dwyer, Kalgoorlie.
INSPECTOR M. H. BROPHY.
his retirement from the Imperial
Service. Educated at the Auckland
High School, at the termination of
his studies the gentleman under
review entered upon agricultural
pursuits on his father’s farm near
that city. At the age of nineteen
he joined the Armed Constabulary,
a frontier police formed to protect
the settlers against the Maori people
who resented the encroachment of
civilization into their territory.
Subsequently he was a member of
the force which made history in the
early eighties by the storming of
Parahaki and the capturing of the
Maoris, Te Whiti and Tohu, who
were posing as prophets and leading
their tribes into rebellion. For
some time afterwards he was identi-
fied with the force stationed at
Toupi, now the favourite pleasure
resort of the Dominion, but then in
its primitive condition, and he
officially assisted in the settlement of
that district. In 1886 reports of the
gold finds in the north-western por-
tion of Western Australia attracted
him to this State, and he became a
member of one of the first mounted
police gold escorts from Kimberley to
the seaport of Derby, the police force
of Western Australia being then
under Imperial control. Mr. Brophy
passed through all phases of police


pioneering in the Nor’-West at a
time when the natives were hostile
and dangerous, and his recital of
these experiences is full of thrilling
interest. A result of his long resi-
dence in the northern parts of Aus-
tralia is that he is a confirmed
“White Australia" advocate, and
has no hesitation in asserting that
the country in these latitudes can be
successfully peopled and developed
by white races. He served for six-
teen years in the Nor’-West, during
which time he gathered more infor-
mation in regard to the natives than
any other member of the force, and
in 1901 was transferred to the
Eastern goldfields as Inspector, hav-
ing previously passed through the
grades of trooper, sergeant, and sub-
inspector. Since that date Mr.
Brophy has resided on the fields, and
has identified himself generally with
the life of the place. He is very
keen on all forms of outdoor sport,
in his young days having been a
well-known footballer and cricketer
in New Zealand, and now acts on
the committees of most of the local
athletic organizations. He employs
many leisure hours in reading his-
torical works, is a student of Shakes-
peare, and is conversant with Aus-
tralian literature in its various
forms. In 1893 he married Isabella,
daughter of Mr. Henry Barand,
well known in the mining industry of
New South Wales, and has three
sons and three daughters.
WILLIAM CHIPPER LAW-
RENCE, who was Superintendent
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM CHIPPER LAWERNCE.
of Police from 1900 to 1912,
is an Australian, having been
born at Picton, near Bunbury, in
1849, receiving his education in
his native place. He joined the
police force in 1871, and was pro-
moted to be corporal in 1879 and
Sub-Inspector in 1885, in which
capacity he was for a time in charge
of the Detective Department. In
1889 Mr. Lawrence was transferred
to Kimberley, where he was in
charge of the Nor’-West, and in
1893 he was raised to an inspector-
ship. He was next located at
Geraldton in control of the Western
district, and while there received
the appointment of Chief Inspector
in 1899, at the same time receiving
transfer to Perth. In the following
year he was elevated to the position
of Superintendent of Police for the
Metropolitan area, which post he
held until his retirement from
service early in 1912. Mr. Law-
rence on several occasions filled
the position of Acting Commissioner
of Police. He was made a Justice
of the Peace for the State by Sir
John Forrest prior to that gentle-
man's departure to take up his
duties as representative for Western
Australia in the first Federal Parlia-
ment.
II


State Institutions Governed by Boards.
PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUM, AND ART GALLERY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
By the operation of the Public Library, Museum,
and Art Gallery of Western Australia Act, which came
into force in November, 1911, the Public Library of
V estern Australia and the Western Australian Museum
and Art Gallery became incorporated under trustees
described as “the trustees of the Public Library,
Museum, and Art Gallery of Western Australia." With
the proclamation of the Act the committee which had
governed the two institutions as quite separate concerns
ceased to exist, and a trust governing the two as one
took its place. On this trust the Hon. Sir Winthrop
Hackett, M.A.,, LL.D., M.L.C., who for years had been
chairman of the defunct committee, was elected the first
president, the term of office being six years. At the first
meeting after the full constitution of the trust Mr. J. S.
Battye, 8.A., LL.B., the Chief Librarian of the Public
Library, was appointed General Secretary to the Trus-
tees, arrangements being made at the same time to keep
the institutions, until the trustees should otherwise
direct, separate, so far as possible, in administration.
In describing them, therefore, it will be more convenient
to treat them separately.
PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The Estimates for 1887, laid before the Legislative
Council in 1886, contained provision for the sum of
£5,000 to be expended on the celebrations in Western
Australia of Her Majesty's Jubilee. As no decision was
arrived at in the Council regarding the objects to which
this money should be devoted, a Commission was ap-
pointed, consisting of members of the Council and other
gentlemen, with the then Governor, Sir Frederick Napier
Broome, as chairman, to draw up a scheme for the erec-
tion of a fitting memorial in honour of the event. The
Commission met on December 21, 1886, and various pro-
positions were made, but ultimately it was decided that
£2,000 of that amount should serve as Western Aus-
tralia's donation towards the Imperial Institute, and the
balance should be devoted to the foundation of a Free
Public Library to be established in Perth.
A committee was then appointed by His Excellency
the Governor to have charge of the arrangements in con-
nection with the choice of a site, preparation of plans,
and the foundations of the institute; and they, in their
report to the Legislative Council, recommended that the
site of the old Government Boys' School in St. George's
Terrace would be tlie most suitable on which to build the
library; but owing to the scarcity of funds they sug-
gested that the foundations only of the building be laid,
and that the premises situated almost opposite, lately
used by the Western Australian Bank, should be leased,
and books to the value of £I,OOO be ordered from Eng-
land and placed therein, to serve as a temporary library,
pending the completion of the structure.
The recommendations of the committee were, in the
main, adopted, and on June 21, 1887, the foundation-
stone of the institute was laid by His Excellency the
Governor in the presence of representatives of all the
public bodies of the colony. The Victoria Public Library
Bill was placed before the Legislative Council soon after-
wards, but although it was passed through all its stages
it ultimately failed to become law.
A committee of management, consisting of Sir Mal-
colm Fraser, K.C.M.G. (chairman), and Messrs. Sep-
timus Burt, Q.C., J. W. Hackett, M.A., M. F. A. Can-
ning, and F. J. Hickling, was appointed in May, 1888 ;
and on January 26, 1889, the library was opened with
I, volumes on the shelves. On the resignation of Sir
Malcolm Fraser, who became Agent-General, Sir J. G.
Lee Steere, K.C.M.G., was appointed chairman. Mr.
W. C. Townsend was appointed clerk to the committee,
he being succeeded in March, 1890, by Mr. Basil Porter,
who held the position until 1894, when he resigned owing
to loss of eyesight, and the present Chief Librarian, Mr.
J. S. Battye, was appointed.
The original site being considered unsuitable, the
Government reserved a large block of land at the corner
of Beaufort and James Streets as the permanent site for
a building to include the Library, Museum, and National
Gallery, and in 1896 a commencement was made with
the first portion of such a structure. This was intended
to be temporarily the home of the Library, but
ultimately for the use of the Museum.
The foundation-stone previously laid in St. George's
Terrace was removed to its new position, a further stone
commemorative of the Diamond Jubilee of Her late
Majesty being placed with it, and the two were unveiled
by His Excellency the Governor, Sir Gerard Smith, on
June 22, 1897, the function forming part of the celebra-
tion in Western Australia of the completion of the six-
tieth year of Her late Majesty's reign. In August, 1897,


the Library was moved from the old premises of the
Western Australian Bank in St. George’s Terrace into
the basement, and twelve months later to .the ground
floor of that building.
In 1902 the rapid growth of the Library caused a
demand for more extensive accommodation, and in 1903
the second portion of the comprehensive scheme was
erected by the Government. This forms the first part of
the permanent Library, and contains accommodation for
100,000 volumes, as well as ample and well-ventilated
space for readers.
By resolution of the committee, confirmed by the
Governor-in-Council, the word “Victoria” was, in April,
1904, deleted from the name of the institution, which
then became known as “The Public Librarv of Western
J
Australia.”
When the
Hon. Sir Jas.
G. Lee Steere
died in No-
vember, 1903,
the position
of chairman
was conferred
up o n the
Hon. J. W.
H a c k e t t,
M.A., LL.D.
The addi-
tions made to
the buildings
in 1903 were
rapidly out-
grown, and in
1910 the Gov-
ernment was
approached
with a request to build the first portion of the main
front. This request was acceded to, and the work
actually started in October, 1911. It is expected that
it will be ready for occupation by the end of the present
year (1912). There will then be sufficient accommoda-
tion for about 250,000 books. A useful adjunct to the
reference library is the system of travelling libraries,
under which cases of books are loaned for definite periods
to country mechanics’, miners’, and agricultural insti-
tutes. This arrangement is largely availed of, there
being at present about eighty institutes receiving assist-
ance. The total number of volumes in the Library on
June 30, 1912, was 102,815, of which over 93,000 were
in the reference collection and about 9,500 in the travel-
ling libraries’ branch. The average annual attendance
of visitors approaches 190,000. The principal assistants
are Mr. H. B. Collett, the Sub-Librarian, and Mr.
n 2
Charles Battye, who has control of the Cataloguing De-
partment.
MUSEUM AND ART GALLERY.
The Museum is situated about 250 yards north of
the Perth Central Railway Station, at the corner of
James and Beaufort Streets. The entrance is from
Beaufort Street.
As its name implies, it is essentially a Western Aus-
tralian museum, the collection already containing speci-
mens of the greater number of the indigenous mammals
and birds, as well as of many of the reptiles, fish, etc. Full
particulars of these will be found in the “Natural His-
tory Notes,” a new edition of which is going to press.
In the year 1860 a number of the residents of this
State resolved to establish a museum, and for that pur-
pose opened
a subscription
list, obtaining
altogether the
then large
sum of £340
19s. lid., for
it must be
borne in mind
that forty
years ago the
popul a tio n
(15,227) was
small, scat-
tered, and
far from
wealthy. The
list showed
how general
was the in -
terest taken.
To the then Surveyor-General, Captain John Sep-
timus Roe, R.N., who died in 1878 at the age of 81
years, must be accorded the chief credit for the work,
for he, in addition to subscribing, gave valuable col-
lections and devoted much time to their arrangement.
The museum thus formed was attached to the Swan
River Mechanics’ Institute until 1892, when the Govern-
ment purchased the collection for <£4oo, so that it might
be incorporated with others, in 1881 the Rev. C. G.
Nicolay had, at the suggestion and with the help of the
late Sir W. C. F. Robinson, established a geological
museum in the old Guard-room at Fremantle, where he
arranged and added largely to the geological collections
made by Dr. F. Von Sommer; by Messrs. Gregory
Bros.; by Mr. H. Y. L. Brown, F.G.S. (now Govern-
ment Geologist of South Australia); and by the late
Mr. E. T. Hardman, F.R.G.S.L, Government Geologist
THE MUSEUM AND ART GALLERY, PERTH


of Western Australia in 1882-3. The collection in the
Fremantle Museum was, in 1889, transferred to the
charge of Mr. Harry P. Woodward, P.G.S., then Govern-
ment Geologist, and was removed to Perth and placed
in the room formerly used as the High Court of Justice
(now the Ethnological Gallery), Mr. Bernard H. Wood-
ward, F.G.S., C.M.Z.S., being appointed Curator of the
Geological Museum. The title was, in 1892, abbreviated
by the omission of the word “Geological,” when, as
before mentioned, the Government purchased the
museum of the Swan River Mechanics' Institute, as the
collection then obtained included zoological, botanical,
and ethnological, as well as geological, specimens.
In the same year the late Colonel Phillips, then
Commissioner of Police, deposited in the Museum the
valuable collection of native weapons and implements
that had been gradually got together by his department.
In 1895 the control of the Museum was transferred
from the Hon. the Minister of Mines to a committee
which controlled the Public Library. Two additional
galleries were then added —one for zoology, opened by
His Excellency the Administrator, Sir A. C. Onslow,
on July 31, 1895 ; and the other for art, the latter of
which was not opened until the following year. The
Government then increased the annual grant from <£2oo
to £4,000 per annum, at which amount it remained until
1897-98, when it was reduced to £3,000, but subse-
quently increased to £3,500 in 1899-1900, and then fur-
ther to £3,800 in the ensuing year, at which figure the
annual grant at present stands.
In 1897 Parliament agreed to the erection of fur-
ther buildings, and a substantial stone edifice of two
stories, containing two galleries, 132 ft. by 38 ft., with
offices and storerooms in the basement, was erected at a
cost of £20,000. The ground floor and basement were
temporarily lent to the Public Library until its own
building should be erected, for which purpose Parlia-
ment, in 1900, voted the necessary money, as also at the
same time that for the building of an art gallery, which
is to comprise two floors 150 ft. long. The foundation-
stone of this wing was laid by H.R.H. the Duke of
Cornwall and York on July 25, 1901, but nothing fur-
ther was done for some years owing to the want of funds.
In 1907, however, money was voted for the new art
JAMES S. BATTYE, 8.A.,
LL.B., Editor of “The Cyclopedia
of Western Australia.” The Public
Librarian of the State, James Sykes
Battye, is the younger son of the
late Dan Battye, and was born at
Geelong, Victoria, in 1871. He was
educated first at the Flinders State
School, where he succeeded in win-
ning a Government exhibition, and
afterwards at the Geelong College
and Melbourne University, where he
graduated as 8.A., LL.B., in 1893.
From 1889-94 he was a member of
the staff of the Public Library of
Victoria, resigning from that insti-
tution to accept the position he now
occupies. After the passing of the
Public Library, Museum, and Art
Gallery Act 1911 Mr. Battye was ap-
pointed General Secretary to the
Trustees, still retaining the Chief
Librarianship of the Public Library,
During his residence in this
State he has been prominently
identified with the Methodist Church
gallery, which was opened to the public in 1908, and
now forms one of the most attractive and instructive
institutions of the capital. Considerable attention is
also being paid to the question of applied art, and the
Museum now contains a collection of examples which
are of very considerable interest.
In addition to the art and zoological sections, there
are sections dealing with ethnology, palaeontology, and
mineralogy, all of which aim at presenting for public
information complete collections representing Western
Australian types.
The palaeontological collections contain the historical
collection of 3,400 fossils made by the late Professor
Tennant; of these the vertebrates were named by the
late Mr. William Davies, F.G.S., and the invertebrates
by the late Dr. S. P. Woodward, F.G.S., both of the
British Museum. This collection had been in the geo-
logical department of the British Museum for some
years, as its purchase was contemplated by that institu-
tion because it contains so many “type” specimens.
The chief interest, perhaps, of most visitors to the
State centres in the rich gold specimens from the Cool-
gardie, Yilgarn, Murchison, Pilbara, Roebourne, Kim-
berley, and other goldfields. These have nearly all been
presented by directors of mines or by residents in the
State.
The early history of Western Australia is illus-
trated by numerous relics, the most interesting of which
are those of the Dutch vessel “Zeewyk,” wrecked on the
Abrolhos in 1727. They were unearthed most carefully
by Messrs. Broadhurst, McNeil, & Co., and it is
through their courtesy that this Museum has been en-
riched by these valuable additions.
In order to extend the influence of the Museum as
widely as possible it has been the custom for years past
to deliver each winter a course of free popular lectures
on science and art subjects. These have always been
very well attended, and constitute a very attractive and
entertaining adjunct to the ordinary work of the
Museum.
On the natural history side of the Museum Mr.
Woodward is assisted by Mr. W. B. Alexander, B.Sc.,
and Mr. L. Glanert, P.G.S., and on the art side by
Mr. G. Pitt Morrison.
and has devoted most of his spare
time to the various charitable move-
ments of the community. For eight
years he was Honorary Secretary" to
the Victoria Institute for the Blind,
and has been a Trustee of the Chil-
dren’s Hospital since the inaugura-
tion of the movement in 1897. From
1908-10 he was Vice-President of the
institution and is still a member of
the Committee. He has taken a pro-
minent part in educational move-
ments, and from 1909-11 he acted as


Honorary Secretary to the Royal
Commission on the establishment of
a University for Western Australia,
and as Honorary Secretary to the
Committee (appointed late in 1911)
to recommend to the Government a
suitable site for the University.
When the first Senate under the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES S. BATTYE.
University Act, 1911, was constituted
by the Governor-in-Council in
February, 1912, Mr. Battye was one
of the eighteen appointed. For
the past six years he has been a
member of the Board of Governors
of the High School, and since 1911
has been Chairman of the Board.
He was appointed a Justice of the
Peace in 1901. In 1895 Mr. Battye
was married to May, eldest daughter
of Mr. Edward Jenkins, J.P., of Mel-
bourne, and has living three daugh-
ters and a son.
BERNARD H. WOODWARD,
P.G.S., Director of the Western Aus-
tralian Museum and Art Gallery, has
been in charge of this institution ever
since its establishment on the present
site in 1889. At that date it was
only the Geological Museum, contain-
ing the collections made by the Gov-
ernment Geologist (Mr. Harry P.
Woodward) and his predecessors in
that office, and the Rev. C. G.
Nicolay (Registrar of Minerals). The
Museum was then contained in one
room, now the Ethnological Gallery,
and was open only once a week. Mr.
Woodward also held the positions of
Government Assayer and Govern-
ment Analyst up to 1895, when the
scope of the institution was enlarged
to that of a National Museum and
placed under the control of a com-
mittee. Mr. Woodward belongs to a
family widely known in scientific
circles for several generations, as
mentioned in Francis Gal ton’s work
on “Noteworthy Families,” whose
achievements in modern science have
been publicly recorded. Outside his
official work Mr. Woodward at all
times has been ready to help in move-
ments tending to the advance of
education and culture. He was Pre-
sident of the first Vine and Fruit-
growers’ Association formed at
Toodyay in 1893 and instituted the
first pruning contest in the year
1894. He founded the first Wilgie
Sketching Club, and in 1896 was
elected the first President of the
Western Australian Society of Arts.
In 1891 he promoted the formation
of the Western Australian Natural
History Society, acting as Hon. Sec-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. BERNARD H. WOODWARD.
retary for some years and contribut-
ing many papers at its meetings. In
1905 he inaugurated the series of
free popular lectures on science and
art at the Museum with a lecture
on ‘ The Aims and Objects of
Museums," and has since frequently
contributed to these lectures, which
have become very popular in fact as
well as in name with a large section
of the public.
ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.
Like all other institutions of a similar character in
the State of recent growth, the Zoological Gardens of
Western Australia can claim to be second to none in
regard to location and in regard to the excellence of
their arrangement. The grounds, which comprise 42
acres, are beautifully situated at South Perth, within
easy reach of the ferry and fairly accessible from all
parts of the metropolitan area. They were opened to
the public in 1898, and have since then had an average
annual attendance of over 70,000 visitors.
The management is vested in a committee, of which
the Hon. Sir Winthrop Hackett is chairman, but the
actual control falls upon the Director, Mr. E. A. Le
Souef, a member of that family which has been so long
and favourably known in connection with zoological
work in Australia.
The Gardens have been arranged by him on well-
considered plans, with the result that the best effects
from the public point of view have been secured, while
every care has been taken with rare and costly crea-
tures, and so far as possible the natural habitat of all
the animals has been reproduced.
Amongst the animals bred in the Gardens since
their establishment may be mentioned tigers, leopards,
dingoes, buffalo, various cattle, deer, and wild swine,
whilst many less important animals have also proved
prolific. Many birds have also been bred, including
ostriches and emus. An excellent supply of artesian
water was struck in the Gardens on February 27, 1899,
at a depth of 1,860 ft. The flow is estimated at 350,000
gallons per day, and as the water is warm, being 103°
at the bore mouth, it is very suitable for keeping up the
temperature of reptile and other houses that require
artificial heat. In fact, one of the features of the
“Zoo” is the Snake House, an excellently arranged and
commodious structure, in which the reptiles find condi


tions most nearly approaching those to which they arc
naturally accustomed.
Apart from the accommodation for zoological speci-
mens, the grounds are beautifully laid out, and in some
measure compensate for the absence of botanical gar-
dens in Perth. Sporting bodies, too, are catered for by
a large recreation ground, where cricket, football, and
other sports can be carried on, and a series of tennis
courts are available for the votaries of that game.
Children are especially welcomed, and every atten-
tion paid not only to their pleasure but to their in-
struction. Mr. Le Souef is always glad to receive
parties and conduct them personally round the Zoo,
imparting as he goes a fund of useful and entertaining
information. Altogether the Zoological Gardens thor-
oughly deserve the appreciation that is accorded to them.
KING’S PARK.
Visitors to Sydney, it is said, are invariably met
with the question, “What do you think of our harbour V ’
Though Perth has no harbour it can show to those who
appreciate natural beauty a stretch of river second to
none in Australia, and a vast extent of park overlooking
it which no Australian capital can even approach. It
is one of those great concessions to the joublic for which
the name of Sir John Forrest will ever be revered in
Western Australia.
Embracing the whole summit of Mount Eliza, a
commanding eminence overlooking the city, the King's
Park forms a beauty spot of almost incomparable charm
and a lung for the city that will be more and more appre-
ciated as time goes on. It contains upwards of a
thousand acres of ground, and while j:>ortions of it have
been grassed and laid out with trees and flowers, every-
thing has been done to preserve in all their natural
beauty the native trees and flora that form so distinguish-
ing a feature of Western Australia. Roadways and
paths have been constructed throughout, the main drive,
from Havelock Street entrance to Crawley, a distance
of nearly three miles, being opened in 1897.
The “May" drive, a distance of three miles, com-
pleted in July, 1901, was opened by H.R.H. the Duke
of York during the royal visit to the State. This is a
particularly fine roadway, opening up the central por-
tions of the Park. On commanding positions, over-
looking the river, are two fine pavilions; a charming tea-
room on the terraces below the cliff (one of the most
attractive spots in the Park) and a very pretty and orna-
mental lodge at the main entrance have been erected.
A caretaker's cottage also stands at the entrance gates,
Rokeby Road, in the vicinity of which a further tea-
room has been constructed. A third tea-room has been
erected near the Queen's Statue.
“The Fallen Soldiers' Memorial," standing to the
left of the drive, a short distance from the main entrance,
was erected by voluntary contributions and pound-for-
pound grant from the Government. It is in memory of
the Western Australian soldiers who lost their lives dur-
ing the South African War. To collect the funds for its
erection a citizens’ committee was formed in 1900, and
competitive designs were invited, Mr. J. White, sculptor
Annandale, New South Wales, being the successful com-
petitor.
The memorial consists of a bronze group on stone
pedestal, with four bronze panels depicting various scenes
during the war, the foundation-stone of which was laid
by His Royal Highness the Duke of Cornwall and York
in July, 1901. The memorial was unveiled by His Excel-
lency Sir E. A. Stone, Administrator, in September, 1902.
In October, 1903, a very fine marble statue, erected
to the memory of the late Queen, was unveiled by His
Excellency the Governor, Sir Frederick G. D. Bedford.
It is of beautiful workmanship, by Mr. F. J. Wilkinson,
the well-known sculptor of Esher, England, and was pre-
sented to the State by Mr. Allen H. Stoneham, London.
The Leake Memorial Fountain is of a semi-classic
style of architecture, and was specially designed by Mr.
J. W. R. Linton, artist, of Perth. It rests on two
courses of finely-rubbed bluestone steps. It has four
sides, and standing out from each corner is a pier con-
sisting of pilaster, with moulded base and cap, support-
ing two coloured marble columns with carved caps and
bases. There is a finely-moulded cornice running round
the whole memorial, which is capped by a solid marble
dome, the top of which is 10 ft. from the ground. On
two opposite sides of the fountain marble basins project,
the water being supplied through nickel-plated taps.
The drinking-cups, which are of plain but substantial
design, are made of nickelled gun-metal. The whole of
the memorial, with the exception of the bluestone steps
and coloured marble columns, is made of white Sicilian
marble, and covers a space of 9 ft. square. The execu-
tion of the work was entrusted to the well-known firm
of monumental masons, Messrs. Wilson, Gray, & Co.
On the front of the memorial an inscription in lead-
letters reads as follows :
This fountain was erected by the State as a tribute to
George Leake, C.M.G., K.C., M.L.A., Premier of the State
from 27 May to the 21 November, 1901, and from the
23 December, 1901, to the time of his death, on the 24 June,
1902. It was during his Premiership that the May Drive
was opened to the public by H.R.H. May, Princess of
Wales, on the 23 July, 1901.
On the reverse side an inscription reads :
On the second anniversary of his death this memorial
fountain was dedicated to the use of the people of Western
Australia by Admiral Sir Frederick G. D. Bedford, G.C.8.,
Governor of this State.
In the way of ornamentation an artificial gully
below the first pavilion has been constructed, and is a


great additional attraction. Some beautiful coral, and
also many choice shrubs, have been utilized in its
ornamentation.
The Park may be reached by tram through Colin
Street, and also on the Subiaco side by Rokeby Road.
It is open daily from sunrise to 10 p.m.
Throughout the year thousands of visitors take
advantage of the pleasure afforded by a stroll or drive
through the Park, and the commanding view from the
summit of Mount Eliza never fails to excite admiration.
The control of the Park is vested in a board ap-
pointed by the Governor-in-Council. The Honourable
Sir John Forrest is chairman, and the Honourable Sir
Winthrop Plackett, M.L.C., vice-chairman.
The Royal Mint.
(PERTH BRANCH.)
Early in 1894 an application was made by the
Government of Western Australia to the Imperial
Government for the establishment of a branch of the
Mint at Perth. The assent of the Lords of the Treasury
and of the Secretary of State for the Colonies having
been obtained, the Parliament of Western Australia
passed an Act entitled “The Perth Mint Act, 1895/’ by
which “there shall be payable to Her Majesty in every
year out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Western
Australia a sum or sums not exceeding in the whole in
any year the sum of £lO,OOO, for defraying the salaries,
contingencies, retiring and other allowances, and ex-
penses connected with the establishment of the Perth
Branch of the Royal Mint,” and “all sums by way of
fees, dues, or charges lawfully received or collected at
the Perth Branch shall be from time to time accounted
for and paid over by the Deputy Master ... to the
Colonial Treasurer, to be paid by him into the Con-
solidated Revenue Fund of the colony.”
To meet the cost of treating the increased output
of gold, the annuity to the Mint was subsequently
raised to £20,000 a year (Perth Mint Act,of August 2,
1899).
On October 13, 1897, Her late Majesty the Queen
passed an Order-in-Council, approving a draft proclama-
tion establishing a branch Mint at Perth. This pro-
clamation was published in The London Gazette on
October 15, 1897, and was promulgated in Western Aus-
tralia on July 13, 1898. It ordains, among other things,
that “the gold coins coined ... at the branch
Mint at Perth shall be deemed to have been issued from
our Mint, and shall be current and a legal tender in like
manner and to the like extent as if they had been coined
and issued in England.”
The necessity for having a branch of the Royal Mint,
and not a local institution, is due to the fact that coinage
is one of the prerogatives of the Crown, and can only
be conducted in the British dominions by officeis undei
the direct control of the Lords Commissioners of His
Majesty’s Treasury. The Mint buildings are colonial
property, but the Mint as an institution for the conver-
sion of bullion into coin is in every sense a department
of the Imperial Government. When the application for
the establishment of the branch Mint was made, the pro-
duction of gold in Western Australia was in its infancy,
and it was expected that the out-turn of the precious
metal would reach a total of £1,000,000 during the then
current year, 1894, an expectation which was not fully
realized, the value of the metal produced being about
£BBO,OOO only. Since that time, however, the output of
gold has been increasing rapidly; that for the year 1911
amounted to a little more than £5,131,381.
The main object in view in having a Mint estab-
lished in the colony was to provide a market where the
miner would be able to dispose of his gold at the sterling
value of the metal (£3 17s. per ounce of gold
11-12ths fine), and would obtain that value after the
delay of only a few days, instead of having to make the
best bargain he could with his bank or with a private
dealer. Prior to the opening of the Mint a miner, who
did not care to accept a rough-and-ready valuation of
the metal he had won, was compelled to either arrange
for it to be sent to one of the existing Mints in Aus-
tralia, or to some firm of refiners in London or else-
where. Either alternative involved delay and consider-
able expense in freight, loss of interest, etc.
The opening of the Mint has, therefore, directly
benefited the mining industry and indirectly the State
as a whole. When considering the value of the Mint to
the State it must not be lost sight of that the form into
which most of the metal is converted is one which has
advantages over any other shape in which gold can be
commercially dealt with. Ingots, except wdien they bear
a Government stamp, as in the case of those issued by
the Australian Mints for use in India, and those made
at the Mints of the United States, are not saleable with-
out being assayed and reassayed almost every time they
change hands. The sovereign, however, is not only the
standard of value and the chief current coin of the
United Kingdom and of most of the British colonies, but
is accepted as bullion throughout the world without ques-
tion as to fineness.
The Deputy-Master is Captain J. F. Campbell, who
has held office since the branch was established.


Municipal.
Perth and Environs.
The Lieutenant-Governor (Captain Stirling, R.N.)
iiad fixed on a site for a town about 12 miles up the
Swan River on the right bank, just below the islands,
where he intended removing immediately with the whole
of the party landed on Garden Island. The town is to
be called Perth; there is also another town to be built
at the mouth of the river for the convenience of ship-
ping in Gage Roads, near the spot where the party from
the ship first established themselves. The number of
settlers arrived from England, including women and
children, were about 150, making the whole party now
at Swan River amount to nearly 300 persons. . . .
The soil of the sea-coast was generally sandy, but on
arriving at the fresh water in the Swan and Canning
Rivers, the banks were rich and the soil capable of
producing anything/' —(Extract from despatch by Cap-
tain Fremantle, October 8, 1829.)
That Captain Stirling did not lack aesthetic sensi-
bility when exercising his choice of a site for the capital
is admitted by every visitor to the city as well as by its
own inhabitants, who are justly proud of the natural
beauties that surround them. The bold headland of
Mount Eliza, the noble expanses of water, the distant
hills of the Darling Range, all combine to render pic-
turesque the surroundings of the capital. The first stone
of the city was laid on August 12, 1829, but town-
planning in Captain Stirling’s day had not been reduced
to an exact science.
To quote from a comprehensive report prepared
by the Town Clerk of the city in 1911:—“Perth is
unfortunate in having been planned with little foresight
of the dimensions it was ultimately to assume or the
quantity of traffic which would have to be provided for.
No special provision was made for wider streets for the
main arteries of traffic —in many cases roads come to
abrupt terminations, and little provision has been made
for the extension of main roads through other municipal
or roads districts to give through communication to the
world beyond. Further, there has been no central
authority governing the respective subdivisions of North
Perth, Mount Lawley, and Maylands, and streets set
out in one district come to a sudden termination when
they reach the boundary of the next district. The whole
question should now be considered from the point of
view of the metropolitan area. Main avenues should
be laid out, and where possible streets in one district
should be connected with others in the adjoining dis-
trict. Particularly in Central Perth, the main arteries
are even now too narrow, and are destined to prove
even more unsuitable as time progresses. A most im-
portant task for the committee will be to select arterial
lines of communication from the commercial centre to
the outskirts, and also main connecting lines between
the various suburbs. We can now appreciate in Perth
one of the grave disadvantages of the rectangular or
draught-board system of town-planning."
To overcome the many drawbacks incidental to city
expansion a joint committee, formed of members of the
various corporate bodies involved, has been formed. A
“Greater Perth 1 ' movement has been set afoot, and in
time to come the problems attendant on traffic, land
subdivision, and the beautification of the city will receive
that consideration that is and will be necessary.
The progress of the infant city was, to modern
ideas, slow. By the middle of 1837 —eight years from
the date of foundation—422 town allotments had been
disposed of. About 350 houses, valued roughly at about
<£loo each, had been erected. The type of architecture
was archaic. Light and ventilation were little con-
sidered. Four walls and a roof seemed to be the standard
idea. Even official buildings had no claims to anything
but mere utility. This type of architecture ruled for
many years, and it can be fairly claimed that not until
the third-quarter of the century did the crude, squat,
four-square building give place to anything more ornate.
The population of the city had reached 524 at the date
above mentioned. The infant colony was prospering,
and with its prosperity that of the capital kept pace.
The price of land had reached £5 per acre, but no signs
of a land boom arose with city lots offering at even that
price. Public works were carried out till in 1840 came
the commencement of the construction of the Causeway,
the next year witnessing its completion.
it was not till 1856 that Perth was constituted a
city, in those days the Government of the city was in
the hands of a body called the Town Trust, but in 1871
The Municipal Institutions Act came into force, and
since that date the affairs of the city have been adminis-
tered by a City Council, with a chairman till 1880, but
since then having a Mayor at its head. In 1864 the


city was divided into three wards, and three years later
the corner-stone of the present Town Hall was laid by
the then Governor, Mr. Hampton, the building being
formally opened twelve months later. Telegraphic com-
munication with Guildford was opened in 1871, and later
with other country towns. In 1879 the first sod of the
Eastern Railway was turned by Governor Ord at the spot
close to where is now situated the Horseshoe Bridge in
William Street. In 1880 the present Chief Justice, Sir
Henry Parker, was elected Mayor. In the following
year the railway line from Fremantle to Guildford was
opened, a month later mails were dispatched by train
along the Eastern line. In December, 1887, the first
begun to live, to move, and these fortunate ones invested
in city lots, and the architecture of the city began to
change. Little by little the old-time buildings have
given way to more modern erections, some classic in their
design, some meretricious. But the general taste is being
wisely directed in right lines, and time will be when
Perth will be a city of noble buildings. The widening
of the streets has already been discussed, and it is
reasonable to expect that should the appointment of a
Municipal Art Commission (as has been suggested) come
to pass, the city will in years to come grow into one of
the most beautiful in the Commonwealth.
The city proper embraces an area of about four
Telephone Exchange was inaugurated in Perth, and
within a month connection made with Fremantle. In
1889 works for the supply of Perth with water conserved
in the Darling Ranges were commenced by the Perth
Water Supply Company, and completed in eighteen
months. A reservoir was constructed on Mount Eliza,
and therefrom water supplied by gravitation to the city.
With the rush following Bayley and Ford's discoveries of
gold at Coolgardie, Perth became a busy city. The old
order had begun to change. The calm, placid life of the
community was leavened with the yeasty excitement of
the never-ceasing flow of gold-seekers. Many of these
fortunate in their quest, saw in Perth a place that had
square miles, being bounded on two sides —east and
south —by the Swan River, on the west by Subiaco and
Leederville, and on the north by Leederville and North
Perth, Mount Lawley, and Maylands. The commercial
centre may be regarded as being included within the
block bounded by Milligan Street, Wellington Street,
Pier Street, and the River. Beyond this area, of course,
there are many places of business, mostly smaller retail
businesses and factories. The outer fringe is mainly de-
voted to residences. Hay Street, regarded at present as
the main business thoroughfare, is narrow and con-
stricted as to traffic, a double line of trams rendering
vehicular traffic cautious. In this street are located the


present Town Hall and many fine public and mercantile
buildings, from the Mint in the east to His Majesty’s
Theatre, one of the largest—and coldest —buildings of
its sort in Australia. St. George’s Terrace—the Rialto
of the city—is the finest thoroughfare in the State. Jus-
tice can, therefore, be done to the facades of the numer-
ous buildings occupied by banks, insurance companies,
and legal practitioners. Here, too, is clubland—the West
Australian, the Perth, the Commercial Travellers', and
Tattersall’s—each having very luxurious and well-
appointed premises. The Weld Club, the oldest and
most exclusive in the State, is situated in Barrack Street,
facing the Government Gardens in one direction and in
the other the River, with the Esplanade and Recreation
Grounds intervening. Barrack Street runs from the
lately reclaimed area on the River to the railway, where
it at present crosses on what is known as “the new
bridge,” but which in turn is to give way to a more
imposing structure, rendered necessary by the project
for the expansion of the railway premises, wherefore
some hundreds of thousands of pounds’ worth of land in
the city have been resumed from east to west of the
municipality. This project for the improvement of rail-
way facilities in the city is to be carried out by the
Government of the State, and involves the closing of
streets and reforming of others, demolition of large
numbers of buildings, the erection of overhead bridges,
etc. A large area in the western part of the city has
lately been resumed for the purpose of erecting markets
and refrigerating premises, those at present in existence
having been outgrown by the city’s needs.
Although the city is fairly well provided with
“lungs” —Russell, Weld, and Delhi Squares, Queen’s
Gardens, public gardens, and various other open spaces
for recreation—there is a desire for more, the proposal-
made in the Town Clerk’s report on the expansion of
the city—before referred to —that a “green belt” should
be formed around the city, finding favour with many of
the citizens.
But the noblest heritage of people is the King’s
Park, an area of 1,000 acres, which is as Nature made
it but for the formation of roads, the erection of statues,
heavy artillery, and rest-houses. The abrupt face of
Mount Eliza, whose foot is lapped by the waves of the
River, forms one boundary of the Park, which spreads
in an irregular trapezoid along the River banks. Here
in spring-time are to be found—and looked at but left
untouched —wildflowers of a thousand hues, from the
regal “kangaroo paw” to the modest little ground orchid.
The general effect of the vegetation of the Park is such as
is suggested in pictures representing life in the Palaeozoic
Age, and to many —especially those accustomed to the
bush foliage of the British Isles —has a depressing effect.
But there is a stern beauty in the scenery that with time
grows on one. This Park, though included in the
boundaries of the municipality, is controlled by an inde-
pendent board of trustees, whose duties are to maintain
and preserve intact for ever the people's playground.
Of the public buildings of the city the Mint, the
Houses of Parliament, and the Supreme Court are the
principal examples. The Government offices are some-
what out of date. The Post Office, Treasury, and Lands
Department are all housed in buildings forming part of
a block facing St. George's Terrace, Barrack Street, and
the Anglican Cathedral. Lately, however, the Federal
Government has resumed a large block of business
premises in Wellington Street, on which it is proposed
to erect a noble structure to house the Post and Tele-
graph Services.
The River front of the city has been reclaimed from
mud fiats that have been filled in with material dredged
from the River bed, a stone retaining wall having been
first built. At the foot of Barrack Street ferry, wharves,
and houses have been built, and the club houses of the
Royal Yacht Club and Perth Flying Squadron have been
brought into the general scheme.
The general revenue for 1911 was set down at
£40,291, the expenditure being £43,234. The out-
standing loans amounted to £231,800 and the sinking
fund to £67,503. During the past year the property of
Perth Gas and Electric Light Co. has been purchased,
and it is anticipated that a profit on a large scale will be
secured during the current year, though, of course, the
price paid—about £500,000 —has added greatly to the
burden of debt. The City Council consists of fifteen
councillors, three elected from each of the five wards of
the city for a period of three years, one retiring annually.
The Mayor is elected annually.
Since the first Act of the Legislature constituting
municipalities, the following gentlemen have held the
position of Chief Magistrate of the city, until 1880
under the designation of Chairman, and since that date
as Mayor:
Mayors of Perth.
1871-3, George Glyde; 1874, George Randell;
1875-7, George Shenton; 1878-9, S. H. Parker; Sep-
tember, 1880, George Shenton; 1880-1, S. H. Parker;
March, 1881, George Shenton; 1881-4, George Shenton;
1884-5, George Randell; 1885-8, George Shenton;
1888-91, Dr. Edward Scott; 1891-2, Edward Keane
and S. IT. Parker, Q.C.; 1893-5, A. Forrest, M.L.A.;
1896-7, Hon. Henry J. Saunders, M.L.C.; 1898-1900,
A. Forrest, M.L.A.; 1901, Hon. W. G. Brookman,
M.L.C., and S. H. Parker, K.C.; 1901-2, Hon. W. T
Loton; 1902-5, IT. Brown, M.L.A.; 1906-7, Sydney
Stubbs; 1908-9, T. G. A. Molloy; 1910, R. P. Vin-
cent; 1911-12, T. G. A. Molloy.
The Municipal Council at the present time consists
of the following :


Mayor: Right Worshipful Thomas G. A. Molloy,
retires 1912. Councillors: A. W. Berryman (Central
Ward), retires 1912; J. Tatham (North Ward), retires
1912; E. W. Hocking (South Ward), retires 1912;
D. H. Braidwood (East Ward), retires 1912; J. C.
Foster (West Ward), retires 1912; James T. Franklin
(Central Ward), retires 1913; James George (North
Ward), retires 1913; Ebenezer Allen (South Ward),
retires 1913; L. R. Butt (East Ward), retires 1913;
Hugh F. McSorley (West Ward), retires 1913; F. R.
Rea (Central Ward), retires 1914; S. Gibson (North
Ward), retires 1914; J. L. Ochiltree (South Ward),
retires 1914; J. E. Ledger (East Ward), retires 1914;
Walter Simpson (West Ward), retires 1914. Auditors:
O. L. Haines, retires 1912; and W. C. Byass, retires
1913.
Traffic facili-
ties are supplied
mainly by an
electric tram ser-
vice connecting
with the various
suburbs. In 1898
a concession to
construct tram-
wavs within the
municipality was
granted by the
City Council,
and in the fol-
lowing year the
work of construc-
tion from the
east end of Hay
Street to Thomas
Street was com-
menced and com-
pleted. The sub-
urbs followed
suit, granting concessions on somewhat similar terms to
those conceded by the City Council. The establishment of
the service has done much towards the expansion of both
city and suburbs, but, nevertheless, there has been for
THOMAS GEORGE ANSTRU-
THER MOLLOY, the Right Wor-
shipful the Mayor of Perth, was born
at Toronto, in Canada, on October
4, 1852, being the elder son of the
late Mr. John Molloy, of the 22nd
Royal Welsh Fusiliers, who was en-
gajjed in active service in the Cri-
mean war and in the Indian
Mutiny of 1857. In 1862 Mr.
Molloy, sen., with his family
decided to make his home in
Western Australia, and died here in
WILLIAM STREET, PERTH.
1881. The subject of our sketch re-
ceived his scholastic training at the
Christian Brothers’ School, Perth,
and on the completion of his educa-
tion turned his attention to commer-
cial pursuits, gaining an introduction
at the hands of Mr. Henry Saw.
He afterwards joined Mr. J. T.
Riley, late of St. George Terrace but
now of Northam, and at a later date
became Manager of the Co-operative
Stores at the corner of Barrack and
Murray Streets. In this position he
a considerable time a feeling that the service should be
owned and controlled by the people. Negotiations for
the purchase by the City Council of the works within
their boundaries were entered upon, but came to
naught. Eventually the Scaddan Government came to
terms with the Company owning the concession, and,
subject to Parliamentary approval, purchased the whole
system, city and suburban. The beginning of 1913, it
is anticipated, will see the service under the control
of the Government.
A frequent train service supplies the eastern and
western suburbs, as well as Fremantle and Midland
Junction, with ready access to the metropolis, while for
casual excursions in all directions private enterprise pro-
vides motor-cars of up-to-date pattern.
Of the future of Perth who shall prophesy ? Twenty
years have seen
the city grow
from a village to
a city worthy of
the name. Given
the fulfilment of
the project of a
“Greater Perth,”
future genera-
tions shall see a
city spread for
many miles along
the banks of the
Swan, with mod-
ern systems of
sewerage and
water supply,
fast and fre-
quent trams in
all directions,
widened streets,
noble public
buildings, wide-
spi'ead open spaces, and, it is to be hoped, that live sense
of municipal responsibility without which progress can
only be the result of duties perfunctorily performed, and
not prompted by that pride that goes before success.
was so successful that in 1870 he was
enabled to purchase for £9OO on be-
half of the Society the whole block
running down Barrack Street from
Murray to Wellington Streets. At
the end of 1873 Mr. Molloy relin-
quished the control and left the State
for South Australia, remaining there
about eighteen months, during which
he gained further mercantile know-
ledge in and round Adelaide. Re-
turning to the West in 1875 he imme-
diately set up in business for him


self, speculating in land. Foreseeing
that great expansion must necessarily
take place in Perth he invested
largely in landed properties, pur-
chasing the interests of the late Mr.
James Graves in various hotel ven-
tures, and afterwards building the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. THOMAS G. A. MOLLOY.
Hotel Metropole in Hay Street. To
this he added by erecting the Theatre
Royal on the block adjoining, and
having acquired land farther west in
Hay Street he erected His Majesty's
Hotel and Theatre. The Theatre
Royal was remodelled in the year
1912 at a cost of £9,000, in ful-
filment of conditions of lease made
with Mr. C. Spencer, of the Sydney
moving-picture firm. In the midst
of business cares Mr. Molloy has also
found time to turn his attention to
Parliamentary and municipal work,
and for the past twenty-seven years
has in one capacity or another repre-
sented his fellow-citizens. On the
introduction of responsible govern-
ment in 1891 he was elected the
representative of Perth in the Legis-
lative Assembly, and held that seat
during the term of the Parliament.
At the elections of 1894, not being
able to support the policy of free,
secular, and compulsory education
which was then a burning question,
he was, in common with the other
members for Perth, defeated at the
polls, and has not since held Parlia-
mentary office. In 1884 he was
elected to represent West Ward
in the City Council, and from that
time onward, with a few trifling
breaks, has been a member of that
body, first as a Councillor for the
Ward mentioned and latterly for the
Central Ward. He has also on three
previous occasions been Mayor of the
city, a position he is now holding for
the fourth time. In municipal life
Mr. Molloy has always set his face
against allowing public utilities to
get into the hands of private com-
panies and become monopolies. The
gas and water supply, transport
facilities, drainage, and sewage he
has firmly contended should be the
property of the municipality, and
that whatever profits may be derived
therefrom should be used to lessen
the burden of taxation. To this end,
when Mayor of the city some two
years ago, he took steps to terminate
the concession owned by the Perth
Gas Company, and pusned the mat-
ter forward so well tliat this valuable
business became the property of the
citizens in the year Lie further
strenuously opposed granting the
concession to the Perth Tramway
Company, but was overruled by the
majority of the Councillors. He is
still, however, of the opinion that
events will prove his contention to
have been right. In the matter of
facilities for free exercise and recre-
ation for the people he has been
specially interested, an instance of
which is to be found in his successful
fight to prevent any charge being-
made for admission to sports and
other gatherings held on the Esplan-
ade. In the first year of his mayor-
alty he secured a sum for the erection
of free public baths on the river,
and suggested a site below the King's
Park near the Swan Brewery. How-
ever, after considerable discussion
and opposition from the Park Board
and other interested parties he found
himself unable to carry his sugges-
tion out so far as regarded that par-
ticular position. Other localities
offered were in the opinion of the
Council unsuitable, so that the
dream of free-bathing facilities for
the people is as yet unrealized. In
politics the Mayor has been a con-
sistent Liberal, leaning at times even
toward radicalism. When in Par-
liament he advocated manhood suf-
frage and the extension of the fran-
chise to women, as well as the re-
moval of all possible restrictions
upon voting at elections, all of these
matters at a later stage becoming
the subject of legislative enactment.
In industrial affairs he is favourably
disposed toward the workers, whom
he acknowledges as his strongest sup-
porters. He was appointed a Justice
of the Peace in 1895. Mr. Molloy
has been married twice —in 1873 to
Amelia Littlejohn Molloy and in
1889 to Mary, daughter of Mr. Pat-
rick Raine, of Perth. By the first
marriage there are two daughters
and a son (John Joseph); by the
second two daughters —Kathleen,
now travelling in Bavaria (1911),
and Constance, who is at present
completing her education in Perth.
WILLIAM ERNEST BOLD,
J.P., Town Clerk to the City of
Perth, was born at Southport, Eng-
land, on May 6, 1873. Educated in
London, at the conclusion of his
scholastic career he went to Scotland,
and was for two years apprenticed
to electrical engineering. He then
returned to London and turned his
attention to commercial pursuits,
gaining experience in the offices oi
firms of Australian merchants and
shipowners and brokers. In 1896 he
came to Western Australia, and
entered the City Council's office as
assistant to the then Town Clerk
(Mr. W. E. Victor, J.P.). On De-
cember 1, 1900, he was appointed
Bartletto, Perth
MR. WILLIAM ERNEST BOLD.
Acting Town Clerk owing to the
resignation of his predecessor (Mr.
It. E. Pethrith, LL.B.), and nine
months later the permanent appoint-
ment was conferred upon him. Mr
Bold was appointed a Justice of the


Peace in 1906. He married in 1907
Miss Nellie C. Jeffrey, of Eaglehawk,
Victoria.
Councillor DUNCAN HENRY
BRAIDWOOD, representing East
Ward in the Perth City Council, is
a son of the late Mr. James Braid-
wood, of Glasgow, Scotland, and
latterly of Perth. He was born at
Portland, Victoria, on August 29,
1856, and having concluded his
studies at a school in Hamilton, at
a very early age became his father’s
assistant in contracting work in the
district where he was born. Sub-
sequently he spent about four years
in the employ of various contractors
at Balmoral and elsewhere, and pro-
ceeding to Melbourne while still in
his teens joined the firm of Honey
and Co., well known in that city,
by whom he was sent to South Aus-
tralia. Here, by proving himself
worthy of every position of trust in
which he was placed, he rose to the
post of Manager for the Company,
which he eventually resigned to
start in business on his own account.
For eight years he carried on suc-
cessfully in the building trade in the
Central State, his contracts being
chiefly for the construction of roads
and bridges. In 1893 he came to
Western Australia, and continuing
in the same calling built a fine
warehouse for the firm of D. & W.
Murray at Perth. He also con-
tracted successfully for the first
post-office building at Coolgardie, at
a later date being employed in the
erection of the present splendid
premises, the cost of which ran into
£13,000. Turning his attention to
the mining industry Mr. Braidwood
went to London in 1896, and was
concerned in the flotation of several
mining companies, but on his return
once more took up contracting and
completed the Warden’s Court at
Coolgardie, also building the Denver
City Hotel. His connection with
municipal affairs began in 1905,
when he successfully contested the
Central Ward of the Perth City
Council, afterwards resigning his
seat when called away from the
capital by stress of business matters.
He became a candidate for East
Ward in 1909, and on this occasion
was returned at the top of the poll.
Mr. Braidwood married in 1886, and
has one son and two daughters.
Councillor LEWIS RICHARD
BUTT, representing East Ward in
the Perth City Council, is a son of
the late Mr. William Adi am Butt,
of Melbourne, and was born at Bal-
larat, Victoria, on November 22,
1867. He was educated in his na-
tive State and during his youth was
initiated into the baker and pastry-
cook’s calling, at the age of eighteen
entering into business on his own
account at Fitzroy. In 1875 Mr.
Butt came to Western Australia
and established himself in Perth as
a wholesale pastrycook, and has been
successful in obtaining a large-
patronage among the leading mem-
bers of the community. Since 1910
Mr. Butt has filled the seat for East
Ward in the Perth City Council,
during which period he has dis-
played a good grip of the manage-
ment of municipal affairs. He is a
member of the Masonic fraternity,
holding office in the craft, and is
also associated with the Independent
Order of Oddfellows. Mr. Butt
married a daughter of the late Mr.
Christian Levitzke, of Victoria,
formerly of Poland, and has a
daughter.
Councillor JAMES CHARLES
FOSTER, J.P., who holds the seat
for East Ward in the Perth City
Council, is a son of the late Mr. W.
FI. Foster, one of the early pioneers
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES CHARLES FOSTER.
of Western Australia. He pursued
his scholastic studies in Perth until
at fourteen years of age he entered
upon farming pursuits at North am,
where he continued for twenty-five
years. Relinquishing this occupa-
tion he became engaged in business
operations at Kelmscott for three
years, at the end of which period
he came to Perth and opened the
Royal Hotel, the proprietorship of
which he retained for ten years and
then retired from active business
pursuits. He was first elected to
the Perth City Council about 1895,
and with the exception of a break
of about two years has occupied a
seat in this body ever since. A use-
ful, conscientious member, he de-
votes the greater part of his time
to the affairs of the Council, turn-
ing for needful recreation in the
summer time to yachting on the
River Swan and in the winter to
driving, of which he is very fond.
He is owner of the 14-footer yacht
“Wonga” and is a member of the
Flying Squadron Yacht Club. Mr.
Foster is a Justice of the Peace and
a member of the St. John’s Lodge
in the fraternity of Freemasons. Ho
is a widower and has a surviving
family of three sons.
Councillor JAMES THOMAS
FRANKLIN, representing Central
Ward in the Perth City Council, is
a son of the late Mr. James
Franklin, of Middlesex, England,
in which county the gentleman
under review was born on October
25, 1854. Arriving in New South
Wales with his parents when only
two years of age, he received his
educational training at various
public and private schools, and sub-
sequently joined his father in the
building trade. He displayed great-
aptitude in this business and before
reaching man’s estate had carried
out some very large contracts in the
Mother State on his own aecount.
With the exception of a brief
period (when he acted as Inspector
of Government Buildings) he con-
tinued his calling in New South
Wales until the year 1883, during
the latter part of this period enter-
ing into partnership with Mr. James
Finlay, who afterwards joined him
in Western Australia. Mr. Franklin
established himself in business in
Perth upon his departure from the
Eastern State, and from his arrival
has been successful in obtaining a
large share of public patronage. His
partnership with Mr. Finlay, now of
twenty-three years’ standing, is still
unbroken, and the firm owns the
Enterprise steam joinery and timber
business well known in this State.
All matters concerning the Govern-
ment of this country have long com-
manded his deep and serious atten


tion, and in 1904 he became a can
didate and was elected for Central
Ward in the City Municipal Coun-
cil, and twice received election un-
opposed. Four years later he unsuc-
cessfully contested the North Perth
constituency in the House of
Assembly, lie has taken an active
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES THOMAS FRANKLIN.
part in Friendly Society work
and is a Past Master in the Masonic
craft, having been Master of a
Lodge in New South Wales as far
back as thirty years ago. He is
Past Grand Master of the Loyal
Orange Lodge and present Grand
Master of the Royal Black Institu-
tion, which position he has held for
six years. A supporter of all forms
of healthy outdoor recreation he acts
as Patron and Honorary Officer of
many of the athletic clubs of the
city, and derives pleasure himself
from the game of bowls, being a
member of the Perth Bowling Club.
In 1877 Mr. Franklin married Alice
Mabel, daughter of the late Mr.
William George, of Castlereagh, near
Penrith, New South Wales, and has
three sons and six daughters.
Councillor JAMES GEORGE,
representing North Ward in the
Perth City Council, was born at
Pembrokeshire, England, on De-
cember 8, 1864. He was educated
in his native place, and subsequent
to his arrival at Fremantle went to
work at the Northampton Mines,
In 1905 Mr. George established him-
self in his present premises in WiL
liam Street. He was first elected to
a seat in the Perth City Council as
representative for North Ward in
1904, since which time he has twice
received re-election unopposed. He
is a member of the Masonic craft, of
which he is a Past Master, and is
also a Past Master of the Protestant
Alliance Friendly Society, holding
the high office of Grand Trustee of
the Alliance in Western Australia.
Councillor SIDNEY GIBSON,
representing North Ward in the
Perth City Council, was born at
Castlemaine, Victoria, on June 20,
1876, and is a son of the late Mr.
William Hastie Gibson. He was
educated in his native place, and
leaving school at an early age entered
upon seafaring pursuits for five
years. Arriving in Western Aus-
tralia upon the termination of this
period he became engaged in the
work of a carpenter and allied trades,
in which he had received initiation
while still a lad, and spent some
time on the eastern goldfields, ob-
taining a large share of the early
Government building contracts there.
While on the fields he was one of
the founders of the Filter Press and
Cyaniders’ Union in Boulder, and
always took a deep interest in mat-
ters of political importance from a
Labour point of view, acting as dele-
gate to the Australian Labour
Federation Central Executive from
the Goldfields District Council. In
April, 1910, Mr. Gibson came to
Perth and established himself in
business as a builder and contractor.
He became a candidate for municipal
honours when a vacancy occurred by
the retirement in 1911 of Mr.
Lander, who was entering upon the
wider sphere of politics. A sup-
porter of athletics generally, Mr.
Gibson was well known in his
younger days on the eastern fields
as a participator in various forms of
sport. He was married in Perth in
1898 to Catherine, daughter of Mr.
S. Wennstrom, of Creswick, Vic-
toria, and has two daughters. He
resides at 4, Cavendish Street, High-
gate Hill.
Councillor JACK LEARMONTH
OCHILTREE, J.P., A.R.V.T.A.,
architect, of Perth, is a son of Mr.
T. E. Ochiltree, of Melbourne, and
was born at Ballarat, Victoria, on
April 25, 1870. He acquired his
scholastic training at the Ballarat
College and subsequently at the Haw-
thorn Grammar School, and at the
termination of his studies was
articled to the late Mr. Alfred Dunn,
one of Melbourne's leading archi-
tects. Having decided to come to
Western Australia, when his inden-
tures were completed he sailed for
Fremantle, and after arrival joined
the architectural branch of the Exist-
ing Lines Department of the Govern-
ment Railways, where he continued
for three years. Proceeding to the
eastern goldfields he opened in prac-
tice at Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie,
and carried on with marked success
until the end of 1900. During this
year he left the fields to join the fifth
contingent bound for the scene of the
O #
Boer war in South Africa, having
previously held rank as Senior Lieu-
tenant of the Goldfields Battalion.
He served at the front for about two
years, being present at several
engagements, and had the honour to
be mentioned in despatches, besides
receiving the King's Medal and the
Queen's Medal with five bars. While
on active service he was promoted to
the rank of Captain, and went on the
retired list of officers with that rank
upon his return to Western Australia
in 1902. Settling in Perth, he
started professional practice, and has
continued without a break ever since,
devoting himself chiefly to work of a
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JACK KEARMONTH OCHILTREE.
general character. Among the large
erections which may be placed to his
credit are the Western Australian
Club Buildings, the very large factory
built at West Gtiildford by Messrs.
Gumming, Smith, & Co., and most of
the large pastoral homesteads in the


Nor’-West and Geraldton districts.
Mr. Ochiltree has made a close study
of municipal government and man-
agement, and for over six years has
held a seat on the Perth City Coun-
cil, at the present time representing
South Ward in that body and hold-
ing office as Chairman of the Works
Committee. He is a member of the
Masonic and Western Australian
Clubs, and in his younger days
devoted himself to various forms of
outdoor sport, distinguishing himself
especially as a champion in amateur
running events. In 1903 he mar-
ried Mary Rose, daughter of the
Honourable W. T. Loton, of Perth,
and has a son and two daughters.
Councillor FRANCIS RUPERT
IGNATIU S REA, representing
Central Ward in the Perth City
Council, is a son of the late Mr.
James Rea, solicitor, of Bendigo,
Victoria, where the subject of this
memoir was born on February 8,
1867. He received his education at
St. Patrick’s College, Melbourne,
where he remained until he was
nineteen years of age, and although
at first it was intended that he
should follow the profession of his
father, this idea was eventually
abandoned and he became attached
to the firm of Messrs. Farrell and
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANCIS RUPERT IGNATIUS REA.
Tynan, the principals of which were
related to him. Leaving this con-
nection he joined the staff of the
well-known firm of T. K. Bennett
and Woolcock, of Melbourne, with
whom he was associated for many
years. In 1893 he left his native
State for Western Australia, and
proceeding to the goldfields had an
adventurous career as a prospector,
with a considerable amount of suc-
cess attending his efforts. Less pros-
perous days succeeded, however,
when his varied experiences in all
departments of the mining industry
proved of little avail in winning
anew Dame Fortune's smile, and
he was by turns miner, manager,
and owner. He came to Perth in
1904 and established a thriving bus-
iness, and subsequently gained a
large connection as purveyor for the
city, apart from the ordinary
course of his other trading opera-
tions. As far back as 1890 Mr. Rea
was closely identified with the
Trades and Labour Council in Vic-
toria, but although still democratic
in his opinions, he is inclined to
favour the Liberal view of politics.
He has always displayed a keen in-
terest in public affairs, but the first
occasion on which he sought the
favours of the community in any
election was in November, 1911,
when he was returned to represent
the Central Ward in the Perth City
Council. He is still largely inter-
ested in mining, and though fully
aware of the precarious nature of the
industry for purposes of speculation,
he has sufficient faith in the mineral
wealth of the State to continue his
support in its development. An ad-
vocate of most forms of manly sport,
he takes his own recreation chiefly
in motor-boating on the Swan River.
In 1908 he married Meme, daughter
of the late Mr. Charles Edwards,
of the Fortuna Hustlers Mine, of
Bendigo, Victoria, and has a son.
Councillor WALTER SIMPSON,
J.P., representing West Ward in
the Perth City Council, was born at
Perth, Western Australia, on Jan-
uary 13, 1855, and is a son of the
late Mr. James Simpson, who
arrived in this State with Sir James
Stirling when a lad of fourteen years
of age. His mother is the oldest
surviving Western Australian na-
tive of European descent, the mar-
riage of her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Cockman, being the first celebrated
in the early days of the colony, on
which occasion the ceremony was
performed by the late Rev. F. B.
Wittenoom, grandfather of Sir Ed-
ward Wittenoom, of this State, and
the first Anglican clergyman in
Western Australia. Having com-
pleted his educational training the
subject of this memoir served some
years of apprenticeship to the trade
of a currier under the late Mr. B. B.
Ranford, the pioneer tanner of the
State. He continued in pursuance
of this calling for about thirty
years and retired in 1900, since
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WALTER SIMPSON.
which time he has devoted the whole
of his attention to his official duties
in connection with the Independent
Order of Rechabites, of which body
he is District Secretary for Western
Australia. During the whole of his
career he has taken an active interest
in the public affairs of the city, and
as far back as 1886 represented a
ward in the Perth City Council. For
eight years continuously he served
the ratepayers in this capacity, and
retired in 1894, only to return to the
arena five years later. Since 1899
he has represented West Ward with-
out a break and enjoys the dis-
tinction of being Senior Councillor
in the Perth municipality, on occa-
sion filling the post of Acting Mayor
of the city. He was appointed to a
commission of Justice of the Peace in
1901, and occupies various public
positions in addition to those already
mentioned, being a member of the
Lake Monger Board and Hon. Sec-
retary of the Methodist College
Trust of Western Australia. For
recreation he resorts to the bowling
green and is a member of the Royal
Park Bowling Club. In July, 1878,
he married Annie, daughter of the
late Mr. John Place, of Fremantle,
and has two sons and two daughters.


Councillor JOSEPH TATHAM,
representative of North Ward in the
Perth City Council, is a son of Mr.
Thomas Tatham, Bishop Auckland,
County of Durham, England, and
was educated at the Barrington Blue-
coat School in that town. He began
life as an apprentice to the building
trade, and in 1885 came to Western
Australia. In 1887 he went to Mel-
bourne, four years later returning to
the Western State. He next left for
South Africa, where he remained
until the time of the Jamieson Raid,
subsequent to which he returned to
Western Australia, having first re-
visited the scenes of his youth in
England. For five years he filled the
post of Engineer’s Inspector to the
Perth City Council, at the end of this
time being promoted to the manage-
ment of the Perth Municipal Stone
Quarries, from which position he re-
tired to enter the office of the City
Building Surveyor, where he re-
mained for nearly four years. In
1907 he was transferred to the
Health Department in the capacity
of Inspector, having previously ob-
tained the certificate of the Royal
Sanitary Institution. His first con-
nection with the City Council began
in 1909, when he contested the seat
for North Ward and defeated the
sitting councillor, Mr. E. F. Brady.
Mr. Tatham is a member of the
Masonic craft, and holds the office of
Past Master in the Lodge of Emula-
tion, No. 7, W.A.C.
WILLIAM POPE SEED,
M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.),
is a son of the late Rev. William
Seed, of Colchester, England, and
was born at Boston, in Lincolnshire,
on July 29, 1868. Upon leaving
Kingswood School, at Bath, where he
received his scholastic education, he
studied for the medical profession at
the Middlesex Hospital, subsequently
being awarded his diplomas in 1896.
Having practised in London for a
year, he sailed for AVestern Aus-
tralia, and proceeded direct to Cool-
gardie to fill the appointment of dis-
trict officer in charge of the local hos-
pital. He continued at this mining
centre until 1904, when he returned
to London to augment his experi-
ence in the most modern methods of
medical treatment at one of the lead-
ing hospitals. After a year’s absence
Dr. Seed established himself in pro-
fessional practice at Perth, and in
1908 was appointed Medical Officer
for the city, a position which carries
with it considerable responsibility,
involving the supervision of all mat-
ters connected with the general
health of the community. He is a
member of the staff of the Children’s
Hospital and occupies a seat on the
Board of the Deaf and Dumb Institu-
tion, besides which he is connected
with the governing bodies of a num-
ber of charitable institutions, and is
a member of the Royal Sanitary In-
stitute of England. Dr. Seed mar-
ried in 1908 a daughter of Mr. Henry
Blake and granddaughter of Chief
Justice Blake, whose name is promi-
nently associated with the early his-
tory of Queensland.
RICHARD PAUL VINCENT,
who holds a commision of Justice of
the Peace for the whole of Western
Australia and Queensland; is a son
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RICHARD PAUL VINCENT.
of the late Mr. Richard Paul Vin-
cent, of Melbourne, and latterly of
Perth. He is a Victorian by birth,
the place of his nativity being
Castlemaine, where he was born on
May 21, 1857. He was educated
chiefly at private schools in Victoria,
and at the close of his scholastic
career was initiated by his father
into the contracting business, for
which he displayed considerable
aptitude. He made an early start
on his own account, and continued
in this calling until 1893, when he
sailed for England and took up his
residence in London for five years,
during which period he was engaged
in the export business. Upon his
return in 1898 he called at Western
Australia and remained for a short
time, taking up a few contracts, and
afterwards continued his journey to
Queensland. While resident in the
latter State for four years he ob-
tained some important Government
contracts, and upon the conclusion
of these left again for London in
1903. About this time, in conjunc-
tion with his brother (Mr. W. H.
Vincent), purchase was made of the
large hardware business of Messrs.
McLean Brothers & Rigg, and Mr.
Vincent returned to Western Aus-
tralia to take up the duties of man-
aging partner, in which capacity he
has acted ever since, his fine business
qualities finding full scope in the
control of the varied operations of
this important concern. He also
joined his brother (Mr. W. H. Vin-
cent) in the building and contracting
firm which has been carried on in
addition to the wholesale hardware
emporium. The gentleman under
review has always taken a keen and
highly-intelligent interest in the wel-
fare of his adopted country 9
although he has never allowed him-
self to be nominated for Parliamen-
tary honours. He was one of the
founders of the National Political
League, which was formed in the in-
terests of the Liberal Party and is
now merged into the Liberal League
of AVestern Australia, in which he
has continued to act on the Execu-
tive Council. In 1909 he stood as
candidate for the mayoralty of
Perth and was elected by a majority
of 1,107 votes. In redemption of a
pledge given at the election he im-
mediately took steps to aid in the
furtherance of the Greater Perth
scheme, and to this end called a con-
ference of the five adjoining munici-
palities. Before the termination of
this period of office he was enabled
to present to the ratepayers a scheme
drawn up by the conference, and
which, by a five to one majority,
was adopted by referenda in four out


of the six municipalities. In 1911
Mr. Vincent was again nominated
for the mayoral office, but suffered
defeat by the narrow minority of
ten votes. This defeat in some
quarters was attributed to the fear-
less manner in which, being ever a
man of independent spirit and a
fighter rather than a “peace at any
price” adjuster, he administered the
laws of the municipality. These he
insisted upon having carried out to
the letter, which was in some de-
gree resented by a coterie of the
ratepayers. Mr. Vincent is a mem-
ber of the Fire Brigade Board and
President of the Philharmonic So-
ciety, of which he was the founda-
tion President, being re-elected
during the present year. He is
associated with the Masonic frater-
nity, and finds recreative enjoyment
on the golf links and the bowling
green, holding membership in the
Perth and Fremantle Golf Clubs and
in three bowling clubs. In 1886 he
married Mina Elizabeth, daughter
of the late Mr. Thomas Chalker, of
Toorak, Victoria, and has a family
of two sons and two daughters. Mrs.
Vincent died in 1911 at Rotorua,
New Zealand, whither she had gone
in the hope of recruiting her
health.
THOMAS ALFRED SHAFTO,
formerly representative for Central
Ward in the Perth City Council, is
a son of the late Mr. Thomas A.
Shafto, of Sunderland, England,
and was born at Hartlepool West,
County Durham, on January 2,
1864. After pursuing his studies
until fifteen years of age he made
an indenendent decision to come to
the antipodes, and landed at New
Zealand an absolute stranger in a
strange land, with total lack of ex-
perience and only a few pounds in
his pocket. The knowledge gained
about his father's store while a lad,
however, stood him in some stead,
and he obtained employment in
Christchurch as assistant in a
general storekeeping business, where
he remained for nearly five years.
At the end of this period, coming to
Sydney, he opened a small store on
his own account at Newtown, one of
the most populous of the suburbs of
that city, and met with such suc-
cess that eventually he became the
proprietor of three large businesses
in the environs of Sydney. In 1896
he took a flying trip to Western
Australia to verify for himself the
jj
promising reports current respecting
the rosy prospects open to the push-
ing man of business, and, well
pleased, returned to Sydney with his
mind made up to settle in the West.
Selling his Haymarket and George
Street stores by auction and his
Waterloo business as a going con-
cern he sailed for Fremantle, and on
the day following his arrival pur-
chased a cordial manufactory in
that town. Shortly afterwards he
established the Victoria Coffee
Palace in Wellington Street, Perth,
and after conducting it successfully
for a few years sold out and tem-
porarily retired from business. In
1903 Mr. Shafto went to England
and spent a year in visiting with his
family all the cities of note in Great
Britain and on the Continent. Re-
turning via America to the land of
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. THOMAS ALFRED SHAFTO.
his adoption, he built the present
Shaftesbury Hotel, containing sixty
rooms, at first intended as a resi-
dential house. Being granted an
hotel licence, the new hostel soon
evidenced its popularity and space
became limited. Extensive addi-
tions were made, and the total block
now covered occupies 200 ft. to Stirl-
ing Street and 165 ft. to James
Street, while the building comprises
over a hundred rooms. Mr. Shafto
has just completed the building of
the Shaftesbury Gardens, a semi
open-air theatre with seating
capacity for over 2,000 people, and
used chiefly for picture shows. He
has in addition large interests in
real estate in all parts of the metro-
polis. He has always taken an
active part in matters connected
with the general good of the com-
munity, and at an early period of
his residence in Western Australia
was elected a member of the Perth
City Council, holding his seat for
twelve years, during which time he
was absent from the Council Cham-
ber only on the occasion of his visit
to England. Mr. Shafto has held
various offices in the Masonic
fraternity, of which he is a mem-
ber. He is very fond of travel-
ling, and considers all sacrifices
to that end well repaid by the
pleasure and profit he derives from
occasional trips to the Eastern
States and, when time permits, in
wider flights. In 1894 he married
Christina, daughter of Mr. Robert
Ralston, of Melbourne, Victoria,
and has two sons.
HENRY ROWLEY,
M.I.E.E.F.C.S. (Lond.), City Ana-
lyst, National Chambers, Perth, Wes-
tern Australia, Telephone 729, Cable
Address “Yelwor,” Reuter’s. The
subject of this notice was born in
South Australia in the early fifties,
and was taken overland to Victoria
by his parents on the outbreak of the
gold discoveries in that State. He
thus acquired an early and intimate
acquaintance with the vicissitudes of
a young Australian’s life under pris-
tine conditions, when resourcefulness
and self-reliance were necessary
assets in those days of wild excite-
ment, adventure, and bushranging.
He acquired his scholastic training
at various denominational schools,
and, having concluded his studies at
the Church of England Grammar
School, at fourteen was apprenticed
to Messrs. Vivian & Company’s
Castlemaine Foundry, where he re-
mained for seven years. After being
employed for a further ten years as
journeyman in practical mechanical
work such as boiler and engine-
smithing, engine-fitting, etc., he pro-
ceeded to Melbourne, where constant
employment, better educational facil-
ities, and a more congenial environ-
ment allowed scope for his energies
and desire for knowledge. While
following his daily avocations he at-
tended evening lectures at the Uni-
versity of Melbourne and technolo-
gical classes, and received the bene-
fit of special private tuition from
Professors Newbury and Andrews in
physics and mathematics. He also
assisted in the experiments and
chemical investigation of the New-
bury-Vautin chlorination process for


gold-extraction, which has since been
superseded by cyanide processes.
Having a sound knowledge of prac-
tical mechanics and some experience
in applied science, the advent of
electric lighting and power obtain-
able from the varied combinations
of electrical magnetism and chem-
istry provided him with a wide field
for original research, and he was
selected to take charge of the elec-
tric light department (then in its in-
fancy) of the Victorian railways. The
continued advancement of this
branch of industrial science neces-
sitated close application to the
study of kindred branches in physics
and chemistry, and in order to per-
fect himself in the many phases of
an electrical engineer's requirements
he fitted up a private mechanical
workshop and chemical laboratory,
in which he was able to make many
interesting experiments and inven-
tions, to which latter the Patents
Office gives ample testimony. After
many years' strenuous activity in
responsible positions Mr. Rowley de-
cided to take advantage of his large
connection and establish himself in
private practice as consulting elec-
trical and chemical engineer and
metallurgist. In 1896 he officially
visited the eastern goldfields in
Western Australia, and as a re-
sult entered upon the practice of his
profession in Perth, where he has
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HENRY ROWLEY.
continued ever since, and has made
his influence widely felt both in
home institutes and in scientific
circles. Mr. Rowley is a member of
the Society of Public Analysts, Lon-
don, a member of the Royal Sanitary
Institute, London, and practises in
Perth as a consulting electrical and
chemical engineer and metallurgical
analyst, and bullion and check as-
sayer, in addition to his appoint-
ment as City Analyst, which took
place in 1900.
JAMES WIGGLE S W ORTH,
Secretary of the Perth Gas and
Electric Light Company, is a York-
shireman, having been born at the
historic capital of that country in
the year 1870. He pursued his
scholastic studies at the Manor
School in his native City, and at a
later date entered upon mercantile
life in the York Electric Light and
Gas Company with which he
remained for about twelve months.
In 1885 he came to Western Aus-
tralia and formed his early connec-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES WIGGLESWORTH.
tion with the Perth Gas and Electric
Light Company Ltd. In 1895 he
occupied the position of accountant,
ten years later taking over the
responsible duties of Secretary, and
when the concern was purchased by
the Perth Council Mr. Wigglesworth
was prevailed upon to continue in
the service of the municipality.
He is a Past Grand Steward
of the fraternity of Freemasons
in Perth and has a seat on the
Committee of the Masonic Club,
of which he is a member. He also
holds membership in the Perth and
Western Australian Clubs.
HERBERT BROADBENT,
M.1.C.E., A.M.I.Mech.E., Manager
of the Electric Light Department,
the Perth Gas and Electric Light
Company, was born at Ashton-
under-Lyne, Lancashire, England,
in the year 1868. He was educated
at the Anglo-French College in Lon-
don and subsequently apprenticed
to the engineering profession with
Messrs. Scott & Plodgson, of Guide-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HERBERT BROADBENT.
bridge. In pursuance of his calling
on three separate occasions he went
to Portugal, where he was engaged
in the erection of various works of
machinery, and at a later period
became associated with Messrs.
Holmes & Co., electrical engineers,
Newcastle-on-Tyne. Subsequently he
was transferred to their London
house and continued in the service
of this Company for about four
years. Leaving their employ, he
spent three years at Nicaragua, in
Centra] America, erecting some
large works for Messrs. Merilles,
Watson, & Co., a large engineering
firm of Glasgow, and upon the com-
pletion of this period became iden-
tified for a time with the staff at
their headquarters in Scotland. A
term of service followed as erecting
engineer at the Sunderland Electric
Light Station, and in 1896 Mr.
Broadbent was requisitioned by his
original firm, Messrs. J. H. Holmes
and Co., to come to Western Aus-
tralia to erect the first instalment of
the present electric light plant. He
acceded to the request, and in the
following year, having completed the
erection and received the guarantee
for that Company, he became con-
nected with the Perth Gas Company,
which had bought out the small con-
cern then existent that had not


reached the stage of supplying
electric light. Successfully inaugu-
rating this department he undertook
its personal control, and has con-
tinned in the discharge of its duties
ever since, having transferred his
services to the municipality when the
company disposed of its interests to
the Perth Municipal Council in
1912. From the original plant of
a few hundred horse-power the busi-
ness has expanded to such an extent
that about 5,000 horse-power is now
necessary to supply the present-day
wants for electricity. The former
directorate on two occasions sent Mr.
Broadbent to London to purchase
new plant, and during each trip,
both of which extended over six
months, he was given carte blanche
in the exercise of his commission,
The gentleman under review is a
member of the English Institution
of Mechanical Engineers and of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers,
He is also a member of the Western
Australian Institute of Engineers.
To the new arrival the town of Fremantle offers the
suggestion that it was dumped down haphazard on the
nearest piece of shore to the roadstead where lay the
vessel which brought the first batch of settlers. The
extreme narrowness of the streets gives no opportunity
for the display of architectural grandeur, while traffic
is necessarily impeded and little opportunity given for
modern sons of Nimshi to practice traffic-speed
regulations.
Fremantle's birth may be said to date from the
arrival of the first immigrant ship, the “Parmelia," in
1829. Before the
end of that year
eighteen vessels
had arrived, and
during the fol-
lowing year
thirty - nine had
anchored in Gage
Roads. Traffic
inland was main-
tained by a ser-
vice of boats
monthly between
the port and
Guildford. Fre-
mantle people
never lacked en-
terprise, so it
came about that
the first news-
paper in the
colony was pub-
Photo by C.E. Farr .
lished in Fremantle (in 1831), the first horse race
run there (in 1833), and the first sea-going craft,
“Lady Stirling/' built in 1857. It was not till 1850
that Fremantle became the landing-place of the convict
settlement at Swan River. The history of the town had
little of note outside of official records. In 1883 the
Town Hall was initiated by the grace of the Legislative
Council, who voted £2,000 towards its erection. The
first Mayor was elected the same year, but it was not
till four years later that the Town Hall was opened.
jj2
Fremantle.
HIGH STREET, FREMANTLE.
It was in 1892, however, that the breath of life may
be said to have first entered the town, for then it was
that the work on the harbour was begun. The mouth of
the Swan River was opened, a rocky bar that had pre-
viously proved an obstacle to shipping being removed,
breakwaters were built, wharves constructed, a basin and
channels dredged, till in 1898, after the expenditure of
over £1,000,000 sterling, the N.D.L. steamer “Prinz
Regent Luitpold” berthed in the harbour, being followed
a few months later by the “Friedrich der Grosse,” of
10,500 tons. Fremantle had leaped at a bound from a
coastal to an in-
ternational port;
But to-day, de-
spit e further
accomm o d a t i o n
having been pro-
vided, the busi-
ness of the port
has outgrown the
capacity of the
harbour, and a
movement is now
afoot to provide
for extension on
a large scale. As
showing the
rapid increase in
the amount of
cargo handled at
the port and the
necessity for in-
creased berthing
and other facilities, it may be pointed out that
whereas 493,708 tons were dealt with in 1910, in
1911 these figures had jumped to 628,757 tons.
Assuming that this rate of increase is maintained
annually —and there is little reason to believe it should
not be—within very few years the million-ton mark will
be reached. Granted good seasons, with the large in-
crease of area put under wheat annually, Fremantle must
set her house in order for the facile handling of the
stream of produce that will pour into her lap for export


from the interior of the State, to say nothing of the
yearly increasing freights of machinery and other goods
from oversea. Records show that in 1907 only 33 tons
of wheat were exported; in 1908, 3,127 tons; in 1909,
14,774 tons; in 1910, 46,810 tons; and in 1911 about
50,000 tons, despite the comparative failure of crops from
a shortage in the annual rainfall.
The year of the opening of the new harbour saw the
port provided with a water supply commensurate with
her development. Hitherto the supplies had been mainly
from privately-owned wells, but in 1898 the town was
reticulated and a supply laid on wherever required.
It was not till 1906 that Fremantle was provided
with an electric tram and lighting service. The system,
unlike that in Perth, is not privately owned, but is under
the control of a board composed of leading business-
men and members of the various municipalities
interested.
The problem of crossing the river was solved by
the reconstruction of the North Fremantle Bridge, and
the elimination of the “camel’s back,” which had hitherto
proved an obstacle to road traffic.
Fremantle had a rate roll of <£17,334 for the year
1911, for which year the expenditure was <£22,181. The
FREDERICK JAMES
McLAREN, J.P., Mayor of Fre-
mantle, was born near Clare, South
Australia, on July 6, 1873, and is a
son of Mr. Donald McLaren, now
of Fremantle. He was educated at
Canowie, in the Central State, and
leaving school at the age of four-
teen became identified with farming
pursuits for about six years. Tir-
ing of the monotony of country life,
he removed to Quorn and established
himself there in the tobacconist and
hairdressing business, leaving after
three years to open in the metro-
polis, where he carried on a similar
business for some time. In 1901 he
came to Western Australia and
settled at Fremantle, and before a
very long period had elapsed was
proprietor of the leading tobacconist
business at that port. In 1907 he
contested the West Ward in the
Fremantle Municipal Council and
topped the poll against an opponent
who had sat for nearly twenty years.
During the three years' term that he
then served he discharged the duties
of Town Treasurer, but retired from
the Council at the end of that period
on account of the too severe demands
it made on the time he required for
the conduct of his private business. In
1911, however, he was requisitioned
to stand for the mayoralty, and ac-
ceding to the request was returned
unopposed to the chair. Mr.
McLaren received his commission of
Justice of the Peace in 1909, and
has always proved himself to be
possessed of true public spirit, all
matters for the advancement of the
district commanding his ready sup-
port. He holds a seat on the Public
Hospital Board and is Secretary of
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FREDERICK JAMES MCLAREN.
the Fremantle Trades Association,
of which he was president for
a time. He is a committeeman
of the Fremantle Literary Insti-
mayoral report for last year shows that one of the most
thriving concerns in which the municipality is interested
is the fish market, where the humblest buyer may pur-
chase a single fish or the big buyer a whole catch. Sales
amounting to over £19,000 were effected last year at the
markets, that being appointed as the only place for in-
spection of fish before sale.
The municipality has been remarkably successful in
catering for the amusements of the people. A popular
summer resort has been established at South Beach, and
municipal baths are well appointed and maintained.
The future of the State is largely bound up with
that of Fremantle. The prosperity of one means the
prosperity of the other, and with the construction of the
Trans-Australian Railway, the extension of harbour
facilities, and the establishment of the naval base now
in course of construction, Fremantle may well maintain
the title of “The Gateway of the Golden West.”
The population of the municipality is just under
20,000. Mr. F. J. McLaren is the present Mayor, and
Mr. Henry T. Haynes the Town Clerk. The board
elected to manage the tramway system consists of Messrs.
R. J. Lynn (chairman) and E. H. Fothergill and the
Hon. W. C. Angwin, M.L.A.
tute and was largely instrumen-
tal in establishing a free read-
ing-room in connection with that
institution. He is a member of the
Masonic craft and is Chief of the
Fremantle Caledonian Society, in
which body he has always taken a
deep interest, having been one of the
founders of the local branch. His
favourite form of recreation is found
in the game of bowls, and he is a
familiar figure on the Fremantle
Green. In 1903 he married Kate,
daughter of Mr. William Diprose, of
Tunbridge Wells, Kent, England,
and has a daughter and a son.
Councillor JOHN CHARLES
BRENNAN, representative for
South Ward in the Fremantle
Municipal Council, is a son of the
late Sergeant John Brennan, of the
Victoria Police Department, and
was born at Ballarat, Victoria, on
August 20, 1868. He received his
education in his native city, com-
pleting his scholastic career at the
Christian Brothers’ College, and
leaving school was apprenticed to
the cigar manufacturing trade at
the house of Messrs. Phillips & Co.,
of the same place. After twelve
years with this firm, for the sake of
gaining wider experience he obtained
a position with Messrs. Jacobs. Hart,


and Co., of Melbourne, and, having
continued in this connection for
some considerable time, determined
to take a further flight to the Wes-
tern State. He arrived at Perth on
June 15, 1891, and on the following
day secured the appointment of fore-
man with the firm of Dixon & Co.,
subsequently being the first in the
State to manufacture cigars. After
two years he resigned from this ser-
vice in order to join a party of
friends in a speculative venture on
the Murchison goldfields, but
shortly after arrival abandoned this
enterprise to combine with Mr. P.
Nolan in procuring and supplying
produce and foodstuffs for the re-
quirements of the miners. This
merchandise they shipped from the
Eastern States and landed at
Geraldton, and such was the high
rate of living in these remoter
regions that they were able to obtain
quite phenomenal prices for their
goods, potatoes alone bringing <£7o
per ton at Cue in 1894. In 1895
Mr. Brennan opened a tobacconist
business at Fremantle, and after
carrying it on for a short time was
approached by his former employers,
Messrs. Dixon & Co., and was pre-
vailed upon to return to his old posi-
tion with them. Within a couple of
years, however, he was in business
again on his own account as cigar
manufacturer in Fremantle, and
since that time has carried on suc-
cessfully, being well known in the
commercial circles of the town. Mr.
Brennan has always taken an in-
terest in public affairs, and in No-
vember, 1909, was elected to his pre-
sent seat in the Fremantle Munici-
pal Council. Apart from his mer-
cantile and municipal responsibili-
ties, his chief energies are centred
in Fire Brigade work, and as a
younger man he was one of the noted
trophy winners in this connection.
He is a member of the Fire Brigades'
Board and acts as Secretary of the
Western Australian Fire Brigades'
Association. A patron of the
national sport of football, he is a
leading supporter of the Australian
game. Mr. Brennan in 1908 mar-
ried Jane May, daughter of Mr.
Philip Griffin, of County Kerry, Ire-
land.
Councillor RICHARD BEALE
CARTER, representing East Ward
in the Fremantle municipality, is a
son of the late Mr. J. Carter, of
Newton-Abbot, Devonshire, Eng-
land, and was born at that town on
September 3, 1863. He was edu-
cated at Weston College, Bath,
Somerset, England, and upon the
completion of his scholastic course
engaged in a commercial career with
the firm of James Spence & Co., of
St. Paul's Churchyard, London.
While here he received the offer of
a position from the firm of William
Whiteley & Co., the noted universal
providers of London, and subse-
quently passed from their employ
into that of Messrs. Charles Jen-
ner & Co., of Edinburgh. Having
obtained an excellent working know-
ledge of his business, Mr. Carter
crossed the seas to Dunedin, New
Zealand, and there joined in part-
nership with his brother, Mr. S. H.
Carter, who had established himself
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RICHARD BEALE CARTER.
in business in that city. This part-
nership lasted for five years, at the
end of which period, in 1889, he
took a trip to England and opened
in commercial pursuits on his own
account in the town of Blackbourn,
Lancashire, where he remained for
over eleven years. The call back to
the sunny skies of Australia, how-
ever, proved irresistible, and in 1900
he sailed for Western Australia, and
for about seven years carried on a
successful business in Wellington
Street, Perth. In 1907 he disposed
of his metropolitan interests and
came to Fremantle, securing pre-
mises in a central position in Market
Street, and having been for so long
a prominent figure in trading circles
at once came to the front among his
confreres. In 1910 he was elected
President of the Fremantle District
Traders' Association, and prior to
the 1911 municipal elections was
waited upon by a representative de-
putation and asked to stand for
East Ward. Acceding to this re-
quest he was returned to the Cham-
ber, and there is little doubt that
his extensive business experience will
prove of invaluable service in the
deliberations of this body. Mr. Car-
ter is connected with the Masonic
fraternity, having been a Master
Mason for over a quarter of a cen-
tury; and he has held office as Noble
Grand in the M.U.1.0.0.F. In
1886 he married Lucy, daughter of
the late Mr. James Grant, grazier,
of Perthshire, Scotland, and has
seven sons and three daughters.
Councillor JOHN COOKE, J.P.,
representative of South Ward in the
Fremantle Municipal Council, is a
son of the late Mr. Roger Cooke, of
Talbot, Victoria, where the gentle-
man under review was born on De-
cember 7, 1860. Upon the conclu-
sion of his scholastic studies he en-
gaged in farming pursuits in Vic-
toria, afterwards relinquishing this
industry in favour of mining and
prospecting in the neighbourhood of
Port Darwin, in the Northern Ter-
ritory. Having sold a property which
he had acquired in this district he
returned to his native place, where
he married, and soon after opened a
grocery store at Allandale, Victoria,
which he carried on successfully for
six years. In 1886 he came to Wes-
tern Australia, and proceeding to the
far nor'-west opened a store at the
Three-Mile, in the Kimberly district,
spending what intervals he could
spare in prospecting the surrounding
country. Success not attending his
efforts he returned to Victoria and
took up road contracting, at the
same time securing an interest in a
farming property, and carried on in
this way for eight years. At the
end of this period he sailed again for
Western Australia and established
a general grocery store at Mandurah
Road, Fremantle, which he has con-
ducted with growing prosperity ever
since. Mr. Cooke has always used
his influence to advance the interests
of the community in which he resides,
and for a number of years has occu-
pied a seat on the Roads Board, of
which he is now President. In 1906
he was elected by the ratepayers of
South Ward to a seat in the local
Municipal Council, and has been re


turned at each subsequent election.
He makes a hobby of farming pur-
suits and holds a 1,000-acre block at
Merriden and a poultry farm and or-
chard some three miles from the city,
where he spends most of his leisure.
He is a member of the Masonic craft.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. J OHN COOKE.
In 1884 Mr. Cooke married Mary
Fife, daughter of the late Mr. James
Cable, of Talbot, Victoria, and has
two sons and two daughters.
Councillor BARTHOLOMEW
DALY, representing West Ward in
the Fremantle Town Council, is a
son of the late Mr. Timothy Daly,
of County Kerry, Ireland, latterly
of Fremantle. He w T as born at
Lyar, between Killarney and Castle-
island, near the spot where his illus-
trious countryman, Daniel O’Con-
nell, first saw the light. Receiving
his early education in his native
town he was brought to Australia
by his parents while still quite a lad
and joined the South Australian
Government Service in the Water-
works Department. Subsequently he
spent fourteen years at Broken Hill
and assisted in the laying of the first
water main from Stephens Creek to
Broken Hill in connection with Mr.
C. Jobson, under whose direction he
first turned his attention to contract-
ing work. Lie accompanied the latter
gentleman to Western Australia and
after being associated with him in
various contracts for two years re-
turned to South Australia, only
again to obey “the call of the West”
several years later. Lie entered into
a contract with the Fremantle Smelt-
ing Company to supply flux to the
smelters and carried out this work
during the whole life of the Com-
pany, besides taking on carting con-
tracts for the Fremantle Municipal
Council. To Mr. Daly must be given
the credit of introducing the first
slag roads in Western Australia, this
material now being widely used in
roadmaking all over the State. Mr.
Daly first entered the arena of muni-
cipal activity in 1906, and as repre-
sentative of the city ward he finds
his time fully employed with the
many and varied demands of his
office. He is a supporter of the
Liberal Party in politics, and is a
member of the Council of the Liberal
League of Western Australia and
President of the South Fremantle
Branch of that organization. He is
also a member of the Fremantle
Hospital Board and was the first
Chairman of the United Friendly
Societies' Council, being Past Chief
Ranger in the I.U.F. He is a great
lover of horses and spends much of
his leisure time among his equine
friends, the fine qualities of which
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. BARTHOLOMEW DALY.
are widely known. Mr. Daly mar-
ried Nor ah, daughter of Mr. John
Reilly, of County Kerry, Ireland,
and has six sons and a daughter.
Councillor JAMES HEALY,
J.P., representative for East Ward
in the Fremantle Municipal Council,
was born at Ballynagun, County
Clare, Ireland, on October 17, 1870,
and is a son of the late Mr. Michael
Healy, of that place. He was edu-
cated at the National Schools at
Cree and Cooraclare, in his native
county, and in his early teens became
apprenticed to the softgoods trade in
the town of Kilrush. Having con-
tinued with the one firm of O’Connor
and Co. for nine years, during which
he passed through all the depart-
ments of the business, in 1893 be
severed his connection with the com-
pany and emigrated to Australia.
Landing in the Eastern States at the
time of the bursting of the land
boom he suffered wih others from the
resultant depression of trade, and in
1895 arrived in Western Australia.
Here he took a position as assistant
teacher in the Christian Brothers
College, Perth, established about a
year previously by the Rev. Brother
O’Brien, but after a brief period re-
signed in order to accept a position
in his own line of business. In 1898
he opened on his own account in
Fremantle, shortly afterwards admit-
ting Mr. Fontaine as partner and
extending the field of his operations
to the capital. Mr. Healy began his
connection with public life in 1905,
when he entered the Municipal Coun-
cil as representative for East Ward,
which seat he has retained ever
since. The outstanding feature of his
useful municipal career has been his
determined fight for the replacement
of the numerous old and insanitary
buildings in the town by structures
of modern design, and in accordance
with his motion many of the promi-
nent thoroughfares have been greatly
improved by the erection of build-
ings, the architecture of which is a
credit to the State. Mr. Healy was
appointed to a commission of Justice
of the Peace under the Daglish
Government in 1906. He is a
foundation-member of the Perth
Celtic Club and has taken a leading
part in the movement to obtain funds
to assist the Irish National cause
during his period of office as Hon.
Secretary to the local branch of the
United Irish League. He was also
prominent in the civic receptions ex-
tended to Messrs. William Redmond,
Devlin, and Donovan on the occa-
sions of their various visits to this
State. The work of friendly societies
commands his warm interest, and he
especially devotes himself to the
Irish National Foresters, being ap-
pointed a delegate from Western
Australia to the Australian Confer-
ence of that body held in Melbourne
in 1904. In 1911 Mr. Healy visited
Ireland for the first time since his
departure from the land of his birth


eighteen years previously, and spent
nearly a year travelling within its
borders. In 1898 he married Rose,
daughter of the late Mr. John
Stokes, one of England's soldiers at
the Crimean war.
Councillor FREDERICK JONES,
representative for North Ward in
the Fremantle Municipal Council, is
a son of the late Mr. David Jones,
of Aberistwyth, South Wales. A
Western Australian by birth, his
native town is Fremantle, where he
has spent the greater part of his life.
He was born on Noyember 1, 1847,
and there being no schools in those
days was almost entirely self-
educated. At eighteen years of age
Mr. Jones began his training as
shipwright, and three years later
started on an independent career,
during the course of which he has
supervised some of the most impor-
tant shipping repairs ever under-
taken in the Harbour of Fremantle.
In 1869 he took a position as car-
penter on board the ship “Eliza
Bartletto, Perth
MR . FREDERICK JONES.
Blanche" trading east, and upon his
return settled down at Fremantle,
and ever since has followed his call-
ing at the Western Australian port.
Although at times Mr. Jones has
turned his hand to the building of
convenient small craft for local pur-
poses, his chief attention has been
given to repair work for visiting
ships and to the business of a float-
ing builder. Pie was elected to a
seat on the local Council two years
after Fremantle was gazetted a
municipality in 1886, and during his
twenty-three years of service has
represented the ratepayers of South,
North, and West Wards respectively,
and on several occasions has occu-
pied the mayoral office. He is in-
terested in real estate in and about
Fremantle and also owns some gar-
dening land at Jandakot. His
leisure time is spent in making re-
pairs on his house properties and in
working in his garden. He has been
connected with the Oddfellows’
Order since 1867. In 1875 Mr.
Jones married Emma, daughter of
Mr. George Cook, of Fremantle, and
has four sons and three daughters.
Councillor CHARLES HENRY
BEACONSFIELD ROBSON, repre-
senting East Ward in the Fremantle
Municipal Council, is a son of Mr.
Horatio Robson, of Adelaide, South
Australia, and was born at South-
sea, England, on July 29, 1874.
His education, begun at St. Jude’s
School in Southsea, was continued
at Victoria Park School, Melbourne,
where he arrived with his father
when about ten years of age, having
called at Western Australia on the
voyage out. Subsequently visiting
all the Eastern States except Queens-
land he finished his scholastic studies
at Hobart and Sydney. While still
a lad he went to New Zealand and
spent nearly two years on a sheep
and cattle station for the benefit of
his health, in 1894 joining his father
in business in Western Australia as
auctioneers and house, land, and
estate agents. Nine years later Mr.
Robson took over the whole of the
business from his father and entered
into partnership with Mr. J. Cox,
the firm continuing its transactions
from the same offices in Fremantle
where it carries on business at the
present time. Mr. Robson’s munici-
pal career began in 1910, when an
opportunity arose for him to contest
his present seat, and he has since
been able to put to practical purpose
some of the knowledge he gained
during his previous theoretical study
of the management of public affairs.
He is a strong supporter of the
Liberal Party in politics, and is a
member of the Executive of the
Liberal League of Fremantle. A
genial advocate of all healthy out-
door sport he holds office in the East
Fremantle Football Club. Mr. Rob-
son married in 1900, and has a son
and two daughters.
Councillor W. J. SUMPTON,
representative for West Ward in the
Fremantle Municipal Council, is a
son of Mr. Jacob Sumpbon, of Fre-
mantle, and was born at White-
haven, Cumberland, on February
21, 1874. He received his scholastic
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. W. J. SUMPTION.
training at a Board School in his
native place, and at the age of four-
teen left England for Australia with
his parents, landing at Melbourne in
1888. Upon arrival he was appren-
ticed to the tea-blending business,
but that proving injurious to his
health he abandoned it, and though
only sixteen years of age struck out
for himself and came to Western
Australia, where he obtained a post
with Messrs. Simpson & Co.,
fruiterers, of Fremantle. He re-
mained in that connection for several
years, and eventually took over the
business on the retirement of Mr.
Simpson. About five years later he
was joined in partnership by Mr.
George Holmes, and the firm has
since attained to the premier posi-
tion in the port, being sole suppliers
to all the shipping companies’ agents
visiting the place and to the Com-
monwealth Naval and Military
Forces. Distinguished for his active
interest in the public affairs of his
adopted country, he received election
in 1909 to a seat in the Fremantle
Municipal Council, where he still
acts as representative for the rate-
payers of West Ward. His sound
advice on matters of finance during
a trying period of depression which
occurred in 1911 proved of especial
value to his fellow-councillors, and


his name is connected in a special
way with every movement for the
promotion of the public health. He
is a member of the Masonic
fraternity and a Past Master in the
craft. Gardening is his hobby, and
while he meets with considerable
success in the cultivation of flowers
his chief attention is given to the
kitchen garden, where he produces
particularly fine vegetables. He
supports, and to some extent follows
up, the games of cricket and foot-
ball, having been in his youth a very
fair exponent of these sports. Mr.
Sumpton was married in 1899 and
has two sons and two daughters.
Councillor HAROLD WILKIN-
SON, A.I.A. S.A. and V., represen-
tative of North Ward in the Fre-
mantle municipality and Town
Treasurer for Fremantle, is a son
of the late Mr. Charles Wilkinson,
a native of Birmingham, England,
and an early settler in South Aus-
tralia. Born at Norwood, in the
Central State, on January 9, 1871,
he was educated at Mr. Moore’s
school and at St. Peter’s College,
subsequently entering the office of
Messrs. Ostermeyer, Dewez, & Co.,
where, after serving for several years
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HAROLD WILKINSON.
he eventually became chief of the
office and joint signatory of the firm.
Upon the closing of the firm's busi-
ness in South Australia Mr. Wilkin-
son came to Western Australia and
upon arrival received the appoint-
ment of Secretary to the Fremantle
Gas and Coke Company. At a later
period he took over the management
of the concern, and, having com-
pleted about eight years in this em-
ploy, in 1909 he resigned his position
and opened in business on his own
account at Henry Street, Fremantle,
as public accountant, stock, share,
and mercantile broker. Upon tak-
ing up his residence at Fremantle
Mr. Wilkinson made a close study
of municipal affairs, and simulta-
neously with his resignation from
the company’s service he was requi-
sitioned to allow himself to be nomi-
nated for a seat in the Council, and
in 1909 was returned unopposed.
At the beginning of 1911 the Coun-
cil bestowed upon him the honour of
the appointment of Town Treasurer.
In 1903 he married Lina, eldest
daughter of Mr. G. Degenhardt, of
St. Peters, South Australia, and has
two sons and a daughter.
OWEN FRANK PAGET, M.D.,
8.C., J.P., Area Medical Officer to
the Commonwealth Territorial Force,
is a son of Sir George Paget, K.C.8.,
and was born at Cambridge, Eng-
land, on February 17, 1871. He
was educated at the Charterhouse
School and in Germany, and studied
for the medical profession at Cam-
bridge, London, and Paris, even-
tually taking his degree of M.D. at
Cambridge University. After hold-
ing various appointments in London,
Captain Paget came to Western
Australia in 1896 and commenced
practice at Fremantle. At the end
of two years he visited the Hawaian
Islands and established himself in
his profession at Honolulu for twelve
months. Leaving this picturesque
town he travelled extensively in vari-
ous latitudes, but ultimately re-
turned to Fremantle and again en-
tered upon practice at this port. Dr.
Paget is Medical Officer to the Ter-
ritorial Corps of Western Australia,
in which regiment he holds the
honorary rank of Captain. He is
also Health Officer for Fremantle,
North Fremantle, and surrounding
districts, and was for some time as-
sociated with the Fremantle muni-
cipality as councillor, a position he
was compelled to relinquish on
taking up the duties of Medical
Officer of Health. Dr. Paget
evinces a keen interest in all matters
affecting the welfare of the town and
district, and is honorary consultant
to the local hospital. His sporting
instincts are all alive where horses
are concerned, and formerly he was
a well-known figure at a meet of the
Hunt Club. He is one of the
original members of the Fremantle
Hunt Club and the Polo Club, and
is also a keen motorist. He was
Bartletto, Perth.
DR. OWEN FRANK PAGET.
married at Albany, in 1896, to
Hilda Maud, daughter of the Rev.
Astley Cooper, of Buckminster,
England, and has a son and two
daughters.
WILLIAM MILLS was born at
Liverpool, England, on June 22,
1866, and is a son of Mr. Joseph
Mills, of the same town. He came
to Victoria in 1887, where he re-
mained for eight or nine years, at
the end of which time he sailed for
Western Australia and settled at
Subiaco. Two years later he re-
moved to Cottesloe and here laid the
foundation of the present business of
Messrs. Mills & Ware, biscuit manu-
facturers. While resident at Cotte-
sloe Mr. Mills was returned as a
member of the first elected Roads
Board, retaining the seat for three
years, and he was a delegate to the
first Roads Boards' Conference held
at Bunbury. He resigned from these
offices in 1901, in which year he re-
moved to Fremantle, where shortly
after his arrival he was a candidate
for a seat in the Fremantle City
Council. Upon this occasion he
failed to secure election, but twelve


months later he was again on the
field, this time being the successful
candidate for South Ward, and con-
tinned to represent the ratepayers
for five years, at the end of which
time he resigned his seat in 1906.
During these years Mr. Mills was
one of those responsible for the
abolition of the Fremantle Volun-
teer Fire Brigade, and for securing
the passage through the Houses of
Parliament of an amended Bill
which granted to Fremantle repre-
sentation on the Board of the Metro-
politan Fire Brigade. Much money
has since been expended on the local
Brigade, with the result that to-day
the plant will bear favourable com-
parison with any of its size in the
Commonwealth. Mr. Mills was also
one of the original Committee ap-
pointed to investigate the tramways
and lighting questions, and after ac-
quiring data from all parts of the
world, the Committee recommended
the municipalization of both pro-
jects, a scheme which received the
endorsement of the ratepayers, who
have since secured cheap fares and
lighting at reasonable rates. After
resigning his seat for South Ward
Mr Mills took up residence at East
Fremantle, where at the request of
a deputation he stood for Central
Ward and was elected, holding office
f or five years, at the second election
being returned unopposed. In No-
vember, 1911, Mr. Mills relinquished
his connection with the Council
owing to pressure of private busi-
ness. He is a Past Master of the
Masonic fraternity. His chief recre-
ation is derived from the game of
golf, and he is a member of the Fre-
mantle Golf Club; also of the East
Fremantle Bowling Club, of which
he was first President, continuing
to hold that office for two terms. He
married Susan, daughter of Mr.
Joseph Lee, of London, and has
three sons, who are engaged in the
business.
The late WILLIAM THOMAS
JOHN, who represented the rate-
payers in the Fremantle Municipal
Council for fifteen years, was a Wes-
tern Australian by birth, having
been born at Fremantle in Deoem-
ber, 1854. He was educated at Mr.
G. B. Humbles school, and subse-
quently joined the Telegraph Depart-
ment under Mr. Fleming, which he
left to engage in the pearling mdus-
try at Sharks Bay. At nineteen
years of age he entered the service of
Messrs. W. D. Moore & Co., of Fre-
mantle, with whom he remained for
twenty-one years. At the end of this
period he purchased the retail gro-
eery and drapery establishment of
Moore & Co., and for some
years as Messrs. John & Cleary. He
then retired from this line of busi-
ness, taking the Coronation
Hotel at Woodlupine, which he af-
terwards disposed of, and ended his
days at the seaport where he ha
spent so large a portion of his life
Mr. John was elected a member of
the Fremantle Municipal Council in
1885 as representative _ tor South
Ward, and retained this seat until
1900, during which period he fought
strenuously for the municipalization
Fremantle tramways and for
lighting service for the
t°wn. For many years among other
duties, he held the position of irea-
surer to the Fremantle Council, only
resigning the office when it was made
a stipendiary one. He was also one
of the earliest members of the Re-
mantle Hospital and Literary Insti-
tute. Mr. John married in 1876
Marian Caroline daughter of the
late Philip Scott Walker, who
served in the Crimean War and the
early part of the Indian Mutiny,
and was a descendant of the Rev.
George Walker, who defended the
walls of Londonderry with a sword
m one hand and a Bible in the other
at the memorable siege of 1691 His
widow, with six sons and two daugh-
tors, survives him.
Suburban Municipalities.
SUBIACO.
Subiaco came into being as a municipality in the
middle nineties, and owing to good management and the
readiness of the inhabitants to pay for necessary public
works has developed into a city on a small scale. Situated
west of the City of Perth it stretches westerly and
southerly. In 1900 the tramway system was extended
from the city boundary to the Park gates in Rokeby
Road. Property at once rose in price, and building was
carried on with unexampled activity. A few years later
the Municipal Council raised a loan for the purpose of
establishing municipal electric light works. These have
proved commercially successful, the profit for 1911 being
£1,993. The rate roll amounted for that year to nearly
£II,OOO. During the year 110 new buildings were
erected and a considerable length of new roadway con-
structed. The council for the benefit of the ratepayers
maintains several recreation grounds, one at the north-
east end being known as the Oval and Mueller Park,
Shenton Park being situated in the south-west. The
municipal gardens also provide entertainment for mem-
bers of the local bowling and croquet clubs. The
Subiaco river beach is another place of amusement,
where 300,000 visitors enjoyed various methods of out-
door entertainment during the past year. Picture show's
and band concerts are provided on the Oval during the
summer months, the entertainments being conducted
without loss financially. The suburb bids fair to grow
into one of the large manufacturing centres, for besides
minor factories already long established there has lately
been installed a large foundry, with buildings covering
over 100,000 square feet of floor space. Within the
boundaries of the municipality are situated several of
the charitable and philanthropic institutions of the
metropolis. The Home of Peace for the incurable and
dying, the Children’s Hospital, the Perth Modern
School, the Roman Catholic Hospital of St. John of God,
and the Government Receiving Depot for State Children,


all consisting of extensive, and some of stately, build-
ings, assist in beautifying the town and in enhancing its
importance.
Like most other towns, it is divided for the purposes
of local government into wards, each electing councillors.
The Mayor at present is Mr. James Chesters, but as
generally happens in municipal affairs the actual work
of administration falls upon the executive officer, the
iown Clerk, Mr. C. Luth. The population of the town
is about 8,500.
LEEDERVILLE.
A healthy and populous suburb to the north and
west of the city, Leederville may be reached by either
tram or train. Situated so conveniently, fed by both
services, the town has rapidly expanded during the past
few years. It is electrically lighted by current supplied
at wholesale rates by the City Electric Light Works and
retailed to customers at a profit by the local authorities,
who find the method cheaper and easier than maintain-
ing a local lighting plant. The suburb is mainly
residential, there being nearly 1,400 homes, 80 per cent,
of which are owned by the occupiers. Its chief beauty
spot is Monger's Lake, a fine sheet of fresh water about
275 acres in extent, stocked with fish (chiefly English
perch, tench, and carp), and provided with excellent
boating facilities. In the summer time good use is made
of it, and as time goes on it will in all probability be-
come to Leederville what Lake Wendouree is to Ballarat,
The Town Clerk, Mr. R. R. Long, is enthusiastic in
praise of his suburb, and is under the supervision of the
Mayor, Mr. Paul Barrett, well to the front in every
movement for its advancement.
OSBORNE PARK.
This suburb is the home of the market gardener, the
rich peaty soil recovered by drainage from the chain of
swamps that form the continuation of Monger’s Lake
northerly and Herdsman’s Lake. The suburb was
founded by a private trading concern and supplied with
a tramway service. So productive is the soil at Osborne
Park that much of it is valued at from =£lso to £2OO
per acre. It is reached by an extension of the tram
system from the end of the Leederville line, and though
not yet raised to the dignity of a municipality, it claims
to be one of the most progressive adjuncts to the capital
city.
SOUTH PERTH.
As its name denotes, South Perth is the southern
suburb of the city, being separated therefrom by a broad
expanse of river known as Perth Water. It is entirely
residential, though the first building erected there—as
far back as 1835—was purely industrial, and used as a
flour mill by Mr. Shenton. In those days the main high-
way from Perth to the South-West and Albany came
round by Mill Point, and until the Causeway was built
communicated with Perth by a ferry which ran across
to the point, known as Point Belches. When the idea
of making South Perth a residential area began to claim
attention, a roads board was created, which in 1902 gave
way to the full-blown municipality.
The area of the municipality is about 3,147 acres,
its population about 1,500, and the capital value of the
property within it £345,092. It is reached by ferries
from the city; these are now controlled by the State
Government. Many projects, such as a bridge over the
Narrows, have been mooted for bringing the suburb into
quicker communication with Perth, but so far nothing
to better the ferries has been evolved. No doubt, as time
goes on, it will be served by tram, train, and ferry, and
become to Perth the equivalent of some of the harbour
side suburbs to Sydney. The principal attraction of the
suburb is without question the "Zoo,” which fifteen
years ago was a wilderness of sand and scrub, but to-day,
thanks to the untiring energy and enthusiasm of the
Director, Mr. E. A. Le Souef, has been converted into
a beautiful garden surrounding a well-kept menagerie.
VICTORIA PARK.
Situated on the left bank of the Swan, about two
miles from Perth, Victoria Park is reached by a cause-
way built far back in the fifties, and consisting of a series
of islands joined together by bridges, the total length
being about three-quarters of a mile. The chief claim
of the suburb is that it is built on high ground, rising
to 70 and even 100 ft., and overlooking the magnificent
stretches of the river.
It led a somewhat dormant existence till the installa-
tion of the tramway system a half-dozen or so years
back. I he introduction of the current galvanized the
municipality into life, till in 1911 a year of unpre-
cedented prosperity was met with. Every house in the
suburb was occupied, and the income of the council rose
to over £3,000, while the surplus value of the council’s
assets over liabilities amounted to £4,424. When the
time comes to build the railway along the south bank of
the i ivei to I remantle from Perth, there is every possi-
bility that Victoria Park will benefit greatly, and be-
come one of the most prosperous suburbs of the city.
NORTH PERTH.
I his suburb is situated on the northern boundary
of the city. Some of the hills are very high, and give
unsurpassed views of the surrounding country. It is
well served by trams which run along Beaufort Street,
Bulwer Street, and via Oxford Street, Leederville
(Osborne Park tramway), with a further extension along


Bulwer, Fitzgerald, and Angove Streets to Albert
Street, and along Beaufort Street to Walcott Street and
York Road, which junctions with the Mount Lawley
terminus.
Where but a very few years ago there was a waste
of sand and scrub, there is now a thriving municipality
of some 5,000 people.
Of all the metropolitan suburbs none has shown
during the past twelve months a greater tendency to ex-
pansion than North Perth. One hundred and fifty new
buildings were erected, including council chambers and
two churches. The suburb is electrically lit by current
supplied from the city plant, and is served by the electric
tram system. The municipality maintains bowling
greens and croquet lawns for the use of local residents.
CLAREMONT.
This is one of the most picturesquely-situated locali-
ties in the metropolitan area. The banks of the river
rise precipitously from the water, and perched on the
highest parts are the Loretto Convent and numerous
handsome residences. At the northern end of the muni-
cipality is situated the Plospital for the Insane, a series
of buildings of quite the most modern description, and
which are entirely self-contained, being independent of
outside supply for light, power, and water. The munici-
pality maintains an electric light plant that in 1911
worked at a profit of £4OO. It is estimated that over
£II,OOO worth of buildings were added to the
wealth of the municipality in that year. The annual
income was £4,000, and expenditure about the same
amount.
COTTESLOE.
This municipality has the advantage of having a
river as well as a sea boundary. It is almost purely a
residential suburb, many of the wealthiest citizens of the
State having handsome homes there. The municipality
has, during the past year or two, been expending its
energies in developing attractions for trippers from the
city and elsewhere, the Government having given the
control of the beach lands into its hands. Refreshment
rooms, a skating rink, picture shows, and band concerts
have been provided, while ample provision is made for
the pleasure of devotees of surf bathing in the summer
time. Rod and line fishermen find good sport from the
jetty, while the beach provides an ideal playground for
children. A project is now afoot to instal an electric
tram service by arrangement with the Fremantle Tram-
way Board. During the past year new buildings to the
value of £14,000 were erected in the municipality.
EAST FREMANTLE.
East Fremantle, a suburb not of Perth but of Fre-
mantle, was declared a separate municipality in 189/,
and since then has shown that it possesses all the
elements of progress. Overlooking the Swan River, its
charming situation makes it a favourite residential
suburb. It has an area of about 730 acres and a revenue
of about £6,500. That its ratepayers are enterprising
is shown by the fact that, desiring a loan for tramway
construction, they promptly agreed to set aside a 10 per
cent, sinking fund. In addition to two recreation re-
serves of 15 and 20 acres respectively, the town is well
supplied with bowling green, croquet lawns, tennis
courts, baths, and other means of spending pleasant
hours. During the year 1911 over £4,000 worth
of buildings were erected within its boundaries, some
evidence of the favour in which it is held.
NORTH FREMANTLE.
This may be described as the industrial suburb of
the port. Situated towards the mouth of the Swan
River, some 11 miles from Perth, it possesses a fine
frontage to the Indian Ocean along its entire western
boundary. It was mainly a residential suburb, but is
now becoming an active manufacturing centre, for which
the town is admirably adapted, having a fine river
frontage and excellent wharfage accommodation. The
extensive quarries which have supplied the material for
the north and south moles of the Fremantle Harbour
Works are in this municipality. Near to the quarries
at the extreme north of the municipality is situated the
University Endowment Block, a grant of 140 acres given
by the Government to the trustees of the University.
The North Fremantle Recreation Reserve, which is
vested in the municipality, is prettily situated on a bend
of the river, and has a commodious pavilion and training
rooms. An up-to-date sanitary and rubbish service on
the sealed-pan system has been municipalized, the pans
being cleansed by superheated steam and fumigated.
North Fremantle enjoys the enviable reputation of being
the best-lighted municipality in the State, and possesses
a thoroughly up-to-date tramway service. At Fort
Forrest there is accommodation for a large complement
of permanent soldiers. The industries comprise two tan-
neries, timber mill, joinery works, two large bulk oil
stores, boot factory, two soap and candle works, a large
steam laundry, cordial factory, and galvanized iron
works. On the reclaimed portion of the Rocky Bay
Quarry land are erected large engineering, carriage
building, and chemical works, etc. The principal build-
ings are the town hall and municipal offices, police sta-
tion, Government stores (main depot), railway station,
central coal depot, literary institute, fire station, post
and telegraph stations, three public halls, four churches,
Salvation Army barracks, and three schools. Sporting
proclivities are well catered for, there being cricket, foot-
ball, bowling, croquet, and tennis clubs. A graving


dock, grain sheds and elevators, Government abattoirs
and saleyards, and cold stores are in course of con-
struction.
Population of the municipality is 4,080, and the
area 709 acres. The income is nearly £7,000. As in all
the other suburbs of the metropolitan area, residences
are at a premium, for while in 1910 there were over 140
empty houses within the municipal boundaries, not one
is now vacant.
MIDLAND JUNCTION.
The easternmost portion of the metropolitan area
had its origin in the establishment of the headquarters of
the Midland Railway Company on a flat, swampy locality
almost at the foot of the Darling Range, and distant three
or four miles from the existing town of Guildford. The
suburb has developed with giant strides, particularly
since the establishment there of the Government loco,
and railway carriage workshops. The town is flat and
lays little claim to picturesqueness—indeed, utili-
tarianism is the keynote that has been struck in its
foundation and development. The Municipal Council
owns an electric light and power plant, which supplies
current to the neighbouring town of Guildford. Besides
the Government Workshops, the Midland Railway Com-
pany maintains extensive premises, which include admin-
istrative buildings, running-yards, engine-sheds, and
workshops. The Midland system practically forms a
part of the general railway system of the State, and
junctions with the Eastern Railway. During harvest
season a busy scene is continuously maintained in the
running-yards, as train after train from the north
loaded with wheat en route to the port meets those from
the east similarly laden. In course of time Midland
Junction will possibly develop into a large manufac-
turing centre.
GUILDFORD.
This, the prettiest little town in the coastal area, has
been frequently likened to an old-time hamlet in the
country of its founders. The village green, with tree-
guarded church, its quaint old-time buildings, smack of
the Old Country. Not that the keynote of modernity
has not been struck in later years, but in no town in
the State does there survive a greater number of the
quaintly-designed buildings of the early days than in
Guildford. Its tree-planted streets give an appearance
of age, too, that is lacking elsewhere. Guildford in the
past supplied much of the building material of the dis-
trict in the forms of bricks and tiles, but this industry
has been moved farther afield, and the town has become
the centre of an orcharding district. The town itself is
celebrated for the quality as well as the quantity of roses
grown there. The upper reaches of the river about the
town provide many points of scenic beauty, while hand-
some residences have sprung up of late years in great
numbers. The Municipal Council is well to do, with an
income of nearly £2,000 a year. The town is supplied
with water from the Goldfields Water Scheme, and relies
on its supply of electric current from its neighbour, Mid-
land Junction. There is nothing suggestive of mush-
room growth about Guildford; rather there is the dignity
of age borne gracefully.
It is, in fact, one of the oldest towns in Western
Australia, having been surveyed and declared in 1830,
the first lots being awarded to members of the Cowcher,
Parker, and Meares families. Here, too, it was that the
Governor, Sir James Stirling, built for himself a country
residence (“Woodbridge”) and applied himself to the
life and pursuits of a country gentleman. It quickly
became a prosperous little centre, and formed the ter-
minus of the system of ferries that plied up the river
from Fremantle, unloading at Guildford, to allow their
cargoes to proceed by road to the smaller settlements
further in the interior. It was declared a municipality
in 1871, soon after Perth, having been previously man-
aged by a Town Trust, of which Dr. Waylin was Chair-
man from 1863 to 1868 and Mr. T. C. Gull, Dr. Waylin,
and Mr. G. Johnson in 1869, 1870, and 1871. The suc-
cession of Chairmen (later called Mayors) since then has
been as under :
Chairmen: 1871-72, G. Johnson; 1873-74, J. Morri-
son; 1875, S. J. Spurling; 1876, M. R. Meagher; 1877,
Thomas Jecks; 1878, F. B. S. Flindell; 1879, Dr. C. H.
Elliott; 1880, J. Morrison; 1881-84, W. G. Johnson;
1885-87, W. Padbury. Mayors: 1887, W. Padbury;
1888-90, W. G. Johnston; 1891, Dr. F. Tratman, T.
Jecks; 1892, W. B. Wood; 1893, W. G. Johnson; 1894,
Frank Monger; 1895-96, W. G. Johnson; 1897, C. H.
Rason; 1898, W. G. Johnson; 1899, W. Traylen;
1900-1903, R. J. Wilson; 1904-1906, F. Piercy; 1907-
1909, W. G. Johnson; 1910-12, F. Piercy.
QUEEN’S PARK.
Queen s Park, the baby among the metropolitan
municipalities, lies beyond Victoria Park, and is some
four or five miles away from Perth, with which it is con-
nected by rail. Situated in the midst of garden land, it
promises to become one of the horticultural adjuncts to
the city, and with Gosnells, its near neighbour, to afford
to the city man tired of business care and worry the
opportunity to recuperate amidst pleasant surroundings.
A considerable number of comfortable homes have
already been established, and the district offers un-
doubted attractions to those who prefer a country life
while keeping in close touch with metropolitan affairs.


ALEXANDER RANKIN, who
for twelve years held the office of
Town Clerk of Subiaco, is a son of
the late Mr. Robert Rankin, a
farmer of Kenmuir, near Glasgow,
the family property being situated on
the picturesque slopes of the beauti-
ful valley of the Clyde. The gentle-
man under review was born in 1861
and received his education in his
native town, upon the completion of
his scholastic career being articled to
the profession of an architect. Hav-
ing served for live years in the office
of Mr. David Thomson, of Glasgow,
he left Scotland at the age of nine-
teen and landed at Sydney, New
South Wales, in 1880. After spend-
ing twelve months there in survey
work he accepted a position as travel-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALEXANDER RANKIN.
ler for a Melbourne commercial
house, and about a year later took
up his residence in Adelaide. Here
he returned to his early profession,
and having filled a position of
draughtsman for about three years
in that city established himself in
Melbourne on his own account in
practice as an architect. During the
seven years passed in the Victorian
metropolis he executed designs for
thirty-three public buildings in dif-
ferent parts of the State, and out
of that number was successful in
gaining eleven first prizes, almost a
cial crisis which occurred in Mel-
bourne in 1893 Mr. Rankin turned
his attention to farming pursuits in
Gippsland, and continued in this way
for three years. At the termination
of this period, in 1896 he decided to
come to Western Australia, and
upon arrival was engaged by the
Government authorities as architec-
tural draughtsman. While acting in
this capacity he demonstrated his
superior ability by winning several
open competitions for designs of pub-
lic buildings. In 1898 Mr. Rankin
accepted the appointment of Engineer
to the municipality of Subiaco, and
in the following year the additional
responsibilities of Town Clerk, which
offices he continued to fill until
August, 1911, when he resigned in
order to enter upon agricultural life.
During his long connection with the
district he has watched its rapid
growth from a mere sand waste to
the populous suburb it has become
to-day, one proof of its phenomenal
development being that no fewer
than 325 houses were erected within
its boundaries in the course of a year.
Mr. Rankin retained his office under
six successive Mayors, and his con-
duct of the affairs of the munici-
pality met with such general appro-
bation that upon his resignation he
was the recipient from the ratepayers
of a handsome illuminated address
and presentation. The occasion was
a memorable one, the Town Hall of
Subiaco being filled to overflowing
with the citizens of the district and
representative Mayors and Town
Clerks from surrounding municipali-
ties, the late Minister for Works,
Mr. Henry Daglish, occupying the
chair. The property which Mr. Ran-
kin proposes to develop consists of
2,000 acres, situated about 60 miles
north-east of Wickepin, and will ulti-
mately be served by the Kondinin loop
railway. It is high-class country, the
soil being among the best in the
State, and offers splendid opportuni-
ties to the investor of capital and
labour. It is also favourable for
stock-raising, and it is Mr. Rankin’s
intention to combine with cereal-
growing the breeding of sheep and
pigs. Mr. Rankin, who is a member
of the Subiaco Bowling Club, mar-
ried in 1889 Sophie, daughter of the
late Mr. Cato, of Stawell, Victoria,
and has a son and a daughter.
PAUL JOSEPH BARRETT,
J.P., Mayor of Leederville, is a son
of the late Mr. Paul Barrett, of Tip-
perary, Ireland, and was born at
San Francisco, America, on July 16,
1871. As an infant he was brought
to Australia by his parents, who
arrived in Sydney in the year 1872,
and received his education at St.
Patrick’s College in that city.
Reaching the age of fourteen he was
apprenticed to the building trade
under Mr. James White, one of the
most prominent of the master
builders of the State, and having
spent five years in learning the trade
became thoroughly proficient in all
its branches. When twenty-four
years old he left New South Wales
for Western Australia, and within
a couple of years of his arrival estab-
lished himself as a master builder
and contractor, in which calling he
has carried on successfully ever
since. He has engaged in work of
all kinds, from the building of the
humble cottage to the erection of
the Chinese joss-house or house of
worship, the shop, the dwelling of
greater pretensions, and the mercan-
tile office. During the years he has
served as a councillor of the munici-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PAUL JOSEPH BARRETT.
pality of Leederville he has taken
the deepest interest in the delibera-
tions of that body for the good of
the community, and in 1909 was
elected to the mayoral office, which
he still occupies. He was appointed
a Justice of the Peace in 1902, and
is a member of the Licensing Bench
for Subiaco, a member of the Child-
ren’s Hospital Committee, and Vice-
Chairman of the Monger’s Lake
Board. Mr. Barrett is a well-
known patron of outdoor sport and
is President of the Leederville
Bowling Club, which office he has
held for three years, being in the
past captain of the champion
fours of the State. In his younger
days he was also an excellent rifle
shot. He is President of the
Leederville Club, and takes a keen
interest in its welfare. In 1896 he


married Margaret, daughter of the
late Mr. Michael Toober, of Queen’s
County, Ireland, and has two sons
and a daughter.
Councillor WILLIAM JAMES
ARNOLD, representative for North
Ward in the Leederville munici-
pality, is a son of the late Mr.
Hubert Arnold, of Brighton, Eng-
land. He was born at Hobart, Tas-
mania, on October 26, 1869, and as
a child accompanied bis parents to
Adelaide, where he was educated at
the Sturt Street State School. At
the age of sixteen he entered upon a
commercial career in the house of
Messrs. H. J. D. Munton & Co., of
the same city, and having served
two years in their clerical depart-
ment went to Victoria, where he
joined the firm of King, King, and
Co., wholesale warehousemen. Here
he obtained a good insight into the
whole working of such establish-
ments, and after eight years severed
his connection in order to accept a
position with Messrs. Goode, Dur-
rant, & Co., of Adelaide. Shortly
afterwards he undertook the post of
travelling representative for this
firm and spent nearly six years in
this capacity, during most of that
period representing the house in
Broken Hill, where he was second on
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM JAMES ARNOLD.
the staff. In 1899 he was trans-
ferred to Western Australia and was
promoted to the position of depart-
mental head in the Perth establish-
ment, which appointment he has
occupied ever since. He has always
taken an interest in municipal
government, and having made a
special study of its various aspects
in 1906 offered himself to the rate-
payers of North Ward as their repre-
sentative in the Leederville Council.
He was returned and has continued
to hold the confidence of his elec-
tors, at ensuing elections maintain-
ing his seat without opposition. He
occupies the chairs of the Finance
and Lighting Committees, and has
invariably received appointment on
the many delegations which from time
to time are formed to represent the
body outside of its own limits. Mr.
Arnold is a foundation member of
the Softgoods Warehouse Employes'
Association, and has occupied the
position of President since its incep-
tion. He is connected with the
Commercial Travellers' Club. Most
of his leisure is spent in horticul-
ture, and his garden-orchard testi-
fies to his success in this direction,
all kinds of fruit-trees being found
within its borders and very fine
specimens of fruit produced. Mr.
Arnold married in 1900 Eva Alice,
third daughter of Mr. V. Y. Jones,
a member of the well-known firm of
Jones Brothers, of Port Adelaide,
and has two sons and three daugh-
ters.
Councillor HENRY JAMES
HOLLAND, representing West Ward
in the Leederville municipality, is
a son of the late Mr. Walter Hol-
land, of Sydney, New South Wales,
and was born at Surry Hills, in
that State, on July 28, 1871. He
received his education at the Crown
Street Superior Public School,
Sydney, and upon its conclusion,
when fifteen years of age, became
apprenticed to the joinery trade
under his father, who followed
that calling. Having completed his
training he left his native State for
Western Australia in 1894, and
after following his trade for about
nine years accepted the post of
Manager of the Perth Factory in
connection with the business of
Messrs. William Sandover & Co.,
which appointment he has held for
over eight years. Mr. Holland is a
keen student of municipal manage-
ment, and much of his leisure is
given to the study of matters con-
nected with the suburb in which he
resides. He was elected to repre-
sent the ratepayers of West Ward
in 1910, and since this period has
occupied a seat on the Works and
Building Committee of the Council,
and was a member of the special
financial committee appointed to
deal with the loan of 1911. A marks-
man of note for many years Mr.
Holland was connected with the
old National Rifle Association. He
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HENRY JAMES HOLLAND.
is a member of the P.A.F.S., be-
ing Grand Auditor of the Lodge in
Western Australia. For recre-
ative purposes he prefers the game
of bowls and is a member of the
Leederville Bowling Club. In 1895
he married Katherine, daughter of
the late Mr. Andrew Black, of Bel-
fast, Ireland, and has two sons.
EDWARD SHE NT ON, J.P.,
Mayor of South Perth, is a son of the
late Mr. George Shenton, of this city,
and was born on January 29, 1852.
He received his scholastic training at
Bishops College, now the High School
of Perth, and afterwards at Queen’s
College, Taunton, England, where he
remained until he was sixteen. He
entered commercial life in 1869 with
the firm of Crowther & Co., of
Geraldton, of which he eventually
became a partner and remained in
this connection until 1892. Coming
to Perth in the latter year Mr. Shen-
ton joined the Government Audit
Office, rising to the rank of Chief
Inspector, which appointment he
filled until 1907, when he opened in
business on his own behalf as com-
mission and insurance agent. His
first connection with municipal affairs
began at Geraldton, where, having
first served for a considerable period


as councillor, he was invested with
mayoral honours on four separate oc-
casions. Upon his return to Perth
his activities again demanded an out-
let, and in 1909 he was elected Mayor
of South Perth, which office he still
holds. He is an advocate of the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. EDWARD SHENTON.
municipal ownership of the ferry ser-
vice and is exerting his influence to
bring this about in the near future.
The question of a pontoon structure
across the ferry is also receiving his
serious consideration. Military mat-
ters commanded his interest at an
early stage of his career and he joined
the cadets at Perth in 1861. Upon
the inception of the Geraldton Rifle
Volunteers in 1877 he accepted the
commission of second Lieutenant, be-
ing promoted to the rank of first
Lieutenant and ultimately of Cap-
tain in 1879 and 1881 respectively.
Upon taking up residence in Perth
he accepted the command of the
Perth Mounted Rifles, an appoint-
ment he held until his retirement
from the active list in 1895 with the
rank of Captain. Mr. Shenton was
commissioned a Justice of the
Peace for the whole State
in 1883 and acted as Resi-
dent Magistrate at Katanning in
1900-1. He is a member of the Ma-
sonic craft, his mother Lodge being
the St. John’s, No. 485, E.C., and is
a Past Master of the Geraldton
Lodge. In the sporting world he is
identified with the Royal Perth
Yacht Club, of which he has been
commodore for the past eight years,
and with hi£ yacht “Sulituan” has
won several prizes in the various
events he has contested. Mr. Shen-
ton married Charlotte, daughter of
the late Mr. Francis Lockee, for some
time Manager of the Western Aus-
tralian Bank at Perth, and has
three daughters and a son.
Councillor GEORGE CHITTY
BAKER, representing West Ward in
the Council of the South Perth
municipality, is a son of the late Mr.
F. H. C. Baker, of Surrey, England.
Born at Guildford, Surrey, in 1858
he received his education at the
local Grammar School, and at the
close of his studies began life as a
printer in the firm of Messrs. Water-
low & Sons, of London. He con-
tinued in the employ of this firm for
six years, and in 1878 left to attend
the Philadelphia Exhibition, in
which he had entered some printing
exhibits. After enlarging his ex-
perience here and on the Continent
of Europe he ultimately sailed for
Australia in 1879, and arriving at
Sydney, New South Wales, con-
tinued as a printer and publisher on
his own account until 1890. In that
year he came to Western Australia
and established himself in the print-
ing trade for a few years. In 1900
he joined the Government Agricul-
tural Department as editor of The
Agricultural Journal , a position he
Bartletto , Perth.
GEORGE CHITTY BAKER.
filled until 1911, and having relin-
quished this connection accepted the
post of Managing Director of the
firm of Baker, Garrick, & Co., Lim-
ited, mechanical and electrical engin-
eers, which he still holds. Always
displaying a lively interest in muni-
cipal and political affairs Mr. Baker
was appointed Secretary of the first
Trades and Labour Council in 1902,
and was the first candidate to stand
for Parliament in the interests of
the Labour Party at North Fre-
mantle. He took a very active part
in bringing about the alteration of
the franchise from a property basis
to adult suffrage, and was also instru-
mental in stopping the issue of
miners’ rights to Chinese. He entered
the South Perth Municipal Council
six months after the municipality
had been gazetted, and with Mr.
Douglas is the only remaining ori-
ginal member. He married Emily,
daughter of the late Mr. G. G.
French, tweed manufacturer, Dar-
ling Mills, Parramatta, New South
Wales, and has three sons and three
daughters.
Councillor BERNARD DIXON
BRUNING, representative for Cen-
tral Ward in the South Perth muni-
cipality, is a son of the late Mr.
J. T. Pruning, of the Queanbean
district of New South Wales. Born
at Gininderra, in that State, on
August 18, 1872, he was educated
at Sydney, and leaving school at
twelve years of age served for seven
years in the plumbing trade. He
was then apprenticed to the engineer-
ing profession under Mr. John
Moore, of Kent Street, Sydney, and
after completing his six years’ in-
dentures continued in the service of
the firm for another four years. In
1897 he came to Perth and upon
arrival opened in business on his
own account. He was instrumental
in fitting the first installation of the
linotype in the State for the Perth
Morning Herald and at a later
period undertook control of the ma-
in the Government Printing
Office, relinquishing his private con-
nection upon his acceptance of this
post. During the eight years spent
by Mr. Bruning in this employ he
supervised the working of the first
monotype machine in the Southern
Hemisphere. In 1896 he resigned
his position and established himself
as general and printers’ engineer at
513, Hay Street, where he has car-
ried on successfully ever since. Mr.
Bruning has taken an active part
in the municipal life of the district
wherein he resides, and has repre-
sented Central Ward in the local
Council for many years. His first
attempt to enter the Council was un


successful, but at the following elec-
tion he was returned unopposed
and has retained his councillorship
through all subsequent polls, on
various occasions being called upon
to fill the position of Acting Mayor.
He makes a careful study of munici-
pal management and has taken a
leading part in many public matters,
particularly in the agitation for the
improved railway service to South
Swan. He holds office as committee-
man in the Chamber of Manufac-
tures, is a member of the Committee
of the Celtic Club, with which he
has been connected for many years,
and is a member of the Ancient
Order of Foresters. Mr. Bruning
married in 1899 and has a son and
three daughters.
RAY CARGEEG, Town Clerk for
the municipality of South Perth, is
a son of Mr. R. E. Cargeeg, of
Brookton, Western Australia, and
was born at Laura, South Australia,
on August 4, 1884. He was educated
primarily at Adelaide, concluding
his scholastic career in the western
capital, and began active life by en-
tering the Subiaco municipal office in
1899. Here he continued for ten
years, and in 1909 transferred his
services to the South Perth muni-
cipality, where he received the ap-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RAY CARGEEG.
pointment of Town Clerk and Secre-
tary to the Board of Health, and
has continued to discharge the duties
appertaining to these offices ever
since. Lie is keenly interested in the
various matters that come under his
notice in his department and is mak-
ing a close study of municipal work
in all its branches, particularly of
hygienic matters and municipal en-
gineering. Mr. Cargeeg is a member
of the Y.M.C.A. and is connected
with the South Perth Young Men's
Association for the cultivation of lit-
erary and gymnastic pursuits. He is
also a member of the South Perth
Rifle Club.
Councillor ARTHUR DOUGLAS,
representing East Ward in the South
Perth Municipal Council, is a son of
the late Mr. Thomas Douglas, of
Cambridgeshire, England, and was
born at South Perth in October,
1854. He was educated locally, and
since his boyhood has followed the
occupation of horticulture, being a
successful fruit-grower. On the south
side of the Swan River he owns
twenty acres of land, ten acres of
which he has placed under cultivation
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR DOUGLAS.
of vegetables and fruit; and his re-
sidence, “Glenroy," is beautifully
situated on the east boundary of
River Street, commanding a lovely
view of the river and the city, with
its environs beyond. He has always
interested himself in the welfare of
the district surrounding his home
and first became connected with
public life as a member of the South
Perth Roads Board before the in-
ception of the present Council. When
South Perth was gazetted a muni-
cipality in 1902 Mr. Douglas was
elected to a seat in the Council Cham-
ber and is one of the oldest residents
of the district. Having watched the
growth of South Perth from a settle-
ment of five dwellings to the hand-
some suburb of to-day he takes a
natural pride in its further advance-
ment and gives his time and atten-
tion willingly to that end. Mr.
Douglas married Sarah Ann, daugh-
ter of the late Mr. Thomas Smith, of
Perth.
Councillor WILLIAM JOHN
CARLIN DOWNEY, representing
West Ward in the South Perth
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM JOHN CARLIN DOWNEY.
Municipal Council, is a son of Mr.
P. K. Downey, of Ballarat, Vic-
troia, and was born on April 9,
1874. He completed his education
at the Victoria College, Ballarat,
and subsequently entered the office
of Messrs. Mitchell, Nevett, and
Robinson, solicitors, of the same
city, with whom he remained for
three years. In 1895 he left
Victoria for Western Australia with
the intention of trying his luck at
Kalgoorlie, or, as it was then
known, “Hannan’s Find." On his
arrival in Western Australia he
decided, owing to an outbreak of
fever on the fields and a temporary
slump in mining, to remain in
Perth. He accepted a position with
Messrs. Stone & Burt, solicitors,
practising in the metropolis, and was
placed by them in charge of their
mining department, where some of
the biggest mining transactions in
Western Australia passed through
his hands. He has many interesting
reminiscences, some of which he


embodied in a romance of gold-
mining entitled “The Golden Mag-
net,” which was published as a
serial in The Banker’s Magazine of
Australia. He first entered muni-
cipal life in 1905, when he was
elected to the South Perth Town
Council. During his first six years’
as Councillor he consistently advo-
cated the bringing under municipal
control of the ferry service con-
necting South Perth with the
city, the control of which now
rests in the hands of the State.
Mr. Downey has always taken a
keen interest in rifle shooting and
was for many years the best shot in
the South Perth Rifle Club, of
which body he was President for
seven years. He is also one of the
foundation members of the National
Rifle Association of Western Aus-
tralia, and was elected seven years
consecutively a member of the
Council of that body. In 1908 he
had the honour of being elected
Chairman of the Association. At
the time of the Bullfinch boom Mr.
Downey formed the Yilgarn Gold
Prospecting and Development Com-
pany, Limited, and accompanied the
prospectors for a month. The Com-
pany has pegged valuable claims in
the New Mount Jackson Goldfield
adjoining Reidel’s Find. He has
since formed the King’s Cairn
Mining Company, Limited, which is
boring for pyritic ore and copper at
Mount Caudan, near Parker’s
Range, and is being subsidized
by the Mines Department. Mr.
Downey married Mary, youngest
daughter of Mr. Richard Wilson,
of Moama, New South Wales, and
has three sons and two daughters.
Councillor JOHN DANIEL
MANNING, representative of East
Ward in the South Perth munici-
pality, was born in the district where
he now resides in September, 1876.
He is a son of Mr. John Daniel
Manning, originally of Buck-
inghamshire, England, and upon
the completion of his educa-
tion went to work in his
father’s dairy and farming business
on the home estate situated at
Mount Eliza. Ultimately he re-
moved to his present property,
situated on the south side of the
Swan River and comprising about
100 acres, which is chiefly used as
pasture lands for his cattle. Mr.
Manning owns a large number of
Holstein cows, which he has proved
to be excellent milk-producers, and
KK
has been very successful in the use
of this strain for breeding purposes.
He has interested himself in the
various movements for the advance-
ment of the neighbourhood, and
election to the South Perth Muni-
cipal Council was granted him in
1910, since which period he has con-
tinued to represent the ratepayers
of East Ward in that body. He
has scant leisure for recreation, but
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HOHN DANIEL MANNING.
devotes what spare hours occur in
his busy days to riding on horseback,
and is quite an authority on the
qualities of a horse. Mr. Manning
married Maggie, daughter of Mr.
H. Mowday, of Sawyer’s Valley and
South Perth.
Councillor ANDREW ROCHE,
representative for Central Ward in
the municipality of South Perth, is
a son of the late Mr. Thomas Roche,
of Glasgow, Scotland, and was born
in that city on January 4, 1874. As
an infant he was taken to Rothsay,
in the Isle of Bute, where he re-
ceived his education at a private
academy and subsequently con-
cluded his scholastic career at the
Christian Brothers’ College at Glas-
gow. Arriving at Sydney, New
South Wales, in 1887 he commenced
work in Mr. D. Barnard’s picture-
framing establishment, and at the
close of his apprenticeship was trans-
ferred to the firm’s branch in Ade-
laide, where he continued until
1896. In that year he came to Perth
and took up the duties of Manager
for Messrs. Mayrhofer in Hay
Street, an appointment he filled for
a period of eleven years. In 1907
Mr. Roche opened his present
business of art-dealer, picture-
framer, print-seller, etc., at the pre-
mises in Hay Street, where he has
carried on ever since on his own
account, finding an increasing con-
nection among the art-loving section
of the public. He has always taken
an ardent interest in the public mat-
ters that have come under his
notice, and first entered the South
Perth Council a,s representative for
Central Ward in 1908, since which
date he has continued to act in the
interests of this division.- He is a
prominent yachtsman, and is Com-
modore of the Perth Dinghy Club,
in which connection he holds cham-
pionship honours in Western Aus-
tralia, and with his dinghy “Elma”
was the successful winner at Sydney
in 1909 of the only championship
won by a Western Australian boat
in New South Wales waters. Mr.
Roche married Adelma, daughter of
Mr. Eli Dew, of Goodwood, South
Australia.
CHARLES HARPER, J.P.,
Mayor of Victoria Park, was born
on January 3, 1870, and is a son of
the late Mr. R. J. Harper, of Mon-
mouthshire, England. He began his
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. CHARLES HARPER.
scholastic studies at Talywain, in
that county, and at the age of nine
sailed with his parents for Mau-
ritius by the old frigate “Jumna,”
in which vessel after a month’s stay
on the island, they continued their


voyage to Hobart, Tasmania. A visit
was next paid to Adelaide, and ulti-
mately the family settled at Mel-
bourne, where Mr. Charles Harper
continued his education, studying
under Mr. R. Livingstone, 8.A., a
coach for University students, and
matriculated in 1895. With the in-
tention of taking his degree of Doc-
tor of Music he gave special atten-
tion to his musical studies during
this period, choosing the violin for
instrumental practice. Having ar-
rived at the age of twenty-five he re-
ceived from Western Australia the
offer of a remunerative position, and
left Melbourne to take up his duties
on the musical staff attached to the
Cremorne Gardens, of which he was
ultimately appointed Managing
Musical Director. He held
this post until 1897, conclud-
ing with a tour of Australia and
New Zealand, and returning to
Perth in 1898 commenced business
on his own account as an importer of
musical instruments. He holds sole
rights in Western Australia for the
celebrated Bluthner and Gors and
Kallmann pianos and Bell organs,
and is closely asociated with all mat-
ters pertaining to violins and other
musical instruments, being considered
an expert in this direction. Always
keeping himself en rapport with
public affairs, he first began to play
an active part as a councillor in the
local Municipal Council in 1905.
Having served on the various Com-
mittees of this body he was returned
unopposed to the mayoral chair in
1909, and received a similar honour
in the following year. He is a Jus-
tice of the Peace and a member of
the Licensing Bench for the Canning
district. Mr. Harper has passed
through the various degrees of the
Masonic order and was Master
of Lodge Perseverance, No. 45,
W.A.C., for the years 1904-5. He
married Barbara, daughter of the
late Mr. John Stirling Anderson, of
Edinburgh, Scotland, and has two
sons and a daughter.
WILLIE GEORGE RANDELL,
Mayor of North Perth, is a son of
Mr. G. W. Randell and grandson of
the Hon. G. Randell, J.P., both of
this city. He was born at Perth on
August 2, 1880, and received his
education at the State School in St.
George's Terrace, now the Technical
School of Science and Art. Upon
the conclusion of his scholastic career
he joined the service of the A.M.P.
Society in 1895, and has since risen
to the prominent position of cashier
in the head office of the Western
Australian Branch of this important
Company. Mr. Randell has always
displayed considerable interest in
municipal affairs, and was first re-
turned as representative for East
Ward in the North Perth Council in
1907. He ably upheld the interests
of his electors for three years, being
the first councillor to complete his
full period of office in this particular
ward of the North Perth muni-
cipally. In 1910 Mr. Randell suc-
cessfully contested the mayoralty
and continues to hold the honours
of the chair. He is a supporter of
the Greater Perth scheme, and is
strongly in favour of the nationaliza-
tion of the Perth Tramways system,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIE GEORGE RANDELL.
which he hopes to see an accom-
plished fact in the near future. The
Woodville Reserve of North Perth
receives a large share of his atten-
tion, and he never loses an oppor-
tunity of promoting its importance,
from its elevated and central posi-
tion, as the “lungs” of the district.
He is also an advocate of an outer
suburban district railway which shall
loop up the North Perth, Mount
Lawley, and Wanneroo districts
with existing lines. Mr. Randall is
a member of Monger's Lake Board,
Patron of the North Perth Cricket
Club, and President of the North
Perth Liberal League. He married
Elsie, daughter of the late Mr
Arthur C. Stoneham, of North Ade-
laide, South Australia, and has two
daughters.
WALTER St. CLAIRE BROCK
WAY, C.E., Mayor of Claremont,
was born in the County of Devon,
England, on January 17, 1864. He
was articled to the civil engineering
profession, and continued in prac-
tical work at Bendigo until 1894,
in which year he came to Western
Australia. lie was associated for
some time with Mr. C. A. Patterson
in the construction of the Perth tram-
ways, and subsequently accepted the
appointment of engineer to the Clare-
mont and Cottesloe Municipal Coun-
cils. In 1907 he established himself
in practice at Perth, where he still
continues. Mr. Brockway is also in-
terested in the fruit industry, and
has an orchard at Kelmscott, and
owns 1,000 acres of good pastoral
country at Wickepin, where he is
forming a flock of strong-wool
merinos. He was first elected as a
member of the Claremont Municipal
Council in 1909, and, two years later,
was invested with Mayoral honours,
which office he still retains. He is a
Justice of the Peace for the Perth
magisterial district, and a member of
the Liberal League and of the
Masonic craft. Mr. Brockway is mar-
ried, and has three sons and seven
daughters.
HORACE ELGAR MOFFLIN,
J.P., Mayor of Claremont (1910-11),
is a son of Mr. H. Mofflin, of Fre-
mantle. Born at Auckland, New
Zealand, on July 19, 1867, he re-
ceived his scholastic training at the
public schools of his native land. At
the age of fourteen, with his par-
ents he left New Zealand for South
Australia, where he spent six years
mainly in mercantile pursuits. In
1887, having reached the age of
twenty, he came to Western Aus-
tralia and settled down at Fremantle
as representative for the firm of
George Wills & Co., of South Aus-
tralia, which position he occupied
for many years. Resigning from this
service in 1898 Mr. Mofflin opened
in business on his own account at
Fremantle, trading as H. E. Mof-
flin & Co., wool, hide, and skin mer-
chants, and has conducted his
transactions successfully ever since.
He is Director of two important
commercial houses in the State and
is a very busy man, every moment
of his day being occupied in pri-
vate or public duties. While resi-
dent at Fremantle he was a coun-
cillor of the municipality for many
years and filled the office of Acting
Mayor on several occasions. Upon


taking up his abode at Claremont in
1906 he very soon became identified
with the local governing body as
representative for the ratepayers of
South Ward, and when in 1909 he
stood for mayoral honours he was
returned unopposed. Contesting the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HORACE ELGAR MOFFLIN.
seat at the subsequent elections he
won the day by a substantial ma-
jority of votes. He takes a deep
interest in all charitable objects,
more particularly in connection with
Fremantle and Claremont, and is
an ardent supporter of the Methodist
Church, and as Lay Treasurer of
one of the Connexional funds has a
seat in the Annual Conference at
Perth. He is well known as a lead-
ing temperance advocate and is an
honorary member of the Rechabite
Order, besides which he is con -
nected with the Masonic craft,
being a past officer in the fraternity.
In 1911 Mr. Mofflin visited Eng-
land for the Coronation celebrations
and travelled over a large part of
the United Kingdom and Europe,
taking the opportunity on this occa-
sion of studying the municipal
position in the Old Country. A
keen sympathizer with all forms of
amateur athletics he devotes his own
leisure to the time-honoured sport
of bowls and is Vice-President of
the Claremont Bowling Club. He
has been twice married, his first
wife being a daughter of the late
Mr. J. M. Ferres, of Fremantle.
The present Mrs. Mofflin is the
eldest daughter of the Rev. William
Burridge, of Claremont. His family
consists of a son and five daughters.
kk2
Councillor WALTER DRABBLE,
representing East Ward in the
Claremont Municipal Council, was
born at Perth, Western Australia,
on March 13, 1875. He is a son of
the late Mr. William Drabble, of
this city, and pursued his educa-
tional studies at the Commercial
School, Perth, conducted by the
late Mr. Letch, and now non-
existent. At the close of his
scholastic career he began life as a
junior assistant in the office of
Messrs. William Sandover & Co.,
hardware merchants, and went from
there into his father’s oil and colour
shop, subsequently learning the
trade of painting, sign-writing,
gilding, etc. After a few years’
experience he opened in the oil and
colour trade at Claremont, at a
later date handing over the business
to his brother. He next embarked
on a more ambitious enterprise,
becoming an importer of iron-
mongery and general hardware on a
fairly extensive scale, and estab-
lished himself in this line in the
same suburb, where he has conducted
a very prosperous business ever
since. Although always concerning
himself in the various movements
for the advancement of the place in
which he had made his home Mr.
Drabble took no prominent position
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WALTER DRABBLE.
in public life until 1911, in which
year he defeated the sitting member
for East Ward in the local muni-
cipality by a substantial majority of
votes. He is largely interested in
real estate in Claremont, and has
been responsible for the erection of
several of the most up-to-date com-
mercial and residential structures in
the municipality. Hunting is his
chief recreation, and in the indul-
gence of this penchant he makes
prolonged excursions into the heart
of the bush in company with other
kindred spirits, and being an excel-
lent shot usually bags his full share
of game. Mr. Drabble recently took
a year’s trip abroad, when after
visiting Ceylon he travelled through
China and Japan and also called at
the Eastern States of the Common-
wealth. In April, 1900, he married
Marion K., daughter of the late Mr.
Alfred A. Corbett, of North Fitzroy,
Victoria, and has a son and a
daughter.
Councillor HAROLD JAMES
TLTCKFIELD, representative for
South Ward in the Claremont muni-
cipality, is a Victorian by birth, his
father being the late Rev. J. W.
Tuckfield, of that State. He was
born at Drysdale on February 20,
1874, and pursued his scholastic
studies at Wesley College, Mel-
bourne, subsequently training for
the dental profession at the Dental
College in that city. After practising
at Melbourne for about a year he
came to Western Australia in 1897
and opened in practice at Coolgardie,
where he continued for two years.
This period was followed by four
years at Boulder, after which he
came to the metropolitan area and has
been established in his profession at
Perth since 1903. Mr. Tuckfield at
an early period turned his atten-
tion to the study of municipal law
and clearly recognized the im-
portance of establishing the proceed-
ings of the local governing bodies
on a firm substratum of well-
attested principles. Though a can-
didate for election to various
Councils on the goldfields his debut
as a councillor was made at Clare-
mont, where he was returned by the
ratepayers of South Ward in 1910.
He is an excellent public speaker,
in the past having been a gold medal-
list for oratory on no fewer than five
separate occasions; and has always
interested himself in the various
movements for the development of
intellectual and artistic gifts, being
one of the founders and first Sec-
retary of the Mechanics’ Institute
at Midland Junction and a com-
mitteeman of the similar institu-
tion at Claremont. He is Chair-
man of the Board of Health at
Claremont and a promoter of out-
door sport, holding the office of


committeeman of the local Yacht
Club, besides which he is a keen
fisherman and in earlier days made
his mark as a player of lacrosse, cric-
ket and tennis. lie also belonged to
the premier teams of Victoria and
Western Australia in the game of
Australian football. In 1899 Mr.
Tuckfield married Constance, daugh-
ter of the late Mr. 0. S. Olden,
stock- and share-broker, of Ballarat,
Victoria, and has two sons.
Councillor DONALD BROWN,
representing North Ward in the
Cottesloe Municipal Council, is a
Victorian by birth and a son of the
late Mr. George Brown, of the Vic-
torian Railway Service. He was
born at Elaine on February 28,
1863, and received his education in
his native village, where also he
worked on his father’s farm until
twenty-one years of age. Love of
adventure prompted him to "try his
luck” in prospecting in various parts
of Gippsland, but meeting with no
success in this neighbourhood he
joined with two others in a further
venture in the Temora district of
New South Wales. Nothing satis-
factory accruing from this depar-
ture, Mr. Brown became connected
with the Victorian railways for some
time, and subsequently resigned from
this service in order to join the Mel-
bourne Tramway Company, with
which he continued for nine years.
Coming to Western Australia, he
arrived at Coolgardie just in time
for the wave of depression which fol-
lowed closely upon the great boom.
Relinquishing his intention of pros-
pecting he became engaged in a
bakery business at the goldfields city
in conjunction with his brother and
Mr. W. Burns. Shortly afterwards
the business was sold and the gentle-
man under review with the other
members of the firm became estab-
lished at Subiaco in the present
bakery concern, where they have
carried on ever since. Mr. Brown
was returned unopposed as member
of the Cottesloe Council in 1909 and
received a similar mark of favour
in the following year. He is a Past
Master in the Masonic craft and his
love of horses vies with his fondness
for gardening for the premier claim
upon his time and attention. In his
younger days he was a good cricketer,
but this pastime has now given place
to bowls.
Councillor JOHN DOSCAS (Jean
Paraskeva Doscas, or Ntoscas), re-
presenting North Ward in the Cotfces-
loe Town Council, is a son of Para-
skeva Demitri Ntoscas and was born
on August 15, 1866, at Goritza, in
the mayoral district of Therapnon,
County Lacedemonia, Province La-
conia, Sparta, Greece. Having com-
menced his education in his native
town, he subsequently attended the
secondary school at Chrisafa, and
upon the completion of his course at
this institution went to Athens for a
year's study at the Lyceum. In
1882 he became apprenticed
to the firm of Ralli Bro-
thers, merchants and importers, of
Liverpool, England, with whom he
engaged in the study of cotton and
grain-classing with the intention of
taking a post in India or Amercia at
the centre of production. While here
he furthered his scholastic attain-
ments by attending as an evening
scholar for nearly four years at the
Government College of Shaw Street,
Liverpool. In January, 1886, on ac-
MR. JOHN DOSCAS.
count of failing health he was
compelled to return for a brief period
to his native land. Upon recovery he
went to Egypt, where he joined the
firm of P. Rodokanaki & Co., cotton
and grain merchants, of Alexandria.
Being a linguist of no mean order,
speaking and writing no less than six
languages Greek, French, English,
Italian, and partly Spanish and Ara-
bic he afterwards undertook the
office of interpreter and conductor of
touring parties, and in this capacity
travelled all over the historical parts
of Egypt, Syria, Palestine, Greece,
parts of Turkey, and throughout
Central Europe. In the course of his
occupation he came in touch with
many distinguished travellers,
notably the Emperor Don Pedro
of Brazil, the Grand Dukes
Paul and Sergius of Russia,
Prince Henri d’Orleans, Don
Carlos (Pretender to the throne of
Spain), Prince Nelidoff (for many
years Ambassador for Russia at the
Sublime Porte), General Wolseley
(Commander-in-Chief of the British
troops in Egypt), and many other
notabilities; and conducted Lord
Brassey and suite on an expedition
up the Nile just prior to his cruise
in the "Sunbeam” to Australia in
1888. On January 6, 1889, Mr.
Doscas embarked on the "Salazie”
for Australia, and shortly after
arrival at Melbourne on February
5 joined the firm of Thomas Cook
and Son as tourist organizer and in-
terpreter, at a later date entering
business on his own account in the
Victorian metropolis. After seven
years of varied business experience,
during which he visited Sydney,
Brisbane, and Adelaide, Mr. Doscas
came to Western Australia. He
opened at Perth about February,
1896, as a produce importer, gen-
eral merchant, farm and produce
agent, etc., and for fourteen years
conducted the business known as the
Western Australian General Pro-
duce Company, Murray Street, dur-
ing which time he figured promin-
ently in mercantile circles, retiring
from business at the beginning of
1909. He is a large property inves-
tor in the suburbs of Perth, being a
believer in real estate for purposes
of investment. A resident of pic-
turesque Cottlesloe, he interests him-
self in the advancement of the place
and has been a member of the Muni-
cipal Council since its inception in
1907. He devotes some time to the
cultivation of his garden and is a
great reader particularly of a wide
range of historical works. He is a
member of the Masonic order, in
which he holds the rank M.M., and
for diversion is a motorist and a
lover of horses. During his residence
in Western Australia he has tra-
velled extensively in various parts of
the State, notably the nor’-west,
Murchison, eastern goldfields, and
throughout the agricultural areas
from Geraldton to Albany. In 1897
he married Margaret Coleman
(widow), daughter of Mr. Martin
O’Sullivan, of Limerick, Ireland, and
has a daughter (Arethusa Clio).
Councillor GEORGE WILLIAM
HILL, representing South Ward in
the Cottesloe Municipal Council, is


a son of the late Mr. John Hill, of
Hepburn, Victoria, and was born at
that village on December 25, 1867.
He was educated at his native place,
and leaving school at the age of
fifteen began to learn the saddlery
trade under the tuition of Mr. J.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. DEORGE WILLIAM HILL.
W. Burns, at Daylesford, in the
same State. Having completed his
apprenticeship he went to Melbourne
and spent several years at the lead-
ing factories in that city. Ulti-
mately he came to Western Aus-
tralia and opened in business at
Fremantle in 1895 in partnership
with Messrs. Wilson Brothers. This
connection was dissolved some five
years later, and the business has
since been carried on by Mr. Hill
on his own account in High Street.
Mr. Hill resides at Cottesloe, and
has always been distinguished for
the active interest he has taken in
matters pertaining to the welfare of
the community, resulting in his un-
opposed election to a seat in the local
Council in 1909. The confidence of
the ratepayers in his judgment and
ability was further manifested on
the occasion of the Municipal Asso-
ciation Conference held at Cool-
gardie in 1910, when he was chosen
jointly with the Mayor of Cottesloe
to represent the municipality. He
devotes his spare time to the culture
of choice blooms in the garden sur-
rounding his home in Salvado
Street and has been a frequent prize-
winner at the various shows for his
roses and chrysanthemums, this
hobby winning for him a seat on the
committee of the Fremantle Ilorti-
cultural Society. He has passed
through all the offices of the Recha-
bite Order and is a Past Chief Ruler
of the local branch of that body. A
patron of all healthy outdoor sport,
in his younger days he played a good
game of cricket, but his many duties
now prevent active participation in
these diversions. In 1891 Mr. Hill
married Margaret, daughter of the
late Mr. J. C. Ferguson, of Mel-
bourne, and has three sons and two
daughters.
Councillor JOHN HENRY
JAMES, representing North Ward
in the Cottesloe Municipal Council,
is a son of Mr. John Hall James,
manufacturer, of Reading, England.
He was born in Melbourne, Victoria,
on February 11, 1860, and received
his educational training at various
schools in that city. Subsequently
he served his apprenticeship to the
Vulcan Foundry in Melbourne and
entered upon the engineering profes-
sion, at the close of his indentures
joining the firm of Messrs. Mephan,
Ferguson. He continued his
connection with this firm for twenty-
three years, during which period he
was associated with the various im-
portant undertakings in which they
made their reputation, including the
Newport Workshops, various railway
bridges, and large mining machinery
contracts in Victoria, and afterwards
the Coolgardie and Eastern Gold-
fields Water Supply contract. He
learnt electrical engineering during
his association with the Field Com-
pany of Military Engineers in Vic-
toria, and took an ardent interest in
the work of this company, with
which he has been connected over
seventeen years. Having left the
service of the firm referred to he
joined Messrs. Splatt, Wall, & Co.
and erected the Electric Light
Works at Subiaco. Ultimately in
1903 he accepted the appointment
of Manager of the Cottesloe Electric
Light Works, and has continued to
control this department ever since.
Mr. James was elected to a seat in
the Cottesloe Council upon the in-
ception of the municipality in 1907,
and has assisted in the deliberations
of that body up to the present time.
He also interests himself in musical
matters, and was a prominent mem-
ber of the Perth City Band for a
considerable period. He is an
earnest supporter of religious work
and holds various offices in the local
Methodist Church, among which are
those of lay preacher, trustee, and
circuit steward. He takes his re-
creation on the bowling green, and
is a member of the Cottesloe Club.
In 1881 Mr. James married Eliza-
beth Jane, daughter of Elijah
Gribble, of Beechworth, Victoria,
and has six sons and three daughters.
Councillor WALTER SAWKINS,
representing East Ward in the muni-
cipality of Cottesloe, is a son of Mr.
Frederick George Sawkins, of Wagin,
Western Australia. He was born be-
neath the shadow of the famous
Salisbury Cathedral in England on
March 19, 1872, and when eight
years old was brought to Australia
by his parents, who settled in Syd-
ney. He attended the Sydney Gram-
mar School until sixteen years of age
and was then apprenticed to the
drapery business, but tiring of this
before he was twenty in 1890 sailed
for Western Australia. Here he
tried his hand in various
departments of work, taking
whatever position offered, and
eventually settled down at Cottes-
loe in the newsagency and stationery
line of business, since which time he
has steadily ascended the ladder of
commercial success. The study of
public affairs has always possessed an
attraction for Mr. Sawkins, and be-
BartletlOy Perth.
MR. WALTER SAWKINS.
fore the inception of the Cottesloe
Council he represented that district
on the Roads Board. He afterwards
became a candidate for municipal
honours and, undeterred by defeat,
contested the seat at the following


elections, this time with unqualified
success. Many of the recent im-
provements in the lighting of the
town and the development of the sea-
beach for pleasure purposes were
made at his suggestions, and in many
ways he has proved himself a very
useful member of the Council. He is
a member of the Masonic craft and
is Past Chief Ranger in the Ancient
Order of Foresters. The youth of the
district have much to thank him for,
as besides being a keen supporter of
all forms of healthy outdoor recrea-
tion and in earlier days a football
enthusiast he was one of the
founders of the Cottesloe Football
Club, which has won the blue ribbon
of the Western Australian Football
Association since its inception he
has given much thought to the solu-
tion of social problems. In 1903 he
married Alice, daughter of Mr. Wil-
liam McDonald, of Cottesloe, and
has a son and two daughters.
Councillor CHARLES EDWIN
TURVILLE, representing East
Ward in the Cottesloe municipality,
is a son of the late Mr. John Tur-
ville, of Parkville, Melbourne, and
was born at Waimer, Victoria, on
June 28, 1868. He was educated at
the State School at Muckleford, Vic-
toria, and completing his studies at
Bar tletto Perth.
MR. CHARLES EDWIN TURVILLE.
the age of fourteen first spent a year
on his father's farm and was then
apprenticed to the carpentering
trade. He worked at this calling for
a few years in his native State and in
1895 left Victoria for Western Aus-
tralia, where after three years he
opened in business on his own ac-
count at North Fremantle as builder
and contractor. His first contract
was for a residential structure, and
since its completion he has been kept
busy all round Perth and its suburbs,
besides which his contracts have ex-
tended to many of the large agricul-
tural centres. He built the Cottesloe
Municipal Chambers and is respon-
sible for more works of a residential
character in this picturesque suburb,
where he has made his home, than
any other contractor in the State.
Mr. Turville is a member of the Wes-
tern Australian Master Builders and
Contractors' Association and is also
connected with the Australian Na-
tives' Association, being one of the
three Trustees for that organization
in Western Australia. He takes a
keen interest in municipal affairs,
and at the inception of the Cottesloe
Town Council polled a larger number
of votes than any other councillor.
He devotes his leisure hours to the
game of bowls and is a member of
the Cottesloe Bowling Club, but in
early life was a cricketer of no mean
order. A member of the Masonic
craft, he holds honours as Past Mas-
ter in the Lodge of North Fremantle.
He married in 1895 Elizabeth Mary,
daughter of the late Mr. Richard
Phillips, of North Melbourne, and
has two sons and two daughters.
THOMAS CORRAL CAMP-
BELL, Town Clerk of Cottesloe, is a
son of Mr. Thomas Campbell of the
same place, where the subject of our
notice was born on September 6,
1882. After attending St. Bridgid’s
School he completed his education
at the Christian Brothers' College,
Perth, and left this institution at
the age of seventeen to enter upon
a position in the Postal Department
of the State in its pre-Federal days.
A year later he resigned from the
service and proceeding to the eastern
goldfields became associated with
his brother in mining pursuits and
gained considerable experience in the
treatment of ores by the cyanide pro-
cess. He continued in this line for
four years, when he returned to
Perth and obtained a position on the
clerical staff of the firm of Mills and
Ware, biscuit manufacturers, of Fre-
mantle. This connection he relin-
quished after a short time to accept
in 1905 the post of assistant secre-
tary to the Cottesloe Roads Board
which afterwards was merged into
the present municipality, when he
received the appointment of assistant
Town Clerk, assuming the duties of
his present post in 1908. Mr. Camp-
bell is a true patriot and for many
years has been associated with the
Australian Natives' Association, and
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. THOMAS CORRAL CAMPBELL.
among other offices occupied the
position of President of the Cottesloe
branch of this institution. He is a
Master Mason in the fraternity, his
mother lodge being the Boronia
Lodge, No. 42, W.A.C. A warm
sympathizer with all charitable
schemes, almost every scheme in the
neighbourhood having for its object
the relief or uplifting of any section
of the community commands his
practical support. He is a life mem-
ber of the Cottesloe Life-saving Club,
and occupies a seat on the commit-
tee of this institution. In the Beach
Carnival he has always been one of
the moving spirits, and entertains
the anticipation that this function
will become an annual feature of
entertainment in Western Australia.
Until quite recently Mr. Campbell
was a well-known player in the Cot-
tesloe Football Club, but at the pre-
sent time he devotes the greater part
of his leisure time to the game of
bowls. In 1908 he married May,
daughter of Mr. W. H. Clifford, of
Cottesloe, and has one son.
JOSEPH FRANCIS ALLEN,
J.P., F.W.A.1.A., architect and
civil engineer, 31, Henry Street,
Fremantle, is a son of the late Mr.
P. Allen, C.E., of Sydney. He was


born in Cornwall, England, on Au-
gust 6, 1869, and received his edu-
cation partly in his native country.
Subsequently, upon arrival in Aus-
tralia with his parents, he com-
pleted his scholastic studies at Par-
ramatta, New South Wales, and at
C. M. Nixon , Fremantle.
MR. JOSEPH FRANCIS ALLEN.
fifteen years of age began his five
years' indentures with the firm of
Gordon McKinnon, architects, of
Sydney. Upon the conclusion of his
articles he joined the firm of Rhodes
& Co., civil engineers, of the same
city, and spent five years in this con-
nection, acquiring a comprehensive
knowledge of the engineering pro-
fession. This experience he still
further augmented by an association
with the firm of Henry Simon, Lim-
ited, milling engineers, with whom
he occupied the position of works
manager at their engineering shops.
In 1896, encouraged by glowing re-
ports of the scope afforded to talent
and enterprise in the Western State,
he resigned his post with the above
Company and sailed for Fremantle,
from which centre he has operated
in his profession over different parts
of the State. With the exception of
a period extending a little over a
year, which he spent in the service
of the State Government as assistant
engineer, Mr. Allen has given his
attention chiefly to architectural
work, and has been responsible for
the designs and erection of the East
Fremantle Town Hall, the Fre-
mantle Trades Hall, the T.0.0.F,
Orphans' Home at Cottesloe, Messrs.
Strelitz Brothers' premises in Hay
and Murray Streets, Perth, and
numerous other works of a public,
business, and domestic character. On
the engineering side of his profession
he designed and supervised the build-
ing of the only steel-built ship in the
State, viz., the S.S. “Westralian,”
and was also employed in the erec-
tion of the flour-mills at Geraldton.
He received his commission of Jus-
tice of the Peace in 1909, when he
was elected Mayor of East Fremantle,
which office he still holds, and prior
to this was for some years a repre-
sentative of East Ward in the Muni-
cipal Council. He is the property
owners' representative on the Tram-
ways Board for East Fremantle, and
is a member of the Board of the
Fremantle Public Hospital. In the
Masonic fraternity he holds office as
Past Grand Architect for Western
Australia under the Scotch Consti-
tution and Past Grand Superinten-
dent of Works under the Western
Australian Constitution. Mr. Allen
is a student of literature and lectures
frequently on literary subjects, being
well versed in the works of Dickens,
Thackeray, and other standard novel-
ists. He gives his hearty support
to all healthy outdoor forms of
athletics, and acts as Patron of the
Fremantle Rowing Club, President
of the East Fremantle Bowling and
Tennis Clubs, and holds other offices
in connection with the various asso-
ciations of sports. For personal
recreative purposes he divides his
own attention between the Fremantle
Golf Club and the East Fremantle
Bowling Club, in both of which or-
ganizations he holds membership. In
1900 Mr. Allen married Jean S.,
daughter of Mr. John Buntine, one
of the early pioneers of Victoria,
whose name frequently appears in
the former annals of the State, and
has a daughter.
HORACE HILL PARKER,
J.P., Town Clerk and Engineer of
East Fremantle, is a South Austra-
lian by birth, being a son of Mr.
A. W. Parker, late Town Clerk of
Thebarton, in the Central State.
He was born at Aldinga on Sep-
tember 9, 1874, and received his
education at the Grote Street School
under the tuition of Mr. John
Young, M.A. Subsequently he at-
tended the School of Mines, Ade-
laide, and while still in his teens
filled the position of Assistant Town
Clerk at Thebarton. During this
association with his father he em-
braced every opportunity of extend-
ing the knowledge of engineering
previously gained in his classes, and
learnt much that was very useful to
him in his subsequent career. In
1897, coming to Western Australia,
Mr. Parker threw all the enthus-
iasm of youth into a pursuit for
Fortune's smile on the goldfields,
shirking none of the hardships and
toil incident to life in the early min-
ing camps, and following the various
“rushes” with an ardour deserving
commensurate reward. This, how-
ever, was withheld, and eventually
returning to Perth, in 1897, he ac-
cepted the appointment to his pre-
sent position, which he has held
continuously ever since. He is in-
terested in agriculture and owns a
promising estate of 2,250 acres in
the Midland district, at Nugadong,
where he carries on mixed farming
with encouraging results. Mr. Par-
ker received his commission of
Justice of the Peace in 1904. A
member for a lengthy period of the
Masonic fraternity, he holds office
as Past Master of the Richmond
Lodge, No. 32, W.A.C. He is a
keen lover and student of Nature
and spends most of his leisure in
long trips through the bush. In this
way he is also able to gratify his
instincts as a sportsman, always
carrying his gun, and seldom returns
without some spoils of the chase.
He is also devoted to tennis for re-
creative purposes and was one of the
BartlettOy Perth.
MR. HORACE HILL PARKER.
founders of the Fremantle Tennis
Club. In 1898 Mr. Parker married
Eliza Winnifred, daughter of Mr.
Frank C. Moore, of Hyde Park,
South Australia, and has a
daughter.


Councillor ANDREW ELLERY,
representing Central Ward in the
East Fremantle municipality, is a
son of the late Mr. William Ellery,
engineer of one of the first steamers
to ply the Swan River in the early
sixties. His mother was the first
white woman born in Western Aus-
tralia. On January 12, 1860, the
subject of our memoir was born at
Perth, and leaving school at the age
of fourteen he engaged in farming in
the Toodyay district for a couple of
years. He was then apprenticed to
the wheelwright trade, but aban-
doned this work after a short time,
and having taken some sheep to the
Nor*-West remained in that part of
the country for about four years.
During this period he was for a time
associated with a brother, but after-
wards went into the pearling in-
dustry at Broome and surrounding
waters. Having met with fair suc-
cess he disposed of his interests after
three years, and proceeding to the
Eastern States became identified
with station life on Perricoota
Station on the Murray, then the
property of Messrs. Robinson and
Wagner. Seven years later he
entered upon marine pursuits and
visited nearly all the principal ports
of the world, finally returning to
his native State. He next took up
work on the wharves, where he oc-
cupied the position of President of
the Lumpers' Union, which body
made him a handsome presentation
upon his retirement some years later.
Ultimately settling at Fremantle Mr.
Ellery opened a general store in
Silas Street, which he has carried
on successfully ever since. Shortly
after taking up his residence in the
district he contested Central Ward
with the sitting member and won
the seat by a handsome majority,
since which period he has been re-
turned at each election without
opposition. Pie is a keen student
of political economy and is a sup-
porter of the Labour movement, to
the interests of which he devotes the
whole of his spare time. In his
youth Mr. Ellery was a crack
amateur runner, winning notable
events in several of the States. Pie
is still keen in his support of manly
outdoor diversions, and is Vice-
President of the East Fremantle
Football Club. Married in 1899 to
Mary, daughter of the late Mr.
William Creighton, of U.S.A., for-
merly of Melbourne, he has issue one
daughter.
Councillor DIXON HEARDER,
solicitor, High Street, Fremantle,
who represents East Ward in the
East Fremantle municipality, is a
son of Dr. Hearder, of Carmarthen,
South Wales, and was born in that
town on September 20, 1879. He
received his education at the Queen
Elizabeth Grammar School, and
upon the conclusion of his scholastic
career left his native land for Wes-
tern Australia, where he arrived in
1894. Two years later he entered
into articles under Sir Walter James,
K.C., and in May, 1901, was called
to the Western Australian Bar, sub-
sequently proceeding to England,
where he entered the office of the
well-known solicitors, Messrs. Trim
der, Capron, & Co., of Leadenhall
Street, London. Having received a
thorough training for his profession
in 1902 he returned to Western Aus-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. DIXON HEARDER.
tralia, and in September of that year
commenced practice in High Street,
Fremantle, where he has continued
ever since. Outside of business life
the premier place among Mr.
Hearder’s interests is occupied by
matters military. As far back as
1896 he joined the Perth Artillery
Volunteers as gunner, and filled the
position of Acting Quartermaster-
Sergeant when he retired upon the
occasion of his departure for England
in 1900. Upon his return he re-
ceived a commission in the Fremantle
Artillery, and in January, 1905, was
gazetted Captain and obtained com-
mand of the corps, in which capacity
he continued to serve until 1908,
and is now on the retired list. Dur-
ing his stay in the Old Country he
acted as trooper in the King's
Colonials and received the rank of
Sergeant in that regiment. Mr.
Hearder takes a deep interest in the
affairs of the municipality, of which
he is a member, and actively con-
cerns himself in the deliberations of
the Works Committee of the Council,
to which he was elected in 1909. A
Liberal in politics, he was an unsuc-
cessful candidate for Parliamentary
honours at the general elections of
1911. He is a member of the Com-
mercial Travellers' Club. In earlier
days he devoted a good deal of time
to the sport of rowing and general
aquatics, and assisted in winning
several trophies in four-oar contests
for his club, but tennis is now the
favourite recreation of his leisure
hours. In 1908 he married Dorothy,
daughter of Mr. D. F. Booth, C.E.,
of Ontario, Canada, and has a son.
EDWARD HENRY TOMKIN-
SON, J.P., Mayor of North Fre-
mantle, is a son of the late Mr.
George Tomkinson, of Brayton-in-
Hales, Salop, England, and was
born at Perth on November 11,
1869. At the conclusion of his edu-
cation he became apprenticed to the
boot trade with the firm of Pearse
Brothers at North Fremantle, and
at the expiration of his indentures
continued in their employ until his
twenty-fifth year, when he launched
out in business partnership with the
late Mr. James Matthews. Five
years later a dissolution took place,
and Mr. Tomkinson has carried on
the business at the present address
ever since. Municipal affairs have
always claimed his close attention,
and in 1906 he was returned to the
North Fremantle Council as repre-
sentative for East Ward, a seat he
has since continued to hold. For two
years he acted as Hon. Treasurer to
the Council and received elevation
to mayoral honours in 1910. Mr.
Tomkinson is a foundation-member
of the North Fremantle Literary
Institute and was its first President,
holding office for five years, and the
continued existence of the institu-
tion is due to his unflagging zeal and
support in times of financial stress.
He is a member of the Hospital
Board of Fremantle and a member
of the Masonic fraternity, being
Treasurer for ten years of Lodge
Caledonian, No. 830, S.C. In the
past he gained prominence on the
cinder track, and was the winner of


a number of important footraces in
the State. He started the first
football club in the district and
partly maintained it at his own ex-
pense until such time as it was es-
tablished on a sound basis. In 1907
MR. EDWARD HENRY TOMKINSON.
he married Ellen, daughter of the
late Mr. Charles Lee, of Brixton,
London, and has a daughter.
Lieutenant WILLIAM DRYNAN
EVANS, J.P., Corps of Australian
Engineers Field Company, member
of the Institute of Engineers of
Western Australia, is a son of the
late Mr. J. W. Haines-Evans, of
Logan district, Queensland, where
the subject under review was born on
November 29, 1874. He was edu-
cated at the Christian Brothers' Col-
lege, Brisbane, subsequently pursu-
ing his post-collegiate mathematical
studies under Dr. J. Park Thomson,
LL.D., the well-known Queensland
scientist and litterateur . Upon leav-
ing school he joined as cadet the
staff of the Surveyor-General of
Queensland, with which he was con-
nected for fourteen years, at the
time of his retirement having charge
of the Noting Branch of the depart-
ment. This he resigned in order to
take a position on the computing
staff in the Department of Lands
and Surveys, Western Australia,
and in 1905 left the Civil Service to
enter upon his present appointment
of Town Clerk and Engineer of
North Fremantle. He has always
interested himself in military affairs,
and in 1893 joined the Queensland
Volunteer Rifles under Major Gart-
side in Brisbane. At the time of the
Boer war he volunteered for service,
and joining the Queensland Imperial
Bushmen as a subaltern under
Colonel Tunbridge went to the front
at Natal, Transvaal, Orange Free
State, Cape Colony, and Zululand,
being awarded the Queen's Medal
with four clasps. At the present
time he devotes most of his spare
hours, away from municipal duty, to
military matters, but is also a warm
supporter of all forms of athletic
exercise. He was one of the
founders of the Queensland Amateur
Athletic Association, of which he
acted as Secretary for some years,
and also was founder and Secretary
of two of Brisbane's Harrier Clubs,
members of which have taken cham-
pionship honours all over Australia,
Bartletto, Perth.
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM DRYNAN EVANS.
and on behalf of which Mr. Evans
represented Queensland in 1897 at
Sydney, New South Wales. Since
coming to Western Australia he per-
formed a heroic act in the rescue of
two small children from drowning in
the Swan River at Fremantle, and
on behalf of the local community
was presented with an illuminated
address at the Town Hall in recog-
nition of this act of bravery. He
was concerned in the formation of
the Amateur Boxing Association,
being fairly expert with the gloves,
and besides being elected a Vice-
President has held the position of
judge and referee on several occa-
sions in this State. He is a member
of the Council of the Christian
Brothers Old Collegians’ Association
and Vice-President of the South
African Returned Soldiers’ Associa-
tion, is connected with the Masonic
craft, and is a member of the
Masonic Club. In 1899 he married
Jessie Maude, daughter of the late
Mr. Adolphus H. Trevethan, of
Toowoomba, and has a son and a
daughter.
PATRICK JOHN HEVRON,
J.P., Mayor of North Fremantle
(1902), is a son of the late Mr.
Denis Hevron, of Ireland, and lat-
terly of North Fremantle, where the
gentleman under review was born
on April 12, 1867. He was edu-
cated at the Christian Brothers’
School and upon leaving that insti-
tution served his articles to the
leather-dressing trade with the firm
of Pearse Brothers, of North Fre-
mantle. After nine years in this
calling he started business on his
own account as general customs
agent and carrier, and is now a re-
cognized identity of the Port and its
surrounding suburbs. A man of
genial temperament he has readily
won his way into the good graces
of those with whom he has been
brought in contact, and when he
stood for the mayoralty of North
Fremantle in 1902, after having
served as a member of the Council
for a period of five years, his sup-
porters were numerous and easily
Bartletto, Perth
MR. PATRICK JOHN HEVRON.
won for him a majority of votes.
He occupied the mayoral office for
three years, during which his popu
larity in no wise suffered eclipse.
He is a Liberal in politics, and has
unsuccessfully contested a seat in


the House in the interests of that
party. He received his commission of
Justice of the Peace in 1905. In the
arena of athletics he has been a per-
former of note in running and jump-
ing, and few in the State know
more about this form of pedestrian
sport. He is also interested in rac-
ing, and has been handicapper for
several well-known clubs, besides
which he acts as Patron of the
North Fremantle Cricket and Foot-
ball Clubs, and has held presiden-
tial and other offices in connection
with various athletic and sporting
organizations. Mr. Hevron married
in 1894 Silda, daughter of the late
Mr. John Matison, of Fremantle,
and has three sons and a daughter.
GEORGE HISCOX, J.P., Mayor
of Midland Junction, is a son of
the late Mr. William liiscox, of
Hammersmith, England, in which
town he was born in February,
1864. At an early age he left his
native land for New Zealand, and
having completed his education in
the Dominion was subsequently en-
gaged in storekeeping pursuits at
Ohinemutu and Wiro, to which lat-
ter place he returned after a period
spent in the South Sea Islands. In
1887 he left New Zealand for Mel-
bourne, and was there during the
time of the great boom, continuing
his travels to Western Australia in
1889. Here he entered upon hotel-
keeping, first taking over the man-
agement of the City Hotel at Perth.
At a later date he purchased the
freehold of the Guildford Hotel, and
continued as boniface of this estab-
lishment from 1890 to 1902. He
then went for a pleasure trip to
England at the time of the corona-
tion of His late Majesty Edward
VII., and upon his return in 1903
purchased the Royal Standard Hotel
at Perth. After carrying this on for
a brief period he sold out and lived
in retirement for a year at Belmont,
at the end of that period personally
entering upon the conduct of the
Freemasons' Hotel at Midland Junc-
tion, this being one of two hotels
which he had built while formerly
residing at Guildford. Mr. Hiscox
has taken much interest in the devel-
opment of the town of Midland
Junction and the surrounding dis-
trict, and has watched the growth of
the neighbourhood for over twenty-
two years. He has served as a mem-
ber of the various public bodies, in
1896 having been elected to a seat
on the Guildford Municipal Coun-
cil, which he held for a couple of
terms. He was also a member of the
Belmont Roads Board, and in 1911
was returned by a large majority as
Mayor of Midland Junction, which
office he now holds. He holds a
commission of Justice of the Peace
for Swan magisterial district. A
Past Master in the fraternity of
Freemasons he is a member of the
Masonic Club, and is also connected
with Tattersall's Club. He is fond
of field sports and is Patron to all
the local sporting clubs. Mr. Hiscox
married Lily, daughter of Mr.
Joseph Hiscox.
PERCIVAL FORD ROBINSON,
Mayor of Midland Junction (1911), is
a son of the late Mr. W. A. Robinson,
farmer and grazier, of Beverley. He
was born at Sunny Hill, Beverley,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PERCIVAL FORD ROBINSON.
in March, 1866, and received his
education at the Commercial
Student School, Perth. His studies
completed he entered upon pastoral
life at his father's sheep station,
“Mount Florence," in the Roebourne
district, and after continuing there
for a couple of years in 1886 joined
a prospecting expedition to Kimber-
ley, from which, however, he reaped
no satisfactory results. In 1887 he
returned overland to the station and
settled down to the life of a squatter,
two years later taking a portion of
his father's stock to the De Grey dis-
trict, where with his brother he
formed what is now known as the
Coongan Station. In addition to his
large grazing interests in the Nor'-
West Mr. Robinson holds consider-
able property in Perth and Midland
Junction, and in 1902 left the north
and purchased his present residence,
“Undercliff," at Greenmount, the
former property of his father-in-law,
Mr. E. G. Lacey. Before taking
up his permanent residence in his
new home Mr. Robinson, accom-
panied by his wife, in 1904 made an
all-round tour of the world, during
which they visited the famous St.
Louis Exhibition. Upon his return
he was prevailed upon to take up
public life and was returned as
Mayor of Midland Junction in 1907,
after a strenuous fight, and has re-
tained the chair ever since. Various
improvements have been made to the
town during his period of office, not-
able among which was the erection
of the municipal sale-yards, which
rank as second to none in the State.
In 1910 Mr. Robinson took over the
proprietorship of the business known
as the Cardup Brick Company,
which he carries on in addition to
other interests. In the following
year he turned his attention toward
the Parliamentary arena and con-
tested the Guildford electorate in the
Liberal interest, but was defeated by
the Labour member. He is a keen
sportsman, and has always displayed
an active interest in the various
large shows held annually in the
State, in 1909 purchasing “Ring-
leader," the champion buggy horse
of the year. He is a member of
Tattersall's and the Western Aus-
tralian Clubs. Mr. Robinson mar-
ried Clare Elizabeth, eldest daughter
of Mr. E. G. Lacey, who came from
New South Wales in 1880 to open
up the jarrah industry in Western
Australia, and was the first to erect
a saw-milling plant and yards of any
dimensions in Perth. He was also
one of the earliest supporters of
mining in the State.
Councillor ARCHIBALD JAMIE-
SON, representative of West Ward
in the Midland Junction munici-
pality, is a son of the late Mr. Peter
Jamieson, of the Shetland Isles,
where he was born in 1868. At the
close of his schooldays he took to a
seafaring life, during the course of
which he landed at Adelaide, South
Australia, about 1880. Two years
later he came to Western Australia,
and abandoning marine pursuits
joined the Government Railways De-
partment in the construction branch


of the Service. After six years he
transferred his services to the Mid-
land Railway Company, and having
completed twelve years in this class
of work eventually resigned to start
contracting on his own account,
which occupation he followed for
about two years. At the end of this
period he was offered and accepted
his present position of Secretary to
the Midland Club, which office he
has continued to hold ever since.
Mr. Jamieson has long been asso-
ciated with public life, having first
entered the local Council in 1899,
since when he has continuously
served the ratepayers in the capacity
of councillor and has proved himself
a strenuous worker in their interests.
As Chairman of the Works and
General Purposes Committee for six
years he has seen many important
improvements taken in hand and
carried through by the Council,
among these being the new Town
Hall, the Electric Light Station, the
Saleyards, and the construction of
all the main roads about the town.
Being a follower and supporter of all
manly outdoor sport he has displayed
keen interest in the establishment of
the present recreation ground and
oval, and has been Secretary of the
local football and cricket clubs for a
considerable period, besides which he
is a player of bowls. Mr. Jamieson
married Sarah, daughter of the late
Mr. William Rose, of England, and
has six sons and three daughters.
FREDERICK J. PIERCY,
Mayor of Guildford, is a son of the
late Mr. Richard Piercy, of
Reading, Berks, England, and was
born on June 22, 1854. He was
educated at the Reading State
School, with a finishing course at the
Rev. Thomas Caterer's Private
Boarding Academy at Peppard, in
Oxfordshire, and upon leaving school
began work in his father’s pottery
at Reading. He concluded his ap-
prenticeship to the trade at Doul-
ton's, at Lambeth, being identified
with the latter works for four years,
and after an additional year in his
father's employ left England for
Australia, where he joined his bro-
ther in the business of Piercy
Brothers' South Australian Pot-
teries. He continued in this connec-
tion for seventeen years, ultimately
coming to the Western State in 1898,
when he commenced business as
Managing Director of the Wood-
bridge Brush and Pottery Company.
At a later date he purchased this
concern in conjunction with Mr.
Turton and carried it on successfully
until 1908, when he established his
present works at Belmont, known as
the West Australian Pottery Com-
pany, the conduct of which he has
supervised ever since. Mr. Piercy
has devoted a portion of his leisure
to the study of public matters, and
perceiving in municipal life a sphere
for his activities he entered the
Guildford Council and has promoted
the interests of the ratepayers with
unceasing vigilance. He was duly
elected to the mayoral office, an
honour which was repeated some few
years later, since which period he
has continued to fill the chair. Great
improvements have been brought
about by the Council, including the
lighting of the town by electricity,
and Mr. Piercy is now strongly
advocating a new scheme of deep
drainage for Guildford. A follower
of all manly sports, in earlier days
he was a prominent wielder of the
willow in South Australia, and also
gave a good deal of attention to
football and swimming. Latterly he
has contented himself with the less
active game of bowls and is a lead-
ing member of the Swan Bowling
Club, of which he has been President
for two separate terms. Mr. Piercy
married Emma May, daughter of the
late Mr. William Silver, of Nor-
wood, South Australia, and has two
sons and a daughter.
Councillor HAROLD ARTHUR
DEVENISH, representing the rate-
payers of Guildford in the local
Municipal Council, is a son of Mr.
S. B. Devenish, of that town, and
was born on December 20, 1881. He
pursued his early studies at Guild-
ford and, concluding his education
at Perth commenced active life in
the Public Works Department of the
State. After two years he left this
branch of the Civil Service and
joined the staff of the General Post
Office, where he continued for three
years. Upon the taking over of the
Postal Department by the Federal
Government he was transferred to
the Postmaster-General's Office at
Melbourne, where he passed a period
of three years, resigning in 1905. Re-
turning to Western Australia, Mr.
Devenish entered upon business pur-
suits in conjunction with his father,
carrying on as valuators, land
agents, and auctioneers, and has con-
ducted transactions successfully in
this connection ever since. He has
found a field for the exercise of his
public gifts in his native town of
Guildford and since his return from
the Eastern State has on several oc-
casions filled the position of Secre-
tary to the Swan Agricultural So-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HAROLD ARTHUR DEVENISH.
ciety and the Mechanics' Institute.
Always willing to place his services at
the disposal of the people of his dis-
trict in 1910 he entered the Muni-
cipal Council and acts on the Finance
Committee, his particular line of
business specially adapting him for
the work. He is also a member of
the Lighting Committee. He is fond
of horticulture and devotes a good
deal of time to the culture of roses
and the working of a small vineyard
situated at Caversham, about 2 miles
north of Guildford. He is also a
player of bowls and tennis.
The Late GEORGE JOHNSON
was born at Holme, Yorkshire, Eng-
land, in February, 1803, and was
brought up to farming pursuits. In
September, 1829, in company with a
number of other Yorkshire farmers,
notably the brothers John and
Joseph Hardey and Michael and
James Clarkson, he sailed in the
barque “Tranby” for Swan River,
by which name Western Australia
was generally known in those early
days. The colony was founded on
June 1, 1829, and the party arriving
in February, 1830, found a very
prifnitive state of things existing.
With other settlers they suffered
considerable hardships in laying the


foundations of the present flourish-
ing State and led very strenuous
lives. The late Mr. Johnson was a
member of the first party organized
to explore the Avon country and re-
ceived a grant of land in that dis-
trict. He afterwards acquired some
MR. GEORGE HOHNSON.
sheep, and having remained in the
colony ten years, in 1840 returned
to England, where he married and
settled down for about fourteen
years. In 1854 he again took pas-
sage for Western Australia, and
with his wife and two sons took up
his residence at Guildford, where he
established a flour-mill. He was
very active in public affairs and took
his full share in promoting the right
government of the district. He as-
sisted in forming the Town Trust,
of which he became a member, and
was connected with the Municipal
Council from its inception, holding
variously the offices of Chairman
and Treasurer. Pie was also one of
the founders of the Guildford
Mechanics' Institute. After a busy
and strenuous life he died at Guild-
ford on August 23, 1879, at the age
of seventy-six years, universally
respected by all classes as a man of
the strictest probity.
WILLIAM GEORGE JOHN-
SON, Ex-Mayor of Guildford, is a
son of the late Mr. George Johnson,
one of the early pioneers of Western
Australia, who arrived in the State
by the sailing vessel “Tranby" in
1830, and was one of the holders of
land grants on the Swan and Avon
Rivers. He was born at Manchester,
England, on September 13, 1844,
and in his eleventh year was brought
by his parents to Australia, where
he received his education at the
State School at Guildford and by
private tuition. Upon the comple-
tion of his studies he assisted his
father in the working of a flour-mill
owned by the latter, and having
spent a few years in this occupation
at the age of twenty-two entered the
Government Service in the Imperial
Convict Department. He served
ten years in this connection, at the
end of which period he applied for
leave to resign and was granted a
pension. In 1877 he joined the mer-
cantile office of Mr. J. H. Monger,
where he remained for two years,
when upon the death of his father
he returned to Guildford to under-
take the management of the farming
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM DEORGE HOHNSON.
property and vineyard, which he
continued to develop for some time.
He holds the offices of executor and
trustee for several properties, and
the discharge of these duties, to-
gether with the control of his own
interests, fully occupies his time.
His early and long connection with
the district has given him an experi-
ence invaluable to a member of the
municipal government, and as early
as 1880 he was elected a councillor
for Guildford. On November 21 of
the following year he was returned
as Chairman, and continued to fill
this post for the ensuing three years.
In 1887, when Guildford was gazet-
ted a mayoralty, he succeeded the
late Mr. Padbury, who filled the
office for a few months, and con-
tinned to occupy the mayoral chair
for three years, retiring in 1890. In
1893 and 1895 he was again elected
to the mayoralty, and served his
fellow-townsmen continuously in this
capacity until 1899, with a break of
one year only (1897). Since his re-
tirement from this office he has re-
tained his connection with general
public affairs, being a Justice of the
Peace for the whole of Western Aus-
tralia, Licensing Magistrate, a mem-
ber of the Swan Roads Board and
Chairman for several years, a mem-
ber of the Agricultural Society, as
well as President of the Guildford
Mechanics' Institute. He has also
been President of the Swan District
Building Society since its inception
in 1895 and Hon. Secretary of the
Swan District Board of Education for
thirty years. During the whole of
his life he has been a great lover of
music, both vocal and instrumental,
and has held honorary positions as
organist in various churches for
nearly fifty years. In matters of
recreation, during his earlier life he
took considerable interest in cricket,
in later days becoming a member of
the Swan Bowling Club. He mar-
ried Elizabeth Victoria, daughter of
the late Mr. Robert Davy Hardey,
one of the best known of the early
settlers in the Eastern district, and
has a son and five daughters.
Councillor WILLIAM DENVER
ROBINSON, member of the Queen's
Park Municipal Council, is a son
Bartletio , Perth
MR. WILLIAM DENVER ROBINSON.
of Mr. William Robert Robinson,
of Manchester, England. He was


born in New Zealand on January
17, 1878, and received his pre-
liminary education at Christchurch,
concluding his scholastic career in
Victoria. Commencing commercial
life in a softgoods establishment at
Geelong he continued in this con-
nection until 1895, in which year he
came to Western Australia. For
two years he filled a position
in the drapery house of Messrs.
Charles Moore & Co., and spent
five years in the employ of
the late Messrs. E. C. Shen-
ton & Co., of Perth. During three
years of this period he controlled
the department dealing with Govern-
ment orders, for which the above
firm had held the contract for a
number of years. After an interval
in which he was engaged in the same
line of trade Mr. Robinson accepted
his present appointment with the
well-known firm of Foy & Gibson,
Universal Providers, of Hay Street,
Perth. From time to time he has
devoted a considerable share of his
leisure to various public concerns
which have appealed to him as
worthy of the attention of the
thoughtful citizen. For about ten
years he has occupied the position of
Treasurer to the Perth Branch of
the Australian Natives’ Association,
in which organization he takes a
deep interest, and is Secretary of
the local Fire Brigade. In order to
serve his district more efficiently
he became a candidate for a seat in
the Queen’s Park Municipal Coun-
cil in 1911, and has closely iden-
tified himself with the special move-
ments which have since engaged the
attention of that body. He is using
his influence to obtain an effective
drainage system for the district and
favours the dividing of the muni-
cipality into wards. The water
supply question is also receiving his
earnest consideration. Mr. Robin-
son has always connected himself
with the Labour movement and is
a member of the Shop Employes
Federation. He is an adherent of
the Protestant Church and takes a
prominent part in all matters tend-
ing to its advancement. He was at
one time an ardent cyclist and a
follower of river sports, owning his
motor boat, and still advocates a
free indulgence in all manly out-
door pastimes.
WILLIAM GEORGE WITH-
NELL, Guildford, is the eldest son
of the late Mr. John Withnell, one
of the earliest pioneers of the north-
west district of Western Australia.
He was born at Hillside Farm, near
Beverley, in 1860, and when three
years old accompanied his parents,
who sailed for the Nor’-West by the
barque “Kestral,” under the com-
mand of Captain Pringle. After an
unsuccessful attempt to land their
stock, consisting of sheep, cattle, and
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. WILLIAM GEORGE WITHNELL.
horses, at Port Hedland a landing
was effected at Cossack and the stock
driven to Roebourne Pool, where a
station was formed on the Harding
River. A large run was afterwards
taken up on the Sherlock River,
where they made their home and
brought up a large family of chil-
dren under the difficult conditions
presented by lack of educational
facilities and other adjuncts of civil-
ization. The names of John With-
nell and his wife Emma Mary, who
is still living, are household words
in the memory of all those associated
with the early development of the
Nor’-West, and their kindly help
and sympathy, extended freely to all
strangers and fresh settlers, will
keep their memory green when the
recollections of those pioneering days
are fading into oblivion. As years
passed some of the family circle mi-
grated south, while the remaining
members continued in the pastoral
industry in and around the original
“Sherlock Station.” Mr. W. G.
Withnell, upon reaching the age of
twenty-one years, joined partner-
ship with his brother, John Gregory,
and formed a sheep station on the
Shaw River, in the East Pilbara
district. To this they gave the name
of “Hillside” and continued there
for some time, eventually disposing
of their interests and buying into
another pastoral property in the
Roebourne district, called “Karratha
Station,” which has been greatly im-
proved and extended since coming
into their possession. In 1902 Mr.
W. G. Withnell retired from the
active personal management of “Hill-
side Station,” but since taking up
his residence at Guildford has de-
voted a portion of his time and at-
tention to the various operations of
his pastoral properties. He has found
occupation for his leisure hours in
the study of municipal management,
and in 1909 allowed himself to be
nominated for a seat in the local
Council. Subsequently the pressure
of business affairs prevented him
standing for re-election but he an-
ticipates resuming his connection
with public life in the near future.
On March 28, 1894, Mr. With-
nell married Ellen Amelia, eldest
daughter of the late Mr. George
'Worth, of Guildford, and has five
sons and four daughters. His eldest
son, Mr. George Harold Withnell,
in 1911 entered upon pastoral pur-
suits with his uncle, J. G.
Withnell, on the “Dirk Hartog Is-
land Station” at Shark Bay.


Roads Boards in the Metropolitan Area.
The roads of those districts in the metropolitan area
which have not attained municipal dignity are under
the charge of various boards, allied to which are boards
administering the Health Act. Besides those mentioned
hereunder the boards surrounding Perth, Fremantle,
and Midland Junction are as follow: —Belmont Park,
Melville, Wonneroo, Claremont, Maylands, Bayswater,
Gosnells, Fremantle, and Swan. These boards are
authorized by the Road Board Act to levy rates not ex-
ceeding 3d. in the £ on unimproved values. They may
within certain limits float loans, and have specific powers
under various Acts, such as “Width of Tires,” “Noxious
Weeds,” “Cattle Trespass,” etc.
PERTH ROADS BOARD.
This body governs the districts known as Maylands
and Mount Lawley, Osborne Park, and what is known
as the Coast Ward. The most populous part of this
area is the firstnamed, the history of which may be said
to date from 1901, when the population was about 100.
The present population is about 4,500, and during the
past decade some 900 houses have been erected, many of
them being mansions of modern design. The records
of attendance at the Maylands State School offer
some indication of the tendency to increase in popula-
tion in the district, the present buildings having out-
grown their capacity, a local church having been requisi-
tioned until the completion of further additions to the
existing buildings. The daily attendance averages 630.
The Institute for the Blind is situated in the district, as
well as various industrial premises.
For the year 1911 the receipts of Perth Roads Board
amounted to £9,615, and the expenditure to £6,000.
Some idea of the increase of values in the past ten years
may be obtained by comparing the rates of 1901, when
£ll5 was the levy, while in 1911 the amount reached
£3,653. In 1901 there were no roads; to-day over 50
miles of road exist. The capital value of rateable pro-
perty in 1903 was estimated at £114,962. In 1911 the
valuation was £344,631. There are fine bowling greens
and tennis courts in Mount Lawley, while Maylands is
following suit. Osborne Park is the market garden
suburb, and is reached by tram in a run of about half
an hour from the centre of the city.
WEST GUILDFORD ROADS BOARD.
The West Guildford Road District was proclaimed
in July, 1901, with an area of five square miles. The
population is approximately 1,350. For the financial
year 1911-12 the gross revenue was £2,568 10s. 4d. and
the gross expenditure £2,615 12s. Fifty new houses
were erected during the year 1911, and the present year
promises an even greater advance. The following works
were also carried out: —Public hall and offices, at a cost
(including furniture) of £1,020; Perth-Guildford Road,
53 chains widened by 4 ft.; 47J chains of road con-
structed ; 45 chains of footpath constructed; chains
of road formed; 30 chains of drains cut; two culverts
provided; 4 chains road clearing done. A loan of £3,000
is being floated, which will provide funds for construc-
tion of about three miles of new roads. The number of
ratepayers is now over 1,100, as compared with 824 in
1909-10. A public siding has been provided by the
Railway Department. The local State school has been
extended and enlarged during the past year. An altera-
tion in the boundaries of the district has been effected
whereby a portion of the western end has been ceded to
Bayswater district and a portion of Locations 01 and P
has been received from the Swan Roads Board. Brisk
business has been done by the agents for the owners of
the large estates in the district, and land values have
risen considerably.
PEPPERMINT GROVE ROADS BOARD.
This body was formed in 1895, and embraces an area
of some 300 acres, the approximate population being
1,250 persons. The receipts for the year 1911 amounted
to £1,200, the expenditure being £1,284. During the
past year many of the “ribbon” roads, or those made
down the centre only, have been widened, these including
Forrest, Leake, Vieane, Harvey, and Palmerston Streets.
The policy of making footpaths was also vigorously pur-
sued. About £4,000 worth of new building was carried
out in 1911. In this district a better class of house pre-
vails. Its residents are the leading business-men of
Perth and Fremantle; also retired gentlemen and Civil
servants. There is very little land to build on now. The
ground is at a premium, and is very high in price. There
are two or three large houses about to be erected. The
lots are too expensive to build small houses on them.
The foreshore in this district and the recreation
ground is visited by thousands of visitors and picnickers
during the summer months. This is a favourite resort
for Sunday-school picnics and private firms’ picnics.
Bordering Freshwater Bay scores of yachts and motor
launches during the summer evenings, as well as river-
going steamers, “The Zephyr,” and other pleasure boats,
call at the jetty.


ROBERT THOMSON ROBIN-
SON, member of the Perth Roads
Board, was born in Ireland in 1867.
He is a son of Mr. John Robinson,
of Albany, Western Australia, and
left his native land with his parents
in 1872. Arriving at Victoria in
that year he spent some time in the
Eastern State, and in 1887 the
family removed to Western Aus-
tralia. Young Robinson was sent to
South Australia to pursue his edu-
cational studies at Prince Alfred
College, and at the close of his
scholastic career was articled to Mr.
Septimus Burt, K.C., of Perth. In
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ROBERT THOMSON ROBINSON.
1889 he became associated in part-
nership with Mr. S. J. Haynes, solic-
itor, of Albany, and nine years later,
in conjunction with Mr. C. Baxter
Cox, took over the legal practice of
Messrs. Sholl & Foulkes, establish-
ing the well-known firm of Haynes,
Robinson, & Cox, still retaining his
connection with the firm of Haynes
and Robinson at Albany. His
brilliance and energy soon advanced
him to a prominent position in the
legal profession. He quickly grasps
the points of a case and his excellent
memory for leading cases and pre-
cedents frequently brings to naught
the efforts of the opposing counsel
to build up his case. Mr. Robinson
has large property interests, being
a joint owner of Mount Lawley,
where he has directed his attention
to the formation of a suburb which
in breadth and design, as by its
modern and complete sanitary
system, may be regarded as a model.
In 1908 he was returned as a mem-
her of the Perth Roads Board as
representative for Mount Lawley
Ward and in the following year was
elected to represent the Board at
the General Conference held to dis-
cuss the Greater Perth scheme. Mr.
Robinson took a keen interest in
this project, and with Mr. R. P.
Vincent, Ex-Mayor of Perth, was
mainly responsible for the general
construction of the scheme which,
when placed before the electors, at
the taking of the referendum, was
carried by a great majority. In 1911,
with the assistance of Mr. W. E.
Bold, Town Clerk of Perth, he
undertook the supervision of the
Bill or Statute to give effect to the
wishes of the ratepayers in this re-
spect, and looks confidently forward
to the time when the Greater Perth
Scheme shall have become an accom-
plished fact. His interest in political
affairs is very strong, and the more
extended and effective organization
in recent times of the Liberal League
is in no small degree due to the
energy which, notwithstanding pro-
fessional demands on his time, he
has been able to devote to this body
as a member of the Executive Com-
mittee. Mr. Robinson is an en-
thusiastic motorist and is President
of both the Western Australian
Automobile Club and the Perth
Motor Cycle Club. He takes great
interest in horticulture and makes
a hobby of this pleasant occupation.
JOHN BERTRAM ADDEN-
BROOKE, member of the West
Guildford Roads Board, is a son of
the late Mr. David Addenbrooke, of
Staffordshire, England, and was born
at Prince’s End, in that county, on
October 31, 1878. He was brought
to New Zealand at an early age and
pursued his scholastic studies at
Dunedin, afterwards attending a
school in Melbourne, Victoria. At
the close of his schooldays he accom-
panied his father to England and
served his apprenticeship to the firm
of Rushton & Proctor, engineers, of
Lincoln, and afterwards with the
National Gas Engine Company, of
Manchester, with which he remained
for about twelve years. Resigning
the position of Assistant Works
Manager, to which he had attained,
in 1906 he turned his face to Aus-
tralia and landed in Western Aus-
tralia in April of that year. He ob-
tained employment as Manager of
the engineering department of the
firm of Saunders & Stuart, and con-
tinned in this connection until June,
1911. In that month Mr. Adden-
brooke established himself in busi-
ness in conjunction with his present
partner, Mr. A. R. Morrison, open-
ing in Wellington Street, Perth, and
trading as the Globe Engineering
Company. From its inception the
business has gone ahead by leaps and
bounds, and its progress reflects
the utmost credit on the manage-
ment, which has spared no pains to
launch it successfully on the fickle
sea of commercial enterprise. Prior
to 1910 Mr. Addenbrooke, on ac-
count of his business duties, declined
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN BERTRAM ADDENBROOKE.
to take any active part in public
life, but, though still a very busy
man, he occupies a seat at the pre-
sent time on the West Guildford
Roads Board, having been elected to
this position in the above year. He
is an excellent worker in the in-
terests of the ratepayers, fully
realizing the responsibilities of office
and conscientiously discharging them
to the best of his ability. In the
Old Country he filled various posi-
tions of trust, having been Secretary
of the Ashton District Sunday-
schools Union and District Secretary
of the London Orphan Homes and
Training Ships. His favourite
diversion is shooting, and he is
generally successful in securing a
good bag. He devotes his leisure
hours to fruit and vegetable culture
at his residence at West Guildford.
In 1903 Mr. Addenbrooke married
Isabella, daughter of the late Mr.
James Clarke, of Airdrie, Lanark-
shire, Scotland, and has two sons
and a daughter.


JOHN DANIEL TROTT, Secre-
tary and Inspector of the West
Guildford Roads Board, is a
son of Mr. A. Y. Trott,
of Camberwell, Victoria. He
was born at West Melbourne on
October 29, 1877, and after a pre-
liminary course of education at a
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HOHN DANIEL TROTT.
State school studied at Hawthorn
College and finally matriculated at
the Melbourne University. Upon
starting business life, he engaged in
clerical work for several prominent
warehousemen in Victoria, and at
a later period was in business on his
own account for some time. In
February, 1902, he cam© to Wes-
tern Australia, and upon arrival in
this State assumed the duties
of general store manager and
postmaster in the newly-formed
district of Maylands. After
continuing in this position for
two years he was given control of
the Maylands Board of Health, and
during the four years spent in this
appointment made a thorough study
of all matters pertaining to this and
kindred posts, and was successful in
gaining the diplomas of the Royal
Sanitary Institute for Inspector of
Nuisances and Sanitary Science,
being the first local Inspector to re-
ceive the latter award. These
diplomas qualified him for more im-
portant duties, and he accepted the
position of Health and Municipal
Inspector at Bunbury, where he re-
mained for two years. In 1910 he was
appointed to his present post, that
of Secretary and Inspector to the
West Guildford Roads Board and
Board of Health, with which he
combines the office of postmaster.
The West Guildford Roads Board
at one time was partly under the
control of the Guildford Council and
Bayswater Roads Board. In 1901 it
was created a separate Roads Board,
now being a self-governing and self-
supporting body. Since that date
the district has made rapid advance,
and the population has increased
from 200 to 1,300, while the im-
proved condition of the roads testi-
fies to the efficiency of the body of
control. Mr. Trott is Secretary of
the local Fire Brigade and has
always taken an active part in the
various public movements of the
districts in which he has been loca-
ted. He has been a devotee of
friendly society work, and suc-
cessfully filled the office of Grand
Master of the Western Australian
district, M.U.1.0.0.F. He is a well-
known figure in musical and sport-
ing circles, and is now enthusias-
tically promoting the formation of a
tennis club at West Guildford.
HENRY FRANCIS BRIGGS,
member of Cottesloe Beach Roads
and Health Board, is a son of the
Bartletto , Perth
MR. HENRY FRANCIS BRIGGS.
late Mr. Joseph Briggs, of Romsey,
Victoria, and was born at Carlton,
in that State, on February 15, 1856.
He was educated at a private school,
and when fourteen years of age be-
came engaged in storekeeping pur-
suits, which subsequently he relin-
quished to join his father in the
building trade. He also obtained
some experience in the farming in-
dustry, but after reaching man's
estate abandoned these callings and
joined the Survey Department of the
Victorian Railways. In July, 1884,
he was offered and accepted a posi-
tion with the firm of C. & E. Millar,
the well-known railway contractors,
and eventually rose to the manage-
ment of the head office at Mel-
bourne. In 1905 he came to Wes-
tern Australia as Manager of the
Fremantle Branch of Millars’ Karri
and Jarrah Company, Limited,
where he has continued ever since.
Making his private residence at
Cottesloe Beach he has taken an
active interest in local affairs and in
1910 was elected a member of the
Roads and Health Board. While
in Victoria Mr. Briggs took a lead-
ing part in musical matters in and
round Melbourne and was associated
with the Royal Metropolitan Lieder-
tafel for many years. He was also
a prominent member of the Mel-
bourne Celtic Club. His chief re-
creation at the present time is found
in the game of bowls, and he is a
member of the Cottesloe Club. In
1896 he married Alice, daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Coop, of Gis-
borne and Moonee Ponds, Victoria,
and has two sons and five daughters.
RICHARD EPHRAIM BRADY,
Secretary of the Darling Ranges
Roads Board, Kalamunda, is a son of
the late Mr. James Brady, farmer, of
South Australia, and was born at
Callington, in that State, on Decem-
ber 18, 1873. He received his educa-
tion at Murray Bridge, and upon
leaving school followed farming pur-
suits on his father’s property until
1892, in which year he left for New
South Wales. Mr. Brady was
engaged in fruit-growing in the
mother State for about four years,
at the end of which period he was
called to Western Australia to
arrange matters in connection with
his late brother’s estate. Having
completed these arrangements he de-
cided to take up his residence in this
quarter of the island continent, and
with a view to fruit-farming selected
a property at Kalamunda, which he
ultimately disposed of in 1908.
Three years prior to this date Mr.
Brady received the appointment of
Secretary to the Darling Ranges
Roads Board, and has continued to
fill this office ever since. His duties
include the supervision of 116 miles
16 chains of roads, and the area of


country under control of the Board
extends over 125,845 acres, including
28,545 acres of horticultural and
residential holdings, 2,300 acres of
pastoral leasehold, and 95,000 acres
of timber concessions. Subsequent to
selling his property above mentioned,
Mr. Brady purchased a suburban
block, embracing 13 acres, with a sub-
stantial eight-roomed house and
about an acre of good, moist garden
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RICHARD EPHRAIM BRADY.
ground. For recreative purposes he
here engages in strawberry culture
and the growing of flowers, in which
he has met with considerable success.
His berries have obtained favourable
recognition from the adjudicators in
connection with the local shows, and
his flower-beds command general
admiration, his collection of carna-
tions including all the best-known
LL
varieties of this favourite bloom.
Mr. Brady has held many honorary
positions in the district, and prior to
his appointment as Secretary filled
the post of Assistant Secretary to the
Horticultural Society from its incep-
tion.
FREDERICK JOHN DUFFY,
Secretary of the Wanneroo Roads
Board, is a son of Mr. Bernard Duffy,
of Ireland, one of the first settlers
in the Wanneroo district, where the
gentleman under review was born on
September 22, 1875. He received
his education at Mr. H. Briggs’
school at Fremantle, with a finishing
course at the Christian Brothers’
College, Perth, and upon leaving this
institution became associated with
farming pursuits at Wanneroo in
conjunction with his brother. At a
later date he started operations on his
own account on a property situated
about 12 miles from Perth con-
sisting of 320 acres freehold, and in
addition rented a pastoral lease of
6,000 acres in the Wanneroo district,
which properties he still retains. Of
the freehold about 40 acres have been
cleared and a market garden is cul-
tivated, a large variety of vegetables
being grown successfully. Mr. Duffy
also engages extensively in grazing
of cattle and horses, the herd being
composed chiefly of a cross between
the Ayrshire and Jersey breed, in
which he has been a successful
exhibitor at the Wanneroo Shows.
The horses are of a light strain, prin-
cipally intended for riding-hacks or
for buggy use. Mr. Duffy has always
been distinguished for the active part
he has taken in local affairs, and in
1903, when the Wanneroo Roads
Board was first established, received
the appointment of Secretary, which
office he has filled ever since. Since
that period the development in the
district has advanced by leaps and
bounds, the increase of revenue
amounting to about 150 per cent.
The Board controls about 100,000
acres of country, extending from the
eight-and-a-half milepost on the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. FREDERICK JOHN DUFFY.
Wanneroo Road to the Yanchep
Caves, and eight miles inland from
the coast. Mr. Duffy is also Secre-
tary to the Agricultural Society,
Government Electoral Officer, and
Postal-Vote Officer, and was gazetted
Justice of the Peace for Perth magis-
terial district in 1906. In 1907 he
married Eva Matilda, daughter of
Mr. James Samuel Cockman, and has
three sons.


The Press of Western Australia.
The genesis of journalism in Western Australia is
an interesting chapter not only of the history of the
Press, but also of the many striking personalities who
formed the "Fourth Estate” of the infant Swan River
settlement.
Much of the following summary is abstracted from
a work by Mr. Edward Stirling, afterwards identified
with one of the largest journalistic enterprises in the
State. In this little work, "A Brief History of Western
Australia,” we have facts placed before us by one who
was contemporaneous with the situations he depicts, and
in many respects the work partakes of the nature of an
autobiography.
We also learn from a diary kept by Mr. George
Fletcher Moore that within a few months of the founda-
tion of the settlement that a copy of a manuscript paper
was issued. This paper was published by a man named
Gardiner, but its existence seems to have been brief and
troubled. This was followed by another manuscript
journal published by W. K. Shenton at the Gazette office,
Fremantle, and published at 3s. per copy. A copy of
this sheet is at present in the library of the British
Museum.
In May, 1832, Charles Macfaull in conjunction with
W. K. Shenton printed a small news-sheet called The
Fremantle Observer , but the partnership was not of long
duration.
The story of the first newspaper is a somewhat
humorous resume of the history of the "Fourth Estate”
in Western Australia. The publishing house was a shed
owned by Colonel Latour in Fremantle, and whilst in
one corner was printed the first newspaper of the settle-
ment in the other was the mill which ground the first
bushel of wheat in the colony.
The partnership existing between Messrs. Macfaull
and Shenton was not of very lengthy duration owing to
the vagaries of a contributor, and Mr. Macfaull con-
tinued the sheet for a time after the dissolution of the
partnership.
The paper, however, became defunct after twelve
months’ existence owing to the financial embarrassment
of the publisher, who could not afford the weekly rent
required for the hire of the plant.
The owner of the plant, Mr. Weasel, soon after
established a paper called The Inquisitor , which led to a
sad contretemps, with a still sadder ending. The con-
tributors or staff of this journal were Captain Graham,
formerly Governor of Sierra Leone, whose bickerings
with the Colonial authorities were public knowledge; Mr.
Yule, afterwards police magistrate of Perth; a Mr.
Johnstone, who was engaged in mercantile pursuits;
and a Scotch lawyer named Clarke. The policy of the
paper on Government affairs led to many disagreements
between the staff, who held on many questions of public
interest strongly divergent views. A disagreement of a
more than usually passionate and acrimonious nature led
to the statement by Johnstone that Clarke was "no
gentleman,” and a duel was the result. Johnstone was
mortally wounded by Clarke’s fire, and died in twelve
hours. Thus the first year’s publication ended in
murder —a significant travesty on that freedom which
should be the keynote of all true journalism.
In 1833 The Perth Gazette made its appearance,
under the leadership of Mr. Macfaull, whose second
venture in the realms of journalism was fairly success-
ful —at least for a few years. This was the progenitor
of The West Australian of to-day.
In 1835 Mr. Waylen published a letter in this news-
sheet in criticism of the captain and crew of a vessel
named the "Skerne,” which had been wrecked between
Carnac and Garden Island. The letter accused the
captain of drunkenness, and he sued the paper for £5OO
damages for libel. The solicitor for the plaintiff was Mr.
Nairn Clarke, already notorious as the slayer of John-
stone, who put in an ingenious plea, that as the captain
only wanted to protect his character any damages tb*
jury liked to assess would be given to the poor of Perth
On the evening of the first day of the trial Clarke had
an interview with the foreman of the jury—a most-
unrighteous proceeding —and promised him the sum of
£5 for a jollification if the jury returned a verdict for the
plaintiff. This they did, assessing damages at £75. The
"spree” eventuated, but Macfaull never recovered from
the financial embarrassment caused by this unjust
verdict.
In 1835 Clarke, so notorious previously in journal-
ism, became the publisher of a second journal named
The Guardian , which had a brief existence of twelve
months.
Having outlined the early efforts of journalism in
this State, let us pass on to a history of those particular
journals whose policies and literature have become part
and parcel of the life of the people.


“The West Australian.”
Before proceeding to give a brief historical review
of the oldest daily paper in this State — The West
Australian —which has had a continuous existence dating
from the year 1833, it would be as well to take a glance
at the earlier history of Australasian journalism.
A comparative table giving the date of the founda-
tion of the oldest newspaper in each State of the Com-
monwealth, including New Zealand, will no doubt prove
interesting, and serve also to impress the fact that in the
realm of journalism throughout Australasia Western
Australia holds a deservedly high place.
The following brief summary of dates will show
very clearly the position of the leading Western Aus-
tralian newspaper in regard to the other principal news-
papers in the capital cities of the Commonwealth and
New Zealand:
Sydney Morning Herald (New South Wales).—
first published in April, 1831, as The Sydney
Herald .
West Australian (Western Australia). —First
published under the name of The Perth Gazette
and Western Australian Journal in January,
1833, since which time publication has been
continuous.
South Australian Register (South Australia). —
First published as The South Australian
Gazette and Colonial Register in June, 1836.
The Argus (Victoria). —First published in 1838
as The Melbourne Advertiser , in 1846 renamed
The Melbourne Argus , eventually to become
The Argus.
The New Zealander (New Zealand). —First pub-
lished in 1841, and ceased publication in 1863,
but was followed immediately by a paper called
The New Zealand Herald , published by one of
the proprietors of the defunct journal.
The Launceston Examiner (Tasmania). —First
published in March, 1842.
The Brisbane Courier (Queensland). —First pub-
lished under the name of The Moreton Bay
Courier in June, 1845.
A glance at the above will at once disclose that The
West Australian can justly lay claim to the proud posi-
tion of the second oldest journal in Australasia, and it
will be satisfactorily proved that the reputation of the
newspaper is as high in every other respect.
While it is the oldest existing newspaper in Western
Australia, it must not be forgotten that several other
efforts in journalism, already noted, preceded it, though
they had but an ephemeral life.
Satisfactory evidence is forthcoming that a manu-
script newspaper was published but a few months after
the foundation of the Swan River Settlement, and in
112
the library of the British Museum is to be found a copy
of a news-sheet published in March, 1831, with the high-
sounding title of Western Australian Chronicle and
Perth Gazette. The imprint shows that it was published
by W. K. Shenton at The Gazette office, Fremantle.
It would be interesting if The West Australian
could be traced to have had its genesis in this news-sheet,
and when we consider the transactions that existed
between Shenton and Macfaull, the first publisher of
The Perth Gazette , it requires no stretch of imagination
to give to the paper even an earlier date than that
already ascribed.
Late in the year 1832 Macfaull, who already had
had several essays in journalism, imported a Stanhope
printing press, and on January 5, 1833, he printed the
first number of The Perth Gazette and Western Austra-
lian Journal , which still survives as The West Australian.
Of the first issue a copy does not exist in the State,
but it is known that it was printed as a four-page demy
sheet. News in 1833 was strictly limited, and the issue
was certainly an artistic production of “scissors and
paste” ; but the community cheerfully paid the sum of one
shilling for the paper. The second issue of the Journal
was on January 12, 1833, and Macfaull was justly proud
of his effort. The libel action spoken of before now
eventuated and placed the intrepid publisher in financial
difficulty. With varying success Mr. Macfaull conducted
the paper for some years, but ultimately it passed into
the hands of the Shenton family, owing to the death of
its founder, his widow having disposed of her proprietary
rights.
The late Rev. C. G. Nicolay, who was acquainted
with the early history of the paper, states that it was
first located in a small building near the Perth Cause-
way, which in the early “forties” was razed to the
ground. It was then removed to a small house which at
one time stood on the corner of St. George’s Terrace and
Adelaide Terrace. This no doubt was its location when
Mrs. Macfaull sold it to the Shenton family. Up to this
period its fortunes had been very varying, and when we
consider that the total population of the State in 1846
was 4,547 souls, its circulation could only be restricted.
However, with the steady increase in population came
a steady increase in circulation, clearly proving that the
paper was no mere ephemeral publication like its prede-
cessors, but a firmly implanted product that was to
become part and parcel of the prosperity of the State.
In 1864 the business had so increased that the size
of the sheet had become too small for its purpose, and
it was enlarged to a double demy. At the same time
its name was changed, and it appeared under the title of
The Perth Gazette and West Australian Times , by which
name it was known for fifteen years.


The location of the paper was several times changed,
until eventually it was printed in the old building which
stood upon its present site, only to be temporarily
removed pending the erection of the present palatial
offices.
In 1848 Mr. Arthur Shenton had been installed in
the editorial chair, which he continuously occupied for a
period of twenty-three years, until his death in 1871.
His death was said to have been accelerated by the effects
of an imprisonment he had undergone for contempt of
court.
Certain comments had appeared in The West Aus-
tralian Times and The Inquirer , which were held by the
then Chief Justice to reflect upon the impartiality of the
Supreme Court, and Mr. Arthur Shenton and Messrs.
Edmund and John Stirling were sentenced, the former
to pay a fine of £IOO and to be imprisoned for two
months in Perth gaol, and the Stirlings, whose offence
was held to be of a lighter nature, to one month's
imprisonment in the same place.
Submitting to the wishes of their friends, Messrs.
Stirling and Shenton apologized and were released and
the fine was remitted, but the intense feeling of
unmerited degradation so preyed on Mr. Shenton's mind
that in the early part of 1871 he utterly broke down and
died literally of a broken heart.
Speaking of his death The West Australian Times
said: —“His friends have at least the consolation of
knowing that he died at his post, and that almost his
last act was in defence of the proper privileges of the
Press, and the right to criticize the acts of public men."
During the twenty-three years he had held the posi-
tion of editor he rendered many great and valuable ser-
vices to the colony, and he was a strenuous and fearless
fighter for what he considered to be a just and righteous
cause. 1
In August, 1874, The West Australian Times ap-
peared as a bi-weekly, being published on every Tuesday
and Friday. The results more than justified this step,
and the commercial success of the journal was largely
increased. Later on in the year Mr. William Henry
Hullock was appointed editor, and his brilliant ver-
satility had much to do with the success at this period.
Mr. Hullock continued his service until certain changes
which led to his severing his connection. He died in New
Zealand some years later under peculiarly sad circum-
stances.
At this time and until the year 1879, The West Aus-
tralian Times was owned by a somewhat numerous pro-
prietary, including the present Lieutenant-Governor (Sir
Edward Stone), the late Sir George Shenton, Mr. Sept.
Burt, K.C., the late Mr. Maitland Brown, the late Mr.
Charles Crowther, M.L.C., and several other well-known
colonists. Several changes had taken place in the
editorial chair, amongst the occupiers being a minister
of religion, already mentioned, the Rev. C. G. Nicolay,
and one of its most-valued contributors was Sir Thomas
Cockburn-Campbell, Bart., who was afterwards to under-
take the editorship.
The latter half of 1879 witnessed an important stage
in the history of the journal, for it was purchased by the
late Mr. Charles Harper, who invited Sir Thomas
Cockburn-Campbell to fill the editorial chair.
Under the new management the title of the journal
was changed to The West Australian , and with the first
issue under this name, on November 18, 1879, the paper
embarked on that career which was to place it in the
front rank of Australian journalism.
It is beyond question that to the influence of Sir
Thomas Campbell The West Australian owes a very large
amount of its success. After his editorship ceased he
continued to mark it with the impress of his talents by
frequent contributions up to the time of his death to-
wards the end of 1892.
Notwithstanding that Sir Thomas Campbell had
so large a share in moulding the fortunes of The West
Australian in the earlier portion of its career, there is
another who stands out conspicuously from all others,
including Sir Thomas himself, on account of the part he
has played during nearly three decades in raising the
journal from its comparative obscurity to its present
commanding position—Sir Winthrop Hackett, one of its
present owners.
An Irishman of the highest type by birth and
descent, a barrister by profession, Sir Winthrop, then
Mr. Hackett, after following pastoral pursuits for a brief
period, relinquished all and adopted the profession of a
journalist, to which he has imparted the highest dignity,
joining Mr. Harper in the partnership of The West Aus-
tralian in 1883.
Of unbounded energy and endowed with the keenest
insight, Mr. Hackett, who entertained the most sanguine
hopes of the future of the State, determined to elevate
The West Australian to the proud position of similar
metropolitan papers in the other States. What The
Argus and The Age are to Victoria, and The Sydney
Morning Herald is to New South Wales, he determined
The West Australian should be to the State of his adop-
tion, and in short time he persuaded Mr. Harper to con-
sent to the conversion of the paper, which was now a tri-
weekly one, into a daily issue. Visiting England for the
purpose of acquiring the necessary plant for the new
enterprise, he had on January 1, 1885, the great satis-
faction of receiving from the Press a copy of the paper
in its new form as a daily issue. It must have been a
proud moment for the new partner, but his energies did
not rest here, for he at once put into operation plans for
a special weekly issue of The West Australian y as a fore-
runner of a distinct weekly, and on December 19, 1885,


he started his new venture, The Western Mail , which
now holds no unworthy place amongst the weeklies of
other metropolitan capitals.
The position of the paper during the Crown colony
stage was a delicate one, and the defective state of the
libel law made it peculiarly liable to harassing and
speculative actions by unscrupulous individuals.
The West Australian , despite these many disabili-
ties, stood out boldly for the freedom of the Press, and
its unbroken record of success is an excellent and over-
powering testi-
mony to the
righteousness of
its position.
In 1887 Mr.
Hackett succeed-
ed Sir Thomas
Cockburn - Camp-
bell in the edi-
torial chair, and
since that time
the paper can be
said to have
been part of his
very existence.
To every move-
ment for the
advance of Wes-
tern Australia
the paper lent its
valuable aid, and
it became the
leading advocate
in the struggle
for responsible
government,
which was now
becoming acute.
Eventually this
was conceded,
and the success
of the movement
was due in no
small measure to
the powerful help of The West Australian newspaper.
Not content with its present success, the partners
made large sacrifices to increase the usefulness of the
paper, and out o-f the profits large and important addi-
tions were made in every department, and on July 1,
1891, it was produced as an eight-page paper contain-
ing forty-eight columns. Year by year it increased in
length and number, and its pages multiplied until it
has reached its present extensive form.
Side by side with the development of The West
Australian , The Western Mail has also increased, and
since 1897, when an illustration department was added
to the office, the weekly issue has gradually attained its
present phenomenal stage.
All matters of more important interest are repub-
lished in The Mail , and its weekly summary of events is
of incalculable value to the general reader. Besides the
regular weekly issue there is a special Christmas number,
containing upwards of 100 pages, profusely illustrated,
and distinguished by an artistic excellence that has
commanded the most flattering notices everywhere.
Mention has already been made of the offices in
which The West
Australian , un-
der different
names, has been
housed. Since
1870 it has occu-
pied buildings on
the site of its
present office.
From that year
up to the end of
1895—exactly a
quarter of a cen-
tury —the work
of editing, print-
ing, and publish-
ing the paper
was carried on
within the double
block of build-
ings standing on
the site of The
West Australian
Chambers. At
one time in its
history the whole
of the work ex-
cept the literary
portion was car-
ried on in one
room, about 14
ft. by 15 ft. As
the needs of the
paper increased
other rooms were taken in, until when Mr. Hackett joined
it five comparatively small rooms sufficed for its wants.
For the play of his expectations and prosecution of his
enterprise further room was needed, and, as already
shown, building alterations and additions were fre-
quently made for the use of the staff and the housing of
the machinery and plant. These, however, were always
recognized as being of a mere temporary character, and
years before the erection of the present building the
scheme was in contemplation, and the time was earnestly
looked for when the position of the colony would justify
the erection of buildings suitable for carrying on the
OFFICES OF THE WEST AUSTRALIAN NEWSPAPER COMPANY, LIMITED.


business of a large and important daily metropolitan
journal. It was not till the establishment of the eastern
goldfields as a recognized permanent industry, in 1894,
that the opportunity presented itself, and it was at once
seized by the proprietary. The preparation of the
designs was entrusted to Lieut.-Colonel J. Talbot Hobbs,
one of the leading architects of the city, and the closing
days of 1895 witnessed the demolition of the building in
which The II est Australian had been conducted for a
quarter of a century. Temporary offices were put up at
the rear of the new buildings, the erection of which
occupied nearly the whole of 1896, and on Boxing Day
of that year the conductors of the paper and their staff
took possession of their new offices in The West Aus-
tralian Chambers, the property of the owners of the
journal. Within this substantial and solid pile of build-
ings the business of The West Australian and Western
Mail is carried on, a business which is continually ex-
panding in every direction, necessitating the employment
of inside and outside staffs numerically equal to a large
Department of State. Those familiar with the old con-
ditions under which the work was conducted would
hardly, if at all, recognize that the same work, under
improved conditions of expansion and development, was
being carried on. Certainly, within the offices no visible
indications of the former conditions can be detected, if
the earlier issues of the journal be excepted. However,
a relic of the old days is carefully preserved in the form
of a small table which, in the earlier times of his editor-
ship, was used by the late Mr. Arthur Shenton.
For a long time the printing of the paper had
been performed on a simple “Columbian” hand-press,
but after the journal became the property of Mr. Harper
a small single Wharfedale, driven by steam, and, on the
occasions of a breakdown in the motive power, worked by
hand, was used. Shortly after the issue of The Western
Mail a double Wharf edale was erected. A complete
stereotyping plant and a Victory rotary machine were
introduced in 1895. In 1898, a rotary machine from
the well-known firm of Messrs. Foster & Sons, Preston,
was added; and in the following year a Cottrell machine,
especially designed for a half-tone block print and general
process work for The II estern Mail , was provided. In
this year, also, the linotype was introduced into the
printing department, to replace hand composition. A
further linotype machine was received in the year 1900,
while a three-decker Foster machine, which can print
three copies at once, arrived from Londen, to the order
cf the company the same year. This fine machine, which
was specially christened by the Mayor of Preston “King
Edward the V 11.,” at a ceremony held to bid it farewell,
was manufactured by Messrs. Foster & Sons.
The development of The West Australian and The
Western Mail since 1900 has been steady and continuous.
The most noteworthy improvements have been on the
structural and mechanical sides, and in these respects
both papers are now among the best equipped in Austral-
asia. The linotype room has been greatly enlarged.
Thirteen typesetting machines are installed, and the
floor space occupied by this department covers 3,800
superficial feet. The room is replete with every device
for the expeditious production of a modern daily news-
paper.
A new building of five floors, each measuring 40 by
30, has recently been completed, and with additions
to the old offices has, by adding about 10,000 feet of
floor space, more than doubled the accommodation pre-
viously provided. The lower floor of this new building
provides a magnificent machine-room, in which is located
a six-roll Foster machine wtih a capacity of 48,000
papers an hour, and a three-roll Foster capable of print-
ing an additional 24,000 copies an hour, space being
available for additional machinery as circumstances
demand.
Other portions of the new building are occupied by
an up-to-date stereotyping plant, machines for printing
the illustrated pages of The Western Mail , a carpenters’
shop, and a complete photo-process plant challenging
comparison with the best in the Commonwealth.
The staff of the two papers is a large and capable
one. The Hon. Sir J. W. Hackett, LL.D., continues to
act as Managing Director and Editor-in-Chief. Mr.
Alfred Dangler is the Assistant Manager and Associate
Editor. The departmental heads of The West Australian
are: —Mr. J. F. Donaldson, Chief Sub-Editor; Mr.
J. W. E. Archdeacon, day Sub-Editor; Mr. T. Hooson,
leader of the staff; Mr. H. C. Davies, Mining Editor;
and Mr. G. White, Sporting Editor. Mr. H. Human
is the Secretary of the Company, Mr. Pegg the printer,
Mr. B. Skull the head machinist, and Mr. Hodgson
chief stereotyper.
The Western Mail is edited by Mr. Alfred Carson.
Mr. Ben Strange supplies two pages of typical cartoons,
the process department is controlled by Mr. Warner, and
Mr. Stan way Tapp is the artist of the journal.
The Fremantle branch of the two papers is under the
management of Mr. C. Frost.
The West Australian contains never less than ten
pages, more often it consists of twelve, and on Satur-
days sixteen pages of nine columns.
The Western Mail now comprises 56 pages, of which
twelve are devoted to an illustrated section. The ‘Mutual
Help” pages, conducted in the interests of the farmers
and men on the land generally by Mr. W. Catton Grasby,
author of ‘‘The Principles of Australian Agriculture,”
are a prominent feature, and ensures for the paper a wide
popularity in the agricultural districts.
During the year 1912 death removed one of the
founders and proprietors of The West Australian and
The Western Mail , in the person of Mr. Charles Harper,


in whom the State has lost a most patriotic public man,
and one of its most enterprising sons. The Western Mail
also lost by death during the same year Mr. R.
Robertson, for twelve years its exceedingly capable
editor, and Mr. W. Smythe, who for about the same time
presided over its photo-process department.
Not a few members of the present staffs of The West
.1 ustralian and The Western Mail might be termed “long
service men.” The oldest servant of the Company is
Mr. Archdeacon, who joined the staff in 1883, and has
therefore been connected with it 29 years. Sir Winthrop
Hackett himself also first became associated with the
paper in 1883. Others long associated with The West
Australian are Mr. Langler, who joined it in 1895, Mr.
Carson in 1896, and Mr. Hooson later in the same year.
Mr. Harold Thompson, the present chief advertising
clerk, entered the commercial department in 1891, and
Mr. H. Harper, the cashier, joined the office in 1899.
On the mechanical side there are three very old servants
of the Company still in full work. These are Mr.
Mcßride, Mr. J. Maynard, and Mr. J. Healy, the latter
being one of the first apprentices to be indentured by
the proprietors. The late printer, Mr. Gibney, retired
last year on a liberal pension after 25 years’ service.
The fact that so many of the employes have been con-
nected for such lengthy periods with the office is a testi-
Sir JOHN WINTHROP HACK-
ETT, M.A., LL.D., M.L.C. The
liberty of the Press has always been
regarded by modern political writers
as a matter of supreme importance.
“Give me,” said Milton in the Areo-
pagiteca, “liberty to know, to utter,
and to argue freely according to con-
science, above all other liberties.
Fairness and impartiality have un-
doubtedly been the keystone of what
for want of a better phrase may be
described as the higher journalism
in Australia. The policy of The
Sydney Morning Herald, controlled
by Sir James Fairfax, and that of
The West Australian, of which Sir
Winthrop Hackett is the guiding
spirit, may best be quoted in favour
of this statement. “Australia has
good cause to pride itself on its news-
papers,” remarks John Foster Fraser.
“With town populations that are
small in comparison with those of the
great cities of Europe and America
it is little short of wonderful the way
in which first-class morning, even-
ing, and weekly illustrated papers
are turned out. They keep to the
British rather than follow the
American model. They do not
screech. They are dignified. This
is the one secret of their power.
With an experience of newspapers
all the world over I know of no place
where the Press exercises so strong
an influence. Newspapers have power
in London; but there have been
occasions when in politics the great-
est city in the world has pronounced
Bartletto, Perth.
S IR JOHN WINTHROP HACKETT.
a verdict different from the teachings
of the journals which own the largest
circulations. In both Britain and
mony to the excellent relations which subsist between
them and their employers, as well as a recognition of the
value of their services.
The West Australian has always been regarded as
a union office, and enjoys tlie distinction of having been
the first newspaper, and indeed the first employer of
labour in the State, to introduce the system of an eight
hours’ day among its employes.
The proprietary of the two journals was formed into
a limited liability company on July 1, 1900, under the
name of The West Australian Newspaper Company,
Limited.
In 1902 Mr. Hackett had conferred upon him, by
his “Alma Mater,” Trinity College, Dublin, the degree
of LL.D., and in 1911 he was created a knight, two
honours well deserved and well earned.
During his strenuous career as a journalist Sir
Winthrop Hackett has taken a deep and abiding interest
in all educational matters in his adopted State, being
unanimously appointed Chancellor of the Infant Univer-
sity of Western Australia. His labours on the Committee
and afterwards as President of the appointed Board of
Trustees of the Public Library, Art Gallery, and
Museum of Western Australia, are not the least incon-
siderable of his works for the betterment of the State of
Western Australia.
the United States there is a tendency
on the jiart of leading politicians to
ignore the influence of the Press.
Not so in Australia. Leading poli-
ticians, not once but many times,
told me that they would have been
unable to take a certain action had
they not had the support of certain
newspapers. Recognizing, therefore,
the strength of the Australian news-
papers, it was excellent to find that
the journals throughout the country
were animated by a fine sense of
responsibility. In all branches, from
careful and judicious reporting of
events up to the special leading
articles, a high tone prevails.” This
deliberate expression of opinion from
Mr. Fraser expresses not only the
position of the Press in Australia,
but is a good enunciation of the
ideals aimed at by Sir Winthrop
Hackett in the conduct of the lead-
ing organ of public opinion in Wes-
tern Australia. An Irishman by
birth, John Winthrop Hackett, the
son of the Rev. John W. Hackett, a
clergyman of the Church of Eng-
land, was educated at Trinity Col-
lege, Dublin, from which he gradu-
ated as an M.A. in the early seven-
ties. Called to the Irish Bar in 1874
he practised for a time in Dublin,
but soon decided to try his fortunes
in Australia. Landing first in Syd


ney, lie was admitted as a barrister,
but did not practise in New South
Wales for any length of time, as he
transferred his residence to Mel-
bourne, and from 1876 to 1882 occu-
pied the position of Sub-Warden of
Trinity College, Melbourne Univer-
sity. Having been called to the Vic-
torian Bar in the meantime, he
resigned his position at the College
in 1882 and unsuccessfully endeav-
oured to gain a seat in the Victorian
Legislative Assembly. At the close
of the year he proceeded to Wes-
tern Australia and at first entered
upon pastoral pursuits, but without
any encouraging results-;* In 1883 he
decided to steadily tlTfe pro-
fession of a journalist, and joined
Mr. Charles Harper in the ownership
of The llVs£ Australian , then only a
tri-weekly newspaper. At the same
time he was admitted a member of
the Western Australian Bar. Since
then Sir Winthrop Hackett has had
two objects always before him:
First, to make The West Australian
the chief newspaper and one of the
most powerful agencies in the State;
and, secondly, to work for all those
ideals of development, culture, and
recreation which represent so much
in the life of a nation. Both these
obiects he has achieved in a measure
u
rarely allowed to any one individual.
At the beginning of 1885 he had the
satisfaction of seeing The West Aus-
tralian enter upon a new phase as a
daily newspaper, and in 1887, on the
retirement of the then editor, Sir
Thomas Cockburn-Campbell, he suc-
ceeded to the position. Since that
time he has guided the destinies of
the paper, and has made it what he
hoped it would become: the most
powerful organ of public opinion in
the State, and worthy to rank with
its great contemporaries in the
Eastern States. To ever}?- movement
for the advancement of the State the
paper gave its aid, and everything
that made for progress and develop-
ment was approved and furthered.
In the discussion surrounding the
question of responsible government
it took a leading part, and there is
no doubt that the consistent advo-
cacy of (then) Mr. Hackett contri-
buted very largely to the success of
the movement. In the unparalleled
expansion of the State since that
time Sir Winthrop has adopted the
same bold and fearless attitude both
in the newspaper and as a public
citizen, and his name is stamped
indelibly upon the history of his
adopted country. Entering Parlia-
mentary life in 1890 as a nominated
member of the South-West province
in the new Legislative Council he
has without difficulty succeeded in
retaining that seat at every election
since held, being the only remaining
member of the first Legislative Coun-
cil under responsible government who
stilL’* occupies a seat in that
body. Though repeatedly declin-
ing Ministerial preferment he has
to no small extent been for the
past twenty years “the power behind
the throne.' ’ Wise and far-seeing
in the interests of the people, Sir
Winthrop Hackett set steadily before
him the establishment of all possible
means of education and recreation
on their behalf. The Public Library,
the Museum and Art Gallery, the
Zoological Gardens, the King's Park,
of all of which he is President, are
the result of his continuous and
whole-hearted advocacy, while the
State’s primary and technical edu-
cational system owes much of its suc-
cess to his support. For many years
also he has been a Governor of the
Perth High School, occupying for
part of that time the position of
Chairman. In the opening of the
wonderful caves of the State to
public view he took a leading part,
and was Chairman of the Caves
Board from the time of its inception
until it was merged into the Tourists’
Department. In Federal affairs he
was a member of the Convention of
1891 and also that of 1897-8, which
framed the Federal Constitution. In
1895, 1897, and 1899 he was a dele-
gate to the Federal Council of Aus-
tralasia. In Church matters Sir
Winthrop has always been most
active, and at present holds the
offices of Registrar of the Diocese
and Chancellor of the Cathedral at
Perth. In Masonic circles he is a
prominent figure, having been deeply
interested in the formation of the
Grand Lodge of Western Australia,
of which he was for three years
Grand Master. Amid all his strenu-
ous labours he has found time to
further the development of our min-
ing and agricultural industries, and
in regard to the latter has shown
practical faith by developing one of
the finest orchards in the State, and
by his successful endeavours to prove
that Western Australia may be made
a great fruit-growing country. Dur-
ing recent years Sir Winthrop has
deeply interested himself in the es-
tablishment of a University in the
State, and owing largely to his
efforts a Royal Commission to con-
sider the question was appointed in
1909. The favourable report of this
Commission led to the University
Act being passed early in 1911, thus
placing the coping-stone upon the
educational system of Western Aus-
tralia. When the first Senate under
the University Act was constituted in
February, 1912, Sir Winthrop was
appointed as one of its members, and
at the first meeting of the new body
was unanimously elected Chancellor
of the University. Since its in-
ception he has been Chairman of the
Karrakatta Cemetery Board ; in
fact, there is scarcely a phase
of public life or of public in-
terest in the whole of the State with
which his name is not connected.
Limitations of space make it impos-
sible to dilate upon his many excel-
lences, but of all her adopted sons
Sir Winthrop Hackett is one of
whom Western Australia may justly
feel proud. He was offered Knight-
hood by His Majesty the King in
1902, but deemed it wise to decline.
However, in 1911 on its being again
offered, he accepted it, public opin-
ion being unanimous in considering
that it was particularly well merited
and deserved. In 1902 the degree
of LL.D. was conferred upon him
by his Alma Mater, Trinity Col-
lege, Dublin. In 1905 Sir Winthrop
was married to Deborah Vernon,
daughter of Mr. F. S. Brockman,
of Guildford, Western Australia,
and has a family of three daughters
and a son.
“The Inquirer,” “The Daily News,” and “The Morning Herald.”
On August 5, 1840, The Inquirer newspaper was
first published under the editorship and management
of Mr. Edward Stirling, who had as partner Mr. Lochee,
a gentleman well known for his financial ability who
afterwards became cashier and eventually manager of
the Western Australian Bank. Mr. Stirling had had


considerable experience of journalism in the Colony,
having been connected with the first manuscript journal
and at least one other of the ephemeral publications.
A long and successful journalistic career followed,
and The Inquirer , which was published as a weekly
sheet at a cost of Is. per copy, afterwards to be reduced
to 6d., became known for its strict impartiality and
fairness of comment under the guiding control of Mr.
Stirling.
Eventually, after many years of hard but successful
work, Mr. Edward Stirling retired from the active
control, handing over the business to his four sons, John,
Frederick, Horace, and Lewis Stirling, with Mr. Horace
Stirling in the editorial chair.
Endowed with youth, energy, and ability, the new
proprietors determined to launch out into the unpre-
cedented venture, so far in Western Australia, of a daily
newspaper. To do this, financial assistance was neces-
sary, and they decided to approach their father's old
partner, who was now manager and controlling head of
the Western Australian Bank.
The* account of the interview with Mr. Lochee,
given by Mr. Llorace Stirling in reference to the publish-
ing of the Daily News , was told by that gentleman at a
dinner given by Mr. Lovekin to the staff, and is
abstracted from the "Twentieth Century Impressions of
Western Australia."
"In 1881, when the Colony had its first Exhibition,
they decided to purchase a cheap four-horse power
engine and embark on the venture of a daily paper.
They went to Mr. Lochee, and told him what they had
done, after they had indented for the engine. At that
time the paper owed nothing to the Bank, and the firm
was in a sound, solvent condition. Mr. Lochee was
told that, with the aid of the steam engine, it was pro-
posed to start a daily paper, and he replied that it was
a mad scheme. He said, ‘Your father and I started
The Inquirer in 1840, and it is quite good enough. You
young fellows are too fast.' Eventually Mr. Lochee
asked how much money would be required, and
was told that £I,OOO was necessary. Mr. Lochee
remarked that they would never get that amount in the
colony, but eventually agreed to let them have £IOO.
When they had drawn some £94 Mr. Lochee called on
them one afternoon and said, 1 told you you could have
£IOO, but that is not £lol.' "
Notwithstanding the many initial difficulties, the
partners had the pleasure of seeing their venture crowned
with success, and the paper, which mainly supported the
people in the struggle that was beginning for responsible
government, grew in popular favour.
In July, 1886, with the paper was incorporated The
Morning Herald , a paper which had hitherto been pub-
lished in Fremantle, and the same year Mr. Lovekin
joined the staff.
The paper now took a leading place in shaping the
policy of the country, and Mr. Stirling, imbued with the
advantages to be gained from responsible government,
resuscitated the movement, which was strongly opposed
at that time by the only morning paper published in the
colony —The West Australian —and a majority of the
Legislature. This paper, however, became afterwards a
devoted adherent to the people's cause.
The story of the struggle for responsible government
has been told in another place, and it is not necessary
to recount it again, sufficient to say that The Daily News
did yeoman service on behalf of the popular party, and
that in the face of, especially at the inception of the
struggle, strong and powerful opposition.
During the year 1888 gold was discovered at
Southern Cross, and Mr. Stirling, ever to the fore in all
that tended to gather news for his readers, sought by
means of carrier pigeons to establish a daily communi-
cation with that centre. Unfortunately, the prevalence
of birds of prey in the interior rendered this attempt
abortive.
The year 1889 in the history of the paper was
remarkable for a most peculiar libel action against the
paper. A letter had been received by the editor stating
that a Chinese hawker of vegetables was suffering from
leprosy, and that the scales which fell from his body on
to the vegetables he was vending were calculated to
spread the dreadful malady. In the usual course of
journalistic procedure the letter was published in good
faith, and immediately roused a storm and cry for ven-
geance on the part of the Chinese market gardeners
residing in South Perth.
The result was a libel action asking for the huge
damages of £5,000, and efforts were made to at once trace
the writer of the letter to substantiate his accusations.
It was generally accepted that a leper did exist, and for
fully twelve months continuous efforts were made to
discover where he was hidden.
These efforts were unsuccessful, until within five days
of the trial, when information was received of his prob-
able whereabouts, and Mr. Lovekin was instructed to
unearth him if possible. Starting from Perth, Mr.
Lovekin, Sergeant Claffey, and a Chinese interpreter took
train for Spencer's Brook, and next day took a trip across
country. While driving through the bush Mr. Lovekin
saw. some black object moving in a hole from which a
tree had fallen, and that the object was the head of a
man. A hideous sight was now presented. Here was the
leper, without doubt, and speaking to the writer very
recently Mr. Lovekin stated "that it was a sight of such
hideousness that so long as life should last he would never
forget it."
The police sergeant refused to take the man without
a medical certificate, and Mr. Stirling was communi-
cated with in Perth, and immediately Dr. Kenny was


dispatched to the scene, arriving only just in time, for
a party of Chinese were endeavouring to remove the
miserable object. The doctor’s examination revealed a
most revolting spectacle, and the man was taken in
charge and handed over to the Government, being
eventually deported to the leper hospital, Singapore,
at a cost of £4OO.
The result of the libel case was now a foregone con-
clusion, but the paper failed to reap the advantage of
the costs which the Court awarded.
However, The Daily News reaped the credit of hav-
ing saved the State from more than possible contamina-
tion, and well deserved the spontaneous outburst of
public approbation that followed the action.
After the proclamation of responsible government
the paper took no small part in shaping and leading
public opinion on all leading questions. The paper grew
in popularity, and in 1893 it was found necessary to
employ more modern machinery to cope with the in-
creased circulation. Mr. Alex. Forrest had become a
shareholder of the firm, and it was decided mainly on his
initiative to send Mr. Lovekin to England to procure a
modern and up-to-date plant.
On his return in the following year, Mr. Horace
Stirling retired from the business, and Mr. Lovekin was
appointed editor and managing director.
The change in the editorial department did not affect
the forward policy of the paper, for very soon we find
Mr. Lovekin suggesting to the board the opening for
a second morning paper in the State.
The directors agreed to the proposal, and as a result
Sir John Forrest, on January 1, 1896, printed the first
copy of The Morning Herald. The advent of The Morn-
ing Herald was directly responsible for a general all-
round improvement in the journalism of the colony.
Mr, Letcher, the secretary of the company, having
accepted the position of the company’s representative in
Adelaide, Mr. Lloyd, the manager of the paper at Fre-
mantle assumed his duties, Mr. P. W. H. Thiel taking
up the position vacated by Mr. Lloyd.
During the Federal issue The Morning Herald op-
posed the measure strongly, and had the wishes of the
paper been carried out Western Australia would have
entered the Federation in an infinitely stronger position
than was the case.
In September, 1900, Mr. Lovekin, who had been in
the company’s service for over fourteen years, retired
from the position of managing director, and at the same
time Mr. Alexander Forrest vacated his seat as chairman
of directors. At a dinner given to Mr. Lovekin on his
retirement that gentleman thus summed up the situa-
tion at that time very tersely :
“During the nine years I have taken an active part
in the management of this business we have expended
in machinery and plant and buildings, including the
linotype machines, no less a sum than £24,775 11s. 3d.
We have paid in interest £3,815 2s. 9d.; we have pur-
chased land, including the redemption of the mortgages,
to the extent of £3,952 75.; we have paid to Mr. E.
Stirling, by way of annuity, £912 10s. 10d.; and we have
spent upon these premises, £943 19s. lOd. —a total of
£34,399 11s. Bd. In addition to this, we have paid in
dividends £IO,BO0 —equal to £9 per share. We have
thus a grand total of profits, apart from the expenditure
on goodwill to which I have referred, amounting to
£45,199 11s. Bd., which would all have been available
for division among the shareholders had the capital,
which the company was supposed to have started with,
been actually paid up. Thus, during the nine years, in
addition to the payment of £IO,BOO in cash, the share-
holders have been relieved out of the profits of the pay-
ment of £30,000 on capital account. We have, in fact,
found the whole of the capital, and £9 per share as
well, out of the profits. With this result I myself am
thoroughly satisfied, and it has been achieved only by the
energy and efforts of the staff which the company has,
during the period I refer to, been fortunate to secure.”
The editorial chair, after the retirement of Mr. Love-
kin, was filled by Mr. W. F. Forster, who had been for
many years editor and part-proprietor of The Albany
Advertiser.
Mr. F. T. Crowder took the position of chairman of
the board, whilst Mr. Lloyd was appointed manager.
At the end of 1901 Mr. Lloyd resigned his position
to enter into partnership with P. W. H. Thiel & Co.,
and Mr. Steadman Glyde was appointed to the vacancy.
In June, 1901, The Inquirer , which was established
in 1840, and was the initial venture of Mr. Edward
Stirling and Mr. Lochee ceased publication, and was in-
corporated with The Daily News. The Inquirer through-
out had been issued as a weekly paper, and had acted
as a weekly issue to the daily publication of the firm.
In 1901 Mr. Colebatch was appointed assistant
editor, with Mr. Hilton as chief sub-editor, Mr. George
Arnold being appointed secretary to the company.
The affairs of the company under the new manage-
ment did not prosper, and eventually Messrs. Crowder
and Forster resigned their respective positions early in
1902. These resignations were followed by that of the
manager, Mr. Glyde. A new board of directors was
formed under the chairmanship of Mr. A. E. Morgans,
and at the express request of this gentleman Mr. Lovekin
resumed the management.
In May, 1902, a lease of The Daily News was granted
to Messrs. P. W. H. Thiel and Reginald Lloyd for five
years, the lessees being given the right to purchase the
goodwill of the paper at any time during the term.
During September, 1902, Mr. J. L. Nanson, M.L.A.,
who had been for some years associate-editor of The West
Australian , acquired a controlling interest in the com


pany, and on the 15th he succeeded Mr. A. E. Morgans
as chairman of directors. Having assisted Mr. Nanson
for some six weeks, Mr. Lovekin also resigned, but was
specially requested to act as adviser to the company for
the ensuing year.
In November, 1902, Mr. A. E. Morgans and Mr.
Lovekin joined Messrs. Thiel and Lloyd in The Daily
News , and subsequently Mr. Lloyd sold his interest to
the three partners.
On March 13, 1905, Mr. Nanson disposed of his
interest in The Morning Herald to Mr. J. Dreyer, as the
nominee of the Right Rev. Bishop Gibney, Roman
Catholic Bishop of Perth.
Mr. Dreyer at once took over the management of
the company, and assumed the chairmanship of the board
of directors.
On August 18, 1905, Mr. Dreyer resigned, and the
Rev. Father Keogh, Vicar-General, was appointed to suc-
ceed him. This gentleman resigned in December, 1908,
and Mr. L. O’Sullivan (Bishop Gibney’s private secre-
tary) succeeded him.
In December, 1908, Messrs. A. E. Morgans, A. Love-
kin, and P. W. IT. Thiel purchased the bishop’s interest
in the company for a nominal sum, but on investigation
it was found that the financial position was hopeless.
They, therefore, decided to place the affairs of the com-
pany in liquidation, and on January 20, 1909, The Morn-
ing Herald ceased publication, and has not since been
revived. Mr. A. Lovekin was appointed liquidator, with
the approval of the bank which held the whole of the
company’s securities.
Thus ended the career of a paper which during the
first twelve months of its career earned a profit of over
<£ll,ooo and paid, and continued to pay, regular monthly
dividends to the shareholders until 1901. Profits then
ceased to be made for some time, and following upon
this, beginning about the middle of the year 1905, losses
were shown for the first time. The debit balance
accumulated rapidly until the paper ceased publication.
The Daily News still continues as a sound financial
proposition, and is practically the only evening daily in
the metropolitan area.
“The Sunday Times” and “The Sun.”
The Sunday Times was originally started by the late
Mr. F. C. B. Vosper, and appeared in December, 1897.
The first issue was a small sheet of eight pages, six
columns each, and the growth of the paper has been
phenomenal, now consisting of one of thirty-two pages,
each of nine columns, or the largest paper in the British
Empire. Mr. Vosper floated the paper into a limited
liability company, but retained the controlling interest
up to the time of his death, after which his widow dis-
posed of it to Messrs. J. M. Smith and A. Read, pro-
prietors of The Kalgoorlie Sun .
The expansion now became phenomenal, and the
financial assistance of Mr. A. T. Saunders was obtained,
and it was eventually decided to purchase the fine block
of land in Forrest Street, on which up-to-date offices were
erected and a modern plant installed. These offices
were most satisfactorily erected by day labour, a lesson in
practical socialism which did credit to both labour and
capital. A 24-page rotary plant was installed in these
premises.
The company, however, only remained for a few
months in this building, both land and erections thereon
being resumed by the Government for railway purposes.
A block of land was then secured in Stirling Street,
and what is claimed to be the most complete set of offices
for newspaper purposes for their size erected, and an
entirely new plant was installed.
The paper is unique in the respect that it is the only
Sunday paper published in the metropolitan district.
It possesses an agricultural section, which at the pre-
sent time is of incalculable benefit, not only to well-
matured farming propositions, but also to the struggling
settler on the land. Its pages are renowned for their
freedom of criticism, and in this respect the paper can
lay claim to have fought more libel actions than any
other in the State. The policy of the paper is absolutely
independent of all political parties and sections, and its
fearless criticism in this respect is one of its most pre-
dominant features.
The editorial chair in the earlier stages of its career
was filled by Mr. Vosper, and the present occupant is
Mr. J. E. Webb, who joined the staff in 1903. During
one of the most strenuous portions of the career of the
paper the editorial chair was filled by the present
Attorney-General, Mr. Thomas Walker. Until recently
the agricultural editor was Mr. Pellatt, who did much to
increase the popularity of the publication amongst far-
mers. One of the most valuable members of the staff is
Mr. A. T. Chandler, whilst Mr. IT. B. Taylor is respon-
sible for the office control in regard to finance.
The Sun , a weekly newspaper published in Kal-
goorlie on Sundays, is strongly democratic in its prin-
ciples, and in its efforts to expose political abuses and
social and moral delinquencies has at times published some
very sensational articles. Its outspokenness has involved
it in several actions at law, notably what was known
as the “ice frauds,” but so far it has safely passed
through these legal ordeals.


The paper first saw light in September, 1898, when
Mr. W. H. A. O’Connor was editor and Mr. J. M. Smith
(the founder) manager. From March, 1899, to January,
1901, Mr. Hugh Mahon had charge of the editorial
department, resigning the post on his election to the
Federal House of Representatives, Mr. Andree Hay-
ward, a barrister-at-law, assuming the editorial reins.
The paper has now one of the largest circulations of any
weekly paper in the State. Mr. C. L. Morgan, late of
Truth, office, is now manager.
“The Kalgoorlie Miner.”
Of the two morning papers published in Western
Australia The Kalgoorlie Miner claims to be not second
to its Perth contemporary in circulation, influence, size
of paper, and volume of cablegrams, telegrams, and
general news. It is the only morning paper that circu-
lates amongst the mining community of some 70,000
persons, whilst in Perth and the agricultural districts it
1894 with but a single primitive hand-press for machi-
nery, quickly progresses until in September, 1895, the
office was able to turn out a daily — The Kalgoorlie
Miner, The hand-press was quickly cast on the one side
for elaborate machinery, and to-day, equipped with
almost a dozen linotypes, the machinery and stereotyping
departments are as up-to-date as any in the Southern
LINOTYPES AR WORK THE KALGOORLIE MINER” NEWSPAPER OFFICES.
has also a considerable circulation. Its history and the
history of its weekly parent and ally, The Western
Argus, is interwoven with the history of the eastern gold-
fields. Collections of tents and bag and hessian shanties
of the goldfields’ pioneers grew as the years went by into
the great cities of Kalgoorlie, Boulder City, Coolgardie,
Menzies, and Leonora, with their busy streets, their
electric trams, their beautiful parks, their magnificent
racecourses, their swimming baths, their excellent tele-
phone services, and all the other conveniences and
luxuries of civilization. And so in the same manner
The Western Argus, a small weekly starting as it did in
Hemisphere. The first issue of The Kalgoorlie Miner
was scarcely the size of an ordinary pockethandkerchief,
but to-day it compares not unfavourably with any of the
Australasian metropolitan journals, and is unquestion-
ably superior to any other inland paper in the Common-
wealth. It was in July, 1895, that Mr. S. E. Hocking.
O J
the chief proprietor, founder, and first editor of The
Kalgoorlie Miner, visited Kalgoorlie. He was then, with
his brothei, tlie late Mr. Percy S. Hocking, proprietor of
a Coolgardie daily, since defunct. After an inspection of
what is now known as “The Golden Mile” he was so
impressed with the great future of the place that he sold


the Coolgardie business, and with his brother he pur-
chased The II estern Argus, with such plant, goodwill,
etc., as it then possessed. Later the two brothers
launched The Kalgoorlie Miner on what proved to be its
most successful career. Early in 1896 they joined with
them in partnership Mr. J. W. Kirwan (now M.L.C.),
who became editor, and Mr. W. W. Willcock, who took
control of the mechanical department.
The views of The Kalgoorlie Miner have invariably
been expressed with great decisiveness and vigour, and it
has always been a consider-
able factor in the conduct of
the public affairs in the State.
It was the first paper to ad-
vocate the extension of the
railway to Kalgoorlie. It
was responsible for securing
the junction of the Menzies
line at Kalgoorlie instead of
Coolgardie, and thus Kal-
goorlie became the railway
as well as the geographical
centre of the eastern gold-
fields. In 1898 serious trouble
nearly arose on the goldfields
through the Government
issuing a regulation forbid-
ding alluvial miners to sink
to a greater depth than 10
ft. This naturally excited
the greatest indignation, es-
pecially amongst the large
numbers of alluvial miners
who were thus deprived of
their means of livelihood.
A digger might discover gold
at a depth of 10 ft., and then
if he obeyed the regulation
he would be forced to sur-
render the fruits of his toil
to others. This at once put
an end to the idea of deep
alluvial being worked in
the ordinary way. The Kal-
goorlie Miner pointed out
that the regulation was
ultra vires. It ridiculed the regulation and contended
that the diggers in continuing to work acted fully within
their legal rights. The 10 feet regulation was finally
annulled, though not before many of the diggers were
sent to gaol for ignoring it. At a later stage the
Supreme Court upheld the legality of the position taken
up by the diggers throughout the troubles.
Another question in which The Kalgoorlie Miner
bore a leading part was the struggle for the inclusion of
Western Australia in the Commonwealth. The
Enabling Bill providing for the submission of the Com-
monwealth Constitution to the votes of the people for
their acceptance or rejection was defeated in the Western
Australian Parliament, despite the presentation of a
petition signed by over 20,000 adult residents of the
colony asking that the question of federation be sub-
mitted to a referendum. Parliament was dissolved, and
there seemed no possible prospect of getting the Enabling
Bill passed in time for Western Australia to join the
Commonwealth as an original State. The prospects of the
Federalists of Western Aus-
tralia seemed dark indeed.
The Kalgoorlie Miner then
suggested that as the people
of the goldfields were practic-
ally unanimous in favour of
union, they should appeal to
Her Majesty Queen Victoria
to create the goldfields and
the Esperance district into a
separate colony with a view
to the latter’s entrance into
the Commonwealth. This
idea was elaborated in the
columns of The Kalgoorlie
Miner , and it was acted on
by the goldfields’ people with
enthusiasm. “Separation for
Federation” became the
watchword of the Reform
League, the organization
formed to secure that ideal.
Every goldfields’ public body
and goldfields’ public man
threw in their lot with the
movement. The petition to
Queen Victoria praying for
separation was signed by no
less than 28,000 adults. That
petition was backed up by
another petition from the
people of Albany asking to
be included in the proposed
new colony. Mr. Joseph
Chamberlain was then the
Secretary of State for the
Colonies, and as he was desirous of the inclusion of all
parts of Australia in the Commonwealth, he made it
plain in a despatch to the Western Australian Govern-
ment that if the Enabling Bill were not passed and the
people given the same opportunity as in the other
colonies of expressing their views on federation, he would
have to take the petition for separation into considera-
tion. The Forrest Government, in response to this hint,
immediately called Parliament together, and the
Enabling Bill was passed through all its stages almost
OFFICES OF "THE KALGOORLIE MINER” NEWSPAPER.


without opposition. In the federal referendum fight
that ensued The Kalgoorlie Miner powerfully urged the
acceptance of the Bill, with the result that it was carried
by an overwhelming majority throughout the colony—
the goldfields’ people were almost unanimous in its favour.
It would fill too much space to go into the details of
all the proposals that were put forward by The. Kalgoorlie
iner and adopted to the advantage of the country.
The paper has never been bound to any party. When
the Wilson Government was in power The Kalgoorlie
Mi ner condemned its administration and also many of
its legislative enactments, including its scheme of redis-
Mr. S. E. HOCKING, J.P., the
Managing Director of Hocking and
Co., Limited, was born at Nairne,
South Australia, on December 18,
1859. Educated privately and at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, he
joined the literary staff of The Adver-
tiser as a junior reporter on leaving
college, and after some eight years’
experience accepted an appointment
as mining reporter at Broken Hill
for the Sydney and Melbourne even-
ing papers. In 1894 he, in conjunc-
tion with a few others, established
The Goldfields Courier and The
Golden Age , of which he was the first
editor, in addition to being the re-
presentative on the eastern goldfields
for The Register , Melbourne Argus ,
and many other leading newspapers
of the Eastern States. His know-
ledge of mining induced him to make
tribution of seats, which it characterized as grossly unfair
to the Opposition. At the ensuing general elections the
Wilson Government was politically extinguished. The
Kalyoorlie Miner has ever been a strong opponent of
centralization, is extremely progressive in its views, and
a consistent champion of the mining industry. Messrs.
Hocking & Co. are still the proprietors, and the leading
members of the firm still take an active interest in the
business. Messrs. S. E. Hocking and W. W. Willcock
retain their old positions, whilst Mr. J. W. Kirwan is
editor-in-chief, with Mr. E. H. Irving, M.A. (Oxford),
as editor.
his home in Kalgoorlie in July, 1895,
where in conjunction with his
brother, the late Mr. P. S. Hocking,
he purchased The Western Argus ,
and in September, 1895, started and
edited The Kalgoorlie Miner , while
still retaining his position as almost
the only representative of the Eas-
tern States’ Press on the then little-
known goldfield. He was elected a
City Councillor in 1895, and after
serving his term retired owino- to the
pressure of business, but re-entered
the Council in 1907, and in 1909 was
elected Mayor of Kalgoorlie, holding
the position for two years. He has
twice visited the Old Country and
the Continent, and recently spent
some time in Egypt. Mr. W. W.
Willcock, another director, is associ-
ated with Mr. Hocking in the man-
agement of the company.
MR. S. E. HOCKING.
“THE SOUTHERN TIMES/’ BUNBURY.
The first issue of a newspaper in the South-Western
district was the result of the enterprise of a Mr. Ashwell,
who in January, 1888, published The Southern Adver-
tiser at Bunbury, which, however, had but a short exist-
ence, and became defunct in August of the same year.
The plant and effects were purchased by Mr. H. E.
Reading, and a new paper immediately started under the
name of The Southern Times , which is still in existence.
Later on the firm undertook the publication of The Collie
Miner , a bi-weekly paper mainly given over to the inci-
dents of life and news in that coal-producing district.
Both papers as seen at the present are excellent produc-
tions for small provincial centres.
“ THE BUNBURY HERALD.”
The first number of The. Bunbury Herald was issued
on September 28, 1892, being founded and edited by the
late Mr. S. J. Cusack. Issued first as a weekly sheet, it
is now issued tri-weekly, and is an excellent circulating
medium for the South-Western districts. The manage-
merit has from time to time changed hands, but the
success of the paper remains assured.
“ THE EASTERN DISTRICTS CHRONICLE/’
YORK.
The organ of the York district is The Eastern
Districts Chronicle , which journal was published for the
first time in 1873 as a weekly sheet, and as such has been
published ever since. Its founder was the late Mr. Ink-
pen, and it is still published by a descendant of the
founder in Mr. George Edwards Inkpen.
“THE ALBANY ADVERTISER.”
The first Albany newspaper was The Albany Banner,
printed some thirty years ago in Perth and circulated by
post. It belonged to Mr. Edmund Stirling, the founder
of The Perth Inquirer. It did not prove a success finan-
cially, although it was only crown folio in size. About
twenty years ago Mr. Ashwell, a New Zealander, estab-
lished The Albany Mail , a double-demy weekly. For
some years it was fairly successful. Mr. Ashwell sold his
interests to Mrs. Clark, his step-daughter, who became


editress, while her husband also aided in the literary work.
In 1888 Mr. W. F. Foster, a member of the
staff of The West Australian , established The Albany
Advertiser, a tri-weekly double demy. The basis of this
enterprise was that the Great Southern Railway had
opened up a large extent of good country, and gave easier
means of access to the capital, and this afforded a field for
the establishment of a newspaper. The construction of a
railway trebled the population of Albany. The Adver-
tiser, while giving special attention to local questions,
which at times were of an important character, owing
to the private ownership of the railway and the at-
tempts of the Government to take away the English mail
steamers, was generally democratic in its policy—
strongly favoured federation, and opposed the centraliza-
tion policy of the Forrest Government. When finally the
mail steamers were moved to Fremantle Mr. Forster
retired from the editorship of The Advertiser and
accepted the chair of the Perth Morning Herald, while
Mr. Arthur Catling succeeded him at Albany. The
paper is now published as a bi-weekly, and serves a large
district, yearly increasing in importance, and enjoys a
large circulation in its own immediate locality.
“ THE NORTHAM ADVERTISER."
With the impetus given to the trade of Northam,
consequent on the decision of the Government to make
that station the starting-point of the eastern goldfields
railway, there arrived in the town a large number of
persons bent on the establishment of businesses of one
description or another. Among others who foresaw possi-
bilities was Mr. J. T. Reilly, an experienced journalist,
to whom the opportunity afforded for the publication of
a local paper presented itself, and he accordingly
decided to issue a paper, to which he gave the title of
The Northam Advertiser. At first the paper was issued
as a modest weekly, but the large measure of support
accorded to the new journal speedily justified its being
issued in an enlarged form, and still later the paper was
issued as a bi-weekly. For some years the paper has been
owned and published by Mr. H. P. Colebatch, formerly
of The Morning Herald editorial staff, now a member of
the Legislative Council. The paper is one of the most
important in the provinces of Western Australia, and
serves many interests, both agricultural and industrial.
The paper has a rival in The Northam Courier, also
a bi-weekly issue, started late in 1909. This paper, which
has been subject to the “vicissitudes of fortune,” is now
published by Messrs. O’Connor, Campbell, & Dixon.
“ THE SOUTHERN CROSS TIMES."
This paper is not the pioneer journal of theYilgarn
goldfields, there being a previous issue entitled The
Southern Cross Miner, which is not at present in circula-
tion. The Southern Gross Times, however, is owned
locally and published bi-weekly.
“ THE EVENING STAR," BOULDER.
Boulder City owes the establishment of its first news-
paper to the enterprise of Mr. A. G. Hales, more famili-
arly known as “Smiler,” and now famous as a war cor-
respondent. Mr. Hales was running a paper called The
Review in Coolgardie, and financially the undertaking
was not too successful, so he removed the plant to Boulder
City, and there issued an afternoon daily called The
Miners' Right. Eventually Messrs. Osgood & Co., pro-
prietors of The Broad Arrow Standard, owing to the
decline of mining at Kurrawah, transferred their plant
to the Boulder and started The Evening Star , which
paper is still in existence, and grows both in popularity
and importance.
66 THE GERALDTON EXPRESS."
Geraldton is well represented in the matter of
journalism by The Express, and recent years have pro-
duced another publication —The Geraldton Guardian.
The Express was founded as far back as 1878 by Mr.
Isaac Walker, the first editor being Mr. Stephen Mon-
tague Stout, in his day a well-known journalist. The
paper is now a tri-weekly one and is conducted by Mr.
John M. Drew, M.L.C.
The Guardian has also a tri-weekly issue, being
published on alternate days to The Express. Thus
Geraldton is practically served by the daily issue of a
locally-printed paper, and the rising importance of the
port should assure the prosperity of the publication.
“ THE TRUTH."
Late in the year 1902 Mr. John Norton, proprietor
of the Sydney Truth , decided also to produce the paper
in Western Australia, and during January, 1903, the
first issue was received from the press. The paper has
been continuously published from the date mentioned,
and at present enjoys a wide circulation. Until recently
the editorial chair was occupied for some considerable
time by Mr. Morgan, who recently accepted a similar
position on The Sun newspaper at Kalgoorlie. The
present editor is Mr. P. Finn, who is not unfavourably
known to the Western Australian Press.
The '‘Statistical Register” gives the number of news-
papers in publication in Western Australia at the close
of the year 1911 as 77, so it will at once appear that to
give separate details in regard to them is obviously
impossible. These latter will receive fuller mention in
that portion of the work which treats in more detailed
form of the localities in which they are published.
Labour is specially represented by The Westralian
Worker, which was for some considerable time published
at Kalgoorlie. The paper, which is a weekly issue,
recently transferred its headquarters to Perth, with the
ultimate hope that it might form the genesis of a Labour
daily paper in the metropolis.


Consular.
The Consuls and Consular Agents in Western Aus-
tralia of foreign powers consist of the following :
America (United States of). —U. W. Burke, Con-
sular Agent, Fremantle.
Austria-Hungary.—Alfred Edward Morgans, Con-
sul, Perth and Fremantle.
Belgium.—G. F. Payne, Consul, Perth.
Chile.—John Harry Noble, Consul, Elder Buildings.
Perth.
Denmark. —R. Strelitz, R.a.D., Consul, Fremantle.
France.—D. G. Gawler, Consular Agent, Fremantle.
Germany. —Chevalier C. P. L. Ratazzi, Consul.
Mouatt Street, Fremantle; J. Fleischer, Acting-Consul,
Perth.
Greece.—Henry P. Downing, Vice-Consul, Perth.
Italy.—Cavaliere C. P. L. Ratazzi, Consular Agent,
Mouatt Street, Fremantle; E. Drake Brockman, Con-
sular Agent, Perth.
Japan.—Archie Male, Hon. Consul, Broome.
Netherlands.—P. Strelitz, Consul, Fremantle.
Norway. —Richard S. Haynes, K.C., Consul, Perth;
August Stang, Vice-Consul, Fremantle; A. Y. Hassell,
Vice-Consul, Albany; H. M. Beigel, Vice-Consul, Bun-
bury.
UDOLPHO WOLFE BURKE,
Consul for the United States of
America, was born in New York
City on February 21, 1866, and
until ten years of age was educated
at a private school in his native city.
His father, Mr. David H. Burke,
who had also held a consular posi-
tion, removed to Hamburg, Ger-
many, and the subject of this notice
was placed as a student at the High
School there, remaining for eight
years. At the age of nineteen he
left school and became associated
with the largest coffee-importing
house in Hamburg, and for the fol-
lowing year assisted in consular work
in that city, at the end of the time
returning to New York to join the
Alliance Insurance Association, with
which he remained for about two
years. Tiring of city life he went
out west to the States of Idaho and
Washington, where he embarked in
mining and land speculations, after-
wards migrating to Australia and
engaging in commercial business in
the Eastern States and New Zealand
for a year (1894-5). Mr. Burke
then decided to settle in Western
Australia, and arrived there in 1895,
Bartletto Perth.
MR. UDOLPHO WOLFE BURKE.
Paraguay (Republic of). —John Swift Pearson,
Consul.
Russia. —Peter Micheledes, Consul, Perth.
Sweden.—R. Strelitz, R.a.D., Consul, Fremantle
and Perth; S. J. Haynes, Vice-Consul, Albany.
Nothing in the way of association to protect their
mutual interests existed until within the past few
months, when it was decided to form a Consular Associa-
tion somewhat on the lines of that which has existed
for many years in South Australia. The basis of this
is to assist colleagues in sending away seamen, and to act
in conjunction in any matter of public interest. The
association is of a purely social and beneficial character,
and aims at enabling the Consuls to act conjointly with-
out any interference with the regulations of their
respective Governments under which they discharge their
duties. The functions of Consuls are at times onerous
and difficult, and not often give rise to delicate situa-
tions, and by association mutual action is often facilitated
and valuable assistance rendered. The secretary of the
newly-formed body in Western Australia is Mr. J. H.
Noble, the Consul for Chile, from whose energies, guided
by the advice and assistance of the doyen of Consuls in
the State, the Chevalier Ratazzi, much is expected.
entering into the American trade in
this State and representing the firm
of Mailler & Querean, of New York,
who have been in the Australian
trade since 1861. Previous to re-
ceiving his present appointment as
Consul for the United States he
acted on several occasions as con-
sular agent and took an active and
prominent part in the arrangements
connected with the visit of the
American fleet to Albany in 1908.
In 1898 he married a daughter of
Mr. George Kilminster, of Wool-
lahra, Sydney, the issue being two
daughters.
HENRY PERCY DOWNING,
Vice-Consul for Greece and senior
member of the firm of Downing and
Downing, Barristers and Solicitors,
St. George’s Terrace, Perth. The
subject of our notice was born at
Sydney, New South Wales, in 1873
and received his education at the
High School and at the Sydney


Grammar School. Subsequently he
studied law at the University of
Sydney, and in 1896 came to Wes-
tern Australia, where at Perth he
immediately commenced the practice
of his profession. He received the
appointment of Vice-Consul for
Greece in December, 1903. At the
general elections in April, 1901, Mr.
Downing sought a seat in the Legis-
lative Assembly and contested the
Guildford electorate against Sir
C. H. (then Mr.) Rason, but was
defeated by the small majority of
25 votes. He was for three years a
councillor of the South Perth
municipality and was also for a short
time Mayor of that suburb. In 1899
Mr. Downing wedded a daughter of
the Honourable Sir Edward Stone,
K. 8., Lieutenant-Governor of Wes-
tern Australia.
RICHARD SEPTIMUS
HAYNES, K.C., Consul for Nor-
way, 56, St. George’s Terrace,
Perth, was born at Picton, New
South Wales, in 1857. Pie received
his elementary education under the
tuition of his father, who was a
schoolmaster and a prominent man
in the Hunter district of the Mother
State, afterwards attending the
Sydney Grammar School. In 1873
he was articled to Messrs. Russell
and Plolden, solicitors, of Sydney,
and subsequently to Mr. A. W.
Simpson, of Armidale, New South
Wales. After being admitted to the
Bar he took control of the offices of
Messrs. Norton & Smith, solicitors,
of Sydney, and for five years prac-
tised on his own behalf in that city.
In 1885 he came to Western Aus-
tralia, and being very successful in
the first few cases he undertook soon
became one of the most notable
members of the profession in Perth.
Especially was he able to establish
a high standing in criminal practice,
where his quick wit, ingenuity, and
powers of pleading stood him in good
stead, and after being connected
with all the more prominent cases
since his arrival in the State, to-day
he leads in that class of practice.
Several years after his arrival in
Western Australia Mr. Haynes took
into partnership Mr. W. M. Purkiss,
formerly Crown Prosecutor in New
Zealand, and himself having taken
up civil work devotes the whole of
his time to practice at the Bar. As
early as 1886 he was elected a mem-
ber of the Perth City Council, and
in the same year was appointed the
MM
first Chairman under the Board of
Health Act for the Perth district.
He infused much life into this body
and drew up all its rules, but re-
signed in consequence of lack of
support from the police magistrate
in enforcing regulations. In 1891,
after two years’ retirement, he again
became a councillor for the city, and
served a term of three years, not
seeking re-election. He was the first
to advocate and initiate the forma-
tion of the Municipal Association
of Western Australia, and was
elected its first Chairman in 1894.
During his period of municipal ser-
vice he prepared the by-laws for the
regulation of the Council proceed-
ings and the subdivision of the
Council into Committees. He was
authorized by the Council to report
on the work of its officers, with the
result that a city engineer and ac-
countant were appointed, and he
was instrumental in introducing two
large loan bills which provided funds
for the construction of new streets.
On two occasions when he contested
the seat for West Perth in the
House of Assembly he was defeated
by very narrow majorities, but in
June, 1896, he was successful in be-
ing returned as member for the Cen-
tral province in the Legislative
Council. He was always a strong
advocate of responsible Government,
and was the founder of the Central
Reform League, of which he was
one of seven leaders. He is a sup-
porter of all forms of athletics and
acts as Vice-President to various
football and cricket clubs. In 1880
he married Marion, daughter of Mr.
A. J. Goodwin, of Sydney.
HERMANN McALLUM HEN-
NING was born on December 28,
1877, at Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia, and educated at St. Peter’s
College in that city. For two years
after leaving school he was with
Messrs. W. R. Cave & Co., merchants
and agents of Adelaide, and after
severing his connection with them
in December, 1895, he came to Wes-
tern Australia, being then only
eighteen years of age. On his arrival
in this State he received an appoint-
ment as general clerk in the office of
Mr. W. F. Sayer, the present
Solicitor-General, subsequently being
articled to the late Mr. (afterwards
Judge) Moorhead. He studied for
the Bar and was admitted as Bar-
rister and Solicitor on March 17,
1903, by the then Chief Justice, Sir
Edward Stone, on the application of
Sir Walter James. He practised at
Perth with the firm of Henning and
Co. for two years, and on his own
account for a similar period, but
finding the demand for his profes-
sional services increasing he entered
into partnership with Mr. E. Drake
Brockman in 1909. Mr. Henning
has great faith in the future of
Western Australia, being particu-
larly optimistic respecting the land
values of the State, and he has taken
up all the agricultural country that
Bartletto , Perth,
MR. HERMAN MCALLUM HENNING.
is allowed under the Land Act.
For three years he represented South
Perth in the local Council, and occu-
pied the mayoral chair for two terms,
but owing to pressure of private
business and consequent inability to
devote sufficient time to municipal
affairs he resigned, as he felt he
could not do justice to the position.
As solicitor to the Municipal Asso-
ciation of Western Australia he has
been responsible for much of the
improvement effected in Municipal
Acts during recent years. For some
considerable time he acted as Con-
sular Agent for Italy, but resigned
the office in 1912, Mr. E. Drake
Brockman being appointed in his
stead. He married in June, 1903,
Rita, daughter of the late Mr. John
Harvey, of Adelaide, South Aus-
tralia. Mr. Henning is a son of the
late Mr. R. W. E. Henning, of South
Australia, who was prominent in the
South Australian Parliament as
member for the district of Albert
for many years.


JOHN HARRY NOBLE, Consul
for Chile in Western Australia, is a
native of Nottingham, England.
After studying for the law he, de-
sirous of visiting the dominions be-
yond the seas, left England in the
year 1888 and went to South Africa,
but was induced to journey farther
on, and in the following year left
on a visit to Tasmania and New
Zealand. On arrival in the latter
place he was so impressed with the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN HARRY NOBLE.
country that he decided to remain
there a while, and after embarking
in mining and other pursuits, in
1891 received the appointment of
assistant to Mr. H. G. Wade, the
Government Property Tax Commis-
sioner, subsequently securing an ap-
pointment with the Kauri Timber
Company, Ltd., at its inception, but
resigned and enrolled himself as a
student at the Thames School of
Mines. Subsequently he success-
fully followed mining pursuits, and
for a time worked under Mr. "Long
Drive” Walker, the promoter of the
celebrated Waihi Mine. In 1893
Mr. Noble was privately retained to
conduct a series of experiments for
the extermination of rabbits in New
South Wales. He spent several
years in Victoria and started the
Shepparton Butter, Cheese, and Ice
Factory, Ltd. (at the time the
largest country butter factory in
Victoria), in conjunction with fol-
lowing agricultural pui suits. Migrat-
ing to Western Australia after the
sensational mining developments in
Coolgardie he secured appointment
as Secretary to the Western Aus-
tralian Stock Exchange. Mr. Noble
was for some time associated with
the office of Mr. A. E. Morgans, Ex-
Premier of Western Australia, and
organized and conducted the elec-
toral campaign for the Western Aus-
tralian Party, including the Right
Honoiirable Sir John Forrest, P.C.,
G.C.M.G., the Honourable Sir
E. H. Wittenoom, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C., Messrs. Clark -and Mills at
the Federal elections. He represents
as attorney many mining and other
interests, and is Secretary of the
Pastoralists’ Association of Western
Australia, in addition to many other
private companies.
GEORGE FREDERICK
PAYNE, Consul for Belgium, was
born at Sandhurst, Berkshire, Eng-
land, on February 17, 1862. When
only four years of age he was brought
out by his parents to Australia in
the sailing vessel "Racehorse,” arriv-
ing at Fremantle in 1866. In the
seaport town he was educated at the
Government school until fourteen
years of age, when he joined the firm
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE FREDERICK PAYNE.
of Messrs. W. D. Moore & Co., mer-
chants and shipping agents, of Fre-
mantle, as junior clerk, remaining
with them for about ten years, three
of which were spent in the Far Nor’-
West, where he gained valuable ex-
perience. Resigning his post with
this firm in 1886 he accepted a posi-
tion with the late Sir George Shen-
ton as manager of his Fremantle
business, and with him he remained
until the formation of Elder, Shen-
ton, & Co., Limited, merchants and
shipping agents, stock and station
agents. Mr. Payne became asso-
ciated with Mr. T. E. Field in the
control of the firm, the ramifications
of which extend to the most distant
parts of Western Australia. Some
years ago he was gazetted a Justice of
the Peace. In 1890 he was married
to Maude, a daughter of the late
Walter Easton, one of the early
viticultural experts of the State, and
has a son and two daughters.
JOHN SWIFT PEARSON, Con-
sul for Paraguay, was born on July
10, 1856, in Yorkshire, England,
and educated at St. Mary's College,
Hanover Park, London, E.C. At
the age of seventeen he left College
and entered the firm of Messrs, de
Bernales & Co., marine under-
writers, of Cornhill, London, re-
maining with them for about ten
years, when he decided to settle in
Australia. Accompanied by his
wife, whom he had married but a
few days previously, he set out for
the Antipodes in the sailing vessel
"Macduff,” and after an uneventful
voyage landed at Melbourne on Sep-
tember 19, 1883. His first appoint-
ment in the land of his adoption was
with the New Zealand Insurance
Company, and receiving rapid pro-
motion in this office he was before
long transferred to Adelaide as as-
sistant manager to the Company in
South Australia, which position he
held for five and a half years. In
1885 he relinquished his connection
with this Company in order to accept
the management in Western Aus-
tralia of the Sun Fire Office of Lon-
don, an appointment which he re-
tained until quite recently, when
owing to failing health he was com-
pelled to resign after twenty-six
years' faithful service. Mr. Pearson
was married in 1883 to Jennie, a
daughter of Mr. Charles James
Smith, of Brixton, London, S.W.
CARL PETER LUDWIG RAT-
AZZI, Consul for the German Em-
pire and Consular Agent for Italy,
Mouatt Street, Fremantle, and St.
George's Terrace, Perth. The subject
of our notice was born at Frankfurt -
on-Main on September 21, 1865, and
is a relation of the illustrious Prime
Minister of Italy Urbano Ratazzi
(born, 1810; died, 1873). Mr.
C. P. L. Ratazzi after finishing his
education at Frankfurt - on - Main


joined the firm of Henn Brothers,
wholesale merchants of his native
town. In 1886 he entered the
Frankfurt agency of Armour and
Co., Chicago, as confidential clerk.
Leaving Germany in 1889 he em-
barked for Sydney, and subsequent
to his arrival entered into business
with Carl Goedecker as import and
export merchants and agents. In
1892 Mr. Ratazzi proceeded on a
business tour to New York, and
while in this important city he mar-
ried Miss Kath. Sulzmann. From
New York he toured Great Britain
and the Continent and devoted con-
siderable time to the numerous
manufacturing centres, coming back
to Australia in 1893. Shortly after
his return Mr. Ratazzi dissolved the
existing partnership and joined the
well-known firm of Weber, Leh-
mann, & Co., of Sydney and Mel-
bourne, with whom he remained till
1900, when, having been offered the
Western Australian agency for the
Imperial German mail line (Nord-
deutscher Lloyd) he severed his con-
nection with Weber, Lohmann, and
Co. and established himself in Fre-
mantle, Western Australia, in Octo-
ber, 1900, in partnership with Mr.
Otto Llirraan, of Bremen, the latter
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CARL PETER LUDWING RATAZZI.
gentleman retiring after two years,
and the business has since been car-
ried on solely by Mr. Ratazzi. In
1905 Mr. Ratazzi was appointed a
Justice of the Peace by the Western
Australian Government, and in
mm 2
recognition of valuable services ren-
dered as Italian Consul His Majesty
the King of Italy conferred on him
the Knight Cross of the Order of
the Crown in 1907, and was pro-
moted to the higher degree of
Knight Officer in 1910. In 1901 he
founded at Fremantle the first Ger-
man Club (Deutscher Verein). His
eldest daughter, Maria, and son
Carlo received their education on
the Continent, where they spent in
all six years. The private address
is 115, Victoria Road, Fremantle.
AUGUST STANG, Vice-Consul
for Norway at Fremantle, Western
Australia, is a son of the late Judge
August Stang, of Arendal, Norway,
where he was born on August 4,
1870. His educational training was
conducted at a private college at
Christiana, which he left at the age
of sixteen to enter upon commercial
pursuits. A couple of years later,
in 1888, he sailed for Australia, and
arrived in Melbourne about the
middle of that year, his subsequent
experiences in that city being gained
chiefly among the stock-broking sec-
tion of the community. In 1892,
when the Western State was spring-
ing into prominence by reason of the
phenomenal gold discoveries in its
eastern districts, he followed the
stream of emigration from the older
States, and settling in Perth joined
the Civil Service in the Postal De-
partment. Steady promotion has
attended his years of connection with
this branch, and at the present time
he occupies the position of Officer-
in-Charge of the Cheque Branch of
the Department. In 1910 the
Federal Ministry permitted him to
accept from the Norwegian Govern-
ment the position of Vice-Consul for
Norway at Fremantle, and he de-
votes a great deal of attention to the
responsibilities involved in this office.
He has deeply at heart the possibili-
ties of improvement in the mutual
trade between the country of his
adoption and his native land, and
his efforts are unceasing to bring
about a closer relationship between
the producing and commercial firms
of this State and of Norway. The
shipping trade between the two
countries appears to him capable of
considerable expansion, and he also
is ever on the alert to promote the
interests of his fellow-countrymen
who come to the State, his efforts
in settling such on the land having
met with gratifying success. He is
of opinion that it would be of benefit
to this country if a portion of the
annual stream of agricultural
emigrants from Norway to America
could be directed to Western Aus-
tralia. He is a representative of the
Society for the Promotion of Immi-
gration, which has its headquarters
in the Mother State. Mr. Stang is
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. AUGUST STANG.
a member of many years’ standing
in the fraternity of Freemasons. He
finds recreation in gardening pur-
suits at his residence in Subiaco
and during the summer months in
occasional boating trips on the Swan
River. In 1906 he married Ada,
daughter of the late Mr. John
Bailye, of Kent, England, and has
a son and a daughter.
PAUL STRELITZ, Consul for
the Netherlands, senior partner in
the firm of Strelitz Brothers, Fre-
mantle (referred to in the commer-
cial section of this work), is a native
of Hamburg, Germany, in which
town he was born on July 30, 1867.
At the completion of his education
acquired at Hamburg College, in the
city of his birth, he entered the office
of Mr. R. J. Robertson, one of the
largest ore-buyers in the Fatherland,
and there gained his first insight
into commercial life. He served in
the German army for twelve months
and then took passage for Australia,
landing at Melbourne in 1886. Join-
ing the firm of Messrs. Baker and
Rouse, photographic suppliers, he
subsequently received transfer to
Adelaide, where he managed the


business of the firm for five years.
He returned to Melbourne in 1893
to assume the management of the
firm in that State, but in the follow-
ing year resigned his position and,
attracted by the glowing reports of
the gold discoveries, set out for the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PAU; STRELITZ.
Golden West. Once in Western
Australia he was joined by his
brother Richard, the outcome being
the establishment of the present firm
of Strelitz Brothers. On August 23,
1904, Mr. Paul Strelitz was selected
for the consulship of Western Aus-
tralia by the Netherlands Govern-
ment, an appointment confirmed by
the British authorities some months
later. A lover of all outdoor sports,
rowing in particular arouses his
keenest enthusiasm, and he has taken
part in many amateur events both
in Adelaide and Melbourne with
considerable success, as the numerous
trophies now gracing his home bear
witness. For eight years he has been
President of the Fremantle Rowing
Club, is a Vice-President of the Chil-
dren’s Hospital, and is ever
prominently to the fore in all move-
ments having for their purpose the
raising of funds for charitable ob-
jects. His beautiful home at Mount
Street, Perth, with its delightful
surrounding gardens, is frequently
placed at the disposal of the charit-
able institutions for the purpose of
raising funds to carry on the good
work.
RICHARD STRELITZ, Consul
for Sweden and Denmark and part-
ner in the firm of Strelitz Brothers,
was born at Hamburg, Germany, on
July 23, 1872, and, like his brother
Paul, received his education at the
Hamburg College. On reaching his
sixteenth year he was given a post
in a shipping office, where he re-
mained for three years, and then
emigrated to Victoria, settling in
Melbourne in 1892. Here he became
associated with the well-known firm
of Messrs. Lange & Thoneman,
wholesale merchants, and after six
months’ service was transferred to
the management of the firm’s branch
in Western Australia. In 1894 he
severed his connection with Messrs.
Lange & Thoneman, and with his
brother commenced in business at
Fremantle. Mr. Richard Strelitz
was appointed Consul for Denmark
in 1897, and six years later became
Acting-Consul for Sweden, the fol-
lowing year being gazetted to the
consulship. In 1904 he had con-
ferred upon him by King Christian
of Denmark the order of Knighthood
of Dannebrog, having first obtained
private permission to accept the dis-
tinction from King Edward VII.
personally. He was further honoured
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. RICHARD STRELITZ.
in 1912, when the King of Sweden
bestowed upon him the Knighthood
of the Vasa Order. Mr. Strelitz
visited Stockholm, where he was
personally decorated, and was also
entertained at a banquet by the
Academy of Science. Lie is a noted
motorist, and in 1907 drove his car
through England, Scotland, and
Europe, covering in all a distance of
over 11,000 miles. Mr. Strelitz was
wedded at Perth and has five chil-
dren. His private address is View
Street, Peppermint Grove, Cottlesloe.


Medical.
When the settlement upon the Swan River was first
established, provision for medical assistance was made
by the appointment of a Colonial Surgeon (Mr. Charles
Simmons). Mr. Simmons held the position for some
years before a successor was appointed. The office con-
tinued in existence until after responsible government
was conferred upon the colony.
There being no University in the State to confer
degrees or diplomas in medicine and surgery, the prac-
tice of the profession is governed by the Medical Act.
Under this the Governor-in-Council may appoint or
remove a Medical Board, consisting of not fewer than three
nor more than seven members of the medical profession,
to whom persons desirous of being registered must sub-
mit their degrees, diplomas, certificates, or other proofs.
The board on due proof of qualification, skill, and ability
to practise medicine or surgery, and also that the appli-
cant is a jDerson of good fame and character, may register
such in the Medical Register. Every registered prac-
titioner is entitled to receive from the Registrar of the
Medical Board a certificate of his registration. The
Medical Register of the State must be annually published
MICHAEB O'CONNOR, 8.A.,
M.D., B.Ch., 8.A.0., was born at
Newcastle on December 9, 1865.
After a preliminary course of educa-
tion under private tuition in the place
of his birth he proceeded to Ireland,
where he was sent to the College of
Jesuits in County Kildare, and sub-
entered as a student at
Trinity College, Dublin. It was in
connection with this famous institu-
tion that Dr. O'Connor received his
medical training, and, having first
obtained his Bachelor's Degree in the
Faculty of Arts, in 1889 was
awarded the diplomas of Bachelor of
Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
A year later he returned to Western
Australia and, after twelve months
of travel in different parts of the
State, at the end of 1891 he settled
down to the practice of his profes-
sion in the capital. Shortly after-
wards an outbreak of smallpox,
caused by the landing at Perth of
an infected passenger from one of the
Nor’-West boats, led to his appoint-
ment as health officer, Dr. Scott who
at that time occupied the position
being prostrated by illness. Th©
efficient manner in which Dr.
O Connor grappled with the situa-
tion earned for him the highest
respect and gratitude of the com-
munity and placed his professional
reputation above criticism. Since
that period he has been responsible
for many schemes having as their
object the health of the public, and
he is an uncompromising enemy to
unsanitary conditions. For fourteen
years he carried out the duties of
health officer for the Metropolitan
district, resigning the appointment
in 1907, and during that period he
filled the post of senior physician to
the Perth Public Hospital, also
occupying a seat upon the Board.
In addition to these offices h© also
acted as superintendent and
physician to the Victoria Hospital
at Subiaco, and at the present time
he holds the position of consulting
physician to the Perth Hospital.
Dr. O’Connor is Chairman of Direc-
tors of the Emu Brewery, Limited,
and the Stanley Brewing Company,
Limited. At on© period lie was con-
nected with the Legislative body,
having been returned by the electors
in the Government Gazette in the month of January.
No person other than a registered medical practitioner
is allowed to practise medicine or surgery, or to profess
to be a medical practitioner, or to pretend that he is
qualified to so practise. The fee for registration is illo
10s., and for reinstatement on the register the board may
charge <£2 2s. Additional qualifications are each charged
ss. for registration. Only persons holding British (also
those holding the registration certificate of the General
Medical Council of Great Britain), Australian, Tas-
manian, or New Zealand qualifications can be registered.
A fee of two shillings and sixpence is charged for
inspecting the Register.
The Medical Board established under the Act con-
sists of : —President, T. H. Lovegrove, M.R.C.S. (Eng.) ;
H. T. Kelsall, M.D. (Bond.), L.R.C.P. (Bond.),
M.R.C.S. (Eng.); J. W. Hope, F.R.C.P. (Edin.), B.S.A.
(Bond.), D.P.H., R.C.P., and S. (IreB); W. Trethowan,
M. 8., M.S.; J. S. Hicks, M.D. (Bond.); A. J. H. Saw,
M.D., B.S. (Cantab.), F.R.C.S. (Edin.); T. B. Ander-
son, M.B. (Melb.); Registrar, Wm. Stephens, Trinity
Chambers, 70, St. George's Terrace, Perth.
of the old Moore district as their
representative in the State Parlia-
ment, which seat he held for three
years. In earlier days he was a
prominent cricketer and polo player
in Western Australia, and was Cap-
tain o i the Perth Polo Club. Bat-
terly he has turned his attention to
the ancient game of golf as a means
of healthful and pleasurable diver-
sion and exercise. Dr. O'Connor
married in 1896 a daughter of
Colonel Forbes, of Northam, and has
a son.
SAMUEL MACAULAY, J.P.,
L.R.C.P. (Edin.), L.F.P.S.G., and
L.M., Perth and Cottesloe, is a son
of the late Mr. John Macaulay,
M.D., of Newcastle-on-Tyne, who
died at Tynemouth, England, in
1902. Born at Barrhead, Renfrew-
shire, Scotland, on June 21, 1856,
the gentleman under review received
his early education at the Royal
Grammar School at Newcastle-on-
Tyne, subsequently attending a
private school conducted by Mr.


Marchbank in the same city. He
entered the Glasgow University in
the winter session of 1875-6 and dur-
ing his medical course took class
honours in practical anatomy and in
surgery. Having duly qualified for
his profession in January, 1880, he
began practice as Assistant Surgeon
at the Newcastle-on-Tyne Dis-
pensary, where he gained a good
practical knowledge, and eventually
established himself on his own ac-
count in the suburb of Jesmond in
that city, where his father was al-
ready in practice. For eighteen
years he practised successfully in this
centre, and during the course of
time found his duties increase to
such an extent that he was obliged
to take a partner. Notwithstanding
this assistance his health at length
broke down through overwork, and
he resolved to try a change of
climate. In June, 1898, Dr.
Macaulay arrived in Western Aus-
tralia and commenced practice at
Perth and Cottesloe for a time as a
general practitioner, ultimately de-
ciding to specialize in diseases of the
ear, nose, and throat. He had pre-
viously gained great experience in
these diseases in England, having
been surgeon to the Throat and Ear
Hospital of Newcastle-on-Tyne for
eighteen years, this institution being
the only one of its kind for the four
northern counties of England, and
upon leaving for Australia was ap-
pointed honorary consulting surgeon
and presented with an illuminated
address in recognition of his services
to the Hospital. He was also
Honorary Surgeon to the Northern
Counties Institution for the Deaf
and Dumb for many years. Since
coming to Western Australia he has
held the position of honorary sur-
geon for throat and ear diseases in
the Perth Hospital, which he re-
signed on the occasion of his taking
a trip to England. A similar post
in connection with the Children’s
Hospital he was obliged to give up
on account of the pressure of his
private practice. For seven years he
was a member of the Medical Board
of Western Australia. He is
honorary surgeon to the Deaf and
Dumb Institution of Western Aus-
tralia and to the Convalescent Home.
While practising in England in 1893
Dr. Macaulay was appointed
Honorary Secretary to the Section
of Otology in connection with the
B.M.A. annual meeting held at
Newcastle-on-Tyne. He received
his commission of Justice of the
Peace for the Perth magisterial dis-
trict in 1910. Dr. Macaulay has
always been connected with the
Presbyterian Church, in the ad-
vancement of which he takes a deep
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. SAMUEL MACAULAY.
interest. He is at present an elder
of the Church in Western Australia,
having previously held this office in
England for about sixteen years.
He has held the position of Presi-
dent of the Perth Y.M.C.A. since
its inception in Western Australia
in 1907 and is a stanch supporter
of all that tends to the uplifting of
the community in his adopted State.
In 1881 he married Margaret Mor-
rison, daughter of the late Mr.
Robert Wilson, of “Donard View/'
Annaclone, Banbridge, County
Down, Ireland, and has three daugh-
ters and a son, who is a minister of
the Presbyterian Church at Elstern-
wick, Victoria.
ARTHUR RICHARD HAYNES,
M. 8., Ch.M., of Hay Street, Perth,
was born at Gunnedah, New South
Wales, in 1887, and was educated
first at the Christian Brothers’ Col-
lege, Perth, and afterwards at the
University of Sydney, of which he
is a graduate. In November, 1910,
he succeeded to the practice on the
death of his father, Dr. E. J. A.
Haynes, who for nearly twenty }ears
had been one of the leading surgeons
of Western Australia and a promi-
nent and popular citizen of Perth.
The possessor of high medical and
surgical degrees and a skilful capa-
city at his work, the late Dr. Haynes
made his impress on the professional
life of the State, and by bringing
his knowledge to bear on public
affairs played no little part in many
matters relating to the health and
well-being of the community. For
several years he was a member of the
Perth City Council and was also at
one time a prominent figure in mili-
tary circles. He took the lead in
advocating the training of midwifery
nurses and established at his own ex-
pense a training home for the pur-
pose. In these and many other direc-
tions, particularly in his readiness at
all times to help the poor and needy,
Dr. Haynes will long be remembered
in this State.


Dental.
The Dental Board which controls the registration of
dentists in the State, and also so far as the Act permits
exercises jurisdiction over the conduct of members on
the register, consists of Dr. F. M. Wilkinson (President),
with Dr. R. C. Merry weather and Dr. J. E. Ramsay
representing the medical profession, and Dr. J. A. C.
Wilson and Mr. S. D. Eden representing the practising
dentists. Mr. F. M. Syme is the Registrar.
The board is elected by the profession in the terms
of the Dental Act, and by virtue of the provisions of
that Act regulates the various matters referring to
dentistry in this State.
The board is empowered to make rules:
(a) For fixing the time and regulating the elec-
tion of members of the board.
(h) For the examination of persons claiming to
be registered as dentists, and for determining
the qualifications to be held and the evidence
to be produced by any such persons.
(c) For requiring and regulating the registration
of all articles of apprenticeship under which
apprentices or students to dentists are now or
may hereafter be serving.
(d) For regulating the meetings and proceedings
of the board and the conduct of their business.
(e) For generally carrying into effect the objects
of this Act.
The board may impose and provide for the recovery
of fines and penalties from any person or persons subject
thereto, and prescribe a scale of fees to be charged in
respect of any proceeding or registration under the Act
or the rules.
The fees are as follows : —Annual license fee, <£2 25.;
fee for registration as a dentist, £lO 10s.; examination
fee, £6 65.; for registration of articles of apprenticeship,
£1 Is.
There are sixty dentists upon the Register and
thirteen registered dental students.
In addition to the official body there is a society
called the Odontological Society of Western Australia,
the members of which are subject to the rules of the
National Dental Association, a body formed from all
the ethical dental societies in Australasia. Under the
auspices of this association dental congresses are held
regularly, and at the one held some months ago rules
ALEXANDER JAMES
WRIGHT LD S Royal College of
Surgeons Edinburgh Fellow of the
American Academy of Dental
Science, etc., etc., 76, William
Street, Perth, is a son of the late
Mr. Alexander Wright, of Beathe,
Scotland, one of the first dental prac-
for the conduct of members were framed, but have not
yet been published.
The desire of the society in Western Australia is to
prevent unprofessional conduct and maintain as high a
status as the law of the State allows. It meets monthly
—papers are read and discussed, incidents of practice
reported, and our various failures or successes brought
before the meeting, the interchange of ideas being of
great benefit to all.
The work outside done by the society commenced a
couple of years ago, when 1,750 children were examined
at James Street School. Proper charts of all mouths
were recorded, one being sent to the parent of the child,
the Principal Medical Officer (Dr. Hope) received one,
and one was retained by the society. The society has
since been treating all indigent children at the school, as
well as the Swan Boys' Orphanage and Girls' Orphanage,
free, the members devoting two hours of their time daily
to this work. A great deal remains to be done in con-
nection with charitable institutions, which probably the
society will take in hand.
The children receive attention in all branches of the
profession, special efforts being made to save teeth by
filling and impressing on them the benefits of dental
hygiene, which, as far as they are concerned, means the
use of the toothbrush; the mouths, generally speaking,
are filthy and full of decayed teeth.
The work of the society at the present time is being
conducted at Janies Street, but permanent and well-
fitted rooms will shortly be available at the new medical
offices in Murray Street.
The question of how it has come to pass that the
dental profession has made such a remarkable advance
of recent years has often been discussed. One suggestion
has been that the teeth of civilized people are now more
liable to decay than they formerly were, but it is much
more likely that the reasons are to be found in the in-
creased skill of the operators, the use of anaesthetics, and
a general feeling on the part of the public that pre-
vention by care and attention is far preferable to ex-
traction in the last stages of decay.
From the number of practising dentists in the State
it may be seen that the prevention and cure of what
Robert Burns described as the ' hell o' a’ diseases” re-
quires considerable skill and ability.
titioners in Australia, who arrived in
Victoria in 1847 and took part in the
famous Eureka Stockade riot, being
slightly wounded in that memorable


fray. The gentleman under review
was born at Bendigo, Victoria, on
October 7, 1866, and received his
early education at Ballarat. Having
finished his schooling, Dr. Wright
commenced his dental training under
his father and Dr. Bomford, of
Beaconsfield, Tasmania, under whose
tuition he obtained an excellent
Bartletto , Perth.
DR. ALEXANDER JAMES WRIGHT.
knowledge of the principles and prac-
tices of dentistry. After practising
for five years in Tasmania Dr.
Wright left for Western Australia
and became registered as a dentist
of that State at the jjassing of the
Dental Act of 1894. He played a
leading part in the legislation that
led up to the passing of this Act, and
was for many years a member of the
Dental Board of Western Australia,
for three years occupying the presi-
dential chair. He filled the post of
honorary dental surgeon to the
Colonial Hospital for a lengthy
period, and on the foundation of the
Children’s Hospital was appointed to
a like position in that institution.
He also took some part in public life,
retaining his seat for four years at
the municipal table at Claremont,
where he acted as Chairman of the
Health Committee. In the year
1906 Dr. Wright, leaving a locum
tenens in charge of his practice, pro-
ceeded to Edinburgh, where he ob-
tained the dental degree of the Royal
College of Surgeons, and, at the same
time, having gone through the
course, secured a certificate of com-
petency in the use of anaesthetics
from the same University. Dr.
Wright was then made a member of
the British Dental Association after
having been registered by the
General Medical Council as a dentist
of Great Britain. Deciding to take
further degrees he sailed for
America, where he entered the Har-
vard University and took the degree
of Doctor of Dental Medicine, and
while there was made corresponding
secretary to the Alumni of the Uni-
versity, and in the same year was
elected a member of the School of
Dental Hygiene in the Council of
America. At the request of some of
the professors of the University he
gave a demonstration at the James-
town Dental Congress held in Vir-
ginia in 1907, and had the great dis-
tinction of being made Vice-Presi-
dent of the Congress. In 1908 the
Fellowship of the American Academy
of Dental Science was conferred
upon him, this being the highest
honour in American dentistry. At
Chicago Dr. Wright entered the Na-
tional Medical University and sat
for the examination of Doctor of
Dental Surgery, which degree he ob-
tained the same year. Returning to
Western Australia, he was elected
President of the Western Australian
Dental Society, and at the Aus-
tralian Dental Congress in 1909 was
elected Hon. Vice-President, and
read a paper before this body on the
proper care of the teeth in relation
to the health of children. He fills
various offices in connection with the
Methodist Church, among them that
of superintendent of the Ord Street
Sunday-school. A Past Master of
the Masonic craft, his mother lodge
is the “Bonnie Doon.” Dr. Wright
takes his recreation in motoring, and
is a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Automobile Club. In 1890
he married Rosina, daughter of the
late Mr. Charles Walters, of Mait-
land, Tasmania, and has two sons
and a daughter.
JAMES ALEXANDER CAMP-
BELL WILSON, M.A.C.D.,
D.D.S., dentist, St. George's Ter-
race, Perth, is a son of the late Mr.
Thomas Wilson, merchant, of Mel-
bourne, Victoria, and was born at
Carlton, in that State, on October
13, 1879. Pie received his educa-
tion at New College, Box Hill, near
Melbourne, and matriculated in
1896 at the University of Mel-
bourne. In 1897 he was articled
for five years to Mr. E. W. L.
French, of Collins Street, and en-
tered the Australian College of Den-
tistry, upon the completion of his
course obtaining his M.A.C.D.
diploma in 1901. Subsequently he
passed the examination prescribed
by the Dental Board for registration
in Victoria and shortly afterwards
left for America, where he took the
final course in the Dental Depart-
ment of the University of Pennsyl-
vania, and graduated in 1903 with
the degree of D.D.S. Proceeding to
Great Britain he followed the prac-
tice of his profession while engaging
in further study in the methods of
English dentistry. In 1905 he re-
turned to Australia and filled the
position of locum tenens for Dr. A.
J. Wright during his absence
from Western Australia, and after-
wards continued his connection with
this gentleman for a time. In De-
cember, 1909, Dr. Wilson opened
his present surgery in St. George's
Terrace, Perth, where he has since
carried on professional practice on his
own account. He was Hon. Secretary
of the Western Australian Dental
Society in 1909-10 and Vice-Presi-
dent in 1910-11. Apart from his pro-
fession, his attention has been cen-
tred in the military defence move-
ment, and he holds His Majesty's
commission in the Ist Battalion of
the 11th Australian Infantry Regi-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. J. A. CAMPBELL WILSON.
ment. He received his provisional
appointment as 2nd Lieutenant on
March 17, 1908, which was con-
firmed some eight months later, and
was promoted to the rank of Lieu-
tenant on October 25, 1909. He
takes great delight in motoring and
is a warm supporter of all forms of
healthy outdoor sport. He is a


member of the Naval and Military
Club. In 1905 Dr. Wilson married
Agnes, daughter of the Late Mr.
William Rose, of Stockport, Eng-
land, and has two sons.
GRAFTON CAMERON DICK-
SON FORSTER, dental surgeon,
178, St. George's Terrace, Perth, is
a son of the late Mr. Charles
Cameron Forster, of Brunswick,
Victoria, a well-known chemist and
dentist of that town. He was born
at Moyston, in the same State, and
at the conclusion of his education at
the Stawell Grammar School became
associated in dentistry with Mr.
Donald McGregor, one of the lead-
ing pioneers in the profession in
Australia, whose career was especi-
ally marked by the number of
successful dentists who received
their training under his tuition.
After several years with this
gentleman Mr. Forster practised his
profession at 80, Collins Street,
Melbourne, with Mr. W. A. E.
Graham, and carried on in conjunc-
tion with this gentleman for some
time. In 1896 he came to Western
Australia and established himself
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. G. C. D. FORSTER.
in practice at his present address
where he has continued ever since.
He was appointed honorary dentist
to the Perth Public Hospital, being
the first to hold the honorary ap-
pointment ; was a member of the
Western Australian Dental Board,
and is a Past President of the
Western Australian Dental So-
ciety. In matters of charity he is
always to the fore and takes a deep
interest in the Blind Institute, of
which body he is a member of the
controlling council. The health of
the younger members of the com-
munity has engaged his attention,
and chiefly through his instru-
mentality the Girls' Guild Union
was formed in this State and has
been carried on on very progressive
lines, this organization being a
branch of the very important
similar institution for physical
culture established in Melbourne,
which has done so much for the girls
of Victoria. He is a member of the
Presbyterian Church, and for many
years has been a member of the
Board of Management of that
denomination, besides filling the
position of choir conductor of the
church at Maylands for many years.
A great lover of animals Mr.
Forster is the owner and breeder of
the champion deerhound and the
champion Borgois (Russian wolf-
hound) of the State. He is a Free-
mason of long standing and is a
member of the St. John Lodge,
No. 1, W.A.C. His recreation
consists chiefly of motoring and he
owns an Imperial 30 horse-power
car. Mr. Forster married Mary
Helen, daughter of the late Mr.
C. McDougall, J.P., of Brunswick,
Victoria, and has a son and a
daughter.
DAVID RODERIC DAVIES,
M.A.C.D., dental surgeon, 178, St.
George's Terrace, Perth, is a son of
Mr. D. M. Davies, of South Yarra,
Victoria, where he was born on
May 13, 1878. He pursued his
scholastic studies at the Church of
England Grammar School in Mel-
bourne, and when seventeen years of
age entered upon his training in
dentistry under the tuition of Drs.
O'Neil and Levien, to whom he
served articles for four years. He
was one of the original students of
the Australian College of Dentistry
and Melbourne Dental Hospital,
and having successfully passed his
final examination and taken his
degree of M.A.C.D., which was the
only diploma then granted by that
institution, he was appointed the
first demonstrator in prosthetic
dentistry in connection with the
college. Resigning this post in 1899
Mr. Davies came to Western Aus-
tralia, and shortly after arrival
joined issue with Mr. G. C. D.
Forster, who admitted him into
partnership in 1904. Mr. Davies
has been a member of the Dental
Board of Western Australia for
several years, and at the present
time occupies the position of Vice-
President of the Dental Society of
Bartletto, Perth,
MR. DAVID RODERIC DAVIES.
Western Australia. He has been
connected with the Masonic frater-
nity for a lengthy period, and holds
office as sitting master of the Unity
Lodge, No. 11, W.A.C. A cordial
supporter of all healthy outdoor
sport, he is particularly fond of
yachting and tennis, and in
aquatics has been the winner of
many of the most coveted trophies in
the State, including the cup pre-
sented by the late Governor, Sir
Frederick Bedford, in 1908-9. He
is Hon. Secretary of the King's
Park Tennis Club. In 1909 Mr.
Davies married Elizabeth, daughter
of Captain R. Laurie, Ex-M.L.C., of
Fremantle, and has a family of one
daughter.
SYDNEY DOUGLAS EDEN,
dental surgeon, 195, St. George's
Terrace, Perth, is a son of Mr. James
Eden, Government Engineer, of
Dunedin, New Zealand, and now of
Chatswood, New South Wales. He
was born at Christchurch, New Zea-
land, on December 7, 1879, and re-
ceived his scholastic training at the


Caversham, Kensington, Morning-
ton, and Otago Boys' High Schools,
subsequently taking his professional
diploma in the former city, where he
was an articled student to Mr. A. E.
Boot, of the firm of Boot & Hunter,
the leading dental surgeons of Dune-
din. He carried on practice for
about two years in his native
country, leaving the Dominion in
1900 to come to Western Australia,
and having satisfied himself that
there was a good opening in Perth
secured a surgery in a central posi-
tion on St. George's Terrace, and has
since built up a large practice. He
is a member of the Dental Board of
Western Australia and is one of the
original Committee of the Odontolo-
gical Society and the Government
Dental Hospital, which has accom-
plished so much good work for the
poor children of the State. Mr.
Eden is one of the live spirits of the
motoring community in Western
Australia and spends much of his
leisure time touring in his “F.N."
car. He is very fond of outdoor re-
creation generally, and besides being
Hon. Secretary of the Automobile
Club is a member of the South Perth
Golf Glub, a member of the Royal
Perth Yacht Club, and for years
took a very active interest in the
Western Australian Amateur Box-
ing Club. He was a foundation-
member of the last named institu-
tion, and also of the Western
Australian Amateur Sports Club,
and in the past has devoted a
good deal of attention to the
improvement of sporting matters
generally. He is a member of the
Perth Club.
MR. SYDNEY DOUGLAS EDEN.


Pharmaceutical.
The Pharmaceutical Society was founded in 1892 to
control the practice of pharmacy in Western Australia,
and was constituted under the Pharmacy and Poisons
Act, 1894, which with its amending Acts in 1899 and
1903 was recompiled and readjusted by the Pharmacy
and Poisons Act, 1910. The Council of the Society con-
sists of a President and six members, who are elected
every three years. The Governor may from time to time
remove the President or any member of the Council.
A register has to be kept of all persons certified by
the Council to be duly qualified pharmaceutical chemists,
and an alphabetical list must be published in the
Government Gazette every January giving the names
and residences of all chemists practising in the State.
Penalties are provided for practising without being
registered, and for a company carrying on business as
chemists without having a registered chemist in charge.
The functions of the Council consist of examination
and registration. Under the heading of examination is
included the duty of the Council to prescribe the neces-
sary educational course leading up to the examination for
certificates. The course includes practical pharmacy,
chemistry, botany, materia medica, and Latin, as well
as such other subjects as the Council may by regulation
prescribe. Lectures in some of the subjects are provided
at the technical schools. For registration the certificate
of competency gained by examination is sufficient; it is
also provided that "the diploma of competency as a
chemist of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
or Ireland is recognized, also the diploma of any Aus-
tralasian Pharmaceutical Society or Board established by
Act of Parliament; provided application is made in
accordance with the rules and regulations/'
The Pharmacy and Poisons Act also makes very
stringent provisions for regulating the sale of poisons.
Any person (unless duly licensed by the Council of the
Pharmaceutical Society) who sells any poison is liable to
a penalty not exceeding £5O or to imprisonment with or
without hard labour for not more than twelve months.
No licence is granted for the sale of poisons to any person
other than a pharmaceutical chemist, unless in places
more than five miles distant from the nearest place in
which a pharmaceutical chemist has an open shop.
Persons desirous of securing licences for the sale of
poisons are required to support their applications by a
certificate in the form of Schedule 7 of the Act, signed
by the Police or Resident Magistrate of the district where
the applicants reside, and signed also by a medical prac-
titioner practising therein. Lvery person licensed to sell
poisons must keep all poisons in a safe box, cupboaid,
drawer, or other place securely locked and fastened.
Any person, other than a pharmaceutical chemist,
who has any poison in his possession and leaves it in any
place (whether ordinarily accessible to others or not)
without a proper label with the word Poison" attached
is liable to a penalty of £2O or less.
It shall be unlawful to sell any poison, either by
wholesale or retail, unless the box, bottle, vessel, wrapper,
or cover in which such poison is contained be distinctly
labelled with the name of the article and the word
“Poison," and with the name and address of the seller
of the poison; and it shall be unlawful to sell any poison
to any person apparently under eighteen years of age or
to any person unknown to the seller, unless introduced by
some person known to the seller; and on every sale of
any poison the seller shall, before delivery, make or cause
to be made an entry in a book to be kept for that pur-
pose, stating in the form set forth in Schedule 8 to the
Act the date of the sale, the name, address, and occupa-
tion of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the
article sold, and the purpose for which it is stated by the
purchaser to be required, to which entry the signatures
and addresses of the purchaser and of the person, if
any, who introduced him, and also of the vendor,
shall be affixed; or in the event of the order for such
article being sent to the seller by letter or telegram, in
lieu of the signature of the purchaser being required
to be affixed to the entry above mentioned the seller shall
retain such letter or telegram and make an entry in the
said book as far as possible of the aforesaid particulars.
No person shall sell any poison when ordered by
letter or telegram or other document, unless the signa-
ture of such is known to him, or unless such signature
is authenticated by the signature of a J.P., notary
public, or legal practitioner, or by some person known
to vendor.
Any person who sells poison contrary to the pro-
visions of the Act, or who neglects or omits to comply
with its provisions or gives false information relative to
the particulars required on the purchase of poisons; or
who signs his name as a witness to the signature of any
person unknown to him ordering poison by letter or
telegram, etc., or to the sale of poison to any person
unknown to him, is liable to a penalty of £lOO or less,
or to imprisonment with or without hard labour for not
more than 12 months.


This Act does not extend to the sale of any poison
when made up or compounded in a medicine by a duly-
qualified medical practitioner or by a pharmaceutical
chemist for the purpose of sale, or according to the
prescription of a duly-qualified medical practitioner, or
in the form of homoeopathic medicine, unless in the
crude state or mother tincture, nor to the sale of patent
or proprietary medicines when sold by pharmaceutical
chemists or other licensed persons, nor to the sale of
photographic materials for the purposes of photography,
nor to the sale of medicines dispensed by veterinary
surgeons, for animals under their treatment, nor to the
sale of fly poison papers, nor to the sale of poisonous
mixtures and fluids for the eradication of disease in any
animals, or of insect pests or diseases in fruit-trees,
grape vines, or other vegetation, nor to the sale of
poisoned seed for the destruction of vermin, when duly
FREDERICK ROBERT-
SON PLUMMER, M.P.S.N.S.W.,
M.P.S.W.A., and R.D.S.W.A., is a
son of the late Mr. Eli Plummer, cloth
manufacturer of Dewsbury, Leeds,
England, and was born at the latter
place on June 19, 1862. At the age
of sixteen years he left the Leeds
Grammar School, where he had
received his scholastic training, and
entered into business with his father.
His health giving way he came to
Australia in 1883, and upon arrival
at Sydney took an open-air position
on a sugar plantation on the Rich-
mond River. A year later proceed-
ing to Wilcannia he joined the firm
controlled by Mr. H. C. Armstrong,
chemist, of that town, who at a sub-
sequent period opened branches at
Broken Hill, Silverton, and Mount
Browne. Mr. Plummer here em-
braced the opportunity offered him
to study chemistry, which he ulti-
mately made his profession, and was
successful in winning the diploma of
the Pharmaceutical Society of New
South Wales in 1894, prior to which
he had obtained a good grip of the
commercial side of the business of
which he had acted as Manager.
Before embarking in practice on his
own account he spent a year at the
college in Sydney studying pharmacy
and dentistry. Then hearing that
there were fine opportunities for
pushing a large business in the
western metropolis he came over to
Western Australia, and prevailed on
his brother-in-law, the late Mr. H.
C. Armstrong, to join him in the
establishment of their former phar-
macy in Hay Street, Perth, which
was carried on with signal success
for over fifteen years. Extensive
branches were formed at Fremantle
and Kalgoorlie, and the business be-
came well known as the leading
house of its kind in Western Aus-
tralia. Ultimately the Company dis-
posed of the parent business in Hay
Street, as well as of the Kalgoorlie
and Fremantle branches. Mr. Plum-
mer took charge of the Fremantle
business on its inception, and after
it was sold he spent nearly a year in
Bartlet to, Perth
MR .FREDERICK R . PLUMMER.
travel, visiting China and Japan and
other parts of Eastern Asia. Upon
his return he took up the position of
Director of the Western Australian
Apothecaries’ Company, Limited,
and has since taken an active part in
the management of its city businesses.
The Company has now its head
establishment at the corner of Wil-
liam and Murray Streets, and last
marked as such, nor to the sale for mining or industrial
purposes of cyanide of potassium, strong mineral acids,
or other metallurgical chemicals required in the mining
or in such other industry where such chemicals are
required in large quantities; nor shall it extend to any
sales by wholesale dealers in the ordinary course of
wholesale dealing, if an order in writing, signed by the
purchaser, shall be given for the supply of the same.
Provided that all such sales are entered in a book, and
that the bottle or other vessel, wrapper or cover, box or
case, immediately containing the poison bears thereon
the word “poison” printed conspicuously.
The present Council of the Pharmaceutical Society
consists of A. Tilly (President), E. Mayhew (Registrar),
and E. Parry, J. B. George, J. G. Cooper, E. A. Sagar,
and E. S. Sands, and the register of the society
contains the names of about 200 qualified chemists.
year opened another branch at 66,
Barrack Street. Mr. Plummer spends
his leisure hours in the cultivation of
roses and other choice blooms which
beautify his home in Edward Street,
Perth. He has been connected with
the fraternity of Freemasons for a
period of five years and is a member
of the Masonic Club. He was mar-
ried in the year 1888 to Mary,
daughter of the late Mr. William
Armstrong, of Woodlodge, Coote-
hill, Ireland.
FRED. W. CARTER, M.P.S.,
pharmacist, corner of Hay and Mil-
ligan Streets, Perth. Telephone
1213. Established in 1905, the
business of Mr. F. W. Carter has
rapidly won the favour of an ex-
tended clientele . The premises,
which have been extended to four
times their original size, are
elegantly fitted with showcases and
mirrors, the large show windows
being attractively dressed with a
variety of goods. The important
work of dispensing prescriptions
is undertaken with the greatest
possible care, and to prevent mis-
takes two dispensers always work to-
gether, each keeping a check on the
drugs and quantities used by the
other. By this system errors cannot
possibly occur. Dispensing by post
is a feature of the business, and of
the many orders executed in this
manner disaster in transit has not
befallen one. A bicycle express
vice is available for the collection of
prescriptions and delivery of medi-
cines, and at night urgent cases re-
ceive prompt attention. The large
stock of choice perfumes is one of the


attractions of the place, and already
well known to the citizens of Perth
is the American soda fountain,
handsomely fitted with imported
marble locally polished and erected
THE AMERICAN SODA FOUNTAIN AT MR. F. W. CARTER'S DISPENSARY.
at very heavy expense. The deli-
cious liquids which flow from the
fountain are made from a variety of
fresh fruits, both local and im-
ported, from which twice each week
INTERION VIEW OF MR. F. W, CARTER'S DISPENSARY, HAY STREET, PERTH.
the juice is expressed. No preserva-
tives of any kind are used, and by a
system of automatic carbonization a
sparkling beverage is obtained, the
drinks supplied being absolutely pure.
Pure buttermilk obtained by inocu-
lating fresh cow's milk with lactic
acid bacilli and allowing it to incu-
bate under certain conditions of
temperature is also produced. The
product is vastly superior to ordinary
buttermilk, from which the nutritive
butter-fats have been taken in the
process of churning. And as a
nutritive diet for diabetic patients
and a remedy for gastritis, indigos-
tion, and all stomach disorders it is
widely recommended to patients by
the medical profession, the members
of which send to Mr. Carter for
supplies. It is also supplied in steri-
lized bottles sealed to prevent con-
tamination. Mr. Carter recently
accepted the agency for “Gluten'
bread and flour, prepared by Messrs.
James Woolley, Sons, & Co., Limited,
of Manchester, England. The value
of gluten for dietetic purposes has
always been recognized, and there is
no food better suited to the treat-
ment of cases where starchy or
saccharine foods are found to be
objectionable. The bread has an
agreeable flavour and is an excellent
diet for persons troubled with in-
digestion, corpulence, diabetes, and
MR. FRED. W. CARTER.
other kindred complaints. Mr.
Carter was born at Melbourne, Vic-
toria, in 1883, where also he
received part of his education. He
came to Western Australia in 1896,
and was employed as a clerk in the
firm of Messrs. A. M. Bickford &
Sons, wholesale druggists, for two
and a half years, afterwards spending
some time in the drug department,
where he acquired the rudiments of
chemistry. He then articled him-
self to the late Mr. J. M. Jeffs,
chemist, for four years, but upon
the demise of Mr. Jeffs before that
period had elapsed he concluded the
last eighteen months of his inden-
tures with Messrs. Stewart & Free-
man, who took over the business.
During a portion of this time he
attended the Technical School and
successfully passed the intermediate
examination. His apprenticeship
expired, he took charge of the drug
department for Felton, Grim wade,
and Bickford, Limited (late Messrs.
A. M. Bickford & Sons), and continu-
ing at the Technical School passed


his final examination, winning the
Webster gold medal for highest
honours, a distinction gained by
only two others, although it has
been available for competition for
over nine years. Being now fully
qualified he spent a year with Mr.
A. V. Parkes, and then launched
out in his present business, which
is now in the foremost rank of
similar concerns in Perth.
handsome two-storied building, but
more particularly by the large and
artistically arranged plate-glass win-
dows, where carefully-chosen samples
of the hundred and one wares taste-
fully set out to attract the attention
of the passer-by hint at the immense
and greatly varied stock displayed
in the showcases within. Entering
the establishment one is struck with
the first-class arrangements for light-
the charge of Mr. H. Sandercock,
pharmaceutical chemist by examina-
tion of Western Australia, who
makes use of the latest scientific ap-
pliances in his delicate and respon-
sible work, and who has won for his
firm the confidence of the leading
practitioners of the State. A speci-
ality is made of the dispensing of
doctors' prescriptions, and ‘'no-sub-
stitution" is a firmly-established
INTERIOR VIEW OF MR. A. N. BIRK’S PHARMAVY, 680, HAY STREET, PERTH.
A. N. BIRKS, pharmaceutical
and disjiensing chemist, 680, Hay
Street, Perth. This well-known
pharmacy business is one of the
finest of its kind in the Southern
Hemisphere. It was originally estab-
lished many years ago by the W.A.
Apothecaries’ Company, Limited,
and is the largest dispensary in the
State. Situated in an excellent cen-
tral position in Hay Street, the cas-
ual eye is arrested not only by the
ing and ventilation and with the rich
yet quiet harmony of the artistic
decorations, which are carried out by
means of bronze and marble statu-
ary, carboys and mirrors, palms,
ferns, and pot plants, while the sense
of space induced by the long show-
room and glimpses of the dispensary
and office with their chaste fittings
of polished cedar is not the least
of the attractions of the place. The
fine, up-to-date dispensary is under
policy with Mr. A. N. Birks. In
the extensive basement is stored the
bulk stock of the business, and here
an enormous supply of drugs, chem-
icals, druggists' sundries, and sur-
gical appliances, imported direct
from the manufacturers, is kept in
splendid condition. Particular at-
tention is paid to country orders,
which are packed and dispatched in
the most convenient and expeditious
manner. There is also a large


manufacturing department and
laboratory, where the many well-
known proprietary medical remedies
are compounded, and which are
largely used by prospecting parties
and other sections of the general
public. ARTHUR N. BIRKS,
member of the Pharmaceutical
Society of Western Australia, is
a South Australian by birth, hav-
ing been born at Woodville, in
that State, on December 28, 1885.
He is a son of Mr. John N.
Birks, late of Port Adelaide, the
family being well known in South
Australia and in all the other
States of the Commonwealth. The
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR N. BIRKS.
subject of our notice pursued his
scholastic studies for a few years
at Woodville, later attending Mal-
vern College, Unley, South Austra-
lia, from which institution he passed
to Prince Alfred College, Ade-
laide, where he completed his edu-
cation under the guidance of Mr.
Frederic Chappie, B.Sc. He then
decided to come to Western Aus-
tralia, and in pursuance of this
intention arrived in the State in
the year 1903, soon afterwards
entering as a student at the
Perth Technical School, where he
studied chemistry at the day and
evening classes, gaining the silver
medal of the Pharmaceutical Society
for honours in the intermediate ex-
amination, finally securing his di-
ploma in December, 1907. During
this period he served an apprentice-
ship to his father, then in the
original pharmacy in William Street,
Perth, but on gaining his diploma
proceeded to the Eastern States with
the object of obtaining further ex-
perience, and entered one of the old-
est dispensing houses in Australia,
where he remained long enough to
considerably augment his practical
knowledge of the profession, its busi-
ness management, and the require-
ments of the public. Deciding to
return to Western Australia, he first
took a trip to New South Wales,
where he made further studies in the
different branches of pharmacy, and
arrived in Perth at the end of the
year 1908. In July, 1910, he pur-
chased “The Apothecaries" business,
which had previously passed into the
hands of his father, Mr. John N.
Birks, who carried it on for a time,
and for whom he had acted as Gen-
oral Manager for a period of thirteen
months. Under his capable direc-
tion, ably assisted by the heads of
the various departments, each of
whom very efficiently controls his
part of the business, the concern
continues to grow in popular favour,
and to hold that high place in the
public estimation at which it has
Photo by C. E. Farr .
MR. A. N. BIRK’S SISPENSARY. HAY STREET. PERTH
ever aimed. Mr. Birks takes a deep
interest in matters connected with
the Congregational Church and has
held many offices in that body. He
is also a member of the Young Men's
Christian Association. Most of his
time is taken up in attending to
his business affairs, but in the brief
leisure that falls to his share he finds
recreation in tennis, and is a mem-
her of the Claremont Tennis Club.


EDMUND DEAN & CO., family
and dispensing chemists, 631, Hay
Street, Perth. This well-known
pharmacy business, which is one
of the oldest established in Wes-
tern Australia, was founded by
Dr. Jameson, now a member of
the Transvaal Government, South
Africa, in conjunction with Dr.
Kenny, and was carried on many
years under the capable management
of Mr. E. Dean, who attended to the
dispensing and other branches of the
business. Subsequently the scope of
its operations was enlarged by the
purchase of the business formerly
conducted by Dr. Scott, at St.
George’s Terrace, and about the
same period an interest in the con-
cern was purchased by Mr. F. W.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANCIS WILLIAM COLLETT.
Collett, to whom was entrusted con-
trol of the dispensary and the
general management, which pre-
viously had been resigned by Mr.
Dean. Some years later the latter
gentleman returned and became a
partner in the business, taking over
the management of a branch which
had been opened at Fremantle. Dur-
ing the period that this arrangement
continued the ownership changed
hands several times until Mr. F. W.
Collett assumed complete control of
the business at Perth, the various
branches of the firm meanwhile hav-
ing been disposed of. Carrying on
under the old and popular style of
Edmund Dean & Co. the present
firm by its commercial integrity, the
purity and high-class character of
its drugs and great variety of useful
and beautiful goods, and the unfail-
ing courtesy of the members of the
staff, commands a patronage which
steadily increases as the years bring
their added and honourable prestige
to an already established fame. The
firm is renresented in London by its
own buyer, and from this centre of
the world’s markets is continually
in receipt of importations of drugs
and all the requisites for accurate
dispensing, delicious
perfumes, and other
luxuries of the toilet,
besides the necessities
which minister to the
daily needs of everyday
life and alleviate the
sufferings of the sick
bed. Its stock is the
largest and most com-
plete in Western Aus-
tralia, and that most
important department,
the dispensary, has had
the greatest possible
care bestowed upon its
appointments, the firm
confining itself almost
entirely to the dispen-
sing of doctor’s pre-
scriptions, being well
known among the lead-
ing physicians of Perth.
Another feature of the
business is the large
number of proprietary
medicines which are
made up and find their
way to the most dis-
tant parts of the State,
bringing relief to many
where medical aid is
unobtainable. FRAN-
CIS WILLIAM COL-
LETT is a son of the
late Mr. William Col-
lett, of Gloucestershire,
and was brought to
Australia by his par-
ents, who settled in
Perth, where the sub-
ject of this memoir
received his scholastic
training. At the close
of his schooldays he
served articles to the
pharmacy profession under Dr.
T. Hora, of this city, with whom
he continued for three years. At the
end of that period he transferred
his indentures to Dr. Edward Scott,
and having become fully qualified
during his two years’ term with this
gentleman received the appointment
of manager of Dr. Scott’s dispen-
sary, then situated on St. George’s
Terrace. Subsequently this business
was absorbed into the firm of
Edmund Dean & Co., and Mr. Col-
lett acquired his first interest in
the concern of which he was
afterwards to become sole pro-
prietor. About the year 1899 he
was elected a member of the
Pharmaceutical Council of Western
Australia and held office in that
body for three years. He is a
EDMUND, DEAN &. CO’S DISPENSARY, HAY ST., PERTH
Justice of the Peace, a member
of the Y.M.C.A., and an adherent
of the Anglican Church. He is a
member of the Perth Lodge in
the Masonic fraternity, and has
held office in the order. A member
of the King’s Park Bowling Club,
what little recreation he indulges in
is taken on the greens of the popu-
lar institution. Mr. Collett resides
at Ventnor Avenue, West Perth.


JOHN HENRY TINDALE,
M.P.S., chemist, Guildford, is a son
of Mr. John Tindale, of Newcastle-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN HENRY TINDALE.
on-Tyne, England, where he was
born on July 17, 1870. He received
his education in his native town and
upon leaving school was apprenticed
to one of the leading pharmacists of
that place. Afterwards he sailed for
Western Australia in the barque
"Helena Mena” with his parents,
arriving in Perth in the year 1887.
There he accepted a post with Mr.
May hew, first chairman of the
Pharmacy Council, and after two
years in this connection went to
York and from there to Bunbury,
returning to Perth in 1893 to take
up duties with the firm of Dean and
Co., of that city. In 1894 he opened
a pharmacy business for his em-
ployers at Guildford which he after-
wards took over and has since car-
ried on on his own behalf. During
the sixteen years that he has spent
in the district Mr. Tindale has
watched the steady advancement of
the town but the demands of his
business affairs prevent his taking
an active part in public matters.
What little leisure he has he devotes
to gardening and aquatic pursuits,
and in connection with the latter
is Vice-President of the Guildford
Swimming Club. He married Caro-
line, second daughter of the late
Mr. Henry Milford, of Western
Australia, and has three sons and
two daughters.
MR, J. H. TINDALE'S PHARNACY, GUILDFORD.
NN


Bank.
Locality
of
Head
Office.
Act of
Incorporation.
Date when
Business
commenced
in Western
Australia.
Bank of Australasia
London ...
Royal Charter
* May, 1841
Western Australian
Perth
Special Act
June 23,
Hank
1841
National Bank of
Melbourne
Victorian Companies
1866
Australasia, Ltd.
Act, 1890
Union Bank of Aus-
London ...
English Companies
1878
tralia, Ltd.
Acts, 1862-79
Bank of New South
Sydney ...
Special Act
1883
Wales
Commercial Bank of
Melbourne
Victorian Companies
January 10,
Australia, Ltd.
Act, 1890
1888
* Discontinued about 1845, and recommenced May 2, 1894.
Banking, Insurance, and Finance.
When George Augustus Sala visited the Antipodes
he described Australia as a democracy modified by banks.
In forming this opinion he was no doubt guided by the
fact that in all our capitals —and Perth is no exception —
the most imposing buildings are those occupied by the
financial institutions. His statement may be regarded
as true, too, in other ways. It is probably impossible
to estimate with any degree of accuracy the extent to
which the resources of the country have been promoted
by the various banking institutions.
In the early days of Western Australia the estab-
lishment of a bank was urged upon the Government as
the panacea for all the ills from which the infant settle-
ment was suffering.
The earliest banking legislation of this State is
embodied in an Act passed in 1837 (8 Gul. IV., No. 1),
which provided, amongst other things, that all banks
“issuing promissory notes payable to bearer on demand”
should keep weekly accounts of the amount of notes in
circulation and of deposits, and should furnish quarterly
to the Colonial Secretary a return showing the averages
of such weekly accounts. Subsequently, in an Ordinance
passed in 1866 to incorporate the National Bank of Aus-
tralasia (30 Viet., No. 9), and again in an Act passed in
1879 to incorporate the Western Australian Bank (42
Viet., No. 33), the forms of the returns required from
these two banks were included as schedules to the respec-
tive enactments. These returns were also required to be
furnished quarterly to the Colonial Secretary, and were to
comprise the averages of the statements prepared weekly,
showing under certain specified heads the assets and
liabilities of the banks. In addition to these particulars,
a statement of the capital of each bank was required, to-
gether with the rate and amount of the dividend last
paid and the amount of reserved profits. The forms laid
down in these enactments are those at present in use.
The associated banks operating in this State are:
It will be seen that of these six banks two have their
head offices in London, two in Melbourne, one in Perth,
and one in Sydney.
The first bank of issue to commence business in this
State appears to have been the Bank of Western Aus-
tralia, which opened on June 1, 1837, with a nominal
capital of <£lo,ooo, of which 25 per cent, only was called
up. Small deposits were received on the Savings Bank
principle, and interest was allowed at the rate of 5 per
cent.
In May, 1841, the business of this bank was bought
out by the Bank of Australasia, while on June 23, in the
same year, the present Western Australian Bank was
opened, mainly through the efforts of shareholders in the
old bank who were not satisfied with the arrangements
for transfer.
The Bank of Australasia, however, did not, on that
occasion, continue its operations in this State for any
great length of time, as it appears to have closed its
Western Australian branch in 1845. Nearly fifty years
later it again commenced business, opening in Perth in
May, 1894.
The Western Australian Bank, which commenced
business in this State in 1841, is a purely local bank,
having no branches elsewhere than in Western Australia.
It was incorporated under a special Act of the Western
Australian Legislature, which was passed in 1878, but
subsequently repealed and re-enacted with amendments
in 1896. The authorized capital with which the bank
was established was £20,000, but this has since been
increased to £200,000 paid-up capital. The reserve funds
amount to £539,398, and the average liabilities for the
year were £2,857,644, while the assets stood out at
£3,836,736. To its forward policy as much as to its long
connection with this State, Western Australia owes much.
It occupies the premier position of all the banks, and has
undoubtedly at all times been a prominent factor in the
development and progress of the community whose in-
terests it was originally formed to foster. It has branches
in most of the settled districts, and is always among the
first to afford banking facilities to new centres.
In 1866, twenty-five years after the inauguration of
the Western Australian Bank, the National Bank of
Australasia, Melbourne, established a branch of its
business in this State, a special Act of incorporation
being passed by the Western Australian Legislature in
1866, and amended in 1867. The head office of the bank
is in Melbourne, and branches exist in Victoria, South
Australia, New South Wales, and Western Australia.
As a result of the financial crisis of 1893, this bank was


reconstructed under the title of “The National Bank of
Australasia, Limited.”
Twelve years later, in 1878, the Union Bank of Aus-
tralia, Limited, commenced operations in Perth, and was
followed in 1883 by the Bank of New South Wales.
In 1885 a branch of the Commercial Bank of South
Australia was opened in Perth, but owing to the fact that
this bank went into liquidation in 1886 its career in this
State was very short-lived, the only record of its transac-
tions which appears in the Western Australian Govern-
ment Gazette being the returns for the quarter ended
December 31, 1885.
Some three years later, in 1888, the Commercial
Bank of Australia realized the advantages of gaining a
footing in the State, and commenced operations in
Perth.
The returns for the quarter ending June 30, 1912,
giving the average amount of the liabilities and assets
of the several banks, showed notes in circulation £45,821,
bills in circulation £69,626, balances due to other banks
£225,462, and deposits £6,900,758, making a total of
£7,241,667, while the assets amounted to £11,608,143,
The WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
BANK, Perth, was founded in the
year 1841 with a capital of £20,000,
divided into 2,000 shares of £lO
each, the deed of settlement being
dated June 23 of that year, and
the doors opened for business in
that month with a subscribed
capital of a little over £2,000. Ac-
cording to the original prospectus
issued by the promoters the Pro-
visional Committee was constituted
of the following gentlemen, viz.,
William Tanner, Richard Hinds,
J. S. Roe, Edward Hamersley,
Samuel Moore, T. R. C. Walters,
W. J. Lawrence, and G. F. Stone
(Secretary pro tern.), all of whom
were prominently identified with the
commercial interests of the State.
Since that time many other familiar
and highly-respected names have
been intimately associated with the
history of the Bank, among whom
may be mentioned Mr. George
Shenton (a Director from the year
1847 to the time of his death in
1864), Sir Luke Leake, Mr. F. D.
Wittenoom, Mr. Charles Wit-
tenoom, the late Sir George Shen-
ton (Director for forty years and
Chairman from the year 1886 to the
time of his death in June, 1909),
and Mr. J. G. C. Carr. All these
gentlemen have at one time or
another occupied the chair of the
directorate. The present Chairman
of the Board of Directors is Mr. W.
T. Loton, a gentleman whose con-
nection with the Bank dates from
nn2
the year 1878, the other members
of the Board being the Honourable
George Ran dell, Mr. S. F. Moore,
M.L.A., Sir E. H. Wittenoom,
K.C.M.G., and Sir E. A. Stone.
The Bank opened for the transac-
tion of business in what formerly
had been a private house on the
corner opposite the Deanery in St.
Bartletto Perth.
MR. H. D. HOLMES.
George’s Terrace and immediately
opposite Government House, upon
which site the Presbyterian church
now stands. In 1846 a removal was
effected to a building in the west
made up of coin £1,734,516, bullion £497,713, Govern-
ment securities £147,897, landed property and premises
£217,530, notes and bills of other banks £556,370, bal-
ances due from other banks £53,178, and notes and bills
discounted £8,400,939. The small value of notes in cir-
culation is, of course, due to the operations of the Federal
Banking System, which took over the issue of notes in
Australia.
The two other banks operating are the Government
Savings Bank and the Agricultural Bank, both of which
have been fully described in the section relating to public
departments.
With regard to insurance companies their name is
legion. They cover every variety of risk—life, fire,
accident, guarantee, marine, burglary, etc. They all
operate throughout Australia generally, and many of
them throughout the British dominions.
The only purely finance company is the Western
Australian Trustees, Executors, and Agency Company,
Limited, an organization which is sufficiently explained
by its name, and the operations of which are confined to
the class of business therein described.
end of the Terrace adjoining the
old Victoria Library, where the
Bank remained until 1886, in which
year the present handsome premises
were erected at the corner of St.
George’s Terrace and William Street.
Since that date the building has
been altered and added to on several
occasions to provide sufficient accom-
modation for the rapidly-increasing
business. From the very first the
business of the Bank has proved of
a highly-profitable character, and
shareholders, particularly those who
took up shares in the early days,
have been handsomely rewarded.
The dividends paid have varied from
12 to 20 per cent., but since October,
1905, 20 per cent, per annum has
been consistently paid. Prior to
that date for many years the half-
yearly dividends were at the rate
of 17| per cent, per annum.
In the earlier days of the in-
stitution numerous cash bonuses
were paid to the fortunate
shareholders, while in addition
the paid-up value of the shares has
been increased on several occasions
without any further call being made
on the purses of the shareholders.
Latterly they have also reaped the
advantage of the periodical new
issues of shares which were offered
to them at a price well below the
market value of the stock. These
various issues have on all occasions
realized large premiums, which
have been added to the Reserve
Fund, thus assisting in a substan


1852
1871
1882
1890
1896
1911
' March)
£
£
£
£
£
£
Deposits ...
36,387
68,389
186,890
268,721
1.897,838
2,977,205
Notes in Circulation
5,915
9,196
13,653
95,535
146,661
Balances due to other Banks
2,275
7,711
91,427
Paid-up Capital
6,006
)
( 60,000
100,000
200,000
>90,000
Reserve Fund
2,039
)
(.64,619
125,000
525,000
Specie and Bullion on hand
16,939
18,164
49,714
929,754
1,258,901
Bills Receivable and all other Advances
30,846
08,400
256,730
339,642
790,449
2,390,072
Baok Premises
1,060
23,234
31,317
74,000
Balances due from other Banks
25,800
13,782
428,428
86,298
tial degree to build up the present
magnificent Reserve Fund. On the
occasion of the celebration in 1891
of the jubilee of this progressive
institution Mr. Walter Padbury,
then one of its oldest shareholders,
stated that he estimated the return
for every original share costing
£1 10s. to be equal to £3 10s. per
annum. It has also to be borne in
mind that this result had been at-
tained while continuing the sound
policy of building up the strength
of the Bank’s reserves. The first
cashier of the Bank was Mr. R.
Wells, who died on April 28, 1846,
and was succeeded by Mr. F.
Lochee, who continued to act in
that capacity and as Manager for
about forty-three years, retiring
in January, 1889, on a well-earned
pension. Mr. J. F. Law was the
Acting Manager for a short period
until August 15, 1890, when Mr.
H. D. Holmes, the present General
Manager, was appointed. Mr.
Holmes was previously connected
with the Bank of South Australia,
and at the present time is a banker
of some fifty years’ standing. Under
his able management, and aided by
the great impetus given to Western
Australia by the rich gold dis-
coveries and the subsequent rapid
development of the State’s agricul-
tural and pastoral resources, the
business of the Bank has continued
to expand in a most satisfactory
manner. In July, 1869, the staff of
the Bank numbered five, and there
were no branches in existence. By
1896 the staff had increased in
number to eighty-five and twenty
branches had been established. At
the present day the staff totals 241,
branches and sub-branches have
multiplied to the number of sixty-
three, and the Bank’s operations
have spread well over the whole of
the State. The following figures will
indicate the remarkable progress
of the institution :
The Manager at the head office of
the Bank is Mr. R. L. Herbert, who
has held that office since September,
1899, and the Inspector is Mr. A.
L. Johnston. The management of
the Bank is to be heartily congrat-
ulatcd upon the success which has
attended its operations in the past
and upon the progressive policy
adopted by the Board of Directors,
THE WESTERN AUSTRALIAN BANK, PERTH
which undoubtedly will secure
to the Bank a good propor-
tion of the new business which
must necessarily follow the open-
ing up of the vast areas of the
Western State. To effectually cope
with the continued increase in the
Bank’s operations in 1911 a new
issue of 5,000 shares was made, the
minimum pi ice of each share being
fixed at £2B, which has had the
f 0C eo-A th p 6 P aid-u P ca P ltal
to the full extent of its
present authorization, and the Re-
seive und to well over £615,000.
It is evident that the shareholders
and public generally have every con-
fidence in the policy pursued by
the Board of Directors, a policy
which has placed the State under
a heavy debt insofar as much of
the present prosperity of its local
industries has to be credited to the
sympathetic support of this local
financial institution.
The NATIONAL BANK of
AUSTRALASIA, Limited. This
institution, which has played a pro-
minent part in the financial history
of the various Australian States,
was founded in Melbourne in 1858,
when the following prospectus was
issued:—“The National Bank of
Australasia. Established 1858. To
be incorporated by Act of the Legis-
lature limiting the liability of the
shareholders to double the amount
of their shares. Capital, £1,000,000
sterling, in 200,000 shares of £5
each. Preliminary deposit, 10s. per-
share; first call of £1 10s. per share,
after which no further call to exceed
£1 per share. Interest allowed on
current accounts and bills for dis-
count received daily. To be con-
ducted by a Board of Directors not
to exceed six in number, who shall
annually elect from amongst them-
selves a Chairman.” The Act of In-
corporation having been obtained
from the Parliament of Victoria, on
August 10, 1858, the first Board of
Directors was elected. Out of six-
teen candidates the six successful
ones were Messrs. Thomas Brown,
jun., Dalmahoy Campbell, Eras Bur-


dett Franklin, John Houston, T. H.
Lempriere, and John Mackenzie.
The management of the Bank was
placed in the hands of Mr. Cunning-
ham, who entered upon the appoint-
ment in 1860 and held sway until
1866, when he was succeeded by Mr.
Fred. Wright. This gentleman was
followed by Mr. E. M. Young in
1870, and in the succeeding year Mr.
Frank Grey Smith was appointed
Nixon , Northarn .
MR. F. T. MULLEN.
Chief Manager of the institution.
On May 1, 1901, Mr. J. G. Addison
assumed control, and continued to
fill the chair up to the time of his
death in 1912, when Mr. E. H.
Wreford was appointed Chief Man-
ager. The operations of the Bank
have extended over a wide area, and
branches have been established at
Sydney, Adelaide, Perth, and Lon-
don, while there are 165 other bran-
ches and 42 sub-branches in the
Commonwealth. According to the
half-yearly balance-sheet for the six
months ended September 30, 1911,
the net profit amounted to £76,856
10s. 2d., which, with the balance
carried forward from the previous
half-year, left available for distribu-
tion the sum of £80,405 ss. Bd. Of
this amount £2,000 was appropriated
to the Officers' Provident Fund,
£20,000 transferred to the Reserve
Fund Account (making it £285,000),
£5,000 was written off the Bank pre-
mises, and a dividend at the rate
of 6 per cent, per annum declared
on preference shares, which absorbed
£9,173 Bs. After payment of the
dividend on the ordinary shares at
the rate of 6 per cent, per annum
(£35,773 45.) and a bonus of £6,532
6s. to the officers, a balance of £8,458
13s. Bd. remained, which was car-
ried forward to the next financial
term. Notes in circulation amounted
to £102,732 10s. and bills to
£750,340 14s. lOd. The working
expenses for the half-year at the
branches and agencies amounted to
£87,604 4s. Id., while £8,448
17s. Bd. was paid on account of note,
income, and land taxes. The present
capital of the Bank is as follows:
Authorized capital, £3,407,904;
capital paid up preference
THE NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRLASIA, LIMITED, PERTH
shares £305,780, ordinary shares
£1,192,440; reserve fund, £785,000;
and reserve liability of shareholders,
£715,464. Mr. E. H. Wreford is
the Chief Manager of the Bank in
Melbourne and Mr. R. G. Fincham
the Manager. The Manager of the
Perth Office is Mr. F. T. Mullen, who
is assisted by Mr. Angus McDonald,
Sub-Manager, and A. W. Ball-
hausen, Accountant.
The NATIONAL MUTUAL
LIFE ASSOCIATION OF AUS-
TRALASIA, Limited, St. George's
Terrace, Perth. Head Office: Corner
of Collins and Queen Streets, Mel-
bourne. The establishment of the
National Mutual Life Association in
the year 1869 marked a new era in
the history of life-assurance practice.
Up to that year the offices transact-
ing life-assurance business in the
colonies did so on the old-fashioned
principle that a policy should be null
and void if any premium remained
unpaid more than thirty days after
it was due. A really effective non-
forfeiture condition was inserted in
the policies of the National Mutual
to the effect that when default was
made in the payment of a premium,
and the surrender value of the policy
was sufficient to pay such premium,
it became compulsory on the part
of the directors to pay the premium
and keep the policy in force for the
benefit of the assured, the premium
so paid remaining as a debt against
the policy, to be repaid with interest
for the time during which it re-
mained a debt. This inaugurated a
new era in the practice of life assur-
ance, and the principle has since
been copied by all prominent life
offices. The credit of introducing
this liberal principle into life-
assurance practice is due to the late
Colonel J. M. Templeton, C.M.G.,
F.1.A., the founder of this Associa-
tion. The introduction of such a
feature alone was a sufficient warrant
for the establishment of the National
Mutual, but there were other
reasons, viz., to found the first
mutual life association in Victoria,
to liberalize the general conditions of


policies by removing stringent con-
ditions unfair to members of a
mutual life association, and to intro-
duce an improvement in the mode of
dividing profits, the rule adopted by
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HENRY WRIGHT.
the National Mutual being that
profits should be divided among
members in proportion to their con-
tributions to the profit fund. The
principles of mutual assurance were
strictly observed from the inception
of the Association, no ad-
vantages being given to the
first members, who were ad-
mitted on the same terms as
those upon which new mem-
bers now enter. Based on
such firm foundations it is
not to be wondered that the
rise and progress of the
National Mutual has been
wonderfully rapid. From
the beginning a prudent but
comprehensive policy was
adopted, and to-day the
Association occupies a fore-
most place in the ranks of
the great life assurance in-
stitutions of the Empire.
The Association enjoys a re-
markable popularity, and
in the most distant fields of
its enterprise has a strong
place in the public esteem.
The first premium received
by the National Mutual
forty-one years ago amount-
ed to <£6 Os. lOd. To-day
the funds of the Association
stand at £6,200,000, while
the income for the year
1910 was £1,120,000, a
truly wonderful increase.
Ten years ago the business trans-
acted was about one - third of
the sum that is now annually
written, while the funds have im-
proved by over 50 per cent. For
the State of Western Australia the
total amount of business in force to
date approximates one million
pounds sterling. The following ex-
tract from the March (1911) issue
of The Scottish Critic succinctly sets
forth the position of the National
Mutual at the end of the financial
year, September 30, 1910:
"Although this Association has com-
pleted only its forty-first year it has
reached a place in the front rank
of British life offices which average
more than three times its age. This
is the case in regard to the amount
of new business, the sums received
for premiums, and the position of
the assurance fund. The National
Mutual of Australasia establishes a
new and progressive record every
year. The rate of expansion is
steadily accelerating. Even in the
trying years of drought in Australia
the business was successfully main-
tained. That can be accepted as an
evidence of the energy and enterprise
with which the business is conducted,
and further proof is found in the
development both at Home and in
this country. . . . The new busi-
ness of over three and a quarter mil-
INTERIOR VIEW OF OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION, PERTH.
lions sterling in the past year —the
largest the Association has ever
transacted in any year —suggests the
magnitude of the Company's opera-
tions, and the progress is shown in
adding £305,811 to the figures of the
previous year. New policies were
issued in the past year to the number
of 13,088, bringing in new annual
premiums of £121,925. The income
of £1,122,668 was £78,867 more than
for the previous twelve months, and
of this increase £23,139 was contri-
buted by interest. The large amount
of interest received, £280,862,
shows that the funds were kept
well invested during the year, and is
a satisfactory proof of the spe-
cial care devoted to this important
department of the Association's busi-
ness. It is almost needless to say that
the safe and profitable investment of
funds is of absolutely vital import-
ance to a life-insurance company.’'
The Insurance Journal and General
Financial Record , published on
March 11, 1911, contains the follow-
ing laudatory comments : —"Rapid
development, based upon firm and
solid foundation and directed by a
spirit of prudent enterprise, con-
tinues to characterize the marked
progress of the National Mutual
Life Association of Australasia.
The amount of interest earned on the
invested funds was strikingly satis-


factory, the average rate realized
being £4 14s. 7d. per cent, as com-
pared with <£4 14s. 3d. in 1909 and
cent, it becomes evident enough how
largely the reserves must benefit.
Although there has been so
continues to be reduced, falling
during the past three years from
23'3 per cent, to 21‘2 and 21 per
OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION. ST. GEORGE'S TERRACE. PERTH.
£4 13s. 3d. in 1908, and when it is
considered that the rate assumed as
a valuation basis is only per
marked a development in the new
business of the Association the ratio
of expenditure to total premiums
cent., the ratio for the triennium
just completed being 21'8 per cent,
against 25 per cent, for the preced


ing similar period. That the ratio
of expenditure should so diminish
even while business is so rapidly
expanding speaks convincingly as to
the care devoted to the business by
the directorate and the manage-
ment." The Review , The Financial
L mon, and The Stock Exchange also
referred in complimentary language
to the operations of the Association
and to the general feeling of con-
fidence which it has inspired in its
patrons. During the year under
review the Association acquired free-
hold properties at Colombo and
London for the use of the local
branches, and to enable additions to
be made to the head office the adjoin-
ing property in Queen Street, Mel-
bourne, was purchased. The Direc-
tors of the Western Australian
Branch are the Right Honourable
Sir John Forrest, G.C.M.G., P.C.,
M.H.R., and Mr. William Mac-
murtrie. The Manager is Mr. Henry
Wright. HENRY WRIGPIT
was born in Fitzroy, Victoria, on
June 7, 1862. His' early education
was received at Melbourne, and he
was afterwards sent to the Scotch
College till the age of sixteen, when
he joined, as junior clerk, the Na-
tional Mutual Life Association under
the founder, the late Colonel J. M.
Templeton. At that time the whole
staff consisted of only seven persons,
but during the next two years busi-
ness increased so rapidly that a
branch was opened at Adelaide,
South Australia, Mr. Wright being
sent to that city to join the clerical
staff. Having remained there for
eight years he attained the position
of acting accountant, and in 1886
was transferred to Western Austra-
lia as local Secretary, acting under
South Australian jurisdiction. Two
years later, when a Branch was
established at Perth, Mr. Wright
was selected as Resident Secretary,
and later was appointed Manager for
Western Australia. For many years
no one was better known than he in
connection with any charitable move-
ment, and being the possessor of a
fine tenor voice of wide range
his services as an amateur vocalist
were freely requisitioned at concerts
arranged in aid of charities, and in
the musical world he was equally to
the fore as Secretary to the Perth
Musical Union for a number of
years. Church matters have always
occupied a good deal of his atten-
tion, and he is at present Treasurer
of the Associated Churches of Christ
in Western Australia, having in the
past occupied the position of Presi
dent and represented Western Aus-
tralia in that capacity at the Federal
Conference of Churches at Adelaide.
His favourite recreation is cricket,
and he was associated as Hon. Sec-
retary with the old Metropolitan
Cricket Club, of which he was
regarded as the principal batsman
and bowler. Married in Western
Australia in 1886 to a daughter of
the late Mr. John Sands, of St.
Peters, South Australia, he has two
sons (now occupied in commercial
life in Perth) and two daughters.
JOHN GALE POTTENGER,
New-Business Manager in Western
Australia for the National Mutual
Life Association, is a son of the late
Mr. Henry Foster Pottenger of Vic-
toria, and was born at Maryborough,
in that State, on September 23,
1864. He attended local schools un-
til thirteen years of age, when he
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN GALE POTTENGER.
was placed under the care of pri-
vate tutors in Melbourne, complet-
ing his studies under the late Mr.
Thomas Paul Johnstone, M.A. Sub-
sequently he began his career in the
Victorian Postal Dapartment, where
he remained for three years, resign-
ing in 1884 in order to accept ser-
vice as a salesman for an American
importing house, in which capacity
he achieved much success. At a
later period he engaged in the real
estate business at Melbourne, and
at the time of the land boom
in 1887 became associated with
the firm of Messrs. Munro and
Baillieu, auctioneers, land salesmen,
etc., as Auctioneer and Branch Man-
ager. When the collapse of the
land boom occurred in 1890 Mr.
Pottenger again commenced busi-
ness on his own account at Melbourne
as press correspondent and general
advertising agent and contractor,
under the style of the International
Press Association, afterwards estab-
lishing a branch in Sydney. Owing
to failing health he retired from
that business and subsequently
joined the staff of the National
Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralasia in Sydney. After three
years' sojourn in New South
Wales Mr. Pottenger returned
to Victoria to accept an appoint-
ment on the staff of the Aus-
tralian Mutual Provident Society,
where for three and a half years he
was signally successful. As a result
of this he was offered and accepted
the position of metropolitan super-
intendent at the head office at
Melbourne of the National Mutual
Life Association of Australasia,
subsequently being promoted to
the management in Tasmania in
1904. The very marked success
of the business of that institu-
tion in Tasmania during his six
years of office is a tribute to his
great energy and special organizing
ability. He received from the authori-
ties, however, a request to come to
Western Australia to take charge of
the New-Business Department in
that State, and his health requir-
ing a change he acceded to the pro-
position, entering upon his duties in
1910. Since then he has travelled
nearly over the whole of the State
in the arduous discharge of his
office. Mr. Pottenger is regarded as
an able organizer and one of the best
exponents of the science of salesman-
ship in Australia. He takes a keen
interest in metaphysics, psychol-
ogy, and mental science, is a mem-
ber of the Masonic fraternity, and
is associated with the Perth and
Cottesloe Golf Clubs, this being the
form of recreation he prefers. In
1886 he married Harriett, second
daughter of the late Mr. Edward
Francis, of Wodonga, Victoria, and
has three sons and a daughter.
The COLONIAL MUTUAL
LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,
Limited, St. George’s Terrace, Perth.
This Society has its head office at
Melbourne and branches in most of
the principal cities throughout the


Commonwealth. The Western Aus-
tralian Branch opened its doors for
the transaction of business about the
year 1873, and rapidly made its way
in the public regard, each year wit-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE HORNER JOHNSTON.
nessing a substantial increase in the
amount of business recorded. The
steady progress of the Colonial
Mutual reached its culminating
point at the General Meeting held
on May 10, 1911, when the balance-
sheet for the year 1910 was placed
before the shareholders. Not only
was the amount of new business
obtained a record for the Society,
but the newly-established industrial
and accident branch gave evidence
of extraordinary vitality. The new
policies issued numbered 85,231,
assuring £5,554,137, the totals in-
cluding the business acquired as a
result of the Society obtaining a
controlling interest in the Standard
Life Association. Death claims in
the ordinary branch represented
£155,118, and the sum of £75,789
was paid for endowments matured
under 325 policies. In the indus-
trial branch claims matured by
death absorbed £1,869, and endow-
ments of £1,567 were paid to former
policy-holders in the Standard Life
Association. The addition to the
assurance fund in the ordinary
branch was £107,565, and the rate
of interest yielded was £4 ss. Bd.
The report of the actuary discloses a
surplus of £172,678 in funds over
liabilities, out of which the directors
have decided to allot £64,858 for
immediate absorption in providing
reversionary bonuses to all partici-
pating policies at the rate of £1 ss.
pei' cent, on the sum assured,
£101,561 to be distributed among
policies with deferred participation
in profits, and to carry forward
£6,258. The ordinary life-assurance
business exceeded by a million and
a half sterling the total value of
policies issued for the previous year,
while the industrial branch attracted
business to the extent of two millions
sterling, a noticeable feature in con-
nection with this big increase in the
Society's returns being the propor-
tionate reduction in the ratio of
working expenses. The present year
has opened most auspiciously and
bids fair to leave all previous re-
cords far in the rear, as the
business recorded up to May 10 was
£841,524 as against £448,355 for
the same period in 1909. GEORGE
HORNER JOHNSTON, J.P.,
Resident Secretary and Manager of
the Industrial Department, is an
Irishman by birth, but nearly all
his life has been spent in New Zea-
land and Australia. At the com-
pletion of his education obtained at
the High School, Auckland, he
entered the service of the Equitable
Life Assurance Society of America
as a cadet, and in the course of time
graduated through the various posi-
tions to cashier and accountant,
finally receiving the appointment of
Manager at Perth for that Society
in 1890. He remained in charge of
the Equitable affairs in the Western
State until the Society ceased active
operations in 1906, and subsequently
became associated with several life
offices in the succeeding years, dur-
ing which time he gained an all-
round knowledge probably excelled
by few representatives in the great
field of insurance. In 1910 he
was appointed to the dual positions
of Resident Secretary and Manager
to the Colonial Mutual Life Assur-
ance Society at Perth, which posi-
tion he still continues to occupy.
The ROYAL INSURANCE
COMPANY, Limited, 67 and 69,
St. George's Terrace, Perth, is one
of the leading fire and accident
offices in the Empire. Business is
transacted in a number of risks, in-
cluding fire, life, marine, accident,
employers' liability, burglary, and
fidelity, and the total value of poli-
cies issued each year is enormous.
The head office for Australia is at
Collins Street, Melbourne, and there
are Branches in all the capital cities
of the Commonwealth. The Wes-
tern Australian Branch was estab-
lished many years ago, and is very
popular with the residents and busi-
ness men of the State. An excel-
lent feature in connection with the
Company is the prompt manner in
which claims are adjusted, the local
Manager being empowered to deal
with these matters without reference
to the head office. GEORGE
LEWIS EVES, Manager for Wes-
tern Australia, was born at Bris-
bane, Queensland, in 1870, and is a
son of the late Mr. G. T. Eves. He
was educated at the Brisbane Gram-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE LEWINS EVERS.
mar School and at other scholastic
institutions. In 1886 he joined the
staff of the Federal Bank, and here
continued until 1896, when he trans-
ferred his services to the Imperial
Insurance Company as chief clerk at
Brisbane. Four years later he be-
came chief clerk to the North British
and Mercantile Insurance Company,
with which office he continued until
1907, when he received the appoint-
ment of Manager of the North
Queensland Branch of the Royal
Insurance Company, Limited. In
1911 he was promoted to his pre-
sent position, and in the early part
of the year arrived in Western
Australia to take over the duties
attached to the managerial chair.


The Stock Exchange.
When the question of mining first began to attract
the attention of the people of Western Australia, a semi-
private association for the conduct of dealings in stocks
and shares was established, but this gave place in 1889
to the Stock Exchange of Perth, a corporation of which
Mr. (now Sir) Cornthwaite Hector Rason was president
and Mr. Alexander Morrison secretary. This is the in-
stitution which exists at the present day, and which con-
trols all stock and share transactions. During the ex-
citing times of the gold boom an open exchange was
established, but this was regarded by the members of the
Stock Exchange itself much in the way that unregistered
racecourses are regarded by the Western Australian Turf
Club. It did not survive for any lengthy period.
The objects of the Stock Exchange are: —The con-
ducting and carrying on of the business usually carried
on by similar institutions, and more particularly to pro-
SAW & GRIMWOOD,
Jun. (C. A. Saw and Sam. E. Grim-
wood, jun.), stock-and share-brokers,
auctioneers and land agents, etc.,
New Zealand Chambers, 105 St.
George’s Terrace, Perth. CHARLES
AUGUSTUS SAW, J.P., Presi-
dent of the Stock Exchange of
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES AUGUSTUA SAW.
Perth, was born at the western
metropolis on September 15, 1865,
and is a son of the late Mr. Plenry
Saw, a merchant in the early days
of the State. He received a sound
education at the Perth High School
and subsquently joined the staff of
the National Bank for the sake of
gaining commercial experience. Three
years later he resigned from the ser-
vice, and attracted by the gold dis-
coveries at Kimberley followed the
rush thither in 1886. For a year
he prospected on this field, but meet-
ing with only moderate results at
the end of that time returned to the
capital. The Yilgarn goldfield was
being opened up about this period,
and, undaunted by the difficulties
of transit which could be made only
by means of drays and horses, Mr.
Saw proceeded to Southern Cross,
then newly discovered. Here his
enterprise was rewarded by the ac-
quirement of several promising
claims; but in 1889 he returned to
Perth and once more entered upon
banking pursuits. In 1890 he re-
ceived the appointment of manager
of a branch of the Commercial Bank
at Southern Cross, being the first
official entrusted with the responsible
duties of this position on the gold-
fields. While resident at this centre
before the great Coolgardie dis-
coveries were made Mr. Saw took
every advantage of the opportunities
offering for commercial enterprise,
and in conjunction with others estab-
lished the coach connection between
Southern Cross and the eastern gold-
fields. This venture, in which Mr.
Saw was the largest shareholder,
mote and facilitate all dealing in stocks and shares; and
in all monetary transactions to adjust and enforce the
settlement of all disputes and controversies between the
members; to establish just and equitable principles in
connection with all transactions taking place on the Ex-
change; to maintain uniformity in the rules, regulations,
and usages of any trade or business, the subject matter
of transaction on the Exchange, and of the trade or busi-
ness of brokers and dealers in stocks and shares; and to
promote the business of the Exchange and increase its
amount and augment the facilities with which it may be
conducted.
The governing body of the institution at present
consists of the following: —President, Charles A. Saw;
Vice-President, H. Hocking; Committee, W. H. Willis,
Alfred J. Mellor, and W. Williams; Secretary, Arthur
W. Glover.
proved a huge financial success, and
was carried on under the style of
Cobb & Co., a firm which afterwards
became famous. Upon the rise of
the Coolgardie prosperity he several
times visited this now noted centre
and acquired large interests in the
vicinity of the growing settlement.
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. SAM. FRIMWOOD.
In January, 1896, disposing of the
various business claims that held
him at Southern Cross, he estab-
lished himself at Perth, engaging in
stock- and share-broking and the con


duct of mining agencies, etc., his
connection with large mining inter-
ests enabling him very efficiently to
transact business on behalf of lead-
ing firms and citizens of Perth and
the Eastern States. In 1910 he
entered into partnership with Mr-
S. E. B. Grimwood, jun., since when
the firm has been carried on under
the above title at New Zealand
Chambers, St. George's Terrace,
Perth. At the request of the rate-
payers Mr. Saw became a candidate
for a seat in the City Council, and
was returned as representative for
South Ward in May, 1&97. Mr.
Saw has been a member of the
Western Australian Turf Club Com-
mittee for nine years and is at pre-
sent Acting Vice-Chairman. He is
of genial disposition, and by his
business probity and upright prin-
ciples has won the respect and
esteem of his fellow-citizens in
the “City of the Golden West.”
SAMUEL EDWARD BYRNE
GRIMWOOD, member of the Stock
Exchange of Perth, is a son
of Mr. Samuel Thomas Grimwood,
of Perth, his birthplace being
Melbourne, Victoria, where he first
saw the light on September 21,
1875. He was educated at the Scotch
College, Melbourne, and in 1897
came to Western Australia, where
he became engaged in accountancy
work. For six years he occupied the
position of local Secretary to the firm
of Daniel White & Company, Lim-
ited, carriage builders and importers,
and subsequently joined the senior
staff of Ford, Rhodes, Ford, & Co.,
chartered accountants, of England,
with whom he continued for four
years. He was Secretary and Busi-
ness Manager of the Emu Brewery
for some time, and in 1910 resigned
this appointment to join Mr. Saw
in partnership, his special depart-
ment being the general land agency
and auctioneering business carried
on by the firm. Mr. Grimwood has
always been prominent in athletic
and sporting circles, and since com-
ing to Western Australia has also
taken a deep interest in military
affairs, now holding a commission of
Lieutenant in the 18th Australian
Light Horse Regiment. When at col-
lege he was captain of the Cadet
Corps, and had a seat in the winning
boat when the College was head of
the river, besides being a member of
all the athletic clubs formed in con-
nection with the College. In 1892,
when this institution was champion
school of Victoria, holding an un-
beaten record in all branches of sport
for the year, he was included in
every team competing in the various
events. He is popularly known in
racing circles and for eight years
acted as judge to the Western
Australian Turf Club, the Canning
Park Turf Club, the Helena Vale
Race Club, the Belmont Park Race
Club, TattersalTs Club, and the
Premantle Hunt Club, resigning
these offices in September, 1911, to
take up the duties of Stipendiary
Steward to the W.A.T.C. He filled
the position of judge with perfect
satisfaction to the large section of
the community which follows the
'‘sport of kings” and retained the
full confidence of the public during
the years that he occupied the box.
For several years past he has acted
as honorary judge and starter in con-
nection with the sports of the four
public secondary schools of the State,
and in this capacity has rendered
utmost satisfaction to all associated
with the promotion of these im-
portant contests. He has a large
circle of acquaintances and his popu-
larity is widespread. Mr. Grimwood
is a member of the Perth and Tatter-
saTs Clubs. He was married in
the year 1907 to Mabel, youngest
daughter of Mr. George Pilly, of
St. Kilda, Victoria, an old and
esteemed resident of the sister State,
where he has resided for a great
number of years.
HERBERT HOCKING, J.P.,
Vice-President of the Stock Ex-
change of Perth, is a native of
South Australia, having been born at
Adelaide on March 19, 1850. He is
a son of the late Mr. Nicholas Hock-
ing of the same city, and received
his education at the Grammar
School, Nairne, in the Mount Lofty
Ranges. His schooldays ended he
engaged in station work, and his ex-
periences during the ensuing years
were of a highly-adventurous na-
ture. He was a cattle-drover and
station-hand in turn, and in the
country round about Mount Gam-
bier, where lived Lindsay Gordon,
the Australian poet, he spent con-
siderable time in taming the un-
broken steed. Seeking a change in
the daily routine Mr. Hocking pro-
ceeded to Adelaide and was engaged
in business, which he carried on for
nearly ten years, at the end of that
time proceeding to Port Wakefield,
some 75 miles north of the capital,
where he entered into farming pur-
suits, with which he combined the
office of auctioneer, etc. In 1896 he
left the Central State for Western
Australia, and soon after his arrival
in Perth commenced in business as
a land and commission agent and
importer at the same time becoming
representative for The Kalgoorlie
Miner , in which capacity he still con-
tinues to act. Mr. Hocking became
a member of the Stock Exchange of
Perth in 1898, and has since taken
an active part in its affairs. He is
a member of the Committee, and has
filled the presidential chair on two
occasions, being at present Vice-Pre-
sident of the institution. He has
always evinced a keen interest in
public affairs and was Chairman of
the Wanneroo Roads Board for the
first eight years of its existence. He
has at heart the welfare of the Con-
gregational Church, and in con-
nection with that body holds office
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HERBERT HOCKING.
as senior deacon of the Trinity
Church. Besides this he acts as
Treasurer to the Congregational
Union and Home Missions of
Western Australia. He is a mem-
ber of the Masonic fraternity and of
the Perth Club. In his youth he was
devoted to athletic sports of all kinds
and was an amateur rider of some
note, as well as a strong supporter
of cycling when that sport held a
prominent place in the public fancy.
Mr. Hocking was for four years on
the Caves Board, always taking a
keen interest in that work, and for
several years was on the Board of
Management of the Perth Public
Hospital. At present he holds the
position of Hon. Secretary to the


Victoria Institute and Industrial
School for the Blind, having served
on the Committee for ten years. Mr.
Hocking, who was gazetted a
Justice of the Peace in 1903, married
Eliza Smillie, daughter of the late
Mr. Joseph Ryder, of Nairne, South
Australia, and has a surviving
family of three sons and five
daughters.
ARTHUR WILLIAM GLOVER,
J.P., Hon. Secretary of the Stock
Exchange of Perth, was born at
Penge, County Kent, England, on
January 1, 1863. He is a son of
the late Mr. William Brooks Glover,
of London, and was educated by
private tuition in that city. Subse-
quently he served a seven-years'
apprenticeship to the building and
contracting trade with the firm of
Messrs. George Trollope & Sons, up-
on the completion of which in 1885
he left London for Western Aus-
tralia. After spending three yeais
as a Government draughtsman he
joined the commercial branch of
The West Australian newspaper, and
in 1890 started on his own account
in Perth as a stock- and share-
broker. He is the only foundation
member of the Perth Stock Ex-
change now in Western Australia,
and is a well-known identity in min-
ing and financial circles. A Director
of the Canning Park Turf Club and
the Aachen and Munich Fire In-
surance Company, he is also Chair-
man of the Bunbury Brewing Com-
pany, and holds a commission of
Justice of the Peace.
SYDNEY JAMES YEO, of the
firm of Yeo & Cooke, stock- and
share-brokers, Emanuel's Buildings,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr. John
Yeo, of Stonehouse, Gloucestershire,
England, where the subject of this
memoir was born on October 23,
1862. Lie received his educa-
tion at a private school in his na-
tive town, and upon the conclusion
of his scholastic career was appren-
ticed to the grocery business for three
years. At the end of this period
he came to Australia, and landing
at Sydney followed the same calling
in that city for a time. Two years
after his arrival he relinquished his
connection with commercial life in
the city and took a position as store-
keeper on the “Willandra Station,"
on the Lachlan River, in New South
Wales, which he retained for about
five years. In 1894, attracted by the
Coolgardie gold discoveries, the re-
ports concerning which were spread-
ing all over the world, Mr. Yeo came
to Western Australia. Proceeding
to the goldfields he started opera-
tions in dry-blowing, but not meet-
ing with much success in the first in-
stance he decided to go to Hannan’s
(now Kalgoorlie), and in conjunc-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. SYDNEY JAMES YEO.
tion with Messrs. Home and Mac-
kay pegged out the claim which is
now known as the South Kalgoorlie,
a mine which proved a magnificent
proposition, and has continued to
yield good results ever since its
first development. After working
the property for some years the pro-
prietors sold it to the present Com-
pany, and Mr. Yeo entered upon
business pursuits as representative for
Messrs. Clark & Robinson,, share-
brokers, of Adelaide and London.
Four years later he opened in Kal-
goorlie on his own account and met
with great success in the conduct of
his operations, in 1902 forming a
branch business at Perth in partner-
ship with and under the manage-
ment of Mr. Cooke,, and which con-
nection has existed ever since. In
1911 he ceded his goldfields business
to Mr. C. W. Cameron, for several
years his chief clerk and assistant at
Kalgoorlie, and took up his residence
at Perth, having reaped a fair re-
ward for his years of strenuous mer-
cantile activity, which precluded
participation in the various attrac-
tive pursuits open to men of greater
leisure. He is a member of the Stock
Exchange and the Weld, Kalgoorlie,
and Hannan's Clubs, of the Western
Australian Club, and of the Kal-
goorlie Racing Club. In 1897 he
married Eliza, daughter of the late
Mr. John J. Donnelly, of England,
and has two sons and a daughter.
ALFRED JAMES MELLOR,
stock- and share-broker, of the Stock
Exchange, Perth, is a son of Mr. C.
J. Mellor, of the Bank of Adelaide,
and was born at Gawler, South Aus-
tralia on March 14, 1874. After
attending various schools he con-
cluded his scholastic career at Prince
Alfred College, and being desirous of
obtaining some station experience
journeyed to “Warrakimbo," in the
Far North of the State, where he
remained for somewhat less than two
years. Returning to Adelaide he
joined the Civil Service in the Tax-
ation Department, and continued his
connection with this office until 1896,
when he was attracted by the pros-
pects offering in the rising State of
Western Australia. Mr. Mellor
arrived at Perth in January of that
year, and proceeding to Coolgardie
commenced manual work on the
mines. He worked on the Golden
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ALFRED JAMES MELLOR.
Leases for some time, and having
gained a good practical knowledge of
the mining industry within two years
joined the clerical staff of the Central
Exploration Corporation under the
late Mr. Julius Judell. This post he
resigned in order to enter the business
of Messrs. Heinemann & Co., stock-
and share-brokers, of Kalgoorlie,
eventually transferring his services to
the firm of Messrs. T. F. Brimage and
Co., for whom he acted as Manager


on the goldfields. In 1902 he was
placed in charge of the Perth branch
of the latter firm, and during the
following year joined the Stock Ex-
change and established himself in
business on his own account. Mr.
Mellor is a great lover of horses and
enjoys all sports where this noble
animal takes a prominent part. He
is one of the leading members of the
Western Australian Hunt Club and
takes an active part in its manage-
ment.
ALBERT GEORGE BIRD,
stock-, share-, and investment-broker,
12, New Zealand Chambers, St.
George's Terrace, Perth, member of
the Stock Exchange of Perth, is a
son of Mr. S. H. A. Bird, valuator,
of Adelaide. He was born in the
Queen City of the South on March
14, 1873, and received his scholastic
training at St. Peter's College in
his native place. At the close of his
schooldays he joined the staff of the
Savings Bank of South Australia
and after about two years in this
service relinquished it to take a
clerical position in the Adelaide
office of the Australian Mutual Pro-
vident Society. He steadily rose
through the different grades of pro-
motion in this employ and upon his
retirement in 1896 was relieving
manager at Mount Gambier. Upon
his arrival on Western Australian
shores in the latter year Mr. Bird
proceeded direct to the goldfields,
and in conjunction, with his brother
carried on flourishing stores and
general agency business at Menzies
and Leonora. During this period he
became well known all over the north-
eastern fields for his go-ahead com-
mercial principles and strict atten-
tion to business, a reputation he still
enjoys. In 1905 he came to Perth
and established himself as a stock-,
share-, and investment-broker, and
in his markedly successful career
in this line has gained a wide and
ever-increasing experience in the
financial side of the mining indus-
try. He has enjoyed the confidence
of many leading men in the com-
mercial world, and for many years
represented the firm of Messrs.
Theodore Bruce & Co., and after-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALBERT GEORGE VIRD.
wards Messrs. Wilkinson & Bruce, of
Adelaide. Mr. Bird is an ardent phil-
atelist, being the fortunate possessor
of two valuable stamp collections.
He is very fond of photography,
and as an amateur takes great in-
terest in the pastime, gardening also
being one of his hobbies. He is a
member of the Western Australian
Club, of the Masonic fraternity, and
of the Commercial Travellers' Club,
and as a member of the Libera]
League of Western Australia follows
the course of politics with interest.
He is also a member of the Horticul-
tural Society. In 1901 he married
Olive, daughter of Mr. John Tasker,
late of Adelaide, and has two sons
and a daughter.
HENRY ROSALES WALSH,
representative in Perth for the firm
of M. H. Walsh, Kalgoorlie, is a
son of the late Judge Walsh, of Mel-
bourne, and was born at St. Kilda,
in the vicinity of that city, on
December 14, 1873. He pursued his
scholastic studies at the well-known
Wesley College, Melbourne, and at
the close of his schooldays estab-
lished his first interests in the
mining industry by joining the firm
of Messrs. John Taylor & Sons, the
well-known London mining man-
agers, in their Harrietville ventures.
In 1897 he came to Western Aus-
tralia and went right to the heart of
things on the goldfields, spending
three years as battery manager on
the Menzies Consolidated Mine at
Menzies. At the time of the rush
to the alluvial field at Kanowna he
was among the first to proceed to the
scene of action, and took up claims,
one of which proved a very fortunate
venture. In 1902 he commenced
assaying on the North Boulder and
Block 45 Gold Mines, and continued
there until two years later, when he
joined his brother (Mr. M. H.
Walsh) in the sharebroking business,
and later successfully represented
the firm in the Perth office, where he
is now stationed. Mr. Walsh is a
great lover of horses, and as an
amateur rider is well known in rac-
ing circles, where he has carried off
several prizes. He has been keen
in the matter of athletic sports
generally, and is a strong supporter
of cricket and football and other
manly exercises.


Engineers, Architects, and Surveyors.
The Western Australian Institution of Engineers
was established in 1909, and includes civil, mechanical,
electrical, hydraulic, mining, or other professional
engineers. Its objects are the advancement of engineer-
ing knowledge and practice and the maintenance of a
high professional standard among its members, and the
promotion of the professional interests of engineers and
the improvement of their professional status. Among
the means to be employed for this purpose are meetings
for the presentation and discussion of appropriate papers
and for social and professional intercourse; the publica-
tion of such papers and discussion as may be deemed
expedient; the maintenance of a library; the collection
of maps, drawings, and models, and the establishment of
facilities for their use.
The membership list is divided into members,
associate members, associates, honorary members, and
students. Members must be professional engineers of at
least five years’ standing and have been engaged in
responsible positions; associate members consist of
engineers of five years’ practice who may be elected into
the class; associates are those not qualified as engineers,
but who by virtue of their connection with science or the
arts are qualified to confer with engineers; honorary
members consist of distinguished persons not engaged in
the profession of engineering in Western Australia; and
students are those not under the age of eighteen who are
qualifying for the profession.
The affairs of the institution are governed by a
council, the President being Mr. E. E. Light, M.I.C.E.
(who succeeded the Engineer-in-Chief in that position),
and the Secretary Mr. W. B. Shaw. Though it has only
been in existence for some two years, the institution has
published several valuable papers upon engineering works
in the State, and has done much to increase the influence
of the profession generally.
The Western Australian Institute of Architects was
founded in 1892, incorporated in 1902, and admitted to
alliance with the Royal Institute in 1910. The objects
for which the institute is established are: —The study
and cultivation of the science and art of architecture;
advancing, protecting, and elevating the practice of it in
its several branches; and the cultivation of friendly
intercourse between the members of the institute. The
institute consists of life fellows, fellows, associates, and
honorary fellows, and such other classes of members,
either subscribing or non-subscribing, as may be estab-
lished by the institute. Life fellows are architects who
have been fellows not less than ten years, and who are
elected life fellows by the institute for eminent services
rendered to the institute. Fellows are architects who
have attained the age of thirty years and have served
articles for at least three years to a recognized practi-
tioner, or otherwise have satisfied the council as to their
qualifications, and who have been engaged as principals
for at least seven years in the practice of architecture,
and have erected buildings of sufficient importance in the
judgment of the council. Provided that the institute
shall have power to declare that every person desiring
to be admitted a fellow shall be required to have passed
such examination or examinations as may be directed by
the institute; but in special cases the council shall have
power to dispense with such examination or examina-
tions. Honorary fellows are gentlemen eminently dis-
tinguished by scientific, artistic, or literary attainments.
Should an honorary fellow commence practice as an
architect in Western Australia he ceases to be an
honorary fellow. Associates are persons engaged in the
study or practice of architecture who have attained the
age of twenty-one years, and have served at least four
years’ articles to a recognized practitioner, and have
passed such examination or examinations as may be
directed by the institute, according to a standard fixed
from time to time by the council. Associates of the
Royal Institute of British Architects, or of any other
incorporated association of architects which the council
may from time to time recognize as upholding a suffi-
ciently high standard of qualification, may be admitted
to ballot without being required to pass an examination.
An associate need not pass examination prior to election
as a fellow. Examination may from time to time be held
at such times and places within the State of Western
Australia, or elsewhere, and in such a manner, as the
council may from time to time determine.
The institute has power to grant such diplomas or
certificates in connection with examinations or otherwise
in such manner as the council of the institute may from
time to time prescribe.
Professional practice as to charges and architectural
competitions is regulated by a schedule based upon that
of the Royal Institute of British Architects, but adapted
to local conditions.
Mr. G. T. Poole was the principal founder of the
institute and also the first President when it was
incorporated, and is the only member who has been
elected a life fellow of the institute. The other
Presidents are Messrs. M. F. Cavanagh, J. T. Hobbs,
and P, W. Harrison.


The Hon. Secretary and chief executive officer of
the institute is Mr. William A. Nelson, who has occupied
that office for a number of years, and by his efforts has
raised the institute to a position of importance among
the professional bodies of the States.
It is worthy of remark that the Western Australian
Institute was the second Australian institute to be ad-
mitted to alliance with the Royal Institute of British
Architects.
The qualifications necessary to enable a person to
practise as a surveyor in the State was determined by
the Surveyors’ Licensing Board (of which the Surveyor-
General is Chairman). Registration is granted either
as the result of examination or on production of
satisfactory evidence gained in some other State or
country.
Following upon the establishment of the Institution
of Civil Engineers, an Institution of Surveyors was
founded in 1910. The Articles of Association set forth
that “the institution is established for the purposes and
with the objects expressed in the Memorandum of Asso-
ciation and all matters incidental thereto, and in further-
ance thereof the council shall, subject to the resolutions
of the institution in general meeting, direct attention
from time to time to such of the matters therein men-
tioned, or incidental thereto, as may appear to them
expedient. The council of the institution shall not con-
sider or entertain any cause of complaint or grievance on
the part of any surveyor who is not for the time being
a member of the institution, and no such surveyor shall
be directly entitled, through the aid or instrumentality
of the institution, to any benefits or privileges contem-
plated thereby.”
The institution consists (firstly) of all members and
associates on the roll of the institution who signed the
Memorandum of Association and the Articles; also
(secondly) of all those persons named in the schedule to
the Articles who shall, after the date of registration of
the institution under the Associations Incorporation Act
1895, apply in writing, under their respective hands, to
the council of the institution to be declared members or
associates thereof, and who shall, by such writing, under-
take to agree and abide by all the provisions of such
Memorandum and Articles of Association, and to pay all
moneys which under or by virtue of such Memorandum
or Articles they shall be liable to pay, and who shall
from time to time be declared by such council to be mem-
PERCY WILLIAM HARRI-
SON, F.R.V.I.A. and F.W.A.1.A.,
President of the Institute of Archi-
tects of Western Australia, was born
at London on June 19, 1864. At
the age of fifteen he entered the
office of the late Mr. Thomas Watts,
F.R.1.8.A., to whom he was articled
for five years. Upon the completion
of his indentures he was elevated to
the post of chief draughtsman to
the firm, and in 1893 he severed his
connection with Mr. Watts in order
to launch out in business for him-
self. Mr. Harrison came to Perth in
1895 and immediately after his
arrival in the Western State entered
upon the practice of his profession,
bers or associates of such institution; and (thirdly) of all
such other duly-qualified surveyors as may from time to
time be elected and entered on the register of members
in accordance with these Articles, and all such other per-
sons as may from time to time be elected honorary mem-
bers, associates, and students, and shall, in writing, in
such form as the council shall from time to time deter-
mine, have accepted such membership, and each person
so accepting or who shall become a member, associate, or
student as aforesaid (all which persons are hereinafter
included in the term “members,” unless otherwise ex-
pressed, or the context shall not admit thereof) shall re-
ceive a certificate of membership indicating the class to
which he belongs. A member shall be a person who is
entitled to practise as a surveyor in any of the States of
the Commonwealth or in the Dominion of New Zealand,
or who can produce a certificate of having passed
examinations in either surveying or civil engineering,
which, in the opinion of the council, is sufficient evidence
that he thoroughly understands the theory and practice
of surveying, provided that any person of eminence in
any profession allied to that of surveying shall, with the
consent of the council, be eligible for election as a mem-
ber in the manner prescribed. An honorary member
shall be of high scientific attainments, of eminence as a
surveyor, or a member of the institution who, having
retired from practice, is in the opinion of the council
entitled to the special respect of the profession. An
associate shall at the time of his election be at least
twenty-one years of age, and shall satisfy the council that
he has been employed in connection with surveying for
a period of not less than five years, and shall produce a
certificate from a member of the institution to the effect
that he is competent to conduct surveys; or he shall
satisfy the council that he has followed the profession of
a civil engineer for a period of not less than five years,
and that during a portion of that time he has held a
responsible position on some engineering work. A
student shall be a student of surveying.
The first President of the institution was the
Honourable Sir Newton J. Moore, K.C.M.G., who was
succeeded by the present occupant of the office, the
Surveyor-General (Mr. Harry F. Johnston). Mr. W. B.
Shaw is the Secretary. As in the case of the Institution
of Engineers, the proceedings are published, and contain
much information of interest to surveyors in their work
throughout the State.
in which he continues to the present
day. In 1885 Mr. Harrison was
elected an Associate of the Royal
Victorian Institute of Architects
and fifteen years later Fellow of the
same Society. He is a foundation
member of the Western Australian
Institute of Architects and has been
a member of the Council since its


creation, and on three occasions has
occupied the presidential chair, be-
sides which he has acted as Hon.
Secretary for two years and Hon.
Treasurer for a term. He has held
high honours in the Masonic world
and at present is Senior Grand War-
den, and Master of the Mundaring
Lodge, No. 90, W.A.C.
GEORGE TEMPLE POOLE,
J. A.R.T.8.A., Assoc.lnst.C.E.,
and F.W.A.1.A., is a son of the
late Lieutenant - Colonel J. George
Temple, of Wingfield, and Dame
Louisa Poole, of Rocborne Manor,
Hampshire, England, and was born
on May 29, 1856. He was educated
at Winchester College, and was com-
missioned to the Hants Militia
School. Upon leaving he was
articled to the late Mr. Christopher
Crabb Crecke, subsequently study-
ing under the late Mr. George
Judge, F.R.1.8.A. Having com-
pleted the course of study he became
associated with Sir James Lemon,
Past President of the Institute of
Civil Engineers, and continued with
this gentleman for some considerable
time, afterwards joining the staff of
the late Mr. John Ashdown, who
made his name in the designing and
execution of harbour works in
England. Having gained consider-
able and varied experience in the
Old Country Mr. Poole turned his
attention to the overseas dominions
of Britain and, in 1885 was ap-
pointed Superintendent of the
Public Works Department of the
Imperial Service in Western Aus-
tralia. Three years later, upon the
retirement of the Honourable J.
Arthur Wright, Sir Napier Broome,
K. then Governor of the
State, promoted Mr. Poole to the
position of Director of Public
Works, which he occupied until the
abolition of the office upon the
introduction of responsible govern-
ment in 1890. Under the new
Government he was given the ap-
pointment of Colonial Architect and
Superintendent of Pubh’c Works,
and upon the reorganization of the
department accepted the post of
Assistant Engineer-in-Chief, from
which he retired on a pension in
1897. He afterwards directed his
energies to the promotion of a
company for an all-British cable
service, which project, however, fell
through, greater success attending
his scheme for the establishment of
the Perth Tramways at a later date.
A couple of years were spent by Mr.
Poole in Europe, and upon his
return he began private prac-
tice as an architect and en-
gineer in Perth, and has added
various works to the long list of
important public buildings erected
under his supervision while in the
Government Service. Among these
] atter may be mentioned the Perth
Government Offices, including the
General Post Office, the Colonial
Hospital, Perth Observatory, Perth
Branch of the Royal Mint, the
Victorian Public Library and
Museum, Lighthouses at Cape Leeu-
win and Rottnest, and numerous
others. The gentleman under review
was appointed Justice of the Peace
for the whole State in 1889. He is
a Past President and now Vice-
President of the Institute of Archi-
Bartletto Perth.
MR. GEORGE TEMPLE POOLE.
tects. He gives much time and
thought to matters political and has
had a prominent share in the
organization of the Liberal League
in this State, while a favourite
hobby is to further the interests of
the Society of Arts in Western Aus-
tralia, this body having commanded
his services as President in the past.
Tie married Beatrice, daughter of
the late Captain John Banger, R.N.,
of Havant, Hampshire, England.
HOBBS, SMITH, & FORBES,
architects, Weld Chambers, St.
George’s Terrace, Perth. (J. J. Tal-
bot Hobbs, and W. J. Waldie
Forbes.) In the remarkable pro-
gress made by the City of Perth
since the eighties the firm under re-
view has played an important and
leading part. Mr. Talbot Hobbs
commenced the practice of his pro-
fession in Perth as far back as 1887,
and much of the fine architecture
which to-day graces the lead-
ing thoroughfares of the wes-
tern metropolis was designed
by him. He continued on
his own behalf until the year 1904,
when he admitted into partnership
Mr. Dean Smith, since deceased,
and Mr. Waldie Forbes, and the re-
constructed firm adopted the pre-
sent designation, under which it
has come prominently before the
public notice. With the fresh per-
sonnel the firm has lost nothing of
its ancient vigour, but rather con-
tinues each year to add to the pres-
tige so worthily gained by its
founder. During the past decade
many prominent structures have
been erected in the metropolitan
area, the designs of which reflect
great credit on the creative faculty
of the firm and go to enhance the
architectural features of the capital.
Among these are the Temperance
and General Chambers on St.
George’s Terrace; Messrs. Sargood
Brothers’ warehouse: the Masonic
Temple, Hay Street; Dalgety’s
Buildings, Fremantle; Messrs. Boan
Brothers’ emporium in Wellington
Street; and Sandover’s fine frontage
in Hay Street, Perth. Surrey Cham-
bers, Furnival Chambers, New Zea-
land Chambers, the warehouses of
Messrs. Harris, Scarfe, & Co., and
Messrs. Falk & Co., the Bon Marche
Stores, and Messrs. Charles Moore
and Co.’s premises are also the work
of this well-known firm. Many pri-
vate residences also have been de-
signed and erected by the firm
which for comfort and convenience
compare favourably with similar ar-
chitecture in the Eastern States.
W. J. WALDIE FORBES,
F.A.W.A.1.A., is a son of the late
Mr. Walter Scott Forbes, of Banff,
Scotland, an officer in the Imperial
Army, and was born at Kinsale,
County Cork, Ireland. He was taken
at an early age to India and after-
wards to New Zealand, and pursued
his scholastic studies in various
places, attending schools in New
Zealand. Brisbane, and Melbourne,
where he finished his education at
St. James’ Grammar School. At the
age of fifteen he entered the office of
Mr. Walter Scott Law, an architect
of Melbourne, with whom he re-
mained for eight and a half years.
At the end of that period he went
to Sydney and became connected


with Mr. Edward E. Raht, who was
then engaged as chief architect and
building administrator in the erec-
tion of the great Equitable Build-
ings in Sydney and Melbourne. Mr.
Forbes spent three years in the
carrying out of these and other
works of large dimensions, and upon
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. W. J. WALDIE FORBES.
the completion of the important con-
tracts referred to the office staff was
disbanded and Mr. Raht returned to
America. Arriving in Western Aus-
tralia, the gentleman under review
shortly afterwards entered the office
of Messrs. Wilkinson & Smith, and
later, after the dissolution of that
firm, accepted the position of man-
ager and chief draughtsman with the
late Dean Smith, who afterwards
amalgamated his practice with that
of the present firm. He continued
to fill this post until the partnership
referred to was formed in 1905,
when he was admitted as one of the
principals of the new firm, and has
continued to practise in this connec-
tion ever since. He is a member and
Past Master of the Masonic craft,
and at the present time holds the
office of Grand Superintendent of
Works in the Grand Lodge of Wes-
tern Australia. He is a member of
several social and sporting clubs,
among the former being the Free-
masons’ Club and “The Perth,” and
the latter the Fremantle Golf and
the Freshwater Bay Yacht Clubs.
He seeks outdoor recreation mostly
on the golf links and finds indoor
pastime in billiards, of which he is
a skilful exponent. In 1903
Mr. Forbes married Clara, eldest
daughter of the late Mr. David
oo
Strickland, of Perth, a descendant
of a very old English family. He
has a son and four daughters.
EDWIN SUMMERHAYES,
F.R.1.8.A., F.W.A.1.A., is a son
of Mr. George Summerhayes, of Lon-
don, and was born at the world’s
metropolis on March 6, 1868. He
was educated at Christ College, Lon-
don, and at sixteen years of age
accompanied his parents to Austra-
lia. After landing at Melbourne he
returned to Adelaide and was
articled to the late Mr. James Hill,
F.5.A.1.A., completing his studies
in the profession of architecture
under the Honourable William Pitt,
of Melbourne, with whom he re-
mained for about five years. In
1894 he came to Western Australia,
and proceeding straight to Coolgar-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. EDWIN SUMMERHAYES.
die established himself in business as
an architect in that town. When
Coolgardie began to decline Mr
Summerhayes removed to Perth and
began practice in the capital, where
he has continued ever since. His
first work of importance was the fine
building of Forrest Chambers, which
he designed and erected for the
Right Honourable Sir John Forrest,
G.C.M.G., and was also responsible
for the plans and erection of “The
Bungalow," a private residence for
the same gentleman. In the country
towns and districts he has a very
large connection, much public and
private work being placed to his
credit. He has designed and erected
numerous public buildings for Roads
Boards, Municipal Councils, and
other bodies at Katanning, Wagin,
Coolgardie, and Kalgoorlie, and com-
fortable homesteads and villas for
which he was architect abound in
all parts of Western Australia. Mr.
Summerhayes in 1907 was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Institute of Bri-
tish Architects. He is attached to
the 11th Australian Infantry Regi-
ment, having been gazetted Lieu-
tenant in 1905, and major in 1911.
Keenly interested in municipal affairs,
for a time he filled the office of coun-
cillor at Claremont, near Perth, and
is Hon. Treasurer of the Claremont
and Cottesloe Branch of the Austra-
lian Liberal League. He is a Past
Grand Lodge Officer in the Masonic
fraternity, and at the present time
is a member of the Military Lodge.
He married Florence, daughter of
Mr. Thomas Camm, of Royal Park,
Melbourne, and has a son and a
daughter.
CAVANAGH & CAVANAGH,
architects and sworn valuators, Com-
mercial Bank Chambers, corner of
St. George’s Terrace and Barrack
Street, Perth [M. F. Cavanagh,
F.R.1.8.A. (Lond.) and F.R.Hist.S.
(Lond.), and J. C. Cavanagh,
F.W.A.I.A.]. Twenty years ago
Perth had but little in the way of
imposing architecture to support her
claim to rank as one of the capital
cities of Australia, but the inter-
vening years have brought about a
wonderful metamorphosis, and to-day
she worthily upholds the distinction
of being one of the first half-dozen
cities of the Commonwealth. To the
Messrs. Cavanagh must be given a
large share of the credit due for
this transformation, as the plans
and designs of many of the striking
buildings now adorning the thorough-
fares of the Western metropolis were
conceived and executed by them.
The work by the firm has been of a
most varied character, and examples
of it are to be found in almost every
centre of importance in the State.
Numerous business premises, private
houses, and modern homes have been
designed and erected by the firm
which, in addition, has designed and
superintended the erection of a large
number of convents, churches, and
educational buildings in connection
with the diocesan work of the Roman
Catholic Church. Worthy of men-
tion among these is the Church of the
Oblate Fathers at Fremantle (a hand-
some example of Gothic decorated
architecture, which when finished will
be crowned by an imposing steeple),


the Hospital at Subiaco for the
nursing sisterhood of St. John, the
Convent Boarding School on Cathe-
dral Hill, the Convent at Bunbury,
the Christian Brothel College on
St. George’s Terrace (the eastern
wing of which was only added early
in 1912), the large three-storied
MR. JOHN CAVANAGH.
orphanages on Monger’s Lake and
on the Canning River, the Redemp-
torist Monastery and Church at
North Perth, the Bishop’s Palace
(Perth), and churches at Northam,
Coolgardie, and Kalgoorlie. The Fire
Brigade Stations at Perth and Fre-
mantle, and Baird’s Arcade, Hay
Street, Perth, we/re also designed
by the Messrs. Cavanagh. The
business premises include Brennan’s,
Hay Street; Foy & Gibson’s Hay
Street frontage; warehouses for A.
M. Bickford & Sons; Commercial
Union Assurance Buildings, St.
George’s Terrace; extensions of the
Commercial Bank, St. George’s Ter-
race; and a number of banking pre-
mises and country residences
throughout the State. The firm
also designed the plans of the Hotel
Esplanade, Perth, of which an excel-
lent view is to be had from the river,
the P. & O. Hotel, the Orient Hotel,
the Newcastle Club Hotel at Fre-
mantle, and a number of other hos-
telries in different parts of Western
Australia. The work turned out by
the firm has been of a most complex
nature, but the intimate knowledge
of every branch of the profession pos-
sessed by the principals has enabled
them to cope with the heavy de-
mands upon their creative faculties,
which have been stimulated to
higher flights by the continued con-
fidence of the firm's extensive
clientele. MICHAEL FRANCIS
CAVANAGH, the principal, was
born in the picturesque district sur-
rounding the town of Beechworth, in
the north-east of Victoria, in August,
1860. He is the second son of the
late Mr. John Cavanagh, of Tip-
perary, Ireland, who left his native
land in 1854 and came to Victoria, in
which State he first turned his atten-
tion to mining, which was then in the
heyday of its vigour, following the
rushes to the various newly-
discovered fields and delving after the
yellow metal with a fair modicum of
success. After some years of this
strenuous life he decided to return
to his original business as a builder
and general contractor, and so
settling near the town of Beech-
worth, and afterwards in Melbourne,
soon established thriving and pros-
perous connections. He continued in
Victoria until 1881, in which year he
removed his business to South Aus-
tralia, where he was similarly
engaged for several years. Later he
ioined the Government Architect's
Department as supervisor of public
buildings, and during the occupancy
of this post, which he held up to the
time of his decease in 1894, he super-
intended the plans and construction
of a great number of important
public buildings., Mr. M. F.
Cavanagh's elementary education
was obtained in the vicinity of his
birthplace, after which he attended
at a private academy conducted bv
Monsieur A. Longue, a gentleman of
considerable scholastic attainments.
His educational studies at an end, it
was decided that he should adopt the
profession of architecture as his life
work, and as a preliminary step to-
wards the realization of this ambition
he entered the local School of Arts
and gained practical experience of the
various branches of building on the
works conducted bv his father.
While still in his teens he entered
the South Australian Civil Service in
the Architect-in-Chief's Department,
and during the next few years made
rapid headway in the various
branches of architecture, and dis-
played such aptitude as to give everv
promise of a future career of great
brilliance. He now resigned his post
in the Government Service in order
to pursue his studies in London, and
subsequent to his arrival there he
entered the office of Mr. John Slater.
F.R.T.8.A., of Bedford Row, a
in.? man in architectural circles in
the Old World. He also entered as a
student in the Atelier, conducted by
Messrs. Millard & Bagallay, both
of whom are gold medallists of the
British Academy and men of con-
siderable distinction in the profes-
sion, where he made a special study
of design in its manifold branches.
His insatiable appetite for study was
further gratified by a course of lec-
tures at the Royal Academy, and he
also became a student at the South
Kensington School of Arts, where he
“crammed” the lengthy list of sub-
jects preparatory to undergoing the
severe tests conducted by the Royal
British Institute. In due course he
sat for the examination, and was re-
warded with the diploma entitling
him to Associateship in the Royal
British Institute, for which he had
travelled so far and studied so
assiduously. For the ensuing six
months he found work as temporary
hand in various offices, gaining
general practice (known in the profes-
sion as “inkslinging”) in planning and
designing all classes of work. Dur-
ing this time he had conferred upon
him the honour of Fellowship in the
Royal Historical Society of London
for his studies in ancient and modern
architecture and art. Mr. Cavanagh
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. MICHAEL FRANCIS CAVANAGH.
next returned to his adopted State,
and re-entered the Government
Architect’s Department as general
draughtsman, but he was soon
elevated to the post of Chief
Draughtsman, which he continued to
hold until the year 1891, when he
resigned, having decided to enter into
private practice on his own behalf.
While filling the last-mentioned posi


tion, he was responsible for the
pavilion hospitals, operating theatre,
and accident ward of the Adelaide
Hospital, and for a number of model
schools based on the design then in
vogue with the London County
Council, but adapted to local condi-
tions. In private practice Mr.
Cavanagh soon established a flourish-
ing connection in Adelaide and in the
northern centres of the Central State,
his work embracing designs of many
important buildings of public and
private nature, besides which he was
responsible for the plans of many
convents and church edifices. He
carried out the duties of correspond-
ing secretary to the R.I. of 8.A., and
was secretary of the South Australian
Institute of Architects, which offices
he resigned upon his departure from
the State. Mr. Cavanagh also held
a seat on the Board of Governors of
the Public Library, Museum, and
Art Gallery, and was an indefatigable
worker in the interests of the local
Society of Arts, being a constant ex-
hibitor at the annual exhibitions
held by the Society. Before the Aus-
tralasian Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, the Institute
of Architects, and the Society of Arts,
he delivered a series of lectures,
which afterwards were published in
pamphlet form. In matters of public
moment he also took a leading part,
and as representative for Macdonnell
Ward in the Adelaide City Council
and President for two terms of the
Australian Natives’ Association, his
name was closely identified with those
of the leading men of the day. He
took a live interest in politics, and
was strongly urged to contest the seat
for North Adelaide rendered vacant
by the death of the Hon. G. C.
Hawker, but about this time he was
considering the advisability of
settling in Western Australia, and
was compelled to refuse the proffered
honour, Mr. P. McM. Glynn being
chosen in his stead. He was also a
member of the Adelaide Rowing
Club, and held a seat in the champion
fours and pairs, taking part in many
events on the Torrens River. Mr.
Cavanagh first came to Western Aus-
tralia in 1895, with the object of
establishing his brother in a branch
office at Perth, but the tremendous
rush of work which assailed them on
all hands during the first twelve
months led to his decision per-
manently to take up his residence in
the Western State, and so we find him
at this stage abandoning a public
career of great promise in order to
devote his energies to the urgent re-
-002
quirements of a rapidly-expanding
practice. In the midst of this press
of work he managed, with other lead-
ing architects, to find time in which
to resuscitate the Western Australian
Institute of Architects, and with
characteristic vigour he soon infused
new life into the Institute which had
long remained in a moribund state.
He filled the presidential chair for
two consecutive terms, and for years
continued actively to promote the in-
terests of the Society. In 1898 Mr.
Cavanagh was made a Fellow of the
Royal Institute of British Architects.
Always taking an interest in develop-
ing and beautifying he was asked to
join the City Council, and for a num-
ber of years he represented West
Ward. He was Chairman of the
Public Works Committee, and a
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES CHARLES CAVANAGH.
strong advocate of municipalization
of lighting, tramways, and other
metropolitan services. He con-
tributed a series of leading and ex-
haustive articles advocating that the
services of the city which were neces-
sarily monopolies should rest in the
hands of the people, and these were
published simultaneously in The
West Australian and the now defunct
Morning Herald , at the moment
attracting a great deal of attention.
He was also a member of the Perth
Fire Brigade Board and of the Perth
Hospital Board. Politics also
claimed his attention, and at the first
Federal elections he was chosen by
the National, Liberal, and Protec-
tionists’ Associations to contest the
Perth seat in the House of Repre-
sentatives, but failed to secure a
majority, his opponent being Mr.
J. M. Fowler, the nominee of the
Labour Party. On another occasion
he was nominated for the Senate in
the Commonwealth Parliament, but
with no better success. Mr.
Cavanagh advocated a progressive
policy, which included Old-Age Pen-
sions, a Trans-Australian Railway
linking Western Australia with the
Eastern States, the Nationalization
of the Federal Area, etc.; but of re-
cent years he has entirely withdrawn
from active participation in the
politics of the day. Outside his pro-
fession he is interested in pastoral
pursuits, and at Kojonup has several
thousands of acres of land, which are
devoted to sheep-raising, the flock
being of the merino strain, founded
with rams brought from the Bun-
garee Estate in South Australia.
For recreation purposes he turns to
hunting, and he is freauently to be
seen at the meets of the Perth Hunt
Club. He is one of the founders and
an Ex-President of the King’s Park
Bowling Club, and in 1900 was the
winner of the Sargood Cup and Gold
Medal. He married in 1897
Dorothy, daughter of Judge Francis
LePoer Trench, of Ballarat, and has
two sons and a daughter.
JAMES CHARLES
CAVANAGH, F.W.A.1.A., the
youngest son of the late John
Cavanagh, was born at Melbourne
in 1874. Educated at the Chris-
tian Brothers’ College, Adelaide, he
first held a minor appointment
in the Adelaide School of Arts
and Design, at the age of sixteen
becoming articled to his brother, Mr.
M. F. Cavanagh. He entered as a
student at the R.8.1.A. in 1891, and
at the South Kensington Academv.
and was successful in passing many
examinations in architectural sub-
jects. Having finished his articles.
Mr. J. C. Cavanagh continued in his
brother’s office for several years as
general draughtsman, and later as
principal draughtsman, afterwards
spending twelve months on a visit to
the capitals of the Eastern States in
search of practical experience. He
came to Perth in 1900, and shortlv
afterwards was admitted into part-
nership with Mr. M. F. Cavanagh.
the arrangement continuing until
1905, when a dissolution was effected,
and Mr. J. C. Cavanagh left for Eng-
land to continue his studies under
Professor Tite and other eminent in-
structors. He next proceeded to the
Continent on a sketching tour, spend-
ing several months in the French


Provinces, and after an absence of
two years returned to Western Aus-
tralia, when the former partnership
was renewed and has since continued.
Since his arrival in the State he has
been a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Institute of Architects, and
for several years acted as Hon. Secre-
tary to that body, and is now on the
Council. He wields a very skilful
brush, and some of his water-
colour sketches are beautiful concep-
tions, giving every evidence of the
true artistic touch. He has been
President of the Old Boys’ Associa-
tion in connection with the Christian
Brothers' College for several years,
and is a member of long standing in
the Amateur Sports Club. His in-
terest in outdoor sport is keen, and
he played lacrosse with the first team
formed in the State, but nowadays
he takes his recreation on the golf
links.
OLDHAM & COX, architects and
building surveyors, Howard Street,
Perth. (C. L. Oldham, A.R.1.V.A.,
and A. E. Cox, F.5.A.1.A.). This
well-known firm, established in
Perth in 1905, has witnessed a
steady growth in popular favour ever
since its inception, and which shows
no signs of decreasing with the
greater demand for combined beauty
and convenience which is one of the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES LANCELOT OLDHAM.
marked characteristics of the present
era, while for stability and dignity
the designs executed by this firm are
second to none in Western Australia.
Prominent among the public build-
ings for which Messrs. Oldham and
Cox are responsible are the Emanuel
Buildings, erected at a cost of
£30,000, the great warehouses of
Messrs. G. Wood, Son, & Co.,
Messrs. G. & R. Wills & Co.,
Messrs. George Wills & Co.,
Messrs. Dobbie & Co., Copley's
Buildings, Wellington Buildings,
the Commercial Travellers' Club,
and the whole eastern side of
Howard Street, besides a large
and ever-increasing number of the
most important homesteads, hotels,
and villa residences in the area
surrounding the metropolis. Worthy
of special mention is the Geraldton
Town Hall, where Messrs. Oldham
and Cox designed and carried out %
suspended gallery which gives full
floor-space when the gallery is not in
use. The firm was also the first to
introduce into Perth buildings the
large steel-girders of 50 ft. span over
shop-fronts, doing away with the
older methods of pillars, which had
been found cumbersome and in
the way of future adjustments
or improvements. CHARLES
LANCELOT OLDHAM is a son of
the late Mr. James Oldham, of
Ballarat, Victoria, where he was born
on September 22, 1865. He was a
student at Ballarat College and sub-
sequently served articles to the firm
of Messrs. Tappin & Gilbert, archi-
tects, of Sydney, and
Ballarat. Having completed his in-
dentures he was sent to Sydney to
represent his firm in that city
and remained for about three years.
Among his earliest works was the
supervision of the erection of the
famous Riverview College, the
Roman Catholic Church in Lewis-
ham, and extensive school buildings,
at one time the work entrusted to his
hands totalling a cost of £lOO,OOO.
Mr. Oldham was then offered a posi-
tion in the Railways Department of
the Victorian Government, and
designed for it the Maryborough
Railway Station, subsequently being
given charge of the plans of the
extensive and up-to-date Lunatic
Asylum at Sunbury, for the Public
Works Department. Upon the com-
pletion of these and other large pub-
lic works he began practice on his
own account in Melbourne, giving
his attention chiefly to designs for
private residences, and in 1890 be-
came a partner in the firm of Messrs.
Kempson & Connolly. He repre-
sented this firm in Ballarat for
several years, and when the great
land boom burst he retired from the
connection, and following up the
Steiglitz mining boom practically
built that town during the two years
it lasted. He was then associated
with Mr. G. W. Clegg in private prac-
tice, mostly in designing homesteads
and woolsheds in the neighbourhood
of Ballarat and in the Western
district of Victoria. In 1896, with
Mr. J. Herbert Eales, he commenced
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALFRED EDWARD COX.
professional practice in Fremantle,
Western Australia, and during the
six years that this partnership con-
tinued the firm was responsible for
the designs of the Fremantle
Markets, Detmold's establishment,
and many other well-known build-
ings. In 1901 Mr. Oldham started
on his own behalf in Perth and Fre-
mantle, and entered into partnership
with Mr. A. E. Cox in 1905, since
when the firm has carried on under
the above title. He is a prominent
member of the Perth, Fremantle,
and Cottesloe Golf Clubs, finding in
the pursuit of this time-honoured
pastime a thoroughly congenial
recreation. He is also a member of
the Weld and other prominent
Clubs. In November, 1901, Mr. Old-
ham married the second daughter of
Captain Russell, R.N., late harbour-
master, Fremantle, and has two sons
and two daughters. ALFRED
EDWARD COX was born in Ade-
laide on May 21, 1869, being a son
of the late Mr. Richard Baxter Cox,
of that city. He was educated at
Whinham and St. Peter's Colleges
and, at the close of his scholastic
career, when about eighteen years of
age, entered upon commercial pur-
suits in the office of Elder, Smith and
Co., Limited, in the Broken Hill
branch of their business. After serv-
ing about two years on the clerical


staff of this firm he resigned and
went for an extended tour over the
States of Queensland and New South
Wales. Upon his return to Adelaide
in 1888 he became articled to the
firm of Messrs. Evans & Evans,
architects and licensed surveyors,
and during the term of four years
with the firm he competed against
allcomers for the designing of
labourers’ cottages and English farm
at the Adelaide Exhibition of 1889,
winning both prizes and also being
awarded special mention for
mechanical invention at the same
Exhibition. At the end of 1889 he
qualified as a member of the South
Australian Society of Arts, and in
1890 was admitted as an Associate
of the South Australian Institute of
Architects, and five vears later a
' %!
Fellow of that Institute. In the
early part of 1893 he left for Wes-
tern Australia, and landing at
Geraldton he proceeded on foot to
the Murchison goldfields, where he
joined in the search for the precious
metal and at the same time practised
mining surveying. He soon obtained
a footing in his profession and estab
lished himself at Cue, the whole of
which town he practically designed
and built, and erected several of the
public buildings on the fields and at
Geraldton. About this period he
received the appointment under
Government of resident architect of
all areas north of Perth, with head
office at Cue and a branch at Gerald-
ton, and continued in the Civil Ser-
vice until he joined Mr. Oldham in
practice at Perth in 1905. Mr. Cox
is a member of the Masonic frater-
nitv, in connection with which he
was lodge organist for many years.
In the past he participated in most
athletic games, including cricket,
football, and rowing, but more re-
cently has devoted his attention
chiefly to the game of bowls, and was
a member of the first interstate bowl-
ing team to represent Western Aus-
tralia in the Central State. In 1897
he married Halle, daughter of the
late Mr. John Siviour, of Manoora,
South Australia, and has three sons
and two daughters.
WRIGHT, POWELL, & CAM-
ERON, architects, 39, St. George’s
Terrace, Perth. (J. W. Wright,
F.W.A.LA., M.R.5.1.C.E., M.W.
A.1.E.; T. W. L. Powell, A.W.A.
1.A.; A. D. Cameron, A.W.A.1.A.).
JAMES WILLIAM WRIGHT is a
son of the late Mr. James William
Wright, of Chiswick, Middlesex,
England, where he was born on
October 9, 1854. He was educated
at King's College, London, and at
the close of his schooldays was
articled to the firm of Messrs. Bar-
nett & Gale, engineers, completing
his indentures with Mr. F. C. Stile-
man, St. George's Street, Westmin-
ster. In 1876 he came to South
Bartl etto, Perth
MR. JAMES WILLIAM WRIGHT.
Australia as assistant in the Engin-
eer-in-Chief's Department of the
Government Service, and less than
two years later began practice on his
own account as engineer and con-
tractor. He was employed by the
Government in various large con-
tracts, including the first and second
sections of the Adelaide sewers, the
Nairne railway bridges, and under-
took the erection of twenty-one
public school buildings within a 250-
mile radius of the capital. In 1880
Mr. Wright returned to England
and spent a portion of his time there
and upon the Continent, sailing in
1881 for Western Australia, where
he accepted the contract for the
second section of the railway from
Guildford to Chidlow's Well. Upon
the completion of that work, in the
beginning of 1884, he opened up in
business as an architect and engin-
eer at Perth, and a few years later
admitted into partnership Messrs.
T. W. L. Powell and A. D. Cameron,
with whom he has continued ever
since. Among the many works placed
to the credit of this well-known firm
may be mentioned the stands and
buildings on the Perth racecourse;
the National Bank, Perth; the
Union Bank, Town Hall, and Na-
tional Bank, Fremantle; the Gas
Company and Electric Light Works;
the Federal Hotel, West Perth; the
Town Hall, York, and a host of
other public and private buildings,
while a speciality is made of sewer-
age and sanitary engineering work.
Mr. Wright was one of the founders
of the original Architects' Associa-
tion, and is a foundation member of
the present Institute. For fourteen
years he held membership on the
Central Board of Health. He takes
keen interest in the progress of Free-
masonry, in connection with which
he has been instrumental in the
founding of four lodges, and has re-
ceived investiture with Grand Lodge
and Royal Arch honours. He takes
his needful recreation in a variety
of ways, but derives greatest pleasure
perhaps from driving and motoring.
Mr. Wright married in 1884, Ada
Phyllis Louisa, daughter of Mr.
G. T. Light, Government Architect,
South Australia, and has a son and
a daughter. THOMAS WALTER
LLOYD POWELL was born at Mel-
bourne, Victoria, on November 18,
1864, being a son of the late Mr.
Levi Powell, architect of that city.
He received his early educational
training at one of the State schools,
and having concluded his studies at
a private college at the age of six-
teen entered the office of Mr. J. H.
Fox, quantity surveyor, with whom
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. THOMAS WALTER LLOYD POWELL.
he studied for two years prepara-
tory to following the profession of
his father. In 1882 he became
articled to Mr. Powell, sen., who
at that time carried on a large gen-
eral practice in Melbourne, and after


the decease of his parent three years
later the gentleman under review
continued the business in connection
with Mr. R. B. Whitaker. This con-
nection lasted for about five years,
at the end of which period Mr.
Powell practised his profession on
his own behalf, designing and erect-
ing many well-known buildings.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALEXANDER DONALD CAMERON.
When the depression occurred in the
building trade in Victoria during
the years 1895 and 1896 he decided
to migrate to Western Australia,
where prospects were brighter, and
in the latter year arrived at Perth,
where shortly afterwards he became
associated in professional practice
with Mr. Wright. Mr. Powell was
at one time secretary of the Insti-
tute of Architects, of which he is
an Associate. He is a loyal ad-
herent of the Craft of Freemasons,
in which he is Past Grand Superin-
tendent of Works of the Grand
Lodge of Western Australia and
a Past Master of the Bruce Lodge,
No. 51, Claremont. As Vestry
Secretary of the Claremont Angli-
can Church he gives his warm sup-
port to movements in connection
with this ecclesiastical body, and in
matters musical has long been
known to take a prominent part,
when in Victoria being associated
with various Liedertafel Societies,
etc. He is a familiar figure on the
bowling green, and has held place in
the champion fours in the Western
Australian Bowling Association. In
1894 he was married to Helen,
daughter of Mr. Caleb Powell, of
Melbourne, and has three daughters.
ALEXANDER DONALD
CAMERON is a Queenslander, hav-
ing been born at Toowoomba, in that
State, on October 10, 1878. He
pursued his primary studies in his
native town and completed his
scholastic career at Perth, his father
being Mr. John Cameron, Govern-
ment supervisor to the Western Aus-
tralian Government. He served
articles to the profession of architec-
ture with Mr. J. W. Wright, with
whom he is now in partnership, and
having concluded his term remained
in the ofiice as draughtsman and
assistant until January, 1906, when
he was received as a member of the
firm, which has since carried on
under the style of Wright, Powell,
and Cameron. He is at the present
time (1911) Auditor to the Western
Australian Institute of Architects.
Mr. Cameron has given considerable
time and attention to the study of
municipal government, and in 1907
was elected to a seat in the North
Perth Council as representative for
East Ward. His electors subse-
quently honoured him by an urgent
requisition to allow himself to be
nominated for the mayoral office,
but pressure of professional duties
would not permit of his acceding to
the request. He is a member of the
Ancient Independent Order of
Druids, and interests himself in all
matters pertaining to the advance-
ment of this body. He is perhaps
best known as a tennis player in the
athletic world at the present time,
but as a junior made his name
among his companions as a foot-
baller; and in 1900-1 represented
Western Australia in the amateur
cycling events at the sports in con-
nection with the inauguration of the
Commonwealth. In 1904 Mr.
Cameron married Violet Adelaide,
third daughter of Mr. Walter
Woolley, of Perth, and has a son.
JAMES HINE, F.R.1.8. A.
and F.W.A.I.A. and formerly
F.I. A.N.S.W., Colonial Mutual
Buildings, 51, St. George’s Terrace,
Perth. When in the distant future
the history of Perth comes to be
written much attention will be given
to the wonderful rise and progress of
the city during the past decade.
Much of the history of a great
metropolis is necessarily woven
about its architecture, and the
heavy responsibility of building up
a city which will evoke a distinctive
period falls upon the shoulders of
the architects of the present day.
In this regard Perth is fortunate in
having in its midst a number of
gentlemen who cannot fail to add
lustre to its fair name. One of
the members of the honourable pro-
fession of architects, Mr. James
Hine, has already contributed his
quota, and to-day St. Andrew’s
Presbyterian Churcia at the corner of
Pier Street and St. George’s Terrace
stands as an instance of his creative
genius. A son of the late Mr. James
Hine, merchant, of Ludlow, Eng-
land, he received his education pri-
vately, and at a school at Longville,
in the neighbourhood of his birth-
place. He was articled to the late
Mr. John Grosvenor, of Ludlow,
and for four years received tuition
from this master of the craft, with
whom he remained three years after
the expiration of his articleship.
Having become fully qualified, in
1873 he commenced practice on his
own account at Leominster and Lud-
low, and for some years added valu-
able experience to his store of know-
ledge. In 1881 he crossed the sea to
South Africa and settled in Cape
Town, where he continued in his
profession for two years, when he set
out for Australia, of which country
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES HINE.
he had received glowing accounts.
Proceeding to the Mother State he
took up his residence at Bathurst for
twelve years, and during that time
designed many of the handsome
buildings for which that town is
noted, as well as the beautiful Park
in its centre. He acted as diocesan
architect to the Anglican Church,


and also held the appointment of art.
master to tne Technical School. Mr.
Hine was attracted to Western Aus-
tralia in 1895, and since iiis arrival
has played a prominent part in the
advancement of the western capital,
in addition to St. Andrew's Church,
already referred to, he was respon-
sible for tiie design of the Congrega-
tional Church at Subiaco, and the
Methodist Ladies' College at Clare-
mont, besides which he is to be
credited with the plans of numerous
warehouses and cosy suburban
homes. On the social side he takes
a keen interest in all matters affect-
ing the welfare of the Protestant
Churches, and the Masonic frater-
nity also claims him as a member.
He is an ardent supporter and mem-
ber of the King s Park Bowling
Club, and most of his leisure is
given to the pursuit of this plea-
sant pastime. Mr. Hine has been
twice wedded, the first time in 1872
to Miss Gilbert, of Coventry, Eng-
land, who died in 1908. He re-
married in 1910 the widow of the
late Mr. F. Birch, of this city.
J. HERBERT EALES, J.P.,
F.W.A.1.A., is the son of the late
Mr. Joseph Eales, a scion of one of
the old Devonshire County families
who for centuries have made their
home among the picturesque hills and
vales which have inspired the brush
of many an artist lover of quiet
beauty. Born at Exmouth, in Devon,
on October 19, 1864, the subject of
our notice, upon concluding his
education at Totnes Grammar School,
made choice of architecture as a pro-
fession, and entered into articles with
Mr. E. H. Harbottle, F.R.1.8.A.,
one of the foremost architects in the
English provinces. Having com-
pleted his indentures he continued
for two years with that gentleman,
during which period he gained
valuable and extended experience in
church restoration work and the erec-
tion of certain important buildings
which have linked Mr. Harbottle's
name with architectural fame. Sub-
sequently Mr. Eales spent consider-
able time in the study of his special
branch of art and in sketching on
the Continent, finally deciding to
come to Australia in 1887. He first
joined the Civil Service in Melbourne
as draughtsman, afterwards resign-
ing to accept a post as chief draughts-
man in one of the leading offices in
that city. At the termination of the
great land boom he established him-
self in practice at Ballarat, Victoria,
and succeeded in winning an excel-
lent reputation for himself both
there and in the western dis-
tricts of the State. In 1897, at-
tracted by the glowing reports
of the Golden West, he set sail for
Fremantle, and upon arrival started
professional practice at the Port,
where he soon made his way to the
front ranks in his line of art. Some
nine years later he still further in-
creased his connection by removing
to the capital, and steadily holds
his place in popular favour at the
present time. While responsible for
many city structures designed for
commercial purposes, Mr. Eales has
specialized in designs for hotels and
the fine comfortable homesteads,
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. J. HERBERY BALES.
farm buildings, and shearing-sheds
which mark the growth of prosperity
on the large pastoral areas of the
State, and his name is well known
among all sections of the public and
private community. Apart from his
profession he is one of the best
amateur musicians in Western Aus-
tralia, having acquired the technique
of three instruments, and has held
prominent positions in the musical
world of the Commonwealth. He
held the post of organist both at St.
Augustine's and St. Peter's Churches
in Melbourne, and was organist at
St. Patrick's Roman Catholic Church
at Fremantle for five years, this
church having long been famous for
its fine musical service. He also de-
signed and presided over the finest
organ built in the State, viz., for the
Roman Catholic Cathedral at Perth;
but latterly pressure of business has
set limits to his indulgence in this
elevating art. In the realms of sport
his forte is rifle-shooting, and he is
known all over the Commonwealth
in this connection as a member for
nine years of the Victorian Inter-
state team of riflemen and Queen's
prizeman in 1890. He also held a
commission in the defence forces in
Victoria for twelve years, retiring
with the rank of Captain upon his
departure for Western Australia. A
Sitting Master of the St. George
Lodge of Freemasons, he has been
Grand Organist for two years, and
takes the keenest interest in all
matters pertaining to the craft. For
recreation he resorts to the golf links
in winter and the bowling greens in
summer and is a well-known expon-
ent of both games; while as a
billiardist he has been called upon to
play for his club against most of the
visiting English professionals. Mr.
Eales is on the Council of the In-
stitute of Architects and is a past
Vice-President. He married in 1908
Mabel Hannah, daughter of the late
Mr. James Lilly, of Fremantle.
WILLIAM ARTHUR NELSON,
F.W.A.1.A., Secretary of the Wes-
tern Australian Institute of Archi-
tects, is a son of Mr. Charles Nelson,
of Sydney, and was born at Pott's
Point, near that city, on March 19,
1875. He was educated at Royston
College and the Sydney High School
and passed with honours through the
courses of architecture, construction,
and modelling at the Sydney Techni-
cal College while serving his articles
to the late Colonel Rowe,
F.R.1.8.A., then President of the
New South Wales Institute of Archi-
tects and of the Water Supply and
Sewerage Board, and was employed
by him as draughtsman on the de-
signs of many important works. He
also studied under Messrs. John
Smedley, W. Wright Campbell, and
J. L. Bruce. In 1895 he began prac-
tice in Sydney and a year later
came to Perth, where he entered the
service of the Imperial Survey De-
partment as chief draughtsman
under Commander Dawson, R.N.
Resigning from the Service he com-
menced practice on his own behalf,
and has since designed and carried
out many well-known works, includ-
ing Melba Corner, St. Alban's, build-
ings at Albany, Padbury Memorial
Church, Johnston Buildings, Torrens
Building, several leading hotels,


many characteristic residences, and
other structures in town and
country, including the first rein-
forced concrete building in Western
Australia. He is architect to the
Bank of New South Wales and
several corporations, and was ap-
pointed sworn valuator under the
Transfer of Lands Act. In 1893 he
won the national medal for architec-
tural design at the South Kensing-
ton Art Schools. He has always
taken a great interest in the welfare
of his profession, and for the past
five years has been the chief incen-
tive officer of the Institute. Mr.
Nelson is a Past Master of his Lodge
in Freemasonry and a Grand Lodge
past officer. Apart from his profes-
sional duties he has farming interests
at Balingup, where he owns an
estate.
RICHARD JOSEPH DEN-
NEHY, F.W .A.I. A., is a son of
the late Mr. Patrick Dennehy, of
Ireland, and latterly of Melbourne,
Victoria. He was born at Cork, in
the “Green Isle,” on August 16,
1859, and was brought as a child by
his parents to Australia, where
he received his education at the
Jesuit College in Melbourne. When
sixteen years of age he was articled
to the profession he now follows, and
after two years' practice joined the
firm of Tappin & Gilbert, the style
of which was changed to Tappin,
Gilbert, & Dennehy, afterwards be-
coming Tappin, Dennehy, & Smart.
This firm carried on business at
Sydney, Melbourne, and Ballarat,
and during the time Mr. Dennehy
was associated with its operations he
had ample opportunity for the full
exercise of his powers of creative
faculty, of which he was not slow to
avail himself. In Melbourne and
other parts of Victoria the works of
importance in which he co-operated
were St. Paul's Cathedral in Swan-
ston Street, for the design of which
Mr. Butterfield, the eminent archi-
tect of England, was responsible;
the Metropolitan Gas Company's
offices, the Art Gallery, the Hiber-
nian Hall, the Mutual Stores; the
Roman Catholic Cathedral, Bendigo;
the Anglican Cathedral, Ballarat;
St. Francis Xavier's College, Kew ;
and the Convents of the Sacred
Heart and of the Good Shepherd,
besides numerous other public build-
ings and warehouses in the
city, also St. Ignatius' Col-
lege, Riverview, Sydney, which
is the largest educational in-
stitution in Australia. The splendid
Roman Catholic Church at Manly,
New South Wales, was also designed
and erected by this well-known firm.
The deed of partnership expiring
after fifteen years, Mr. Dennehy
responded to the allurement held out
for business advancement in the
Western State of Australia, and in
1896 established himself in practice
in Perth, where he has continued
ever since. He designed and carried
out the erection of the Home of the
Good Shepherd, Leederville, and the
Church of the Sacred Heart at
Highgate, and among buildings of
a commercial character are the Mo-
ana Cafe in Hay Street, acknow-
ledged from an architectural point
of view to be the finest building of
its kind in the Commonwealth;
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. RICHARD JOSEPH DENNEHY.
Messrs. Levinson and Company’s
jewellery establishment; the Clar-
ence Buildings, Hay Street; The
Morning Herald office, now the
Government Immigration Depot;
St. John of God’s Hospital; and
several other business houses and
warehouse blocks, besides many pri-
vate residences and domestic dwell-
ings. In the country stand as evi-
dences of his professional skill many
public buildings, hotels, and dwell-
ing-houses, and his name is well
known on the eastern goldfields.
During his sojourn in Sydney Mr.
Dennehy was a member of the In-
stitute of Architects of New South
Wales, and acted as its Hon. Secre-
tary until he came to Western Aus-
tralia. He is at present time a mem-
ber of the Council of the Western
Australian Institute. He makes a
hobby of gardening and finds health
and recreation in the cultivation of
choice blooms in his garden plots at
South Perth where he resides with
his three daughters. He is a mem-
ber of the Celtic Club. Mr. Den-
nehy, who is a widower, has a fam-
ily of two sons and three daughters.
ROBERT HENRY BURNSIDE
DOWNES, F.W.A.1.A., irrigation
and municipal engineer, licensed sur-
veyor, etc., and Hon. Treasurer of
the Institute in Western Australia,
is a son of General Downes, C.M.G.,
late of the Royal Artillery, and was
born at Mauritius on December 10,
1861. He received his education at
various schools in England, and in
1877, at the age of sixteen, came to
South Australia with his father and
was articled to the late Mr. Oswald
Brown, hydraulic engineer, of Ade-
laide. He completed his indentures,
undergoing the usual course in the
engineering workshops and on con-
traction al works; subsequently, hav-
ing obtained eight years’ experience
in the Adelaide sewerage and other
works, he went to Victoria, where he
was offered a position to prepare the
designs for the Watts River water
supply scheme for Melbourne. Upon
the completion of this work he joined
the Victorian Railways Department,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. R. H. B. DOWNES.
and while in this service assisted on
railway surveys and the construction
of the Yea to Mansfield line, the Ser-
vicetown Railway Station buildings,
and other works. In 1888 he accepted
the post of engineer and building


surveyor to the town of Hamilton, in
Victoria, and at the same time
entered into architectural partner-
ship with Mr. Hammond, the firm
being known as Messrs. Hammond
and Downes. Here he carried out the
duties of borough surveyor and
engineer of water supply, and super-
vised the erection of the Commercial
Bank and other buildings, and in
1892 entered upon the duties of a
similar appointment at Geelong
which he held for three years. Upon
his arrival in Western Australia in
1895 Mr. Downes joined the Public
Works Department, with which he
was connected for over ten years,
and in 1905 commenced practice on
his own account as architect and
engineer in Perth. During the period
that has elapsed since then he has
carried out various works in the
State, architectural and otherwise,
and has built numerous country
branches for the National Bank and
for the Bank of Australasia. As an
Associate of the Institute of Civil
Engineers in 1890 he gained the Tel-
ford premium, a much coveted jorize
open to members of the Institute, for
a work on practical astronomy as
applied to land-surveying. He is
also the author of a paper on “The
Determination of Longitude in Land
Surveying," which was published by
the Institute as a sequel to the
former article. Mr. Downes spends
most of his spare time in the study
of natural science, but may be found
in his leisure hours seeking health
and recreation on the golf links, and
he is also fond of a game of billiards.
In 1896 he married Mabel C.,
daughter of the late Mr. C. M.
Poynter, of the Bank of Australasia,
Geelong.
HAROLD BOAS, A.5.A.1.A.,
and A.W.A.1.A., is a son of the
Rev. A. T. Boas, Jewish Rabbi, of
South Australia, and was born at
Adelaide on September 27, 1883. He
was educated at Whinham College,
North Adelaide, and at Prince Al-
fred College, subsequently being
articled to Mr. Edward Davies, one
of Adelaide's leading architects and
President of the South Australian
Institute of Architects. Having
passed through his indentures over
a period of five years he remained
with Mr. Davies for a further
twelve months, subsequently gaining
valuable experience with the firm of
Messrs. Woods & Bagot, and Alfred
Bayer. In 1905 Mr. Boas came to
Western Australia and was for some
time with Messrs. M. F. Cavanagh
and Austin Bastow. In the year
following his arrival he commenced
in practice on his own behalf, and in
1907 was joined in partnership by
Mr. Bastow, who subsequently with-
drew from the firm. Mr. Boas has
executed some very fine designs in
private residences, and excellent
samples of creative work are to be
seen in the suburbs surrounding the
metropolis. He was also responsible
for the handsome hotel at Nedlands
Park, one of the favourite summer
resorts of the residents of the State,
and the warehouses occupied by
Messrs. Sands & McDougall, besides
a number of other business premises
of note. In his student days he was
the winner of numerous compe-
titions, and was successful in gaining
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HAROLD BOAS.
prizes at the exhibitions held by the
Chamber of Manufactures in South
Australia. He is a member of the
Committee of the Commercial Tra-
vellers' Club and takes an active
interest in the Chamber of Com-
merce. Mr. Boas makes a close study
of politics, and is associated with
the Liberal League of Western Aus-
tralia. He married in 1911, Saidie,
only daughter of Mr. S. Cohen, of
Perth.
GEORGE HERBERT PARRY,
A.W.A.1.A., is a son of the late
Bishop Parry, of Perth, Western
Australia, his mother being the
eldest daughter of the late Mr.
George Walpole Leake, police magis-
trate, Perth. He was born at Perth
on February 19, 1882, and received
his preliminary education at the
High School in his native city, com-
pleting his scholastic studies at St.
Edmund’s School, Canterbury, Eng-
land. Subsequently Mr. Parry was
articled to the profession of archi-
tecture in the office of Mr. Mervyn
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE HERBERT PARRY.
Macartney, of London, and return-
ing to the land of his birth in 1907
joined the Civil Service in the Pub-
lic Works Department. He resigned
from the Government Service to
join in partnership with Messrs.
Cavanagh & Cavanagh, architects, of
Barrack Street, Perth, the firm
being known as Messrs. Cavanagh,
Cavanagh, & Parry, Three years
later he retired from this connection
in order to establish himself in prac-
tice on his own account in Perth,
and has since been employed in work
of a general character. Mr. Parry is
associated with the Masonic craft,
being a member of the Perth
Lodge, No. 33, W.A.C., in which
he holds office. He is also a mem-
ber of the Perth Club. In 1910 he
was married to Isla, elder daughter
of Mr. Alfred E. Burt, of Perth.
HENRY JAMES PROCKTER,
A.R.V.1.A., is the son of the late
Mr. Edward Cornelius Prockter, of
Somerset House, London, and was
born at London on November 19,
1863. At the termination of his
scholastic studies he was articled to
the late Mr. Charles Martin Muller,
of Cheltenham, England, and his in-
dentures completed he sailed for
Tasmania. Crossing to the mainland


shortly afterwards he settled in Mel-
bourne and joined the staff of Mr.
W. S. Law, architect, of that city,
with whom he continued for a time.
In 1886 he started in practice on his
own account in Melbourne and while
there designed among many other
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HENRY JAMES PROCKTER.
buildings, the College of Pharmacy
and a very large residence for Mr.
Edwin Millar, of Millar's Karri
and Jarrah Timber Company. Mr.
Prockter came to Western Australia
in 1896 and established, himself in
his profession in Perth, where among
the numerous works placed to his
credit may be enumerated the North
Perth Town Hall, Brookman's Build-
ing, and many warehouses and
private residences in town and
country, besides the Municipal Cham-
bers at Northam. He takes a keen
interest in all public affairs, and is
Secretary to the Roads Board Associ-
ation of Western Australia. In
addition to his professional work he
owns and cultivates an orchard at
Kalamunda, and finds healthy recrea-
tion in this congenial employment.
Mr. Prockter has been twice married,
his first wife being Miss A. E. Ho-
garth, of Newcastle-on-Tyne. The
present Mrs. Prockter is the daughter
of the late Mr. John Walter, of Bor-
den, Kent, England. His family
consists of three sons and two
daughters.
WILLIAM EDWARD ROBERT-
SON, formerly Assoc. R.V.1.A., is a
son of the late Mr. James Robertson,
M.A., M.D., of Melbourne, where
the gentleman under review was born
on August 25, 1863. He received
his educational training at the Too-
rak and Scotch Colleges of that city,
and subsequently was articled to the
late Mr. A. E. Johnston, of the firm
of Messrs. Smith & Johnston, archi-
tects, Melbourne. Having served a
term of four years with this firm Mr.
Robertson went abroad for a couple
of years and studied the prevail-
ing forms of architecture on the
European Continent, in England,
and America. Returning to Mel-
bourne in 1898 he established a
practice in conjunction with Mr. In-
skip, F.R.1.8.A., and during the
five years that this partnership ex-
isted the firm became responsible for
some very important works. Con-
spicuous among these were nearly all
the premises erected for their
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM EDWARD ROBERTSON.
country branches by the Union Bank
authorities, the splendid building of
the National Bank at Kew, and the
magnificent private residence of Sir
Matthew Davis, erected at a cost of
<£12,000, which takes its place among
the finest structures in Victoria. The
firm also designed the plans for the
Fremantle Branch of the Union
Bank, and after his arrival in
Western Australia Mr. Robertson
found no lack of work awaiting him.
The State Hotel at Gwalia was built
by him under commission of the
Government, and he was kept busy
with the designs and erection of
hotels and commercial premises all
over the goldfields and other parts,
the Perth Roller Flour-mills being
among the structures placed to his
credit in this State and numerous
residential houses and villas. In his
younger days Mr. Robertson was
prominent on the football field and
held membership in two of Victoria's
best champion teams, but in more
recent years he has found recreation
in the less strenuous game of tennis.
In 1901 he married Elsie, daughter
of the late Mr. Samuel Paltridge, of
South Australia, and has two
daughters.
LOUIS BOWSER CUMPSTON,
architect and building surveyor,
Perth, is the son of Mr. L. P. Cump-
ston, of that city, and was born in
Liverpool, England, on November
27, 1865. He received his early edu-
cation at the Ramsey Grammar
School in the Isle of Man and com-
pleted his scholastic studies at the
Echuca Grammar School, Victoria,
afterwards spending two years in
visiting the principal towns in Eng-
land. Subsequently he entered the
office of Mr. John Robertson, archi-
tect, of Queen Street, Melbourne,
under whom he received his initia-
tion in the profession he now follows.
Three years later, with the object of
gaining practical experience, he be-
came associated with Messrs. James
Moore & Sons, building contractors,
and continued with them for a
similar period. In 1891 Mr. Cump-
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. LOUIS BOWSER CUMPSTON.
ston sailed for Western Australia,
and upon his arrival at Perth estab-
lished himself in his profession, since
which time he has carried on an un-
broken practice. While in work of a


residential nature he has commanded
a large connection all over the State,
the speciality in which he has emin-
ently distinguished himself has been
in designs for hotels, and over a
score of buildings of this kind have
been erected under his supervision,
the well-known Ocean Beach Hotel
being a fair sample of his abilities
in this direction. In conjunction
with Mr. W. Wolf he won the com-
petition for the plans of the Kal-
goorlie Town Hall, and in private
competition he was also successful
with his designs for the Town Hall
and municipal chambers at Collie.
In 1911 he had in hand the erec-
tion of the largest motor garage in
the State, and new premises for
Messrs. Daniel White & Co., the
well-known carriage builders, which
have a floor space of 38,000 square
feet. He has besides had consider-
able experience in the building of
skating rinks, warehouses, etc. Mr.
Cumpston is a member of the Wes-
tern Australian Club. He married
in 1902 Amy Muriel, daughter of Mr.
Wm. Love, of Perth, and sister of
the late Dr. Love, of Kalgoorlie, and
of Lieutenant-Colonel Love, Com-
mander of the 18th Australian
Light Horse, and has a son and two
daughters.
JOHN STROUD GLASKIN,
architect, Royal Insurance Build-
ings, St George's Terrace, Perth,
is the son of Mr. John J.
Glaskin, accountant, of the State
Civil Service, and was born at
Perth on November 10, 1886. After
attending a State school for a time
he became a student at Webb's
Grammar School and subsequently
at the Technical School, Perth* He
received an excellent training for his
profession under the tuition of such
prominent architects as Messrs. L.
Bowser Cumpston, George Clark, and
T. Anthoness, all in practice in
Perth, and having served nearly
nine years in their several offices
started practice on his own account
in 1907. During the comparatively
short time that has elapsed since
then Mr. Glaskin has made rapid
strides into the confidence of the
public, and has held his own both
in domestic and commercial archi-
tecture. He has specialized in
country homesteads and suburban
residences, a large number of the
latter gracing the outlying parts of
the metropolis. Mr. Glaskin spends
much time in the study of the vari-
ous branches of his profession, and
is a student of the International
School of U.S.A. in architecture and
structural engineering. What time
he is able to spend from the duties
incident to his calling he devotes to
enlarging his knowledge of dramatic
art and elocution, and is a member
of the Perth Academy for the pur-
suit of these studies. He is a mem-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN STROUD GLASKIN.
ber of the Masonic fraternity in
Western Australia, and at one time
was well known as a highly-pro-
ficient amateur athlete and gymnast
being still in a measure attached to
these pursuits.
J. McNEECE & SON, architects
and surveyors, Fremantle. This
firm, founded in 1901 by Mr. John
McNeece, has been responsible for
the designs and erection of many of
the large structures which impart to
the port of Fremantle the imposing
appearance it presents to-day.
Davies' Buildings and the Economic
Stores in High Street, Mason's
Buildings, the Commercial Hotel,
and Fisher Beard’s large emporium
owe their up-ho-date, well-finished
aspect to the creative ability of the
gentlemen under review, besides
Messrs. J. & W. Batemen's ware-
house at Perth, and many other
public and private buildings round
the metropolis and in every import-
ant town in the State. JOHN
McNEECE was born at New York,
in the United States of America,
on August 11, 1860, and is a son of
the late Mr. John McNeece, of the
Imperial Army Service. He was
educated in his native city, also
attending several schools in
Brooklyn, and subsequently was
articled to the late Mr. George
Clutes, architect and civil engineer
of the latter place. Having com-
pleted his theoretical course, he
studied the science of handrailing,
and owing to the remunerative
nature of this occupation spent
several years in its pursuance all
over the States. In addition, at a
later date he carried on as a builder
in America, but prompted by a
spirit of adventure and with the
object of enlarging his knowledge
and experience he left his native
land for Australia, landing at
Sydney. Finding the building trade
very brisk he joined the ranks of
contractors in that State, and after
a brief sojourn there came to
Western Australia, where he ac-
cepted the post of Government
Inspector of Buildings in the Kim-
berley district prior to the days of
the gold rush to that region. Even-
tually, however, the gold fever
seized him and he spent three years
“trying his luck” on the diggings,
during which Dame Fortune with-
held her smile on his endeavour.
Once more entering the building
trade at Perth, he continued until
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN MCNEECE.
1900, when he joined the office of
Mr. F. W. Burwell, F.R.1.8.A.,
architect, of Fremantle, and re-
mained three years in this employ in
the capacity of draughtsman and
supervisor of works. In November,
1901, he opened in business on his


own account and has continued suc-
cessfully ever since. Mr. McNeece
makes a hobby of yacht designing
and has planned and built many of
the handsome and useful craft
plying on the Swan River, among
which may be noted his own yacht,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. PERCY JOHN MCNEECE.
in which he gains health and recrea-
tion in his leisure hours. He takes
a keen interest in all matters per-
taining to the welfare of the
community in which he resides and
is a member of the Fremantle
Municipal Council. He is also asso-
ciated with the Masonic craft, and
has held junior honours in this body.
In 1885 he married Mary Creamer,
daughter of the late Mr. Benjamin
Shemels, of the 73rd Regiment of
the Imperial Army, and has three
sons and five daughters. PERCY
JOHN McNEECE, the junior
partner of the firm, is a son of Mr.
John McNeece and was born in
Perth on February 25, 1888, He
was educated at the East Perth and
Beaconsfield State Schools, and
when fourteen years of age entered
his father's office, where he served
his articles to the architectural pro-
fession. Upon completion of his
indentures he continued in the same
connection for some time, and was
admitted to partnership with his
father during 1911. Mr. P. J.
McNeece has taken a couple of trips
through the Eastern States, which
he turned to good account by
making a study of the styles of
architecture which prevail in the
older cities of Australia. Like his
father he is very fond of yachting,
and makes it his chief diversion.
WILLIAM WOLF, architect,
member of the Imperial German
Institute of Architects, was born at
New York City, in the United
States of America, on November 21,
1855, being a son of the late Mr.
William Wolf, architect, of that
city. He was educated primarily at
Fort Lee, U.S.A., afterwards pro-
ceeding to Germany, where he con-
cluded his studies at Heidelberg.
While resident in the Fatherland he
obtained his diploma as an architect,
and at a later date began practice
in England in the office of Messrs.
Hewitt & Son, an architectural firm
carrying on business at Euston
Road, London. His first work of
importance while in this employ was
the drawing of the designs for the
Army and Navy Club Buildings in
London, and he was also responsible
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM WOLF.
for the plans of extensive additions
to the Langham Hotel. In 1877 he
came to Australia, and landing at
Melbourne became associated with
Mr. Lloyd Taylor, a well-known
architect of Victoria. After filling
the position of draughtsman for
three years he resigned his connec-
tion with this gentleman and estab-
lished himself in independent prac-
tice in Melbourne. During the
thirteen years spent by Mr. Wolf
in the Victorian capital he left his
mark on local architecture, being
employed in the design and erection
of such prominent buildings as
Mort's Stores, the large warehouses of
Messrs. Solomon and Goldsborough,
various churches, and nearly a
score of hotels, besides numerous
other commercial and residential
structures. Subsequently he prac-
tised in Sydney for three years, from
1892 to 1895, and ultimately came
to Western Australia, since when
he has carried on a very successful
business at Perth. Mr. Wolf has a
large general practice both in city
and country, and among the many
notable buildings he has placed to
his credit His Majesty's Theatre and
Hotel, the Royal Arcade, the Swan
River Mechanics' Institute, and the
Jewish Synagogue are deserving of
special mention, while the new
Theatre Royal is also of his design.
Married in 1883 to Maria May,
daughter of the late Mr. Colonel
Jordan, of Tasmania, he has a
family of four sons and six
daughters.
HENRY THOMAS HARDY,
M.V.1.5., M.W.A.1.5., licensed
surveyor of Perth, was born at Yan
Yean, Victoria, on February 17,
1863, being a son of the late Mr.
James Hardy, of the same place.
He was educated partly at the Cen-
tral School, Melbourne, and partly
by private tuition, and subsequently
became connected with the farming
industry on his father's property,
where he remained till he was
twenty-one. He then entered the
office of Messrs. Coane & Grant, sur-
Bartletto , Perth,
MR. HENRY THOMAS HARDY.
veyors and engineers, of Melbourne,
and served articles with this firm for
three years, during which period he
passed the licensed surveyors'
examination in Sydney in 1886, be-
ing placed fourth on the list, only


nine candidates passing out of forty-
six who sat for the examination, tn
1887 Mr. Hardy passed the licensed
surveyors’ examination in Mel-
bourne, obtaining a credit pass, and
eventually commenced private prac-
tice in Collins Street, where he con-
tinued until 1891. In that year he
came to Western Australia and en-
tered the firm of Crossland & Co.,
surveyors, of Perth, being admitted
into partnership two years later. In
1900 he took over the business, and
at the present time operations are
conducted by the firm under the
name of Crossland & Hardy. Messrs.
Crossland & Hardy during the last
twenty years have carried out a large
proportion of the subdivisional and
city surveys round Perth and Fre-
mantle, and have recently been ap-
pointed surveyors in Western Aus-
tralia for the Federal Survey De-
partment. Mr. Hardy designed and
laid out the oval on the Claremont
Showground, and of this he is
especially proud, as it is generally
considered to be the finest in Aus-
tralasia. In 1898 Mr. Hardy was
appointed to, and is still a member
of, the Western Australian Licensed
Surveyors’ Examining Board, which
is affiliated with all the Surveyors’
Examining Boards of Australasia,
including New Zealand; and in 1904
he represented the Western Austra-
lian Board at a conference of all the
Examining Boards held in Mel-
bourne for the purpose of making
the regulations for the conduct of
examinations uniform in all the
States and New Zealand. Mr. Hardy
was elected a member of the Vic-
torian Institute of Surveyors in
1890. He is also a foundation-mem-
ber of the Western Australian In-
stitute of Surveyors and has served
on the council of that body since its
inception. For seven years he was a
member of the Claremont Municipal
Council, but owing to private busi-
ness retired in 1911 after having
done good service for the ratepayers
as a member of the Works Commit-
tee, of which he was Chairman for
three years. Mr. Hardy is interested
in the farming industry, having a
property of 5,000 acres on the Upper
Blackwood which he is devoting to
sheep-raising and mixed farming,
and upon this and the growing of
flowers in his suburban garden his
spare time is spent. He is a member
of the Masonic fraternity, and is also
a member of the Western Australian
Turf Club and of the Western Aus-
tralian Club. In 1903 he married
Grace Lavinia, daughter of the late
Mr. John Elsegood, contractor, of
Perth, and has two daughters.
BERNARD WALFORD
REDLEY, licensed surveyor, ‘‘River-
side,” Gwambygine, York, is a son of
Mr. W. Walford Ridley, timber mer-
chant, of Reading, England, where
he was born in 1864. He received
his scholastic training at Reading
School, one of the oldest scholastic
institutions in England (its establish-
ment dating back to about 1,100),
and there studied for the engineering
branch of the Indian Civil Service.
After taking the mathematics
examination he abandoned the idea
BartlettOy Perth.
MR. BERNARD WALFORD RIDLEY.
of service in India, and for some
years continued his engineering
studies at Bournemouth. In 1886
he came to Western Australia in the
capacity of surveyor to the Wes-
tern Australian Lands Corporation.
Owing to the decease of Mr. A.
Hordern some six months later the
operations of the Company, of which
he was the principal, ceased, and
Mr. Ridley’s engagement was can-
celled. He then became associated
with the first survey of the Bunbury
railway, as assistant to Mr. May,
civil engineer, with whom he con-
tinued for some considerable time.
In 1888, when precious metal was
first discovered in Golden Valley,
Mr. Ridley was responsible for the
formation of a syndicate in Perth,
called the Grosvenor Prospecting
Company, which had for its object
the prospecting of the newly-found
eastern goldfields. He made his way
to the localitjr among the pioneer
gold-seekers and pegged out claims,
but after a trying and unsuccessful
endeavour to find a payable reef was
compelled to return to Perth. Sub-
sequently he made a second trip,
accompanied by a party who joined
in the working of the claim, and when
gold discoveries eventuated at
Southern Cross one of the claims
taken up by Mr. Ridley on behalf
of his Company was the first in the
State to pay working expenses.
Failure of the water supply after-
wards forced the abandonment of
this mine, and the same trouble oc-
casioned many hardships during a
subsequent trip taken by Mr. Ridley
at the invitation of Mr. Gillies
MacPherson (discoverer of the Nan-
nine Mine) across Hampton Plains,
in the direction of the Fraser Ranges,
from which they returned to the
Plains by a different route. Here
the first claim was pegged out by the
party of three (including an
aboriginal), and after a few weeks’
prospecting the return journey was
attempted. The dry season, however,
forced them to remain at their camp
near Slate Well, and while waiting
for rain their food supply became
almost exhausted. The heaviest rain-
fall ever recorded in those parts oc-
curred between September 13 and 19
in that year (1888), leaving the flat
a sheet of water ten chains wide,
through which the horses had to
swim, and after various vicissitudes
the party arrived at Southern Cross
on October 6. During the trip gold
was discovered by the party in thir-
teen different places, and a mine at
Hope’s Hill, pegged out previous to
their departure from the settlement,
cost owners and shareholders over
£IOO,OOO in machinery. A serious
illness after Mr. Ridley’s return to
Perth caused him to take up his
former profession, and he became
assistant to Mr. Monaghan, Govern-
ment contract surveyor, with whom
he remained for two years. Accept-
ing a position as draughtsman in the
Public Works Department after the
arrival of Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, he
was at a later date associated with
Mr. H. Wilson in the survey of
Boyanup, Busselton, Bunbury, and
Donnybrook railways, and was also
connected with the survey of the
Southern Cross line. Returning to
the head office he was employed in
preparing plans for railways until
June, 1892, when he qualified as a
licensed surveyor, and subsequently
undertook extensive subdividing sur


veys at Armadale for Mr. Charles
Patterson. He then surveyed the
Serpentine agricultural area on be-
half of the Government, and was
identified with selection survey work
in the Lands and Survey Depart-
ment. For thirteen years he was
conducting surveys in the Avon dis-
trict, extending as far eastward as
Southern Cross, was five years in the
Albany district, and has worked for
the Government in all parts of the
State south of Perth. Mr. Ridley
was one of the founders of the Insti-
tute of Licensed Surveyors in Wes-
tern Australia. He is a member of
the Masonic and of the Western Aus-
tralian Clubs. In early life a keen
athlete and sportsman; at fifteen
years of age he was Captain of the
Reading Harriers, played in Hamp-
shire and Dorset Association Rugby
football teams, and was coxswain of
a boat which won nearly every town
cup from Oxford to Twickenham.
He was a founder of the Western
Australian Cricket Association, of
which he is a life member, and dur-
ing the visit of the American Fleet
in 1910 was appointed by the
Government to take charge of the
sports at Albany. He played tennis
against Mr. F. D. North for the
championship of the State, and swam
for champion honours in the Swan.
In 1892 Mr. Ridley married Jean-
nette, daughter of the late Mr.
Tshmael Rogers, of Perth, and has
four sons and a daughter.
JOHN EWING, J.P., surveyor,
Perth, is a son of the late Rev.
Thomas Campbell Ewing, of
Wollongong, New South Wales,
and was born at that town in
1863. He pursued his educational
studies at King’s School, Parra-
matta, and upon leaving that insti-
tution was articled to his brother,
a surveyor, under whom he studied.
Seven years later he opened in busi-
ness on his own account in his native
town and subsequently took control
of the Berry Estate surveys in the
southern district, where he continued
for about five years. In 1896 he
came to Western Australia and be-
gan business as a land and mining
surveyor, and in the practice of his
profession was identified with almost
every part of the eastern and Mur-
chison goldfields. He was concerned
in the survey of the Venture Syndi-
cate Company’s properties in dif-
ferent portions of the State, and in
1897 proceeded to Collie and was re-
sponsible for the survey of the leases
of the Collie coalfields. In 1900 Mr.
Ewing entered political life as can-
didate in the Liberal interest for the
south-west mining electorate and
successfully contested the seat
against Senator George Henderson
and Mr. Courtney of Greenbushes.
Three years later he was defeated
by Mr. Henshaw the Labour can-
didate, and in 1905 regained his lost
honours in the same electorate, only
to resign them to Mr. A. Wilson,
Secretary to the Miners’ Union, in
1908. In 1911 he unsuccessfully con-
tested the Bunbury electorate in the
Liberal interest, his opponent being
Mr. Thomas, who represented La-
bour. He received his commission
of Justice of the Peace for the
magisterial district of Perth in 1905,
having previously been gazetted for
the Collie district. He married
Beatrice, daughter of Dr. Swinson,
of Ashley, England, and has two
sons and two daughters.
JOHN WATSON HENDER-
SON, consulting engineer, Weld
Chambers, St. George’s Terrace, is
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. JOHN WATSON HENDERSON.
a son of the late Rev. David Hen-
derson, of Rockferry, Cheshire, Eng-
land, who was associated with the
Presbyterian Church movement for
about forty years and acted as
Moderator in England on three
separate occasions. The gentleman
under review was born in Cheshire
on April 4, 1867, and received his
education in England. He served
his apprenticeship to the firm of
Cochrane & Co., engineers, of Bir-
kenhead, on the Mersey, with whom
he remained for four years, and con-
cluded his training with two years
in the office of Messrs. William
Esplin & Son, consulting engineers,
of Liverpool, this firm being the first
in that city to engage in mechanical
refrigerating on anything like a
large scale. Mr. Henderson next
sought experience in marine en-
gineering and took two trips on
board the “Thanemore,” of the More
Line of steamers. Some premoni-
tion prevented him embarking a
third time when she sailed from
Liverpool, never to be heard of
again. After visiting the principal
Mediterranean ports, in 1898 he
joined the Atlas Steamship Company
trading between the United States
of America and the European Con-
tinent, and while in this service was
the means of saving the steamship
“Alps” from untimely disaster by
discovering in time a flaw in the
engine shaft of the vessel. At a
later period Mr. Henderson joined
Mr. A. Holt’s steam yacht “Argo”
and made a trip to Norway as far
as the North Cape (“The Land of
the Midnight Sun”). On a second
trip to the lochs of Scotland he
called at all the historical places as
far as Inverary. He then sailed in
the Holt’s Blue Funnel Line, trad-
ing between China and Japan, and
after two years became connected
with one of their vessels plying be-
tween Singapore and Fremantle.
He saw the Western Australian
coast in the early days of the coastal
trade before harbours were made or
lights erected, and after nineteen
months in this service took a trip to
England, returning in 1895, when
he was one of the first consulting
engineers to take up residence in the
State. Mr. Henderson studied for
the profession at the South Reusing-
tion School of Science and Art, and
was awarded the Queen’s Prize, the
highest honour then attainable, for
his papers dealing with the subjects
of heat and steam-engines. He was
also successful in gaining the Bir-
kenhead local prize for engineer-
ing subjects against seventy-four
students who entered. In the early
days of Western Australia Mr. Hen-
derson was a well-known figure on
the mining fields, and was respon-
sible for the erection of the ma-
chinery on the Gem Gold Mine, on
the Upper Gascoyne, which has since
shut down. He also supervised the
installation of the electric lighting


plant at the beautiful Yalingup
Caves in the south-west of the State.
Mr. Henderson has given special at-
tention to refrigerating machinery
and is agent for the well-known
Linde Refrigerating Company of
Australia. His special knowledge
led to his being consulted regarding
the running of the plant installed
by the Fresh Food and Ice Com-
pany, and he superintended the con-
version of the Government Re-
frigerating Machinery from C0 2 , or
carbonic anhydride, to the wet gas
ammonia system, under instructions
from the Australian Linde Re-
frigerating Company. Mr. blender-
son is the Western Australian repre-
sentative for J. Wildridge & Sin-
clair, Limited, Messrs. Drysdale and
Co., engineers, and several other
prominent firms of England and
Scotland. Outside his professional
work he makes a hobby of mechani-
cal invention, and in the past has
patented many ingenious and prac-
tical ideas of his own creation. Mr.
Henderson in 1900 married the
daughter of the late Mr. IT. Harris,
of Victoria, and has two daughters
and a son. Mrs. Henderson prior
to her marriage was a prominent
member of the Woman’s Christian
Temperance Union, and had the
management of several important
branches.
THE ROYAL MINT, PERTH.


Accountants and Auditors.
The Institute of Accountants and Auditors of Wes-
tern Australia was incorporated under Act of Parlia-
ment on December 17, 1900.
Since 1908 it has regularly conducted examina-
tions, requiring a high standard of efficiency for candi-
dates desiring to become qualified accountants. Candi-
dates for admission to the Institute are required to pass
three examinations, viz., preliminary, intermediate,
and final. The papers are set in conjunction with the
Australasian Corporation of Public Accountants, and
the Institute of Accountants in South Australia. The
subjects for the final examination are as follows :
1. Bookkeeping and accounts (two papers).
2. Auditing (one paper).
3. The law of bankruptcy.
4. The law relating to joint stock companies.
5. Mercantile law.
6. The law of arbitration and awards.
7. The law of trustees under wills.
The Institute has also materially assisted to raise
the status of the profession in Western Australia by
(a) Arranging periodical lectures for the instruc-
tion of its members.
(b) The formation and conduct of two Student
Societies—one at Perth and the other at
Kalgoorlie.
SINCLAIR JAMES MCGIB-
BON, F.S.A.A. (Eng.), F.1.A.V.,
and F.C.P.A., accountant, auditor,
and attorney, Colonial Mutual
Chambers, St. George’s Terrace,
Perth, was born at Kew, Victoria,
in 1875, and received his education
at the Camberwell Grammar School
and at Auburn College, in the same
State. At the close of his scholastic
career he became associated with his
father in the firm of Messrs. Gilmour
and McGibbon, well-known account-
ants of Melbourne. In 1896 he came
to Western Australia and after a
brief period spent in the office of
Messrs. O. L. Haines & Co. began
business on his own account in 1898.
Mr. McGibbon has conducted some
of the largest liquidations known in
Western Australia, among others the
"Coliseum” and the "Pantheon,”
and very successfully controlled the
salvage operations connected with
the S.S. "Orizaba,” which vessel
went ashore off Garden Island on
Bartletto , Perth
MR. SINCLAIR JAMES MCGIBBON.
February 16, 1905. In 1909 he was
appointed a commissioner to act
(c) The maintenance of a professional library.
(d) Endeavouring, with the co-operation of
other Institutes of Accountants, to obtain
legal recognition for the profession. At the
time of writing a Bill, which is the fruit of
the combined efforts of the various Institutes,
is before Parliament. The measure seeks to
protect the public and the qualified account-
ant from the unqualified practitioner.
A second Society, under the name of "The Society
of Public Accountants and Auditors of Western Aus-
tralia,” was founded in July, 1911, and incorporated
in the following November. Mr. John Sinclair is
President and Mr. M. H. J. Otto secretary. It consists
entirely of practising public accountants, and its objects
are much the same as those of the preceding institution,
including all matters that bear upon the protection of
the accountants’ profession, and, of course, upon the
protection of the public in matters of accountancy and
auditors. It is deeply interested in the Accountancy
Bill at present before Parliament, which is framed to
give legislative sanction to the various objects of both
Associations.
In addition to these two local institutions there is
also a branch in Western Australia of the Australasian
Corporation of Public Accountants, of which Mr. F. B.
Carter is the local representative.
with the Public Service Commis-
sioner to inquire into and report on
the Public Service of the State, with
a view to suggesting where econo-
mies might be effected. He takes a
great interest in the agricultural in-
dustry and is senior partner in a
7,000-acre farm at Kumminin, a
new agricultural district situated
about 45 miles south of Kellerberrin.
This area was formerly part of a sta-
tion property of 250,000 acres held
by Mr. McGibbon, but resumed by
the Government in 1908. He has
been attorney for the Northern As-
surance Company for the past eleven
years, is Local Secretary for the Vic-
torian Institute, and acts as direc-
tor, attorney, and auditor for several
mining and industrial companies.
Mr. McGibbon is a Fellow of the
Society of Incorporated Accountants
and Auditors of England, a Fellow
of the Institute of Accountants of
Victoria, and Fellow and foundation
member of the Australian Corpora


tion of Public Accountants, having
been on the first Council of that in-
stitution, and being one of two dele-
gates appointed from Western Aus-
tralia to attend a conference of ac-
countants in the Eastern States at
which this Corporation was inau-
gurated.
RANKIN, MORRISON, & CO.,
public accountants, Emanuel Build-
ings, St. George’s Terrace, Perth.
(Alexander Donald Rankin, John
Morrison, and Arthur Andrew
Nairn). This firm was established
in 1907 by the amalgamation of the
separate businesses of Mr. Rankin
and Mr. John Morrison, Mr. Nairn
at that time being the managing
clerk of Messrs. John Morrison and
Co. ALEXANDER DONALD
RANKIN was born at Glasgow,
Scotland, in 1867, and received his
educational training at the High
School of that city. He served his
articles to the accountancy profes-
sion in Glasgow, and subsequently
gained nine years’ experience with
the firm of Smith & Williamson,
chartered accountants, of London
and Glasgow, of whose London office
he took the management when it
was opened in 1893. In 1899 he
came to Western Australia and
established himself in business at
Fremantle, where he remained until
Bartletto , Perth.
Mr. Alexander Donald Rankin.
1903. Removing to Perth in that
year, he continued in the practice of
his profession on his own account for
a time, and ultimately united with
Messrs. Morrison & Nairn in the
formation of the present firm, which
is now recognized as the leading one
pp
of its kind in the State. Mr. Rankin
is Chairman of the South Perth
Electric Supply and Power Com-
pany, Limited, an alternate
Director of the Gold Industry of
Western Australia, Limited, and of
the Hills Proprietary, Limited, a
local Director of the Timber Cor-
poration, Limited, and a local repre-
sentative of the Sons of Gwalia,
Limited. He is also a Director of
the Emu Brewery Company and a
member of the local Lands Commit-
tee of the Midland Railway Com-
pany, and Chairman of the Railway
Committee of that Company. He
is a chartered accountant, and has
been a member of the Institute of
Accountants and Actuaries of Glas-
gow, Incorporated by Royal Charter,
since 1892. He is also a Fellow of
the Incorporated Institute of Ac-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN MORRISON.
countants of Victoria and of the
Australasian Corporation of Public
Accountants. JOHN MORRISON
was born at Sprouston, Kelso, N. 8.,
on January 4, 1867, and received
his education at the Kelso Grammar
School. Fie entered the service of
the National Bank of Scotland,
Limited, Kelso, in 1884, and sub-
sequently was in the Leith Branch
of the same Bank. In 1888 he re-
ceived an appointment from the
National Bank of Australasia,
Limited, London, for its Australian
service, and proceeded to Melbourne,
afterwards being transferred to the
Perth Branch in Western Australia.
In 1894 he accepted an appointment
as Manager for Messrs. Alexander
Matheson & Co., mining attorneys
and accountants, and was in Cool-
gardie until the end of 1897, when
the business was transferred to
Perth. In 1901 he became a partner
of the firm, and in 1905 the business
came into his own possession and the
firm was dissolved, Mr. Morrison
carrying on as a public accountant
and auditor until the present firm
Ba rtletto. Perth.
MR. ARTHUR ANDREW NAIRN.
came into being in 1907. Mr. Mor-
rison is Chairman of the Local
Advisory Board of the Liverpool and
London and Globe Insurance Com-
pany, Limited, a Director of the
South Perth Electric Supply and
Power Company, Limited, a
Director of the Gold In-
dustry of Western Australia,
Limited, and of the Hills Pro-
prietary, Limited, local repre-
sentative of the Sons of Gwalia,
Limited, Chairman of Directors of
Emanuel Bros., Limited, and Attor-
ney for the Perth Electric Tramways,
Limited. He is a Fellow of the Aus-
tralasian Corporation of Public
Accountants. ARTHUR ANDREW
NAIRN was born at New
Cumnock, Ayrshire, in 1884 and was
educated at the Hill Head High
School, Glasgow, completing his
studies at the Scotch College, Perth.
He was associated with the firm of
Ford, Rhodes, & Ford, accountants,
from 1898 to 1907, when he joined
Messrs. Rankin & Morrison in part-
nership. He is an Associate of the
Australasian Corporation of Public
Accountants.
SMITH & GOYDER, public ac-
countants, Elder Buildings, William
Street, Perth (Harold Edmond


Smith, F.C.P.A., F.A.1.V.;
David John Goyder, F.C.P.A.,
F.1.A.5.A.). HAROLD EDMOND
SMITH was born at Liverpool,
England, in 1856, and pursued his
scholastic studies at the Liverpool
Institute and later under the tuition
of the Rev. J. H. Roberts at Den-
bigh, North Wales. He was appren-
ticed to Messrs. Robert Preston and
Co., distillers and wine merchants,
but did not complete his indentures,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HAROLD EDMIND SMITH.
and after eleven months with this
firm left England for Dunedin in
1876. He engaged in various occu-
pations in New Zealand during four
years, at the close of which period
he crossed the water to South Aus-
tralia and joined the firm of Messrs.
Harris, Scarfe, & Co. in their count-
ing-house, continuing there about
three years. In 1884 he came to
Western Australia, and was in the
employ of Messrs. Sandover & Co.
until 1886, when he returned to the
Central State. After a short period
spent with his old firm in Adelaide
he went to Hergott Springs with
Messrs. Davey & Pilkington for a
time, and in 1890 once more sailed
for Western Australia. Here he
took charge of the accountancy de-
partment for Messrs. Tolley & Com-
pany until 1896, when he established
himself as a public accountant in
Perth, and at a later date was joined
in partnership by Messrs. D. J. Goy-
der and R. A. Wadham, the firm
being known as Smith, Goyder, and
Wadham. Upon Mr. Wadham's
withdrawal it became Messrs. Smith
and Goyder, and as such has carried
on ever since. Prior to 1902 Mr.
Smith combined with his work for
the firm the charge of the private
books in connection with the Millars'
Kauri and Jarrah Forest Timber
Company, and in the above year,
when various timber firms amalga-
mated, he was appointed chief ac-
countant for the Millars’ Karri and
Jarrah Company (1902) Limited, a
position he has continued to hold,
this being the largest and most im-
portant accountancy position in the
State. DAVID JOHN GOYDER
is a South Australian, having been
born at Adelaide in February, 1862.
He was educated at St. Peter’s Col-
lege, and at the close of his school-
days entered upon pastoral pursuits
at ‘“Minburra Station,” owned by
Messrs. Bowman Brothers. From
there he went to Messrs. Elder and
Waite’s “Paratoo Station,” and ex-
perienced in all about four years of
station life, the last year being spent
as overseer at Station.” In
1883 he became identified with the
clerical staff in the office of Messrs.
Elder, Smith, & Co., at Adelaide,
and continued there for fourteen
years, working at station and other
books, subsequently being appointed
sub-accountant when the firm was
floated into a limited liability com-
pany. In 1897 Mr. Goyder came to
Western Australia and entered into
business on his own account as a
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. DAVID JOHN GOYDER.
public accountant at Fremantle,
shortly after joining Mr. IT. E.
Smith in partnership. His station
experience has stood him in good
stead, and he acts as secretary and
accountant for some of the largest
o
stations in the State, being also
identified in this way with several
pastoral companies, this being his
speciality. Upon the death of Sir
George S hen ton he was appointed
sole local director for Elder, Shenton,
and Co., Limited, and he is auditor
for many of the largest city firms in
Perth.
FORD, RHODES, CARTER, and
DAVIES, accountants and auditors,
Forrest Chambers, 62, St. George's
Terrace, Perth, and at Mines Cham-
bers, Boulder Road, Kalgoorlie.
(Resident Partners: —Perth, F. B.
Carter, chartered accountant; Kal-
goorlie, W. Davies, incorporated ac-
countant.) The firm under review
was originally established in Western
Australia as Ford, Rhodes, & Ford.
In 1901 Mr. F. B. Carter arrived
from England and had control of the
Kalgoorlie branch of the business for
three years, at the end of which time
he was admitted to partnership and
the name was altered to its present
title. Mr. Carter then took up his
residence at the metropolis, whence
he exercises sole control over the
whole of its transactions in Western
Australia. The concern has con-
siderably enlarged its dimensions
since its inception in this State and
operates over a wide area. In his
seventeenth year Mr. Carter became
a student of the Institute of Char-
tered Accountants and was articled
to the London firm of Fox, Sessons,
and Co. He passed the intermediate
examination with honours in 1896,
and after achieving success in the
final two years later spent three
years in the practice of accountancy
in various parts of England, during
a portion of that time being identi-
fied with the firm of Ford, Rhodes,
and Ford. Under the latter title
this large concern operates in Lon-
don, Sydney, Melbourne, Johannes-
burg, Cape Town, and Durban, and
as Ford, Rhodes, & Church at 3,
Queen Street, Fort, Colombo, while
the Western Australian personnel in-
cludes Mr. Carter and the Kalgoor-
lie Manager, Mr. W. Davies, Mr.
Carter is Secretary to the Austra-
lasian Corporation of Public Accoun-
tants, having been elected to fill that
office in 1908. He has the interests
of the profession at heart and is
popular among his confreres. He is
associated with the Defence Forces
of the Commonwealth and is referred
to in the Military Section of this
work.


O. L. HAINES & Co., public
accountants and auditors, Weld
Chambers, Perth (Octavius Lionel
Haines, F.S.A.A. (Eng.), F.C.P.A.,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. OCTAVIUS LIONEL HAINES.
F.F.I.A. (Vic.), F.1.A.W.A.; and
Charles Augustus Wylie, F.C.P.A.,
F.1.A.W.A., A.1.A.V.). OCTA-
VIUS LIONEL HAINES was born
in the year 1864 at Cheltenham,
England, and received his education
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. CAHRLES AUGUSTUA WYLIE.
at Cheltenham College. At the con-
clusion of his scholastic career he ac-
quired his first commercial training
in a London office, where he re-
mained for six years, and in 1887
came to Western Australia. Pro-
ceeding to Geraldton, he was there
pp 2
identified with the firm of Messrs.
E. & F. Wittenoom, merchants, but
in 1888 he returned to Perth and
joined the late Mr. Herbert Hemsley
Holman in an accountancy and au-
diting business, which partnership
continued for some nine years. Mr.
Holman then retired, and the busi-
ness was carried on by Mr. Haines
under the present style of O. L.
Haines & Co. In 1904 he admitted
as a partner Mr. C. A. Wylie, who
had previously held the position of
managing clerk, and this connection
has continued ever since. Mr.
Haines, who is the oldest established
accountant and auditor in Western
Australia, is a Fellow of the Society
of Accountants and Auditors, Eng-
land ; a Fellow of the Corporation of
Public Accountants; Fellow and
member of the Council of the
Federal Institute of Accountants,
Victoria ; and Fellow of the Insti-
tute of Accountants and Auditors of
Western Australia, of which he was
the first President. He was for
many years a member and Chairman
of the Cottesloe Roads and Health
Boards and also Chairman of the Ex-
ecutive of the Roads Board Associa-
tion of the State.
PYE, BURKETT, & Co., public
accountants, Weld Chambers, St.
George’s Terrace, Perth (M. Edward
Pye, F.C.P.A., F.LA.W.A.;
John Francis Burkett, A.C.P.A.,
F. M. EDWARD PYE
was born at Beechworth, Victoria,
on January 6, 1877, and educated
at St. Patrick’s College, Melbourne.
In 1895 he joined the staff of
Messrs. R. M. Walker & Co.,
accountants, of Perth and Fre-
mantle, remaining through the
changes in the personnel and title
of that firm, viz., to R. W. Walker
and Gray, and finally to T. Birrell
Gray, to whom he acted as confiden-
tial clerk and Manager for six years.
In 1901 he joined the M. C. Davies
Karri and Jarrah Company, Limited,
as Secretary and Accountant,
which position he held for nearly
twelve months before leaving to com-
mence business on his own account
at Fremantle. From 1902 to 1910
he practised as a public accountant
and auditor and held the position of
Secretary to most of the important
public and other bodies such as the
Fremantle Chamber of Commerce,
Netherlands Chambers of Commerce
in Australia (Western Australian
Branch), Wholesale Grocers’ and
Traders’ Association, Retail Store-
keepers’ Association, and many
others, several of which he helped to
form. Toward the end of 1910 he
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. M. EDWARD PYE.
disposed of his Fremantle connection
to Messrs. Ford, Rhodes, Carter, and
Davies, and has since devoted his
attention to the interests of Messrs.
Pye, Burkett, & Co., accountants and
auditors, Perth. For the past six
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN FRANCIA BURKETT.
years he has held a seat on the
Council of the Institute of Account-
ants and Auditors of Western Aus-
tralia and is a member of the Aus-
tralasian Corporation of Public
Accountants. JOHN FRANCIS
BURKETT was born at Echuca,


Victoria, in 1876 and received his
education at the local School of St.
Mary's. At the close of his scholastic
career he was identified with the
staff of a public company at
Echuca until 1894, and coming to
Western Australia in the following
year associated himself with Messrs.
Alex. Matheson & Co. at Coolgar-
die. He remained some years with
this firm and finally joined the office
at Perth, eventually becoming
accountant and chief audit clerk,
which position he retained until the
firm relinquished business in West-
ern Australia. Shortly after his re-
tirement from this connection Mr.
Burkett established himself in busi-
ness at Perth, in conjunction with
Mr. M. Edward Pye, and the firm
has carried on under the above title
ever since. The gentleman under
review is Secretary of the Great
Ophir Gold Corporation, Limited,
Local Secretary of the Westralia
United Goldfields, Limited, and Sec-
retary of the Metropolitan Retail
Traders' Association. The members
of the firm act as auditors for many
companies, pastoralists, and busi-
nesses throughout the State, and are
trade assignees and liquidators. Mr.
Burkett is a member of the Institute
of the Australasian Corporation of
Public Accountants, he holds a seat
on the Council of the Society of
Accountants and Auditors of West-
ern Australia, and is a Fellow of the
Australian Institute of Secretaries.
EATON & LAMB, accountants,
auditors, and attorneys, Moss's Cham-
bers, Howard Street, Perth. SID-
NEY VICTOR EATON, A.S.A.A.,
was born at North Adelaide, South
Australia, in 1879, and pursued his
scholastic studies at Whinham Col-
lege, North Adelaide. Upon start-
ing life he entered the office of the
South Australian Register and con-
tinued there for four years. In 1899
he began business on his own account
as Secretary for several companies.
Two years later he came to Western
Australia and accepted a position as
accountant with Mr. Arthur H.
Shaw, Customs agent, and when this
business was taken over by Messrs.
Frank Manford & Co. Mr. Eaton
remained as Accountant and Man-
ager until 1905. In that year
he established himself in prac-
tice on his own behalf in the
City of Perth, and after three
years was joined in partnership by
Mr. Charles Henry Lamb, A.C.P.A.,
the new firm carrying on under the
above title. Since its inception it has
made rapid strides, and Messrs.
Eaton & Lamb are now numbered
among the leading accountants of
Western Australia. In 1909 Mr.
Bartletto perth.
MR. SIDNEY VICTOR EATON.
Eaton was appointed Registrar of the
Society of Accountants and Auditors
of Western Australia, and the firm
acts as secretaries, accountants, man-
agers, etc., for various mining com-
panies and other business concerns
Bartletto Perth.
MR. CHARLES HENRY LAMB.
in Perth. The gentleman under re-
view for some years filled the post of
Secretary to the Lawn Tennis Asso-
ciation of Western Australia.
CHARLES HENRY LAMB,
A.C.P.A., was born at Dunedin, New
Zealand, in 1882, and is a son of
Dr. Wm. Lamb, formerly of that city.
After leaving school he went to Vic-
toria with his parents and entered
the service of the National Bank of
Australasia, Limited, gaining bank-
ing and commercial experience for a
few years, at the end of which time
he came to Western Australia.
Shortly afterwards he joined the staff
of Messrs. Rankin, Morrison, & Co.
as audit clerk and in 1908 entered
into partnership with Mr. Sidney
Victor Eaton.
WALTER McKECHNIE COL-
LINS, A.1.V.A., public accountant
and auditor, Commercial Union
Chambers, St. George's Terrace,
Perth, was born at Liverpool, Eng-
land, in the year 1872. He pursued
Bartletto Perth.
MR. WALTER MCMKECHNIE COLLINS.
his scholastic studies in the city of
his birth, where also at a subsequent
period he was identified for some
time with a commercial firm. Coming
to Western Australia in 1903, in the
following year he sat for the inter-
mediate examination in accountancy
and was the first of 300 candidates
in Western Australia. In 1905 he
passed the final examination and
afterwards accepted the position of
Secretary to the firm of Bunning
Brothers, timber merchants, of
Perth, with whom he continued for
eighteen months. In 1907 Mr. Col-
lins opened on his own account in
Perth as a public accountant and
auditor, and in conjunction with his
numerous other duties spent a con-
siderable portion of his time in


coaching students in accountancy.
In this he proved very successful and
before October, 1910, was able to
number no less than thirteen passes
among his students for the final ex-
aminations in connection with the
Western Australian Institute of Ac-
countants and the similar institu-
tion of Victoria. Mr. Collins is him-
self an Associate of the Institute of
Accountants of Victoria and is a
member of the local Council of that
body. He has taken considerable
interest in municipal affairs and since
May, 1911, has occupied the mayoral
chair in the Queen’s Park Council.
Lieutenant JOHN HENRY
FOXWORTHY, A. I. A. A. W. A.,
A.C.P.A., was born at Fremantle,
Western Australia, on May 8, 1888,
Bartletto , Perth.
LIEUTENANT J. H. FOXWORTHY.
being a son of Captain J. H. Fox-
worthy, of that Port. Upon the
conclusion of his scholastic training
at the Perth High School he entered
the office of J. M. Ferguson, Limited,
of Fremantle, as junior clerk, and
subsequently served in the firm of
Messrs. Mills & Ware for nearly
three years. With the object of
gaining a thorough experience in all
branches of the profession of ac-
countancy he engaged for short
terms with several of the leading
firms of accountants and merchants,
among whom were included Messrs.
Henry Wills & Co., of Phillimor©
Street, Fremantle, and Messrs. Pye,
Burkett, & Co., accountants, of St.
George's Terrace, Perth. He was
successful in winning the first gold
medal granted by the Fremantle
Chamber of Commerce for high-
est marks and general proficiency in
accountancy at the examination held
in June, 1905, under the auspices of
that body. In 1909 he was admitted
to the Institute of Accountants and
Auditors of Western Australia, and
in the same year the Australasian
Corporation of Public Accountants
granted him an Associateship, and he
also received his diploma from the
English Institution of Certified
Public Accountants, tie began his
military career in 1909, when he
was gazetted Lieutenant, and at
present time is attached to the 11th
Australian Infantry Regiment, most
of his leisure time being given to
his duties in connection with his
regiment. He is, however, fond of
the game of lacrosse and is a loyal
member of the fraternity of Free-
masons, being associated with the
Fremantle Lodge, No. 2, W.A.C.
HAROLD JOSEPH PLATT,
F.C.P.A. (Lond.), A.S.A.A.W.A.,
public accountant and auditor, 53,
St. George’s Terrace, Perth, is a
Victorian, having been born at
Essendon, in that State, in the year
1886. In 1898 he arrived in
Western Australia, and after con-
cluding his studies at the Scotch
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. HAROLD JOSEPH PLATT.
College, Perth, became initiated into
commercial pursuits at the large
emporium carried on by Messrs.
E. S. Wigg & Son in this city.
Fr ’om there he passed into the
counting-house of Messrs. Matthew
Goode & Co.'s warehouse, and after
two years' experience with this well-
known firm was employed for a
similar period in the office of Messrs.
Charles Dunkley & Co., merchants
and indentors, of Perth. At the age
of twenty he opened on his own
behalf as an accountant and auditor,
and in May, 1910, received his
degree of Fellow of the Corporation
of Public Accountants, London, a
year later being admitted as an
Associate of the Society of Account-
ants and Auditors of Western Aus-
tralia. He has steadily made his
way in the commercial world of the
great Western State, and at the
present time acts as auditor to about
forty well-known firms, besides fill-
ing the position of Secretary to the
Davies Franklin Agency, Limited,
the Western Australian Boot Manu-
facturing Company, and to Dr.
Frank Andrew. Mr. Platt is also
auditor to the North Perth Council.
In addition to the other branches of
his profession, he carries on a ship-
ping and Customs agency, and may
be looked upon as one of the pro-
gressive business men who are bound
by means of their ability and up-
to-date methods to rise to the
pinnacle of their profession.
GEORGE EDWARD PROUT,
J.P., C.A., F.C.P.A., F.C.I.
(Lond.), public accountant and au-
ditor, mining and general commis-
sion agent, licensed Customs and for-
warding agent, house, land, and
estate agent, 21, High Street, Fre-
mantle, was born at Williamstown,
Victoria, in 1864. He pursued his
scholastic studies at State schools in
Victoria and Queensland and by pri-
vate tuition, and subsequently was
engaged in accountancy, mercantile,
and pastoral pursuits. In 1896 he
came to Western Australia and
joined Mr. T. Birr ell Gray, account-
ant and auditor, at Fremantle, in
conjunction with whom he obtained
and carried to a successful issue the
railway advertising contract for a
period of five years. Mr. Gray died
in 1901, and the business was taken
over from his widow by the gentle-
man under review, who has held it
ever since. Mr. Front’s operations
are wide and varied, and the scope
of his business necessitates his travel-
ling over the length and breadth of
the State several times each year.
He conducts the audits for many of
the largest firms in Fremantle and
various parts of the State, is largely
interested in pastoral and agricul-
tural concerns in the Yilgarn dis-
trict, and since 1903 has combined


a Customs, shipping, and forwarding
agency and a land, estate, ’ and
general commission agency with the
other departments of his business.
He is the chief agent for the London
and Lancashire Fire Insurance Com-
pany at Fremantle. Mr. Front, who
holds diplomas in accountancy from
various British institutions, received
a commission of Justice of the Peace
in July, 1908. He is an enthusiastic
Freemason and holds the rank of
Past Grand Treasurer of the Grand
Lodge of Western Australia, as well
Bartletto Perth.
MR. GEORGE EDWARD TROUT.
as many other offices in various
branches of the craft. lie is Past
Grand Master of the Protestant Al-
liance Friendly Society, Past Grand
Master of the Grand United Order
of Oddfellows, and is a member of
the Independent Order of Good
Templars of many years’ standing.
QUINTIN IIOBDEN JAMES,
F.C.P.A. (Loud.), of Messrs. Q. 11.
James & Co., public accountants, 4
and 5, Brookman’s Building, Barrack
Street, Perth, is a native of this
city, where he was born in Decem-
ber, 1887. He received his early edu-
cation at the then Perth Grammar
School (now closed) and the public
schools of Perth, completing his
studies in London. Upon his return
to Western Australia he became con-
nected with the firm of Messrs. L. A.
Woolf & Co., accountants, of Perth,
with whom he remained for a period
of seven years. In 1908 Mr. James
established himself in professional
practice on his own behalf, and has
already won the confidence of the
public in a marked degree. A con-
siderable amount of the trade assign-
ment work is conducted by him, and
he also acts as attorney for benefici-
aries under wills and settlements.
Mr. James conducts the audits of
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. QUINTIN HOBDEN JAMES.
several well-known firms and com-
panies in Perth, and also has a fair
country practice. Mr. James has
representatives in Adelaide, Mel-
bourne, and Sydney.
M AURICE H AMILTO N
JOSEPH OTTO, F.S.P.A., public
Bartletto Perth.
MR. MAURICE HAMILTON JOSEPH OTTO.
accountant, New Zealand Chambers,
St. George’s Terrace, Perth, was
born at Albany, in this State, in
December, 1883. At the close of his
school-days he began his commercial
career in the office of Messrs. Moul-
lin & Hayward, Customs and for-
warding agents, and during the
period spent with them became con-
versant with all branches of the
business. In 1905 the firm was
floated into a limited liability com-
pany under the style of J. H. Moul-
lin & Co-, Limited, and Mr. Otto
received the appointment of Secre-
tary, which he retained until 1909, in
which year he resigned and started
in practice on his own behalf as a
public accountant in Perth. He
took a prominent part in the forma-
tion of the Society of Public Account-
ants and Auditors of Western Aus-
tralia (Incorporated), and fills the
office of Secretary to that body. HeAs
Secretary of the Western Australian
Pottery Company, Limited, and of
the West Cycles Company, Limited,
and is rapidly winning his way to
the leading ranks in his profession.
WILLIAM HUGH DUNN,
public accountant, estate agent,
and auctioneer, 4 and 5, Royal In-
surance Buildings, St. George’s Ter-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM HIGH DUNN.
race, Perth, was born at Ballarat,
Victoria, early in the year 1881, and
received his scholastic training at
the local High School. At the con-
clusion of his studies he spent seven
years in the counting-house and
warehouse of the well-known Balla-
rat merchants, Messrs. Harry Davies
and Co., finishing as sub-accountant.
In December, 1901, Mr. Dunn came
to Western Australia to take
charge of the office of the busi


ness firm of Messrs. Charles
Moore & Co., and after two
years in this connection resigned to
accept the post of financial manager
for Messrs. T. F. Elliott & Co., mer-
chants, of Kalgoorlie and Cool-
gardie. He returned to Perth in
May, 1905, under engagement to
the Economic Stores, Limited, as
Secretary, which position he resigned
in March, 1909, to commence busi-
ness on his own account, as above.
Since then Mr. Dunn has made
good headway in his profession, and
is acquiring an influential clientele.
He is associated with Peet & Co.,
Limited, and has prominent con-
nection with many public bodies,
notably the Australian Natives As-
sociation and has occupied the po-
sition of General Treasurer with a
seat on the Directorate of this In-
stitution for the past two years. Mr.
Dunn is a Fellow of the Society of
Public Accountants of Western
Australia.
ERNEST WILLIAM WAUGH,
F.S.P. A.,W. A.,Perth, is a son of the
late Rev. Doctor James S. Waugh,
President for eighteen years of
Wesley College, Melbourne, at which
institution the gentleman under re-
view was born on November 11, 1870,
and where he also received his educa-
tion. At fifteen years of age he
entered commercial life in the firm
of Messrs. Munro & Baillieu, auc-
tioneers, land and estate agents, Mel-
bourne, with whom he spent five and
a half years. He next transferred
his services to the firm of Messrs.
Langton, Holmes, & McCrindle,
accountants and auditors, of the same
city, and some years later sailed for
Western Australia, where he arrived
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. ERNEST WILLIAM WAUGH.
in 1891. Almost immediately Mr.
Waugh proceeded to "Moorarrie Sta-
tion,” on the Upper Murchison, the
property of the late Mr. J. H.
Monger, where he gained a great deal
of valuable pastoral experience,
enhancing this by periods of residence
on surrounding stations. Eventually
he took the position of overseer on
Mr. Frank Wittenoom’s 'Boolardy
Station,” and remained there in that
capacity for three years, lie then
turned his attention to the mining
industry, being connected with the
Woodly’s Reward Claim, Rothesay,
Great Boulder Perseverance, Central,
and West Boulder Mines, and Han-
nan’s Crushing Company. Leaving
the fields in 1898, he joined the
house of Dalgety & Co., Limited, at
Fremantle, and for five and a half
years served in the accountancy de-
partment of the firm. In 1903 he re-
signed in order to renew his associa-
tion with Mr. Frank Wittenoom, as
manager of his business affairs in
Perth, and at the same time began
to practise as an accountant and
auditor on his own account. Having
fulfilled all the requirements of the
Board of the Society of Public
Accountants and Auditors of Wes-
tern Australia, he was admitted
as a Fellow of that institution.
He has met with every encourage-
ment in his profession, and has con-
tinued very successfully up to the
present time. Mr. Waugh for three
years occupied a seat in the North
Perth Municipal Council, during
which period he acted as treasurer to
that body, but ultimately was obliged
to retire on account of the pressure
of his business claims. He is a local
Director of the United Insurance
Company, Limited. Lie is interested
in sport, and has filled the office of
Chairman of the Western Australian
Cricket Association, also being a
member of the committee dealing
with the ground management. Lie
has been President of the North
Perth Bowling Club for the past two
years. In 1900 he married Emma,
daughter of the late George Austen,
contractor, of Prahran, Victoria, and
has three daughters.


Master Builders and Contractors’ Association.
this Association, which is registered under the
Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, consists of
master builders and contractors, all of whom are
employers within the meaning of that Act. At the
present time the constitution and rules of the Associa-
tion and its cognate bodies are under consideration,
more especially as the Amending Arbitration Bill now
before Parliament may require certain alterations and
adjustments to be made. The present objects of the
Association are —
(a) To protect its members in the fair and proper
execution of such works, or supplies, as they
may from time to time contract for.
(h) To protect the interests of its members from
undue aggression and excessive State inter-
ference.
fc) To watch legislation affecting its members
and proposed measures in the same direction.
(d) To adopt whatever procedure may be con-
sidered advisable in the interests of members.
SHIRLEY WHITE, J.P., Pre-
sident of the Master Builders and
Contractors’ Association, was born
at Prahran, Victoria, on March 8,
1869, and is a son of the
late Mr. W. B. White, Veterinary
Surgeon, of that place. Having con-
cluded his scholastic training, he
served his apprenticeship to the
plumbing trade and after a four
years’ course began business on his
own behalf at Melbourne, where he
carried on until 1893. During that
year he came to Western Australia
and proceeding to Coolgardie estab-
lished himself there as plumber and
contractor after some fruitless
efforts in the mining industry. lie
built several of the first condensers
on the goldfields and among other
works of importance erected the
Coolgardie Chamber of Mines and
the Coolgardie Club Buildings. After
about nine years’ residence at this
centre he made an extended trip to
England and sailing for South
Africa in 1903 there joined in part-
nership with Mr. Sheri aw whom pre-
viously he had known for many years
in Coolgardie. The firm carried on
business for a couple pf years at
Johannesburg, Bloemfontein, and
The Springs, and ultimately in 1904
became established as builders and
contractors in Western Australia.
They have made a speciality of sew-
erage work in this country and car-
ried out the greater part of the
sewerage contracts for the metro-
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. SHIRLEY WHITE.
politan area during the period fol-
lowing their arrival in the State.
Mr. White has always interested
himself in the affairs of the districts
(e) To assist each member of the Union when
required in preparing evidence for the
defence of their interests before the Arbit-
ration Court or Conciliation Board.
(f) To act jointly with or without the co-opera-
tion of other public bodies in representing the
interests of members before the Government,
and, if necessary, the State or Federal Par-
liament.
(g) To regulate the rate of wages and transact
any other business that may arise between
members and their workmen, subject to the
provisions of the “Industrial Conciliation
and Arbitration Act, 1902.”
Should any drastic alterations be made in the con-
stitution or objects these will be referred to in the second
volume of this work.
The Association consists of about 100 members, the
President being Mr. Shirley White and the secretary
Mr. W. B. Shaw.
in which he has resided and was a
member of the Coolgardie Municipal
Council for four and a half years.
Since becoming a resident of Perth
for three years he occupied a seat
on the Subiaoo Council and has held
the office of Mayor for a period of
two years. He is a member of the
Fire Brigade Board and of the
Children’s Hospital Committee, be-
sides displaying a practical interest
in various other public institutions.
He is Treasurer of the Builders’
Exchange and of the Master
Builders’ Association of which in
July, 1911, he was elected Presi-
dent. In athletic circles he has been
well known, and in his younger days
was a keen cricketer and footballer.
He is now Vice-President of the
Subiaco Football Club, but devotes
his own leisure hours to the game
of bowls and is Vice-President of the
Muller Park Bowling Club. A lover
and owner of well-bred horses, he is
usually a competitor in the trotting
events in conjunction with the Royal
Shows and other functions, and has
had the honour of winning many
prizes with his thoroughbreds in this
section. Mr. White married a
daughter of Mr. George Williams,
mining engineer, late of the Golden
Horseshoe Mine, a lady well known


in Perth for her great practical in-
terest in the sacred cause of charity.
He has four sons and three
daughters.
SIMON BREMNER ALEX-
ANDER, builder and contractor,
65, Brewer Street, East Perth, is a
son of the late Mr. D. Alexander,
farmer, of Wick, Scotland. He pur-
sued his scholastic studies in his
native town until, reaching the age
of sixteen years, he was apprenticed
to the carpentering trade. Upon the
completion of his indentures he came
to Australia and settling in Sydney
was engaged in the various brandies
of the building trade during a period
of twelve years, and for a consider-
able time carried on business on his
own account as a builder and con-
tractor in the Harbour City. In
1897, attracted by the glowing re-
ports of the bright prospects of
Western Australia, Mr. Alexander
came to this State, and since that
time has been identified very closely
with the growth and progress of the
City of Perth. His first contract was
undertaken within a month of his
arrival, and among the more import-
ant works with which he has since
been entrusted may be mentioned
the Fremantle Railway Station
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. SIMON BREMNER ALEXANDER.
buildings, the A.U.S.N. offices,
Fremantle, the Police Court Build-
ings in Beaufort Street, Perth, the
Perth Modern School, extensive ad-
ditions to the Museum Buildings,
and many mercantile offices and
warehouses all over the city. Mr.
Alexander held office for three years
as President of the Master Builders'
Association. Pie is the proprietor of
the Donnybrook Freestone Quarries,
the stone from which is used in the
principal buildings nearly all over
the State. Pie devotes his hours of
leisure to amateur gardening, and
the flower-beds surrounding his
pretty home at North Perth show
ample reward for the health-giving
labour he has expended upon them.
In 1895 he married Jane, daughter
of Mr. Thomas Norman Kessell, of
Brookton, Western Australia, and
has two sons.
LEO FREDERICK ATKINS,
who manages the building portion
of the business of Mr. William
Atkins, builder and contractor, Lake
Street, Perth, is a son of Mr. Wil-
liam Atkins, and was born at Tarra-
dale, Victoria, on September 26,
1879. He came to Western Aus-
tralia with his father at a very early
age and was educated at the Perth
High School. Subsequently he spent
a short time in the office of the New
Zealand Insurance Company, and
left this employ to learn the building
and carpentering trade under his
father and Mr. Law, who were then
in partnership. Having become
proficient in all branches of the busi-
ness he specialized in the manufac-
ture of reinforced concrete inping,
patented by the Monier Projerietary
Company x and spent several years in
charge of the industry in this State.
At the present time he is superin-
tending the building contracts and
operations of the firm of William
Atkins, and in addition to this busi-
ness is personally interested in the
farming industry, owning a large
estate at Korrelocking, where the
production of cereals is studied to
some purpose. Mr. Atkins is a sup-
porter of all forms of manly out-
door sport, but renders special
allegiance to football, which he con-
siders well worthy the attention of
the man of pluck and muscle.
BENJAMIN THOMAS
BRADLEY, of the firm of Bradley
and Rudder ham, building contrac-
tors, Fremantle, was born in
Gloucestershire, England, on Feb-
ruary 8, 1855, and is a son of the
late Mr. William Bradley, of the
same place. He attended a school
in his native village of Miserden
and subsequently entered upon the
building trade, which he has fol-
lowed ever since. In 1882 he crossed
the seas to New Zealand, and two
years later came to Australia, spend-
ing ten years in Melbourne. During
the great depression in trade in that
State Mr. Bradley came to Western
Australia and settled in Perth.
Ultimately in 1895 he took up per-
manent residence in East Fremantle,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. BENJAMIN THOMAS BRADLEY.
at the close of another decade join-
ing his present partner, Mr. E. Rud-
derham, in business, and this firm
has been responsible for some of the
largest buildings erected in Fre-
mantle since 1905. Among these are
included the Commercial Hotel,
High Street, The West Australian
Office, The West Australian Build-
ings, next Post Office, Market
Street, the terrace of shops in High
Street for the Davies Estate, addi-
tions to the Economic Stores, and a
large number of other shops and
offices, besides structures of a
residential nature. Mr. Bradley is
of a retiring disposition and cares
but little for the diversions offered
by the various sporting and athletic
bodies, preferring rather the quiet
of his domestic hearth and the re-
creation offered by his growing
family. His marriage took place in
1895 with Alice, daughter of Mr.
James Campbell, of Tottenham,
London, and he has three sons and
three daughters.
ARTHUR WILLIAM BROWN,
J.P., builder and contractor, 53,
Kimberley Street, Leederville, is a
son of the late Mr. William Joseph


Brown, contractor, of Kent, Eng-
land, and was born on January 3,
1871. Coming of a family of con-
tractors through several genera-
tions, upon leaving school he en-
tered the building trade and spent
three years in mastering the details
of that calling. He left England
for Australia with his parents in
1887, and settling in the Western
State served his articles for two
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR WILLIAM BROWN.
years with Mr. G. K. K. Bond, archi-
tect, during which term he went
thoroughly into the artistic and
theoretical side of the building
trade. He then joined his father in
business and proceeded to Vic-
toria, where the partnership between
father and son was carried on for
over five years. At the end of this
period, in 1895, he returned to the
Western State, and finding trade
prosperous was followed by Mr.
Brown, sen., who died four years
later. Since that time the gentleman
under review has carried on the
business on his own account, and
in the course of his career has
specialized in the building of villa
residences, many of the finest dwell-
ings of this description which grace
the prosperous and growing suburbs
of Perth being of his erection.
Among other works carried out by
the firm are the Baptist Church,
Perth, the Methodist Church,
Guildford, the Bank of Austra-
lasia at Fremantle, and a number
of shops and warehouses round the
metropolis. Mr. Brown has always
been a studious observer of men
and things and has given some at-
tention to the matter of municipal
government. For four years he
occupied the office of Mayor of
Lccderville and prior to that
served for some time in the Council
Chamber of that municipality, the
status of which was raised during
his mayoralty from nine to twelve
councillors. He has been a member
of the Lake Monger Board and has
also occupied a seat on the Board of
the Children’s Hospital. A member
of the Masonic craft he is also a
keen temperance advocate on
rational lines and was Worthy
Patriarch of the Lodge of the Sons
and Daughters of Temperance. In
the past he was interested in horti-
culture and for a considerable time
was concerned in a fruit-growing
enterprise at Mildura, on the River
Murray, and more recently in Wes-
tern Australia, but through pressure
of business claims he was obliged
to relinquish these interests. In
outdoor sport he devoted a good
deal of time to cricket in earlier
davs. He is a lover of music, him-
%/
self possessing both instrumental
and vocal accomplishments. In
1896 he married Annie Margaret,
daughter of the late Mr. John
Henderson, of Victoria, and has a
son and two daughters.
J AMES BROWNLIE, builder
and contractor, member of the
Master Builders and Contractors’
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES BROWNLIE.
Association, Perth, was born at
Glasgow, Scotland, on August 7,
1863, being a son of the late Mr.
John Brownlie, of that city. He
was educated in his native town, and
early in his teens became appren-
ticed to the trade of carpenter anc|>
joiner, serving a five years’ term.
In 1885 he took passage for New
South Wales, and was engaged as a
builder in that State for a period
extending over seven years. In 1892
he came to Western Australia, per-
ceiving excellent openings for his
trade in the rapidly-rising State.
After working at his calling for some
years, in 1900 he began operations
on his own account, establishing
himself at Fremantle, where he has
since continued. Contracting of a
general character has occupied the
whole of his time, and many of the
newer residential, mercantile, and
commercial buildings in the town
and its suburbs have been erected
under his supervision. He has been
a member of the Master Builders
and Contractors’ Association almost
since its inception.
DAVIS, HANKINSON, & CO.,
contractors, boring engineers for
artesian water and minerals, ma-
chinery and manufacturers’ agents,
T. and G. Chambers, St. George’s
Terrace, Perth. (Matthias John
Davis, Frederick William Hankin-
son, and Frederick Kopke.) This
well-known firm was founded at
Perth with its present personnel in
1895, and its business has been suc-
cessfully carried on by the partners
ever since. From its inception the
attention of the firm has been
mainly directed to the putting down
of bores, by means of which the de-
velopment of the resources of the
country in the mineral, pastoral, and
agricultural districts is so materially
assisted. Most of the principal bores
in the State for artesian water and
coal have been sunk by this Com-
pany, which has specialized in this
direction. In addition it has car-
ried out numerous contracts for the
Public Works Department, particu-
larly in connection with the con-
struction or improvement of jetties
and bridges, notable among which
have been the extension of the jet-
ties at Bunbury and Geraldton and
many of the permanent-ways con-
nected with the tramways service at
Perth. General contracts of a
varied nature have also been success-
fully engaged in by the firm, and an
important branch of the business is
its machinery department, the Com-
pany being agents for a number of
manufacturers in England and


America. The partners are also in-
terested in the pastoral industry
of the State, owning a station
property in the Gascoyne district
comprising about 200,000 acres of
leasehold, which is devoted to sheep-
raising purposes. The members of
the firm are connected with the Mas-
ter Builders and Contractors’ Asso-
ciation, the Builders’ Exchange, the
Perth Chamber of Commerce, and
the Pastoralists’ Association of Wes-
tern Australia. MATTHIAS JOHN
DAVIS is a son of the late Mr. Wil-
liam Charles Davis, of Poole, Dor-
setshire, England, and was born at
that town on June 9, 1861. He re-
ceived his education in the South of
England, and having reached the
age of sixteen entered upon a clerical
position in a commercial office which
he retained for eight years. In 1884
he left the Old Country for A us-
tralia, and arriving in Melbourne
joined the Victorian Government
Service in the Engineering Survey
Department. Subsequently he en-
gaged in a course of study in
engineering, and gained considerable
practical experience in this and
general survey work in connection
with railway construction in Vic-
toria. He next went to New
Zealand, where he spent a couple of
years in the construction of roads
and bridges under the Government,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. MATTHIAS JOHN DAVIS.
by whom also he was employed in
other engineering work. In 1895 he
came to Western Australia and
shortly afterwards entered into the
partnership above referred to, which
has continued unbroken up to the
present time. He is a member of
the Western Australian Institute of
Engineers. His leisure is devoted
to the popular game of bowls, and
he is connected with the King’s Park
Rowling Club, besides which he is
a great reader, his choice falling
chiefly upon works of a scientific
character. FREDERICK WIL-
LIAM HANKINSON, of the firm
of Davis, Hankinson, & Co., boring
contractors, etc., St. George’s Ter-
race, Perth, was born in Melbourne,
Victoria, on January 10, 1863. He
is the eldest son of the late Mr.
Peter Hankinson, of that city, and
received his scholastic training in his
native place. At the age of fifteen
he embarked upon a mercantile
career, entering a city office, where
he spent ten years. In 1888 he took
a- trip to England, and returning a
year later joined the firm of J. Falk-
ingharn & Sons as paymaster and
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. FREDERICK WILLIAM HANKINSON.
bookkeeper on their Great Southern
Railway contract in Gippsland, Vic-
toria. While engaged in this connec-
tion he came into contact with Mr.
Davis, his present partner, the result
of this meeting being the long and
successful partnership which was
arranged a few months later and has
continued ever since. In 1900 Mr.
Hankinson again visited England
and took advantage of the time at
his disposal to travel through the
European Continent, where he made
a study of the newest and most up-
to-date methods in vogue in connec-
tion with his calling. The firm
established itself in Perth in 1895
and since that period has pursued a
very successful career, proving itself
thoroughly reliable and obtaining a
firm footing in the rising State. Mr.
Hankinson is a member of the
Masonic fraternity and is connected
with the local Club, lie is a home-
loving man and spends most of his
leisure in gardening pursuits at his
residence at Claremont. In 1900 he
married Edith, third daughter of
the late Mr. Charles Ford, of Mel-
bourne, Victoria, and has two sons.
FREDERICK KOPKE is a Vic-
torian, having been born at Winder-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FR EDERICK KOP KE.
mere, in that State, on January 14,
1860. He is a son of the late Mr.
L. 11. Kopke, of that town, where
also he received his scholastic train-
ing, and at fifteen years of age be-
came engaged in farming pursuits.
Having attained his majority he
took steps to acquaint himself with
the methods of boring, which at that
time was done by hand in the fam-
ous Madame Berry mining district,
the object of search being gold.
Twelve months later he accepted em-
ployment in the Government Service
as a prospector for coal with the
diamond drill, and spent four years
in this work, in 1885 accepting a
similar post under the Queensland
Government, which he retained for
two years. In 1888 he resumed his
connection with the Victorian State
authorities, and having been en-
gaged for three years at Broken Hill
relinquished this service and for a
short time was identified with a
private firm in New South Wales
which was boring for water in the
Morec district. In 1897 he arrived
in the Western State and joined
Messrs. Davis and Hankinson in the
formation of the present business.


Mr. Kopke is associated with the
fraternity of Freemasons and is a
member of the Masonic Club. For
recreation he resorts to the bowling
green, and is connected with the
Carnarvon Bowling Club. In 1903
he married Edith, daughter of the
late Mr. Henry Ogborne, of Kew,
Victoria, and has two sons.
WILLIAM FAIRWEATHER,
builder and contractor, 137, Ilamers-
ley Road, Subiaco, is a son of Mr.
W. F airweather, of Dollar, Scot-
land, and was educated at the
Dollar Academy, that well-known
scholastic institution on the borders
of the Highlands. When eighteen
years of age he entered the building
trade under the tuition of Mr.
James Crawford, a builder of his
native town, and five years later
came to Queensland, where he spent
twelve years in the exercise of his
calling. When the excitement of the
Coolgardie gold rush drew the
representatives of every department
of life to the fields he sailed with
many others for the West, and
started as a builder and contractor
right in the centre of the gold-
mining industry on those distant
areas. After a period of six years he
came to Perth in 1900 and estab-
lished himself at the capital, where
he has carried out many important
contracts, among which may be
mentioned the North Perth Mon-
astery. He occupies a seat on the
committee of the Builders 7 Exchange
and is a member of the Master
Builders 7 Association. Mr. Fair-
weather takes his recreation on the
Subiaco Bowling Green, of which
Club he is a member. He married
in 1891, Annie, daughter of the late
Mr. Michael Yates, of Glasgow, and
has two daughters and a son.
JAMES FINLAY, of the firm of
Messrs. Franklin & Finlay, timber
merchants and contractors, 697,
Wellington Street, is a son of Mr.
George Finlay, now living in retire-
ment at Roseville, near Sydney,
New South Wales. He was born
at Grafton, in the Mother State, on
October 31, 1862, and having com-
pleted his scholastic education at the
local public school, when sixteen
years of age started work in the
sugar and saw-mill belonging to his
father. While engaged in this occu-
pation he also assisted his father in
the building trade, and having
reached man’s estate took a position
for a short time in the Sydney Steam
Saw and Turnery Works. Relin-
quishing this connection he turned
his attention to the carpentry
branch of his old trade and pursued
his calling at Bowral, having re-
moved to this resort for the benefit
of his health. Subsequently he
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES FINLAY.
proceeded to Goulburn and accepted
the post of foreman in the business
of Mr. J. T. Franklin, whose bio-
graphy appears in the municipal
section of this work. This step
eventuated in a partnership —which
has continued unbroken up to the
present time —between the two
gentlemen in 1892, and a decision
being made to come to Western Aus-
tralia the firm established itself in
Perth in January, 1896, since when
it has carried out many con-
J O
tracts and important works. Mr.
Finlay is a member of the Masonic
craft and is a Master Mason. His
prowess at the game of bowls is well
known on the green, and in the pre*
sent year (1911), in conjunction
with Mr. J. Hammill, he won the
champion pairs of the State; he is
a foundation member and Past Pre-
sident of the North Perth Bowling
Club. In 1888 Mr. Finlay married
Louisa, daughter of the late Mr.
John Smith, of the Clarence River,
New South Wales, and has two sons
and four daughters.
ALEXANDER CRAWFORD
FINDLAY, builder and contractor,
Mary Street, Highgate Hill, is a son
of the late Mr. George Findlay,
builder, of Glasgow, where the sub-
ject of this sketch was born on Octo-
ber 31, 1861. When two years old
he was brought to Australia by his
parents, and subsequently attended
various public and private schools in
Victoria. At an early age he re-
ceived an insight into the calling
followed by his father, and by de-
grees mastered all the details of the
building trade, the business being
carried on by his elder brother after
the death of Mr. Findlay, sen., in
1879. Some years later he was
taken into partnership, and upon the
decease of his brother in 1887 the
conduct and of the
whole business devolved upon the
subject of our memoir. His work
lay chiefly in the western district of
Victoria from the centres of Hamil-
ton and Portland, and many public
buildings,, shire halls, and business
premises are standing to-day as wit-
ness to the credit of the builder. A
season of depression in the trade con-
sequent upon the bursting of the
land boom, together with the pros-
pects of a new era of prosperity in
the Western State, prompted Mr.
Findlay to come to Perth in 1894,
j *
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALEXANDER CRAWFORD FINDLAY.
and since that year he has pursued
his calling in Western Australia.
Shortly after arrival he joined in
partnership with Mr. W. R. Lakey,
with whom he maintained an un-
broken connection until the retire-
ment of the latter gentleman in
1909. The firm very soon estab-
lished its reputation and became
closely identified with the growth
and progress of the capital, being
engaged in the erection of such


buildings as Empire Buildings, the
Public Library, Emanuel Buildings,
“FurnivaTs” Chambers, the Old
Men’s Home, additions to Messrs.
Goode, Durrant, & Co.'s warehouse,
Elder Buildings, and many others
both in and out of the metropolis.
Since the retirement of his partner
Mr. Findlay has continued the work
so ably conducted in the past, and
his sphere of activity has not yet
been eclipsed. He is a member of
the Masonic craft and of the Western
Australian Rowing Club, while his
connection with the Mount Lawley
Bowling Club and the Perth Rifle
Club indicates the direction of his
chief diversions, rifle-shooting especi-
ally having engaged his attention in
the past, when he was one of the lead-
ing rifle shots in the various clubs in
which he has held membership, and
won several trophies and badges. In
1891 Mr. Findlay married Florence,
only daughter of Mr. James Lamb,
of Ballarat, Victoria, and has a son.
ROBERT ALEXANDER GAM-
BLE, builder and contractor, Gros-
venor Road, North Perth, is a son
of the late Mr. John A. Gamble, of
Lyndhurst, Victoria, and was born
at that town on September 12, 1870.
He received his early education in
Bartletto , Perth.
Mr. Robert Alexander Gamble.
his native place, and concluding his
studies at Melbourne he began com-
mercial life by entering a broker’s
office in the latter city. Desiring
outdoor life, and with ambitions for
an independent career, ho became
apprenticed to the plastering trade,
and at the same time attended a
school of instruction on matters con-
nected with building. Before attain-
ing to man's estate Mr. Gamble
launched out on his own account,
undertaking sub-contracts which he
carried on with a fair amount of suc-
cess until trade became dull as a con-
sequence of the fall of property
values resulting from the bursting of
the land boom in Victoria. He then
temporarily retired to his father's
farm near Lyndhurst, and in 1897,
encouraged by the tidings of pros-
perity in the Western State, left his
native soil to establish a footing in
the rising metropolis of Perth. After
working at his trade for three years
he opened in business on his own
account as a builder and contractor,
and amid the ups and downs of in-
dustrial life has always succeeded
in maintaining his stand among his
fellow-craftsmen in Western Austra-
lia. The demand for residential
structures consequent upon the ever-
increasing community has caused
him to specialize in this class of
work, but he has also been respon-
sible for several ecclesiastical edi-
fices, viz., the Congregational and
Presbyterian churches at Claremont
and the Presbyterian and Baptist
churches at North Perth. He also
built the Methodist Ladies' College
at Claremont. In addition to his
building connection Mr. Gamble has
interests in the farming industry
and owns a property near Wongan
Hills, which it is intended to de-
vote chiefly to the production of
wheat and wool. He takes more than
passing interest in matters affecting
the general good of the community
in which he resides, and served a
term of three years as councillor for
North Perth, subsequent to which
he was twice elected Mayor of that
Municipality. He is a member of
the North Perth Bowling Club. In
1897 Mr. Gamble married Catherine
Sarah, daughter of the late Mr.
John Carton, of the Western district
of Victoria, and has four sons and
two daughters.
HENRY GUTHRIE, builder and
contractor, 483, Newcastle Street,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr.
David Guthrie, one of the pioneer
citizens of Perth, in which city the
gentleman under review was born
on October 29, 1869. He pursued
his educational training at the
Government schools until nineteen
years of age, when he was appren-
ticed to the carpentering trade and
served a term of eight years under
Mr. Alfred Lee, of this city. At
the end of this period, beginning in
a modest way on his own account,
Mr. Guthrie laid the foundations of
his present large contracting busi-
ness, whch he has carried on without
a break ever since. The Grand
Central Coffee Palace and Messrs.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HENRY GUTHRIE.
Brennan Brothers' large premises
stand witnesses to his credit, also the
four-storied warehouse in Queen
Street of Messrs. Mortlock Brothers
and the fine warehouse of Messrs.
Beath, Schiess, & Felstead in Murray
Street, besides many other commer-
cial and private buildings all over
the State. Mr. Guthrie is a member
of the Masonic craft and is well
known in racing circles, being him-
self an owner of racehorses and a
member of the Western Australia
Turf Club. He married in 1890 and
has a family of three daughters.
CHARLES HERBERT HATS-
WELL, builder and contractor,
Leederville, is a son of Mr. G. W.
Hatswell, who followed the same
calling in Melbourne for many
years. He was born at Adelaide,
South Australia, on January 16,
1877, and at the close of his
scholastic education, at fifteen years
of age, entered upon the same walk
of life as his progenitors, learning
the trade under his father in
Victoria. He gained a varied
experience in his early years which
has stood him in good stead, but in
the Eastern States, as since his
arrival in Western Australia in
1897, he has given the chief of his


attention to buildings of a domestic
character. In 1905 he established
himself in business on his own
behalf and has since carried on as
a builder and contractor at McCourt
Street, Leederville, with very satis-
factory results. He interests himself
in the moral good of the community
and is an enthusiastic worker in the
cause of temperance, having held
many positions of honour in the
various organizations to this end
that he has aided by his efforts and
sympathy. He is at present Senior
Trustee of the Sons of Temperance
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES HERBERT HATSWELL.
Lodge at Subiaco. His chief diver-
sion is rifle-shooting, and he has met
with more than moderate success in
this line of sport, being the
fortunate winner of a large number
of trophies. Much of the success of
the local Rifle Club is due to his
co-operation and active furtherance
of its affairs by a conscientious
discharge of his duties as lion.
Secretary. In 1905 Mr. Hatswell
married Isabella, daughter of Mr.
Samuel Ward Rule, of Melbourne,
Victoria, and has two sons.
J. HAWKINS & SON, contrac-
tors, 146, Newcastle Street, Perth.
(James Hawkins and John Bearne
Hawkins.) JA MES 11AWKINS,
Sen., partner in the well-known
contracting firm of Messrs. J.
Hawkins & Son, was born at
Halberton, Devon, England, and
left his native land for Aus-
tralian shores in 1886. After
nine years, during which ho worked
at his calling in the other States of
the Commonwealth, he came to
Western Australia, and since that
time has carried on a thriving busi-
ness in the metropolis of this State.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES HAWKINS.
Messrs. J. Hawkins & Son have
placed to their credit many of the
more important buildings that grace
the streets of the city, having carried
out the contracts for the King Ed-
ward Hostel, the Western Austra-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN BEARNE HAWKINS.
lian Club buildings, Weld Chambers,
and the National Mutual Life As-
surance offices, and are at present
engaged on several large contracts.
The gentleman under review is a
member of the Masonic craft and
for half a century has been associ-
ated with the Independent Order of
Oddfellows, in which he has held all
its honours and offices. He married
Elizabeth, daughter of. Mr. John
Bearne, of Newton Abbot, England,
and has a surviving family of three
sons an d four daughters. JOHN
BEARNE HAWKINS, junior part-
ner in the above firm, was born at
Dawlish, Devonshire, on October 19,
1873, and received his education at
the Teignmouth Grammar School.
When fourteen years of age he came
to Australia with his father and fol-
lowed the building and contracting
trade in conjunction with that
gentleman, who admitted him into
partnership in 1896. Since coming
to the Western State in 1895 he has
taken a very active part in the con-
duct of the business, which is known
as one of the leading concerns of its
kind in Perth. Mr. Hawkins spends
most of his spare hours in piscatorial
pursuits, to which sport he is greatly
addicted. He married in 1901 Ada
Margaret, daughter of Mr. R. J.
Donnelly, of Perth, and has three
daughters and three sons.
JOSEPH DAVIDSON HOS-
SACK, builder and contractor,
Goldsworthy Road, Claremont, is a
son of the late Mr. John Hossack,
master mariner, of Sunderland,
England, in which county he was
born on August 12, 1851. He at-
tended the Villiers Street Academy,
and upon leaving school, at the age
of fourteen, entered the shipping
yards of Mr. Joseph Thompson,
shipbuilder, of North Sunderland.
After remaining here for some time
he was apprenticed to the house
joinery trade, seven years later be-
ing appointed foreman of his firm’s
works. He next went to sea as car-
penter on a brig trading in the
Mediterranean, and accompanied
the vessel on a longer voyage to Aus-
tralian waters. Contracting fever,
he landed at Fremantle to enter the
hospital, and finding upon recovery
that the boat had departed remained
in Western Australia. For a year
he worked as journeyman, after
which he opened in business on his
own behalf as a builder and con-
tractor, and with the exception of
a period devoted to the mining in-
dustry has continued successfully in
this calling ever since. In 1902 he
revisited England and renewed his
acquaintance with the scenes of his
boyhood days, returning to his


adopted country after a lapse of a
few months. Mr. Hossack is a mem-
ber of the Master Builders and Con-
tractors’ Association. He married in
1879 Hannah, daughter of the late
Mr. Thomas Briggs, of Fremantle.
ROBERT OSWALD LAW,
builder and contractor, who was the
first President of the Master
Builders and Contractors’ Associa-
tion, is a son of the late Mr. David
Law, well known in the early days
of Western Australia, and was born
in Victoria on September 20, 1867.
He received his education at the
Commercial College at Ballarat until
fourteen years of age, when he
obtained his first experience in the
trade he now follows in connection
with railway construction work in
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ROBERT OSWALD LAW.
South Australia, lie first came to
Western Australia in 1881, and
with the exception of a brief period
subsequently spent in the Central
State has continued here ever since.
His earliest contract, the construc-
tion of the Fremantle jetty, was fol-
lowed by many others of importance,
among which, in conjunction with
Mr. William Atkins, were the Perth
to Pinjarrah railway —the first sec-
tion of the Bunbury line —the line
from Brunswick to Collie, and nearly
all the jetties along the Western
Australian coast. He was also re-
sponsible for the largest of the sewer-
age contracts in the metropolitan
area and built the Perth Mint, the
Perth Boys’ School, the large
emporium of Messrs. Boan Brothers
in Wellington Street, Surrey Cham-
bers, and numerous other works of
the same class. He has been largely
identified with the trading industries
of the country, particularly in the
brick and timber trades, and is
managing director of the Monier
Pipe Company. Mr. Law was one of
the founders and first President of
the Master Builders and Contractors'
Association, and has been connected
with the management of this body
since its inception. He has taken a
leading part in public affairs gener-
ally, but through pressure of busi-
ness activities has been forced to
relinquish many of the honorary
positions he formerly held. lie is
associated with the fraternity of
Freemasons and holds membership
in various clubs, including the
Masonic, the Western Australian,
the South-Western, and the Liberal
League. For five years he held the
position of President of the Amateur
Sports Club, and he is also President
of the Croquet Association. Lawn
tennis, however, is his favourite
recreation, and he divides his leisure
between this popular diversion and
motor-boating on the River Swan.
In 1894 Mr. Law married Bertha
Pauline, daughter of Mr. J. S.
Brooking, late Surveyor-General of
Western Australia, and has two sons
and a daughter.
FREDERICS W I L H E L M
GUSTAV LIEBE, contractor, is a
son of the late Mr. Edward Liebe,
of Wittenberg, Germany, in which
city he was born on January 18,
1862. He left school at the age of
fifteen, and having served his ap-
prenticeship to the building trade in
the Fatherland travelled all over
Europe, spending a year in Switzer-
land, two years in Vienna, and a
considerable time in Budapest.
During his journeyings he greatly
enlarged his knowledge and general
experience, and entering into part-
nership with the late Mr. Klein was
engaged in the carrying out of some
large contracts in Bulgaria, includ-
ing the present Bulgarian Parlia-
ment House, the Barracks, and
various Colleges. Coming to South
Australia in 1885 the partners
opened in business at Adelaide, and
afterwards extended their operations
to Melbourne, where they carried
out many large contracts. In 1896,
at the time of the Coolgardie boom,
the partnership was dissolved and
the gentleman under review estab-
lished himself in business on his own
account in Perth as a builder and
contractor, his late partner engaging
in the mining industry. Among his
works in Western Australia he
numbers the Art Gallery, His
Majesty’s Theatre, and numerous
Bank premises and offices, besides
which he has made a speciality of
hotel erection, many of the leading
hotels in and around Perth having
been built under his tender. Mr.
Liebe is a member of the German
Club and in the past has occupied
the position of President of this
body.
WILLIAM MASSEY, builder
and contractor, 30, Ord Street, is a
son of the late Mr. William Massey,
merchant, of Scarborough, England,
and was born at Norton, Malton,
near Scarborough, on April 4, 1861.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM MASSEY.
He was educated in his native town,
and at fifteen years of age became
engaged in commercial pursuits in a
store belonging to his father, where
he remained for about a year. Sub-
sequently he was apprenticed to the
joinery trade, and after a five years’
term of service worked at his calling
in England for a short time, and in
1882 came to Australia. Settling in
Sydney Mr. Massey, with the excep-
tion of a short visit to Queensland
in 1883, spent six years in the
Mother State, the major portion of
which time being engaged in the
calling of a contractor, and mainly
employed in minor work of a domes-
tic character. In 1888 he went to
Melbourne, and for about seven
years carried on business in that


metropolis, his contracts including a
good deal of work for the Govern-
ment, besides other undertakings of
a public and private nature in differ-
ent parts of Victoria and New South
Wales. In 1895 he came to Western
Australia and established himself as
a builder and contractor at Perth,
and also went into the sawmilling
business at Dandalup. During his
sojourn at that time he carried out,
among other contracts, the initial
work in connection with the new
grandstand on the Perth racecourse.
Subsequently with his wife he visited
England at the time of the Diamond
Jubilee celebrations and spent nearly
a year on the trip, reviving his
memory of the scenes of his youth
and travelling through Scotland and
Ireland. Sailing again for Austra-
lia, he once more opened in business
at Melbourne and continued for five
years, at the end of which period he
took up permanent residence in
Western Australia. The firm of Mas-
sey & Co., with which his interests
were identified, has since been amal-
gamated with Wunderlich, Limited,
and he still maintains his connection
with its operations, also continuing
in the contracting business. In
addition he owns a stake in the agri-
cultural, pastoral, and mining in-
dustries of the State, and in 1908
purchased a valuable farm and 5,000
acres adjoining the property in the
south-western district, near Yalling-
up, where he engages in sheep and
horse breeding and the culture of
potatoes. Mr. Massey has occupied
a seat on the Committee of the
Master Builders and Contractors’
Association for twenty years. He
is a member of the Masonic craft
and Club, and is connected with the
Western Australian Club. In 1884
Mr. Massey married Miss M. Pick-
worth, of Sydney, New South Wales,
and has two daughters and two sons.
MIZEN BROTHERS, builders
and contractors, 21, Blencowe
Street, Leederville. The period of
this well-known firm’s existence has
run well into the teens, the year of
its establishment in Perth being
1896. Since its inception the major
portion of its attention has been
given to contracting for residential
buildings, but it has also been
responsible for the large additions
and general improvements to the
Weld Club Chambers in Perth and
for the erection of the Picture
Theatre at Subiaco, besides many
Government contracts of more or
less importance. During the slack
season a speciality is made of the
construction of wire doors and win-
dows, many thousands of which are
produced at their Subiaco factory.
Tiie partners own a property at
Baandee, which is under wheat cul-
tivation, and make a hobby of the
development of the agricultural in-
dustry on this estate. They are
members of the Master Builders and
Contractors’ Association. CHARLES
MIZEN is a son of the late Mr.
William Mizen, of Helions, Bump-
stead, Essex, England, where also
he was born. He was educated at
a Church of England school in his
native village and by private tuition,
and emigrated to Australia at the
age of sixteen, arriving at Brisbane,
Queensland, in 1874. After six
months he proceeded to Sydney,
where he spent eight years mastering
the different departments of the
building trade, and having worked
as a journeyman for a considerable
period was attracted to Melbourne
at the time of the land boom in Vic-
toria. Here he engaged in a variety
of callings, and for some years car-
ried on as an orchardist in the New
England district of New South
Wales. Ultimately, in 1896, he
came to Western Australia, and in
conjunction with his brother
founded the present business. His
hours of leisure are devoted to the
study of works of a scientific and
philosophic nature, and he is also
fond of music, being a flautist of
considerable ability. In 1881 he
married Elizabeth, daughter of the
late Mr. J. Hooke, of Wagga
Wagga, New South Wales, and has
two sons and two daughters.
ARTHUR NELSON, builder and
contractor, Subiaco, is a son of the
late Mr. Joseph Nelson, manufac-
turing jeweller, of Banbridge and
Dromore, Ireland. He was born at
Dromore, Ireland, on June 25, 1861,
and received his scholastic training
in his native town and subsequently
in the City of Belfast. Leaving
school he was apprenticed to the
building trade, serving his time in
the joinery branch, and upon the
completion of his indentures left for
New Zealand, where he was engaged
in joinery work for a short period.
He next proceeded to the Fiji
Islands under engagement to the
Government there, but tendered his
resignation in less than twelve
months and started contracting on his
own account at the period of transfer
of the seat of Government from
Levuka to Suva, in these islands.
He erected the residence for the late
Governor Thurston and superin-
tended extensive alterations to
Government House during the visit
of the British squadron, besides
being employed in other contracts of
greater or less importance. In 1884
Mr. Nelson returned to New Zea-
land, where in face of great difficul-
ties arising from trouble with the
Maoris he built the first houses for
the Government in the King
Country on the Main Trunk Line.
He also completed various other
Government contracts and erected
some prominent buildings in the
City of Auckland. Mr. Nelson’s
next arena of activity was in Vic-
toria, where from 1888 he carried
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR NELSON.
out some of the largest contracts of
the following four years, notable
among which were the factory of
Messrs. Sands & McDougall, one of
the finest buildings in the State, the
Portland Lighthouse, and the
Elmore Water Scheme Construction
Works. He came to Western Aus-
tralia at the end of 1892, but finding
trade slack returned to New Zea-
land, via Melbourne, and while re-
siding in the Dominion for a couple
of years completed the Roman
Catholic Bishop’s Palace at Auck-
land, the plans of which were de-
signed by the firm of Pugin & Pugin,
the noted Gothic architects of Lon-
don. The gold rush of 1894 at-
tracted him once more to the Wes


tern State and he settled in Perth,
where he has since carried on his
business. His first work was the
completion of the Perth Railway
Station, which was followed by other
Government contracts, including the
North Fremantle forts and various
commercial structures, among which
Brookman’s Building takes pride of
place. Mr. Nelson is interested in
the cultivation of fruit and owns a
large orchard in the Darling Ranges,
a farm of 4,000 acres in the Victoria
district, besides which he is a
property-owner in the suburban
areas. Mr. Nelson married in 1888
Julia, daughter of the late Mr. Mat-
thew Ramsay Mclntyre, of Glasgow,
and has a family of two sons and one
daughter.
JEREMIAH O’DONOGHUE,
contractor, 232, Stirling Street,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr. Jer-
emiah O’Donoghue, of Killorglin,
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JEREMIAH O’FONOGHUE.
County Kerry, Ireland. He was
educated in his native town, and at
sixteen years of age left school and
took a position as a-ssistant secretary
to the constructing engineer in a
railway contract in County Kerry,
which he filled for nearly two years.
He then served an apprenticeship to
the trade of carpenter and joiner,
and having completed his five years’
indentures worked at his calling in
several of the large cities of Eng-
land. He also attended practical
classes in the science and art depart-
ment at Birkenhead in 1897, and
QQ
went through a special course in
building-construction and drawing.
He then entered one of the biggest
furniture houses in London and con-
tinued there a sufficiently long period
to gain an insight into factory work.
Subsequently at Liverpool, when the
South African war broke out he as-
sisted in altering and reconstructing
the first ship for transport, working
one continuous shift of 33 hours. In
1900 Mr. O’Donoghue came to
Western Australia, and proceeding
to Kalgoorlie spent nearly a year at
that centre with a firm of contrac-
tors. At the end of that period he
established himself in business in
Perth on his own behalf, and has
carried on as a contractor there and
at Fremantle ever since. He speci-
alizes in shop fittings and carried out
several alterations and additions in
the city, but has also given some at-
tention to the erection of shops and
domestic dwellings in the suburbs.
The gentleman under review holds
the rank of High Chief Ranger of
the Irish National Foresters of Wes-
tern Australia, and makes a hobby
of the work connected with this
body and the Friendly Societies’ In-
stitute, with which he is also asso-
ciated. He is also auditor to the
Master Builders and Contractors’
Association. In the year 1902
he married Mary Ellen, daughter
of Mr. John O’Donoghue, of
Killarney, Ireland.
HERBERT CHARLES PIT-
MAN, contractor, of St. George’s
Terrace, Perth, Western Australia,
was born on November 28, in the
year 1867, at Frome, England, of
which town his father, Mr. Thomas
Pitman, was a resident. His educa-
tion was conducted at the Boys’ Bri-
tish School, and when still quite a lad
he was apprenticed to the stonecuL
ting trade, in which he continued
after his arrival at Melbourne in
1889. For a period of some five
years he was engaged in mining and
prospecting pursuits, and came to
Coolgardie at the time of the gold
rush to that region, but found re-
sults too chequered to promise any
great ultimate success. Relinquish-
ing his efforts he turned his atten-
tion once more to his trade, and
established the present large con-
tracting business at Perth and Fre-
mantle. At the present time (1912)
Mr. Pitman has in hand over
<£loo,ooo worth of work, and in the
past has carried out some of the
largest contracts in the State, besides
which he is interested in several im-
portant business propositions about
the city. Mr. Pitman has also a
stake in the farming industry, being
the owner of an estate of 2,000 acres
of land at Kunjinn, on the Merri-
den-Wickepin line, where he has an
area under cultivation of wheat. He
has held various offices in the craft
of Freemasons, his present rank
being that of Worshipful Master of
the Lodge of Emulation, No. 7. In
the year 1901 he married Ethel,
daughter of Mr. Benjamin Fuller, of
Millars’ Karri and Jarrah Company
(1902), Limited, formerly well known
on the River Murray, South Aus-
tralia, and has a family of one
daughter.
JOSEPH RICHARDSON, buil-
der and contractor, Subiaco, was
born at the village of Cammaring-
ham, Lincolnshire, England, on
September 12, 1854, being a son of
the late Mr. Joseph Richardson, of
that country. He pursued his
studies in his native town until the
age of twelve, when he went to
work on a farm. At sixteen he was
apprenticed to the carpentering and
joinery trade, and having served a
term of five years engaged in
journeyman work for a time, and in
1878 left his native land for Aus-
tralia. Landing at Adelaide in
October of that year he applied
himself to gain experience in the
building and contracting trade and
two years later, taking advantage of
an opening that offered, began busi-
ness on his own account. He carried
on successfully in South Australia
for about five years and afterwards
removed to Victoria, where he was
fortunate in obtaining many large
contracts and did some very im-
portant work in that State. Of
peculiar interest, perhaps, is the fact
that he built the first brick house in
the famous shire of Croajingalong,
the building being at Orbost, on the
Snowy River. In 1895 Mr. Richard-
son came to Western Australia and
settled at Subiaco, from which
centre he has undertaken numerous
contracts of a varied nature, from
cottages and shops to hotels and
residences of a palatial character.
He is interested in real estate in-
vestments in and around the capital
city, and until recently was closely
identified with the farming industry
of the State. A member of the
Masonic fraternity he has taken
honours in connection with the


craft and is a member of the
Masonic and Snbiaco Clubs. He is
a member of the Master Builders
and Contractors’ Association. Mr.
Richardson applies a portion of his
leisure to the diversions of the
Bartl et to, Perth.
MR . JOSEPH RICHARDSON.
billiard table and derives consider-
able pleasure from the exercise of
his skill in this direction. In the
year 1881 he married Margaret,
daughter of the late Mr. Charles
Gall, of South Australia, and has
three daughters.
WILLIAM HENRY ROBERTS,
builder and contractor, 122, Cam-
bridge Street, Leederville, is a son
of the late Mr. Edward Roberts, of
Bendigo, Victoria, and was born at
Rheola, in that State, on April 10,
1871. He was educated principally
at the State school at Inglewood,
and abandoning his studies at an
early age began work in the build-
ing trade at Bendigo, and followed
this calling for many years all over
the Victorian State. In 1901 he
came to Western Australia and
settled at Leederville, where he was
employed in the bricklaying trade
for some considerable time. Encour-
aged by the possibilities he perceived
open to the enterprising builder, he
erected some dwellings on his own ac-
count, and about five years after his
arrival in the State undertook his
first contract. Since that time the
success achieved by Mr. Roberts in
his line of business has been remark-
able, and he has just completed a
reticulation contract for the Govern-
ment costing several thousands of
pounds. Shops, cottages, and villas
—in fact all classes of work —he has
undertaken, his success being par-
ticularly notable in view of his small
beginning in this State. In the
arena of sport Mr. Roberts has dis-
tinguished himself in various ways.
He was a champion fireman and
winner of many tronhies in the com-
petitions in connection with the Fire
Brigade sports. He also excelled in
football and cricket and is a keen
marksman, still taking interest in
the handling of the rifle, and vary-
ing with this diversion the game of
bowls, which is his chief hobby at
the present time (1911), he being the
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM HENRY ROBERTS.
champion of the Leederville Bow-
ling Club. In 1895 Mr. Roberts
married Bertha, daughter of Mr.
George Watts, of Inglewood, Vic-
toria, and has a son and five
daughters.
ELIJAH RUDDERHAM, of the
firm of Bradley & Rudderham,
builders and contractors, of Fre-
mantle, is a son of Mr. Elijah Rud-
derham, of Norwich, England, and
was born at Maryborough, Victoria,
on April 10, 1866. His preliminary
education was conducted in the
State school in his native town, and
at a later period he studied at the
South Melbourne Grammar School
and also attended the School of Arts,
South Melbourne, and the Working
Men's Technical College, Melbourne.
At the age of eighteen he was work-
ing at the carpenter's bench, having
chosen the calling of a builder as
his life-work, and gained a wide
range of experience in connection
with the new school buildings which
were at that time being erected all
over the metropolitan area. In 1895
Mr. Rudderham came to Western
Australia and a year later com-
menced contracting work at Fre-
mantle, where he had settled upon
his arrival in the State. His busi-
ness prospered and various impor-
tant contracts fell to his tender,
among others being Messrs. J. and
W. Bateman’s Buildings, Strelitz
Brothers’ Bulk Store and Ware-
house, and numerous cottage, villa,
and shop erections in and about Fre-
mantle. In 1905 he entered into part-
nership with Mr. Benjamin Bradley,
since which period the firm has car-
ried on successfully as builders and
contractors at the Port, and has ob-
tained its fair share of public
patronage, many well-known and
prominent buildings having been
successfully carried out. Mr. Rud-
derham is responsible for the clerical
work connected with the business
and transacts the correspondence,
etc. He is a great reader of works
covering a wide range of subjects,
but perhaps prefers a scientific
treatise to the lighter novel, though
he does not disdain the latter for
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ELIJAH RUDDERHAM.
recreative purposes. A member of
the Masonic craft, he is Past Master
of Beaconsfield Lodge, No. 14,
W.A.C., and is also connected with
the Mark Sampson Lodge, E.C. He
is Past Chief Ranger of the
Foresters’ Lodge, of which he was


for many years Trustee, and still
takes an active interest in this order.
In earlier days he was a lover of
manly sports and was particularly
partial to lacrosse.
JAMES DOUGLAS SANDERS,
65, Walcott Street, North Perth, is
a son of the late Mr. George Sanders,
F.1.A., architect, of England, and
latterly of New South Wales. He
was born at Manchester, England,
on April 23, 1867, and at the close
of his schooldays was articled to
the profession of architecture in that
city; but owing to an accident re-
linquished this calling, and turned
his attention to the building and
contracting trade. Trained in the
Old Country, he arrived in Australia
as a young man and immediately
started business in Sydney and
Newcastle. After remaining in
New South Wales for some years he
came to Western Australia in 1894
and commenced operations at Perth,
where he has continued successfully
ever since. Mr. Sanders joined the
Builders and Contractors’ Associa-
tion in 1896, and in 1909 received
the honour of election to the presi-
dential chair. He has taken some
part in public affairs and represented
East Ward in the North Perth
Municipal Council for three years,
Bariletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES DUGLAS SANDERS.
retiring in 1907. He has always
taken a keen interest in the ad-
vancement of this suburb, and in all
matters connected with its welfare
has played his part worthily as a
leading citizen. In the earlier days
of his residence in the State he had
QQ2
many experiences on the eastern
goldfields, and his reminiscences of
the district north of Menzies are full
of interest. For recreation he in-
dulges in the game of bowls, and
for the past ten years has occupied
the post of President of the Mount
Lawley Bowling Club. Indoors his
great hobby is music, instrumental
and vocal, and for some years he
was a member of one of the leading
orchestras of New South Wales. In
1896 Mr. Sanders married Hannah
M., daughter of the late Mr.
William Manning, of Newcastle,
New South Wales, and has two sons
and two daughters.
JAMES SCOTT, builder and con-
tractor, Riley Road, Claremont, was
born at Bendigo, Victoria, on
August 22, 1867, being a son of Mr.
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES SCOTT.
Robert Scott, who also followed the
building trade in that district. At
the conclusion of his education the
gentleman under review became
engaged in his father’s calling and
spent about eleven years in Mel-
bourne, where he acquired profici-
ency in every branch of the trade.
In 1894 he came to Western Aus-
tralia when the Coolgardie of the
"roaring nineties” was attracting
universal attention, and proceeding
at once to the scene of the mining
energy he went into the building
trade, and also courted Dame
Fortune’s golden smile by various
prospecting enterprises. After spend-
ing several years on the fields,
during which he became a well-
known and valued citizen of Cool-
gardie, in 1901 he established him-
self as a builder and contractor in
the metropolitan area, and has since
carried on a very thriving trade. He
makes a speciality of residences of
every description, from the hand-
some and costly villa to the homely
and comfortable cottage, and in
most of the suburbs of Perth are
found the memorials of his craft.
In the intervals of leisure permitted
by his business he has laid out and
planted a very pretty garden round
Ins home at Claremont and makes
a hobby of the cultivation of
flowers therein. He is a thorough
believer in healthy outdoor recrea-
tion and advocates free indulgence
in most forms of manly sport. In
1900 he married Margaret, daughter
of the late Mr. Thomas M. Arthur,
of Lawrence, New Zealand, and has
two daughters.
FREDERICK EDWARD
SEDGLEY, contractor, 39, Nichol-
son Road, Subiaco, is a South Aus-
tralian, having been born at Hoyle-
ton, in that State, on April 6, 1878.
He was educated in his native place,
and at an early age became iden-
tified with station life and followed
pastoral pursuits for about five
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FREDERICK EDWARD SEDGLEY.
years. In 1896 he came to Wes-
tern Australia and entered the
building trade. After working on
the goldfields for some time Mr.
Sedgley came to Perth in 1902 and
established himself in business on
his own account as a builder and


contractor. Since that time his con-
nection has steadily increased, the
work undertaken being of a very
varied character, ranging from
church erection to the building of
the humble cottage. Mr. Sedgley is
a member of the Masonic fraternity
and holds office in that body. He
is Past Grand of the Independent
Order of Oddfellows and a com-
mitteeman of the Master Builders
and Contractors' Association. In
1902 he married Matilda, daughter
of Mr. James Kelly, of Hoyleton,
South Australia, and has a son.
JAMES WALSH, general con-
tractor, Perth, was born at Thomas-
town, County Kilkenny, Ireland, on
July 18, 1859, and is a son of the
late Mr. James Walsh, farmer, of
the above place. He received his
education at the National Schools at
Knocktopher and Thomastown, con-
tinuing until he reached his teens,
when, owing to the ill-health of his
father, he was compelled to turn his
attention to the working of the home
property for about three years. In
1880 he emigrated to South Aus-
tralia, where he followed farming
pursuits and other occupations for
four years, leaving the Central State
for Western Australia early in 1895.
He first accepted employment on the
railway line between York and
Beverley, and subsequently travelled
all over the State, turning his hand
to various avocations. The discovery
of the Zeehan silver mine in Tas-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES WALSH.
mania attracted him thither, and he
spent some time in work on the
mines and in contracting, eventually
crossing to Melbourne, where he con-
tinued in the latter line of business
for a brief period. In 1893 he re-
turned to Western Australia, and
upon arrival joined his brother in
partnership in a produce store in
Murray Street, Perth. He also be-
came interested in some large con-
tracts, which he took up in conjunc-
tion with the late Mr. Patrick Wool-
ley, these including the construction
of most of the tramways in Perth
and its suburbs, excavations, and
other contracts of a similar nature,
the great bulk of the road-making in
the earlier days of the city's leap
forward being undertaken by this
firm. In 1907 this connection was
dissolved, and Mr. Walsh has since
directed his attention to various pay-
ing propositions in different lines of
industrial enterprise. In partnership
with his brother he owned a property
of about 4,000 acres at Bindoon, near
the “Mooliabeenee Station," where
mixed farming operations are suc-
cessfully carried on. He has always
taken a deep interest in the welfare
of his native land and is a generous
supporter of the Irish National
movement. He is a member of the
H.A.C.8.5., having joined this or-
ganization nearly a quarter of a cen-
tury ago, and was one of the
founders of the Celtic Club, Perth,
on the Committee of which institu-
tion he served for some considerable
time.


Commerce and Industry.
Bor many years after its establishment as a British
colony Western Australia could not boast of anything
like a commercial history. In the early struggles of the
pioneer settler life was a stern fight with Nature for a
bare living, and what intercourse took place amongst
the few settlers partook more of the nature of barter or
exchange than trade. The isolation of Western Aus-
tralia from the eastern colonies —separated as it was by
tne broad stretch of the Australian Bight, and its
distance from other countries, restricted business tran-
sactions to trade amongst the settlers and intermittent
exports of raw products by occasional vessels which
called here with supplies.
Towards the end of the eighties, however, the pulses
of an awakening life were felt. Political aspirations
began to have their effect, and when in 1890 constitu-
tional government and representative institutions dis-
placed the dormant conditions of a Crown colony, com-
mercial intercourse with other colonies and countries
began to be.
Political enfranchisement was almost immediately
followed by the phenomenal discoveries of gold on the
Coolgardie Goldfields, which afterwards developed into
the renowned ‘Golden Mile’ of Kalgoorlie, and
brought Western Australia into worldwide note as one
of the great contributors to the world’s supply of the
precious metal.
The discovery of gold, with its great attractive
power, drew crowds of people to these shores. People
flocked from all parts of Australia and Africa and the
Far East in their eager rush for gold. The rapidly
increasing population needed supplies for their susten-
ance and work, and their demands resulted in great
commercial activity, as the supplies were drawn from
Australasia, India, China, and Japan, as well as from
Europe and America. Steamers and sailers came to our
shores with passengers and cargoes of merchandise, and
an export trade in wool, timber, pearls and peailshell,
and gold sprang up.
These altered conditions speedily worked wondrous
changes. The whole aspect of the colony was altered. A
stimulus was given to the local primary industries to
meet the demand for daily perishable supplies, while
jetties had to be built, harbours improved, and other
shipping facilities provided to accommodate the ships
which came laden with cargo from overseas.
In 1900 Western Australia became a unit in the
Commonwealth, taking its part in the larger scheme of a
Federated Australia in its evolution towards nationhood.
Since that date Western Australia has progressed
marvellously. For ten or twelve years the phenomenal
gold production centred enterprise almost entirely on
the gold-rniniug industry, but agriculture and horticul-
ture now came into prominence. The suitability of the
soil for wheat and other cereals and of some portions
of the State for the production of fruit was speedily
made apparent. Encouraged by the extremely liberal
terms offered by the Government to settlers, large areas
of land were taken up and a yeomanry began to be
formed. The first effect of this land settlement and cul-
tivation was to provide the local requirements for hay
and chaff. A large quantity of fodder had to be im-
ported from the Eastern States until the settlers were
able to supply the local requirements. Then gradually
the breadstuffs were locally produced, until with the
expanding area under wheat Western Australia became
an exporter of corn to the world’s markets.
Horticulture, too, has gradually developed into an
important industry, and now prime fruits are exported
to overseas markets and sold at top prices.
This in brief is the- story of the development of
commerce in Western Australia.
The development may be further emphasized by
some brief statistics which will show how Western Aus-
tralia has emerged from a struggling, stagnant Crown
colony to an active and progressive constitutional State,
whose population is engaged in subduing Nature and
winning therefrom its stored-up riches, and the latest
figures quoted are from 1911 —the last completed year.
The State revenue was £3,850,440, or £l3 17s. Id.
per capita, and the expenditure £3,734,448, or £l3 Bs.
9d. per capita.
The public debt, which in 1902 amounted to
£14,455,573, or £7O ss. 9d. per capita, had increased
in 1911 to £21,159,141, or £73 10s. Id. per capita.
Public Loan Out of this bonded debt have
been expended on railways, £12,078,756; on harbours,
rivers, etc., £2,717,579 ; on water supply, sewerage, etc.,
£3,484,806; on development of goldfields, £1,262,821 ;
on development of agriculture, £1,264,841. The balance
was expended on important public services for the
improvement of the State.
Savings Bank. —As an indication of the prudence
and carefulness of the people the figures of the Savings
Bank may be cited. At the end of 1911 there were
87,569 depositors, and the aggregate amount deposited
was £4,080,084, or an average of £46 11s. lOd. per
depositor, or £l4 3s. 6d. per capita of the population.


Banks. —The growing requirements of an expanding
commercial community have been supplied by six banks,
whose average liabilities in 1911 amounted to
£7,596,987, and assets to £11,623,109.
Shipping and Trade. —The ships which took our
commerce to and from numbered (at Fremantle) in 1911,
724 inwards and 741 outwards.
The imports amounted to £8,645,938 and the
exports to £10,608,863 —or a total trade of £19,254,801.
The products of Western Australia exported during
1911 amounted to £10,606,863 and £111,154 worth of
local coal was produced.
Hallways . —lmportant channels of traffic have been
opened for the large trade which sprung up as the result
of national development and enterprise, and in the
absence of waterways, railways had to be provided. At
the end of 1911 2,376 miles of railways were working,
which carried 14,828,603 passengers and 2,788,703 tons
of cargo. These railways were worked by 323 loco-
motives, 369 passenger carriages, and 7,734 waggons,
and earned a revenue of £1,216,477, and yielded a profit
of nearly one-quarter of a million sterling in 1911.
Gold. —The yield of gold has been a very pheno-
menal one, and though the production of it is somewhat
declining, the yield is still a very substantial total. The
quantity of gold produced from 1886 to June, 1912, was
in value £106,517,422, and dividends have been declared
from gold won by Western Australian gold companies
amounting to £22,589,847.
Live Stock. —The pastoral industry has made
notable advances in recent years, but settlers would seem
not to have touched the fringe of the immense un-
developed resources of the State in the North-West areas
23articularly. The increase of live stock during the last
ten years is thus shown:—Horses in 1902 numbered
80,158, in 1912 140,277; cattle, 437,136 in 1902, 843,638
in 1912; and sheep, 2,704,880 in 1902 ana 5,411,542 in
1912.
Land Settlement. —As proof of the active expansion
and enterprise of settlement on the untilled areas of the
State, it is worth recording that the area alienated at
the end of 1911 was 7,325,928 acres, and in process of
alienation 12,677,384, and held on pastoral, mining, and
miscellaneous leases 173,468,257 acres —a total of
193,471,569 acres. That there is much more land avail-
able is gathered from the fact that there are upwards of
430,000,000 acres of waste lands in Western Australia.
Wheat and Cereals. —Only within the last twelve or
fifteen years has cereal cultivation come prominently to
the front, but it is now one of the standard industries
of the State, and promises to outrival in importance any
other.
The wheat crop of 1911-12 harvest, which was a par-
tial failure owing to the dry season, was 4,358,904
bushels, a quantity which was upwards of one and a half
million bushels less than the crop at the previous harvest.
At the same harvest 961,385 bushels of oats and 299,695
tons of hay were also garnered.
These figures will give a brief glimpse into the pro-
ductiveness of Western Australia and as to the activity
and enterprise of its people in meeting the expanding
conditions of the country and providing those facilities
and conveniences for commercial intercourse which are
inseparably associated with all enlightened and progres-
sive peoples.
In 1873 the Fremantle Chamber of Commerce was
established, and in 1890 a Chamber was also founded in
Perth. Through the intervening years both institutions
have done useful work in promoting the facile and
regular reception and dispatch and distribution of goods
and making the commercial machine run smoothly in the
interests of all concerned. The organization of commer-
cial men for mutual advantage and for the general bene-
fit of the people has been very beneficial and has assisted
the working out of many knotty problems from time
to time.
The following are the officers of the Fremantle
Chamber: —President, Mr. T. Carter; Past President,
Mr. W. E. Moxon; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. F. W.
Barrymore, W. H. Evans, and John Stewart; Com-
mittee, Messrs. E. Allnutt, H. V. Calthrop, R. Cotton,
F. C. Feeley, J. D. Fraser, C. Hudson, G. G. John,
R. Laurie, J. W. Leonard, G. F. Payne, H. Robinson,
and C. H. Salmon; Secretary, Mr. J. W. Parkhill.
The office-bearers of the Perth Chamber are:
President, Mr. W. F. Lathlain; Vice-Presidents,
Messrs. A. E. King and A. M. Oliphant; Treasurer, Mr.
W. Leslie; Committee, Messrs. G. B. Brown, J. East-
wood, J. H. Gosse, G. H. Johnston, J. F. Mullen, B.
Rosenstamm, A. Sandover, and J. L. B. Weir;
Honorary Statistician, Mr. E. G. Stenberg, F.S.S.; and
Secretary, Mr. John Fairfax Conigrave.
Other Chambers have been established at Bunbury,
Albany, Geraldton, and Kalgoorlie, but these have been
restricted mostly to the consideration of local commercial
affairs, and have not taken in the wider view of com-
mercial problems generally which have engaged the
attention of the older and more influential Chambers.
JOHN FAIRFAX CONIGRAVE,
Secretary of the Perth Chamber of
Commerce and of the Marine Under-
writers' Association, patent attorney
and land agent, St. George's Terrace,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr. Ben-
jamin Conigrave, a Freeman of Lon-
don (and of his wife, nee Matilda
Reeve, of Norwich, England), who
came to Australia as early as 1840,
bringing with him his wife and two
children in the ship “Java,” landing
at Adelaide after a protracted and
eventful voyage. In those early days
of emigration it was no light under-
taking to bring a family to this
country, as it entailed an immense
amount of forethought and planning,


as well as considerable expense. First
of all the land was almost in its
primeval state of forest and desert,
with scarcely any settlement; there
were no huge emporiums as now
where could be purchased all the re-
quirements of life under one roof,
but it was necessary to bring with
one a tent or a house, or the
materials for the building of a home,
besides furniture, clothing, tools,
weapons, and all the hundred and
one little etceteras required for the
comfort and establishment of a
family in a new and unknown
country. The natives also were very
aggressive and dangerous, and the
pioneers had to keep careful and con-
stant watch to protect themselves
and their homes from sudden and
murderous attacks, the aborigines
looking upon all white men as inter-
lopers come to wrest from them their
native land and their means of sub-
sistence. The subject of our review
was born at Adelaide in 1843 and
received his scholastic training under
the late Mr. J. L. Young, a gentle-
man who left an indelible mark on
the educational records of the sister
State. In his fifteenth year he en-
tered the office of the South Aus-
tralian Register, and deciding to
adopt journalism for his future
career served his articles under Mr.
E. W. Andrews, then one of the
proprietors of the journal. Remain-
ing six years with this paper, he
resigned and joined the staff of the
South Australian Advertiser , being
connected with that office for about
twelve years. He then entered into
business on his own behalf as a
patent and general agent in Ade-
laide, subsequently forming a part-
nership with Mr. C. N. Collison, the
firm being known as Conigrave and
Collison. He acted as shorthand-
writer to both the Legislative Council
and the House of Assembly of South
Australia, and was secretary to
numerous Royal Commissions. For
some years he acted in a similar capa-
city to the South Australian
Chamber of Manufacturers, and was
mainly instrumental in organizing
the early exhibitions promoted by
that institution. He also assisted Sir
Edwin T. Smith in the inception and
organization of the Adelaide Jubilee
Exhibition of 1836-7, the direct
result of which is to be seen in the
handsome building and grounds on
North Terrace, and shortly after-
wards was appointed to the import-
ant office of Secretary to the Exhibi-
tion. Subsequently he took charge
of the South Australian Court at the
Melbourne Centennial Exhibition,
he did excellent service for his
State. Mr. Conigrave was a member
of the Adelaide City Council during
the mayoralty of Mr. Caleb Peacock,
who was the first native-born Mayor,
and he had the unique honour of
being the first native-born to hold
office as Councillor in the Municipal
Council of the Queen City of the
South. He was a member of the
Council of Education under the pre-
sidency of the late Mr. J. A. Hart-
ley, and acted in that capacity until
the Council was abolished and ab-
sorbed in the Department of the Min-
istry. After a few years as Resident
Secretary of the Australian Widows'
Fund Society he migrated to
Western Australia in 1896, and has
since resided in this State. He has
been for a considerable time Secre-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN FAIRFAX CONIGRAVE.
tary to the Perth Chamber of Com-
merce and the Marine Underwriters’
Association, and performed similar
duties for some years in connection
with the Fire, Accident, and Guaran-
tee Underwriters’ Associations. He
was Mayor of the progressive Leeder-
ville suburb for two terms, and is a
Justice of the Peace for South Aus-
tralia and Western Australia. He
has always been associated with
religious and philanthropic as well
as social movements, and in the
Eastern State he filled the office of
deacon at the Congregational
Church, North Adelaide, and the
Stow Memorial at Adelaide, and for
some years was a deacon of the
Trinity Congregational Church at
Perth. He is also a member
of the Council of Churches
for Western Australia. In the
Masonic craft he has recently
attained Grand Lodge honours as
President of the Board of Bene-
volence. In his younger days Mr.
Conigrave was an enthusiastic
cricketer, but the years that have
since flown have tinged his hair with
silver, and with the advent of the
autumn of his life he has turned
his attention to the ancient game of
bowls, and is a member of the King’s
Park Bowling Club. Married in
South Australia in 1868 to a
daughter of the late Mr. Charles
Price, the well-known breeder of
Hereford cattle on Hindmarsh Is-
land, there is issue two sons and four
daughters. His elder son, Berkeley
Fairfax, is at present (1911) in
London holding a responsible posi-
tion in one of the large African
financial and mining corporations.
The other son, Charles Price, was
for a number of years associated with
the Perth Museum and is a Fellow
of the Geographical Society and a
member of the British and Austra-
lian Ornithological Unions. In 1911
he conducted a scientific and explor-
ing expedition through the north-
west of this State.
ALFRED SANDOVER, J.P.,
President of the Perth Chamber of
Commerce (1911) w r as born at Ply-
mouth, on November 24, 1866.
He is the youngest son of the late
Mr. William Sandover, of Rose
Park, Adelaide, South Australia,
who was for many years a member
of Parliament in that State. He
received his scholastic training at
the North Adelaide Grammar
School, and upon the completion of
his studies entered the office of
Elder, Smith, & Co., Limited, of
Adelaide, in the clerical depart-
ment. Relinquishing this service
after two years he came to Western
Australia in 1885 and became con-
nected with the large hardware and
machinery business which had been
established by his brother, Mr.
William Sandover, three years be-
fore. Three years later he was ad-
mitted as a partner in the firm of
William Sandover & Co., of which
he is now the chief resident partner
in Western Australia, having occu-
pied this position for the past
seventeen years. His connection
with the Perth Chamber of Com-
merce extends over about fifteen
years, during which he has served
about eight years as a member of


the Committee of that body. He
was elected President in August,
1909, but resigned in the following
March on the occasion of his leaving
for London. In March, 1911, he
was re-elected to the chair upon the
resignation of Mr. R. A. Johnson,
and completed his term of office on
August 22, 1911. Mr. Sandover
has occupied a seat on the Committee
of the Perth Children's Hospital
since its inception, and acts also on
the Committee of the Home of Peace
and the Liberal League, and has
always been closely identified with
the various public movements in the
State, although he has taken no
personal part in political affairs. In
1912 he was appointed to a seat on
the first Senate of the University of
Western Australia.
TOM CARTER, J.P., President
of the Fremantle Chamber of Com-
merce, was born at ‘The Grange,”
Garton-on-the-Wolds, Yorkshire, and
received his education at “Monu-
ment House,” Driffield, and at Brid-
lington Grammar School. He emi-
grated to Australia in 1887 and for
a considerable period followed farm-
ing pursuits. In 1889, when Dalgety
and Company, Limited, commenced
business in Western Australia, Mr.
Carter joined the staff and filled the
position of accountant to the Perth
and Fremantle Branches until 1899.
In that year the Company decided
to extend its business to the Nor’-
West ports, and Mr. Carter was en
trusted with the mission of opening
branches at Geraldton, Carnarvon,
Cossack, Roebourne, and Port Hed-
land, residing in turn at each port.
In 1905 he was appointed Sub-
Manager at Fremantle, which posi-
tion he still holds. For the past six
years he has taken a keen interest
in the Fremantle Chamber of Com-
merce, and in 1911 was elected to the
presidential chair. Mr. Carter is a
Justice of the Peace for the Fre-
mantle magisterial district.
WILLIAM ERNEST MOXON,
J.P., who has occupied the position
of Manager for the Adelaide Steam-
ship Company, Limited, in Western
Australia since 1896 is a son of the
late Captain Thomas Moxon, of the
Indian Army, and was born in
Kent, England, on May 3, 1863.
He was educated at the Chigwell
Grammar School in Essex under
Canon Swallow, M.A., and having
completed his scholastic course at
the age of seventeen entered the
office of Messrs. J. & R. Grant,
shipowners, with whom he spent
about seven years. In 1887 he
came to Australia, and landing at
Queensland joined the staff of the
8.1. and Q.A., the agents for the
A.U.S.N. Company, etc., in Bris-
bane, subsequently being appointed
manager and inspector in Queens-
land for the Adelaide Steamship
Company. He was transferred to
Western Australia in 1896, and
since that time has taken an active
interest in the various organizations
in the State relating to his line of
business. For some years he was
Chairman of the Australian Steam-
ship Owners' Federation, Fremantle
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM ERNEST MOXON.
Branch, and now occupies a similar
post in the Fremantle Branch of tire
Commonwealth Steamship Owners’
Association. Lie was for two years
President of the Fremantle
Chamber of Commerce, and acted as
employers’ nominee on the Western
Australian Conciliation and Arbi-
tration Court for a like period. Mr.
Moxon holds commissions as Justice
of the Peace for the whole of this
State and for Queensland. He is
a member of the Weld, and Fre-
mantle Clubs. A warm supporter of
all forms of manly outdoor exercise,
his favourite forms of diversion are
found in cricket, golf, and
angling, and he is a member of
the Fremantle Golf Club. Mr.
Moxon has been twice married. His
first wife, Clara, daughter of the
late Mr. E. Cowley, of Natal and
Queensland, died in 1905, and in
1907 he married Eva, daughter of
the late Mr. R. Taylor, of Streat-
ham, Victoria, and Katanning,
Western Australia. His family
consists of three sons and two
daughters.
PETER RIDLEY, Manager in
Western Australia for the A.U.S.N.
Co., Limited, and Agent for the Bri-
tish India Steam Navigation Co.,
Limited, the Union Steamship Co. of
New Zealand, Limited, and the New
Zealand Shipping Co., Limited, is a
son of the late William Ridley, of
Newcastle-on-Tyne, England. He
was born in the latter city on July 21,
1861, where also he received his edu-
cation by private tuition. At fifteen
years of age he entered mercantile
life in an office where he gained an
excellent knowledge of general ac-
countancy, being afterwards identi-
fied with shipping in the British
India Company’s office in London,
and as purser on steamers trading
with Queensland and India. In 1886
hesettled in Brisbane, joining the old
Queensland Shipping Company,
which afterwards absorbed the
A.S.N. Company, this in its turn be-
ing merged in the A.U.S.N. Com-
pany. After ten years in Brisbane
Mr. Ridley was transferred to the
great sugar centre, Bundaberg,
where he spent four years as repre-
sentative for the Company, and, in
1900, was promoted to the manage-
ment of the Western Australian
branch, taking charge at Fremantle,
where he has remained ever since.
JOSEPH KEANE HITCH-
COCK, Manager for Messrs. James
and Alexander Brown, coal mer-
chants and shipowners, Mouatt
Street, Fremantle, is a son of Mr.
David Hitchcock, who was but seven
years old when he came to Western
Australia in 1842, and has resided
in this State ever since. The gentle-
man under review was born near
Guildford on December 17, 1855,
and at the close of his scholastic
course at a local school, when thir-
teen years of age, entered the office
of Messrs. W. D. Moore & Co.,
where he remained for five years.
He relinquished this connection to
take a position with the firm of J.
and W. Bateman, and after fourteen
years in this employ transferred his
services to Messrs. Padbury, Loton,


and Co. for a couple of years. Sub-
sequently he was with Messrs. James
Lilly & Co. for a number of years,
and finally, in 1905, accepted the
management in Western Australia
for Messrs. James & Alexander
Brown at Fremantle, and has con-
tinued to fill this post ever since.
Mr. Hitchcock, who is an Incor-
porated Accountant, was the first
auditor to the East Fremantle Muni-
cipal Council and at the present
time fills that office in connection
with the North Fremantle Council,
having acted in this capacity for the
past seven years. Being of a retir-
ing disposition he has never taken
part in public affairs, though often
pressed to stand for municipal
honours. His leisure hours are
spent chiefly in boating on the river
Bartletto , erth.
MR. JOSEPJ KEANE HITCHCOCK.
and in gardening pursuits round his
home, where he cultivates flowers
and fruit-trees. In 1876 he married
Maria, daughter of the late Mr.
Samuel Law, of Fremantle, and has
three daughters and four sons, the
latter all being engaged in mercan-
tile pursuits.
%
ELDER, SHENTON, & CO.,
LIMITED, general merchants, ship-
ping and stock and station agents,
Prince's Buildings, St. George's Ter-
race, Perth. The nucleus of this
important trading firm was origin-
ally established at Fremantle by the
late Sir George Shenton and carried
on by him until 1903, when it was
merged into the present concern
under the chairmanship of the
founder, who continued to direct
the destinies of the business until the
time of his death in 1909. Almost
from its inception the firm leapt into
prominence, and to-day it holds an
unrivalled position in the commerce
of Western Australia. In the first
instance operations were confined
principally to shipping agencies, but
with the incorporation of the new
company and the attendant infusion
of the “sinews of war" fresh ventures
were launched and agencies opened
at Northam, York, Beverley, and
Kalgoorlie. Special efforts were
centred on the supply of farming
requisites to settlers in the newly-
opened districts, and with the won-
derful expansion of the agricultural
industry of the State the firm found
it expedient to transfer their head-
quarters from Fremantle to Perth.
In a country such as Western Aus-
tralia, where the needs of the man
on the land are many, and frequently
of a nature requiring assistance
pending the results of partially-com-
pleted efforts, the firm of Elder,
Shenton, & Co., Limited, was bound
to forge ahead, and in this connec-
tion a special feature was made of
advancing sums of money to pro-
ducers against wool and produce con-
signed to the London markets. The
staff of officials in the London Branch
of the firm handle there on arrival
the various consignments forwarded
by the head office, and a special
expert in the service of the Company
places upon each individual shipment
a reserve valuation below which it
is not sold, thereby protecting the
owner against the financial loss which
is often the lot of those who ex-
port independently. The numerous
agencies of this well-known Company
are a household word in the State,
and its travelling representatives and
local agents are at all times most will-
ing to give expert advice to the
settler as to the best means of sur-
mounting the difficulties always pre-
sent in the opening up of virgin terri-
tory. A branch of the business to
which great attention has been given
is the importation of stud stock, and
the selections made by the Company's
officers have received strong confirma-
tion in the various show rings in
which they have been exhibited,
many honours having been secured
by the owners of the imported stock
at the Royal Agricultural Society's
Shows and those held in country
districts. Another distinctive feature
in the firm's operations is to be found
in its country stock sales, in the
establishment of which it has led
the way in this State. Its enterprise
in this direction has been singularly
successful, justifying the most
sanguine anticipations, and its
system of bringing to a common
rendezvous both buyers and sellers
has been highly appreciated and
availed of by the settlers in the
sparsely-populated districts of the
agricultural areas. The Company
is agent for Waite's special
fencing wire, Cooper's sheep-
dip, Donald's woolpress, Donald’s
wire-strainers, the Chilworth Gun-
powder Company, and Nobel's Ex-
plosives Company, Limited, Glas-
gow, the last-mentioned agency
being a very important branch of
the business. Nobel's explosives are
world-famed, and there are very few
mining fields on the earth's surface
that have not at one time or another
made use of the firm's reliable pro-
ducts. From Marble Bar in the Far
North to Ravensthorpe in the
extreme South the Company's
magazines are to be found on every
field, thus giving evidence of its
energy and enterprise in providing
the means whereby the miner and
the prospector may more easily pro-
secute their labours in search of the
treasured metal. The Directors of the
Company are Messrs. A. S. Chap-
man, W. J. Young, and D. J.
Goyder, the joint managers being
Messrs. G. F. Payne and T. E.
Field.
STRELITZ BROTHERS, im-
porters and shipping agents, 46,
Mouatt Street, Fremantle, and at
Kalgoorlie. This important concern
was established by the brothers
Strelitz in 1894, Fremantle at that
time being in its infancy. From its
inception the business went rapidly
ahead, and it was not long before
the partners were compelled to estab-
lish agencies in various parts of the
State to enable them to cope with
the ever-increasing orders which
poured in from day to day. Of the
numerous agencies held by the
Messrs. Strelitz the most important,
perhaps, is that of the Nobel's Ex-
plosives Company, for the handling
of whose goods magazines have been
erected on the various goldfields of
the State. The firm is also a large
importer of railway material and
mining machinery of every descrip-
tion, including rockdrills and air-
compressors, and considerable quanti-
ties of fencing wire, cement, and the


like are kept in stock. There is a
branch of the business at Boulder
Street, Kalgoorlie, and barkmiils at
Mandurah Road, in the South
Fremantle district. So that the firm
shall not be checked in the race for
commercial supremacy one or other
of the partners frequently visits
Europe, there to acquire knowledge
of all the latest improvements in tlie
progressive Old World. Another
very important branch of the above
firm's business is the shipping de-
partment, which is now a most impor-
tant factor in the Western Aus-
tralian trade. In 1896 Messrs.
Strelitz Brothers opened up direct
trade communication between the
continent of Europe and Western
Australia by chartering a sailing
ship to bring the first direct cargo.
This was followed by many vessels
till at a later date a steamship com-
pany, called the German-Australian
S.S. Company, opened up a trade
which has developed into large
dimensions. There is a fortnightly
regular service from Hamburg, Rot-
terdam, and Antwerp to Fremantle
direct and a monthly service from
Swedish ports to Western Australia.
It is well known that these steamers,
although of the cargo type, keep ex-
cellent time and run as nearly as
possible to time-table dates —cer-
tainly a great help to local mer-
chants. Not only has the import
trade been fostered by the firm, but
also the export by regular monthly
steamers from Western Australia to
Colombo and Continental ports.
They have been able to carry large
quantities of jarrah timber and
mallet-bark. The latter article is
used solely on the Continent, and
for this article the steamers also call
monthly at Albany. Further, the
firm has helped to make important
the fruit export trade of Western
Australia, inasmuch as two of its
steamers have been fitted with most
up-to-date refrigerating machinery.
Three additional steamers are now
being built, and in the season 1912
the firm hopes to be able to cater
for the bulk of the Western Aus-
tralian fruit to be taken to Ham-
burg, where hitherto the best prices
have been obtained. Messrs.
Strelitz Brothers are also interested
in two important commercial enter-
prises in the City of Perth. It is
their intention in 1912 to move the
head office from Fremantle to Perth,
to buildings which are now in course
of erection in William Street, be-
tween Hay Street and St. George's
Terrace.
EDWARD HENRY POTHER-
GILL, J.P., of Fremantle, is a son
of the late Captain Edward Henry
Fothergill, who came to Victoria
from Seaford, England, about half
a century ago, and traded between
that State and Western Australia,
being responsible for the only
regular means of communication be-
tween the two States for many years.
The subject of this sketch was born
in Melbourne, and when nine years
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. EDWARD HENRY FOTHERGILL.
of age accompanied his parents to
Western Australia. He was
educated at Fremantle, and at the
close of his scholastic course at the
age of seventeen entered the ware-
house of Messrs. D. & W. Murray,
with whom he remained for six and
a half years, during which period he
passed through all the departments
of the business. He relinquished
this connection in order to take over
the management of the Western
Australian Lighterage and Steve-
doring Company, which position he
continued to hold until the concern
closed down owing to the opening up
of the Inner Harbour. In 1901 Mr.
Fothergill established himself on his
own account as general agent at
Fremantle, and eventually the busi-
ness was floated into a limited
liability company, trading as E. H.
Fothergill & Co., Limited, under
which title it is carried on at the
present time, Mr. Fothergill being
Managing Director. He has identi-
fied himself with the various in-
terests of the community and has
served as a member of the Municipal
Council, occupying the mayoral
chair of the town for some years.
He was granted a commission of Jus-
tice of the Peace by the Moore
Government in 1904 and has been a
member of the Tramways Board for
the past three years. He takes a
deep interest in charitable move-
ments and is Hon. Secretary to the
Fremantle Hospital Aid and
Charity Committee. A Master
Mason of some years' standing, he is
a member of the Masonic Club, and
also of the Fremantle Club and the
local Golf Club, his recreation being
spent on the links. In 1911 Mr.
Fothergill married Gertrude, daugh-
ter of Mr. W. Meadly, of North
Fremantle.
Captain JOHN ABBOTT, senior
partner of the Fremantle Stevedor-
ing Company, Mouatt Street, Fre-
mantle, was born at Hull, England,
on May 9, 1848. He comes of a sea-
faring family, being a son of the
late Mr. Alfred Abbott, ship-master
and -owner, and many of his rela-
tions have followed marine pursuits.
When twenty years of age young
Abbott came to Australia for the
first time, and has been identified
with the history and advancement of
the State, particularly of the Nor.'-
West district, for over forty years.
In 1868 he was mate of the
brigantine “Pilot,” which was en-
gaged in pearling operations along
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN JOHN ABBOTT.
the coast north of Shark Bay, and
in pursuit of this industry had many
thrilling adventures. Pearl-shell
was plentiful and profitable, its price


ranging from £3OO to £4OO a ton, it
was easily obtained in shallow water,
and though pearls were not so valu-
able then as at the present time, the
assistance of crowds of native divers
made them procurable at compara-
tively small expense, and fortunes
were speedily made. A very valu-
able pearl that rightly belonged to
Captain Abbott unfortunately found
its way into other hands and he was
deprived of the profits that should
have accrued to him thereby. On
one occasion he had a narrow escape
by descending in a Trench diving
dress which got slightly out of gear
and deprived him of his air supply.
His rescuers, opening the helmet and
finding him in a state of semi-
suffocation, in their consternation
lost hold of him and let him fall
back into the water with open head-
piece. Unconscious as he was when
he was hauled in for the second time,
he yet quickly responded to remedial
measures and was none the worse
for the adventure. The wholesale
employment of natives in the pearl-
ing industry led to the enactment of
legislation, the restrictions being so
severe that naked divers from the
Malay States were extensively em-
ployed by the pearlers. In conjunc-
tion with Mr. George Roe, Captain
Abbott purchased the schooner
“Amy” and had a successful season.
Subsequently he went to Melbourne
to recuperate after a severe attack
of fever, and upon his return con-
veyed the late Mr. Alex. Forrest
and his exploring party to Cossack.
During this voyage they encountered
a terrific hurricane off the Nor.’-
West coast in which the "Amy”
would certainly have foundered had
it not been for the splendid seaman-
ship and intrepid courage of Captain
Abbott, which received the highest
tribute from Mr. Forrest, who named
a conspicuous landmark on the north
bank of the Fitzroy Mount Abbott,
out of compliment to the master of
the "Amy.” In the course of his
cruisings off the Nor/-West Cape
Captain Abbott battled through five
of the terrific tempests for which the
locality is noted, among them being
one of the. very worst yet recorded.
The gale struck the ship, which
heeled over until she was almost
beam-ended. In the midst of a
deafening uproar of wind, with his
hand funnel-wise to the mate's ear,
the captain gave the order to cut
away the mast, by which measure
the boat —the "Annie Beaton” —
righted herself and eventually
reached port safely. He afterwards
disposed of this vessel and traded
between Hong-Kong, Singapore, and
Mauritius in charge of the barque
“Star Queen/' which was the last
ship he owned. An interesting cir-
cumstance occurred later in his
career. He accepted the position of
first officer on board the “Georgette,"
the first steamer engaged in the
Western Australian coastal trade,
but at the last moment got himself
transferred to his former charge, the
“Amy," providing a substitute to
fill his place on the “Georgette."
Proceeding to sea the latter vessel
was wrecked off Cape Naturaliste,
and many of the crew and passengers
lost their lives. Captain Abbott, in
the early days of the Nor. West,
carried the mails, etc., for the
Government and supplies for the
original settlers in that region.
About 1895 he took up his residence
in Fremantle, and was the founder
of the Fremantle Stevedoring Com-
pany, which he still conducts in con-
junction with Mr. A. McLennan.
He has various property interests in
the town, and is regarded as one of
the identities of that flourishing sea-
port. He is a Freemason of thirty
years' standing, and was one of the
earliest members of the fraternity in
Fremantle.
LESLIE & CO. engineers and
engineering merchants, 959 - 961,
Hay Street, Perth. WILLIAM
LESLIE, M.1.E.5., M.l.Mech.E.,
was born in Scotland in the month
of October, 1860, and received his
early education at public schools in
Alyth and Glasgow, Scotland. Sub-
sequently he attended the Glas-
gow West of Scotland Technical
College and at the close of his
schooldays served a five years'
apprenticeship to the engineering
profession. He became identified
with the staff of John Elder & Co.
in the Fairfield Shipbuilding Yard,
and afterwards spent three years in
the Cape Mail Service in order to
gain experience in marine engineer-
ing work. Returning at the end of
that period to the Technical College
he devoted his attention to civil
engineering and in 1885 proceeded
to British Honduras in Central
America to carry out an important
engineering work in connection with
what was known as Baron Sicama's
scheme for improvements to the
town and harbour of Belize. Mr.
Leslie was engaged in this enter-
prise until 1890 and upon his
return to Glasgow commenced prac-
tice in that city as consulting and
inspecting engineer. Three years
later he was offered the management
of the Firhill Ironworks which he
accepted, and occupied that position
until 1896, when he resigned to
come out to Australia. In October
of the same year he received the
offer of an appointment under
the late C. Y. O'Connor, in
the Public Works Department, as
Engineer in charge of the Swan
River improvements, and filled this
position until the suspension of the
work in 1898. He was then trans-
ferred as Resident Engineer in
charge of the construction of the
Mundaring Weir for the Cool-
gardie water supply scheme, and
after completing this and sub-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM LESLIE.
sidiary works, upon the death of
Mr. O’Connor, was appointed by
the Government to succeed him as
Engineer in charge of the Fremantle
Harbour Works to carry out the
original scheme designed by the
deceased gentleman. When the
Harbour was completed and a
Trust for its administration
formed Mr. Leslie resigned in order
to establish a private practice and
engineering merchant business in
Perth, which he has carried on suc-
cessfully since 1903. Besides being
largely employed by corporations,
companies, and firms in a consulting
capacity in regard to water supply,
tramway construction, and other en-
gineering works, the firm, which in-
cludes Mr. E. A. Randell and Mr.
William M. Cooper, are large con-
tractors for the supply of all descrip


tions of engineering plants and
modern machine tools. Mr. Leslie is
President for the current year (1911)
of the Western Australian Institute
of Engineers.
Photo by C. F. Farr.
FRANK MANFORD & COM-
PANY, bond proprietors, Customs,
shipping, and forwarding agents, 4,
Henry Street, Fremantle, and at
Photo by C. F. Farr.
Perth. The head of this well-known
Company, whose military career ap-
pears in another section of this work,
when seventeen years of age entered
the old original firm of Messrs. Ro-
bert Stevenson, Son, & Co., engin-
eers, of Newcastle-on-Tyne. Four
years of his indentures had expired
when ho contracted rheumatic fever
and retired from business on the ad-
F.MANFORD A. CO ’S PREMISES, HERRY STREET, FRENANTEL,
vice of Professor Page, who as far
back as 1861 was medical officer in
Guildford, Western Australia, under
the old Colonial Office regulations.
F. MANFORD & Co.'S BOND STORES, BAZAAR TERRACE, PERTH.
He left England in the latter part
of 1890 and upon arrival in Western
Australia went on to a sheep station
owned by Messrs. Cruickshank Bro-
thers, on the Murchison River, with
the object of gaining experience. The
discovery of gold in that neighbour-
hood, however, altered his plans for
the future, and proceeding to the
scene of the find he began dry-blowing
and prospecting with varying success.
Perceiving an opening he became
engaged in contracting with teams
between Geraldton and Cue during
the construction of the railway line,
and as the settlement started to form
went into business as a forwarding
agent at Cue and Nannine in part-
nership with Messrs. Jacques, Mcln-
tosh, and Manford. Subsequently
he traded on his own account in the
same place until 1898, when he
sailed for England, where he re-
mained for two years. Upon his re-
turn to Western Australia he estab-
lished his present business at Fre-
mantle, and the Company is now well
known as one of the leading firms of
Customs and forwarding agents and
bonded stores proprietors in the
State. All the business entrusted to
the firm by the great mining com-
panies on the fields and others is
personally attended to by the prin-
cipal of the Company, who has won
the confidence of all sections of the
public by his commercial reliability
and attention to matters placed
under his control.
ALEXANDER WATSON, repre-
sentative for the firm of Emanuel
Brothers, of Fremantle, is a son of
the late Mr. John Watson, of Cole-
raine, Ireland, and was born at St.
Kilda, Victoria, on April 9, 1866.
He pursued his scholastic studies at
Brighton Grammar School, in that
State, and subsequently entered
upon pastoral pursuits. Proceeding
to the western district of Queensland
in 1883, he began overlanding stock,
and at a later date engaged in stock-
dealing on his own account, being
occupied with these and kindred
avocations up to 1895. In that year
he came to Western Australia, and
having passed a year in visiting the
various goldfields eventually became
identified with the firm of Forrest,
Emanuel, & Co., as their cattle-
buyer and representative in Wynd-
ham, East Kimberley, and the Nor-
thern Territory. In this connection
he did a good deal of exploration
work for the Company, on whose be-
half he took up country at the head
of the Pentecost and Chamberlain
Rivers, also adding to his duties
those of stock-shipping representa-
tive for the firm at Wyndham.


Ultimately he was offered the posi-
tion of Manager of the Fremantle
Branch of the business, which he
accepted and has continued there
ever since. During his occupation
of this post he has handled over a
quarter of a million of cattle and
several million of sheep on behalf of
the Company, and in 1910, upon the
transference of the business of
Messrs. Forrest, Emanuel, & Co. to
Messrs. Emanuel Brothers was ap-
pointed a Director of the latter firm.
Mr. Watson has a wide knowledge
of the meat question which is attract-
ing so much attention, and has con-
tributed articles to the daily Press
on the subject. He is an excellent
judge of stock, and has acted in this
capacity for many years at the
Royal Show, as well as at the prin-
cipal shows in various agricultural
centres. Pie is a member of the Fre-
mantle Chamber of Commerce and
of the Commercial Travellers’ Club,
having served on the council of that
body for five years. As a member
of the Western Australian Turf
Club he is an advocate of all clean
sport.
ROBERT HARDY HOLMES,
J.P., is a son of the late Mr. Robert
Holmes, who occupied a post in the
Civil Service in Western Australia
for many years. Born at Busselton
on May 28, 1860, he was educated
at the Government School at Man-
durah, and having arrived at the age
of sixteen became engaged in farm-
ing pursuits on his father’s property
at Lake Clifton, where he continued
for several years. At twenty-one he
accepted the management of the Sut-
ton Estate at Mandurah, which he
relinquished four years later in
order to establish a general butcher-
ing and meat supply business in
Perth in conjunction with his three
younger brothers. This concern
prospered and the business of Messrs.
PTolmes Brothers is an example of
the revitalizing of a dying enter-
prise. It was purchased by the
firm for only £BO, and under
capable management became one of
the best-known and thriving busi-
nesses in the State. Eventually it
was floated into a limited company
and placed under control of Messrs.
Forrest, Emanuel, & Co., when the
Brothers Holmes went into retire-
ment. Mr. Holmes for many years
has taken considerable interest in
public affairs and in 1898 was elected
to a seat on the Fremantle Roads
Board, in which he occupied the
chair for a lengthy period, resigning
his connection with the Board in
1908. He was a member of the Fre-
mantle Municipal Council for twelve
years and represented West Ward
during the whole of that time, on
one occasion only being opposed. He
has been connected with the Royal
Agricultural Society from its incep-
tion, and has continually acted as
adjudicator of stock both at the
Royal and country shows, being ad-
mittedly one of the best judges of
fat stock not only in local circles but
in the Commonwealth. He is a mem-
ber and Past Master of the lonic
Lodge, No. 58, W.A.C., in the
fraternity of Freemasons, and for
many years was connected with the
Royal Arch Chapter. He is promi-
nent in all charitable movements and
gives ready support to all organiza-
tions having for their object the
alleviation of the condition of the
distressed. For twenty-five years he
has been an active member of the
Western Australian Turf Club and
extends his patronage to all forms
of healthy outdoor sport. In the
year 1907 Mr. Holmes married
Cicely Viotti, daughter of Inspector
McKenna, of Fremantle.
CYRIL WALTER WALKER,
Fremantle, is a native of Wolver-
hampton, Staffordshire, England,
where he was born in 1860. He is
a son of the late Mr. William
Walker, a member of the firm of
T. W. & J. Walker, hardware mer-
chants, of that place, and was
educated at the famous St. An-
drew’s College in Scotland. After
attending school and college he be-
came a student at the University,
concluding his course at the age of
seventeen, when he entered upon a
commercial career in his father’s
business house, remaining there for
about twelve years. In 1889 he re-
linquished this connection in order
to come to Western Australia, and
arrived in this State about the time
of the inauguration of responsible
government. For nearly two years
Mr. Walker was associated with the
firm of W. D. Moore & Co., at the
end of which period he accepted a
partnership with the well-known
firm of Sandover & Co., becoming
attached to the Fremantle Branch,
which he has practically managed
ever since. He is a member of the
Fremantle Club and of the Fre-
mantle Golf Club, to which sport he
devotes a good deal of his leisure
time, and he is also fond of shooting.
Before his departure from the Old
Country he took a deep interest in
political life, and was an ardent sup-
porter of the Gladstone Administra-
tion. Even from the age of twenty
he actively concerned himself in the
welfare of his Irish neighbours across
the channel, and was a prominent
worker in the Home Rule cause in
the days when Mr. Gladstone’s star
was at its zenith. Mr. Walker did
more, perhaps, than any other
private member of the community to
forward this movement, and with
Labouchere and T. P. O’Connor
bore the heat and burden of the day
in the battle which was won in the
Commons and afterwards lost in the
Lords. Since coming to Australia
his activities have been mainly con-
centrated on his private business
affairs, and he has taken no active
part in public life. Mr. Walker is
married and has three sons and two
daughters.
ARTHUR MORRIS OLTPHANT,
Manager of the Western Australian
Producers’ Co-operative Union,
Limited, Howard Street, Perth, is a
son of Mr. John Oliphant, of Mont-
rose, Scotland, where he was born
in 1872. He received his education
at the Montrose Academy, and upon
the completion of his studies entered
the office of Messrs. Robert Millar
and Sons, timber merchants, of
Montrose and Aberdeen, with whom
he remained until 1895. He was
then transferred to the Western Aus-
tralian Timber Mills owned by J. M.
Ferguson, Limited, with whom his
former firm ultimately entered into
partnership, and for five years occu-
pied the position of manager in
Perth, in 1900 returning to England
for a year. At the end of this period
he again took passage for Western
Australia, and for a time was en-
gaged in working a cyanide plant at
Southern Cross, subsequently join-
ing the staff of the Lake View Con-
sols in Kalgoorlie in order to obtain
a more up-to-date knowledge of the
process. In 1902 he returned to
Fremantle and commenced business
as a mercantile agent, in which line
he carried on until he received the
appointment of Manager of the
Producers’ Co-operative Union in
1906. The Union, which was founded
through the instrumentality of the
late Mr. Charles Harper and others
who have played a leading part in


its advancement, has 1,242 share-
holders (representing 10,766 shares),
all of whom are engaged in the
farming or fruit-growing industry,
the Board of Directors being chosen
from among themselves. Its objects
are to import those goods in regular
demand by farmers, fruitgrowers,
etc., and to exploit outside markets
for their produce. It was the means
BBartletto , Perth .
MR. ARTHUR MORRIS OLIPHANT.
some years ago of opening up the
London market to Western Austra-
lian wheat, and a large export trade
in wheat and flour is now being done,
while the handling of wheat in bulk
according to the latest methods is at
present engaging the attention of the
Union. It initiated an export of
frozen meat during the last few years
and has made regular shipments of
wool ever since its inception. An ad-
ditional feature is the conduct of auc-
tion sales daily at Perth Yard. The
Union has recently been appointed
agents in Western Australia for
Messrs. Nicholson & Morrow, makers
of the well-known “Union” har-
vesters and other agricultural ma-
chinery, and it is selling agent for
Messrs. Cuming, Smith, & Co.'s
“Florida” superphosphates and
“Sickle” brand manures. Mr. Oli-
phant is Vice-President of the Perth
Chamber of Commerce and a member
of the Perth Club. He is an ardent
golfer and one of the original mem-
bers of the Fremantle Golf Links,
and takes a keen interest in the ad-
vancement of this Club, of which he
was Captain during its first year.
He married a daughter of the late
Rev. David Shearer, of Perth. Wes-
tern Australia, formerly of Edin-
burgh and Gateshead-on-Tyne, and
has a family of three sons and
two daughters.
ALEXANDER CLARKE
MUNRO, “Hinemoa,” Claremont, is
a son of the late Donald Munro, of
Rosshire, Scotland, who arrived at
Hobart, Tasmania, in 1856,where the
subject of this review was born three
years later. At the close of his
V
scholastic studies he became asso-
ciated with the sawmilling trade
under his father, who was manager
for a large timber company at
Hobart, and after spending five years
in this connection proceeded to Vic-
toria to take over the management of
a sawmilling enterprise in the North-
Eastern district of that State. Three
years later he became connected with
Messrs. C. & E. Millar, railway con-
tractors, for which firm he undertook
the building and management of saw-
mills for the cutting of sleepers and
other timber required in the construc-
tion of various railways, notable
among which was the line across the
desert from Dimboola to Murray
Bridge, nearly all the sleepers for the
overland line being turned out from
these mills. Mr. Munro subsequently
carried on business on his own ac-
Bartletto, Perth
MR. ALEXANDER CLARKE MUNRO.
count in Victoria for several years,
being engaged in the timber trade at
the time of the bursting of the land
boom in 1893. Owing to the re-
sultant depression in trade he came
to Western Australia and took a posi-
tion as Manager of the Jarrahdale
Timber Station, at that time owned
hy a proprietary company, and con-
tinued here until 1907. Upon relin-
quishing this management he was ap-
pointed superintendent of Millars'
Karri and Jarrah Company's various
timber industries throughout the
State, the work also including the
supervision of 350 miles of railway
and a plant consisting of twenty-five
locomotives, 800 waggons, 800 horses,
etc. Over 800,000 acres of forest
land are worked by this large con-
cern, and employment is found for
2,500 hands. Mr. Munro was ap-
pointed a Commissioner to the Paris
and Glasgow Exhibitions of 1901 as a
representative of the timber indus-
tries of Western Australia, and took
a prominent part in the preparation
of exhibits and the deliberations of
the Commissioners. Whilst resident
at Jarrahdale he was one of the
original members of the Roads Board,
and has continued his connection
with this body ever since. He has
taken a prominent part in Masonic
work, and was one of the foundation
members of the lodge at Jarrahdale
filling the chair on two occasions, and
still retains membership in this
lodge. He held office as Junior
Grand Deacon, and is now Junior
Grand Warden of the Grand Lodge
of Western Australia. In outdoor
sport he has always been an en-
thusiast, taking special interest in
cricket and tennis. He was an active
member and player in all the clubs
connected with the mills during his
long period of association with the
timber industry. Mr. Munro mar-
ried Annie, daughter of Mr. James
McLeod, of Ayr, Scotland, an early
arrival and prominent grazier and
farmer in Victoria, and has two sons
and fivp daughters.
E. C. STOTT & CO., importers of
Remington standard typewriters and
all typewriter supplies, 45, St.
George's Terrace, Perth (telephone
1281); Business College, Weld
Chambers, 44, St. George's Terrace.
This business was established in 1903
by Mr. E. C. Stott, who had pre-
viously filled the position of repre-
sentative for the Remington Agency
in New South Wales. The Reming-
ton typewriter is well known as one
of the most successful time- and
labour-saving appliances known to
the modern commercial world, and
has run the gauntlet of competition
with othef leading makes with
results more than satisfactory to its
proprietors. Since the period above


referred to the Nos. 10 and 11
models have been put upon the
market, and so great has been the
popularity of these visible writers
that cable advices from America
mention the output as so great that
the orders booked averaged one per
minute. A new device which has
more than doubled the value of the
typewriter is the Wahl adding and
subtracting attachment, which is
built on the front of the Remington
model No. 11, and is operated by
means of the figure keys of the
machine, these keys writing and
adding at the same stroke. This
device works with surpassing speed,
is error proof, and can be used by
any operator after a few hours’
practice. Mr. Stott has also the sole
agency for the Burroughs adding
machine, which already has been
established in all the banks in
MR. EDWIN CHARLES STOTT.
Perth, the General Post Office, the
Railways Department, the Treasury,
and numerous other Government de-
partments and leading commercial
houses throughout the State.
EDWIN CHARLES STOTT is a
son of the late Mr. John Stott, well
known in journalistic circles as the
founder of The Pleasant Creek News
and The Southern Cross newspapers
in Victoria. The gentleman under
review was born at Brighton, Vic-
toria, in 1861, and received his
education at the local Church of
England Grammar School. Upon
the conclusion of his scholastic
career he entered his father’s print-
ing establishment, and remained in
this connection until 1878, when he
left Victoria to continue in the same
line of business in New South Wales.
Three years later he returned to
Melbourne, and was the first
operator to handle the pioneer
practical typewriting machine intro-
duced into Australia, the “Cali-
graph,” which he afterwards trans-
ferred to his brother, Mr. Sydney
Stott. The latter gentleman estab-
lished thfe business of Messrs. Stott
and Hoare, and relinquished the
“Caligraph” agency in favour of the
“Remington,” which machine he was
instrumental in introducing into the
various States of the Common-
wealth. Until 1897 Mr. E. C.
Stott maintained his connection with
the printing trade, but at this period
abandoned it to take uo the duties
of representative for the Remington
machine ill Sydney, which office he
filled for five years under the
auspices of the firm of Stott and
Hoare. In 1903 he came to Western
Australia and established the busi-
ness above referred to, and also, in
connection with it the Business Col-
lege of Messrs. Stott & Co., of which
mention is made in the succeeding
article. Mr. Stott married a daugh-
ter of Mr. Henry Martin, of South
Australia, and has four sons and
three daughters.
STOTT & CO.’S BUSINESS
COLLEGE, Weld Chambers, 44,
St. George’s Terrace, Berth. (Pro-
prietors, E. C. Stott and V. J.
Matthews). This well-known insti-
tution was founded in 1903 by Mr.
E. C. Stott, whose biography
immediately precedes this notice, and
since its inception has made rapid
strides in the favour of the public.
Its central position in St. George’s
Terrace is yet remote from the
disturbing elements of noisier
thoroughfares, the classrooms are
roomy and well ventilated, with
excellent lighting arrangements, and
the hygienic conditions all through
have been made a special study.
Each room is fitted with furniture
especially adapted to the require-
ments of its respective department,
and at night the whole suite is lit up
with electricity, providing a splendid
lighting service for the benefit of
evening students. The departments
include bookkeeping and office prac-
tice, shorthand, typewriting, mer-
cantile law, penmanship, business
arithmetic, business correspondence,
languages (including French, Ger-
man, Spanish, Greek, Italian, Latin,
English, and Esperanto), and ac-
countancy. Elocution classes are also
held on week-days. Students are
prepared for the ordinary Uni-
versity, Commonwealth, and State
Public Service and Parliamentary
Hansard reporters’ examinations,
and for the examinations conducted
by the Incorporated Phonographic
Society, the Dental and Pharmacy
Boards, the Perth and Fremantle
Chambers of Commerce, the British
Esperanto Association, and many
other public examinations covering a
wide area. Evening classes are
largely attended by many students
anxious to augment their day course
by extra study, or those who are
engaged in office work during the
day, and these have been found of
special value. Tuition by post has
established its right to be regarded as
a, successful educational agency and
is one of the recognized departments
MR. VINCENT JOHN MATTHEWS.
of the College work. Sport is not
neglected, the College having its
cricket, hockey, football, and
lacrosse associations, and the
monthly magazine gives scope for the
exercise of literary ability. Everv
department is under the charge of
an expert instructor, and a personal
interest is taken in the advancement
of every student who enters the
institution. Three scholarships are
awarded annually, the examinations
for which are held in October of
each year. From its inception every
year has shown an increase in the
number of students attending the
College, and in 1910 this reached the
large total of 348. The same year
witnessed a greater number of suc-
cesses in the local public examina


tions than fell to the share of any
other business college, and students
from this institution secured the
highest percentage in all Australasia
at the examination of the Incorpor-
ated Phonographic Society of Aus-
tralia held in Sydney, when twenty-
seven of Messrs. Stott & Co.'s
pupils were presented and all passed,
six securing distinction. The Em-
ployment Department plays a very
important part as a medium between
employers and graduates of the
College, and many by this means
have been helped to very high and
responsible positions, while princi-
pals are aided in securing the
skilled service which they require.
The annual picnic and sports take
place in October and speech night is
held in December of each year.
VINCENT JOHN MATTHEWS,
Headmaster and Manager of the
College, was born in Victoria and is
a son of Mr. George V. Matthews, of
that State. After receiving a sound
secondary education he entered
Messrs. Stott & Hoare's Business
College in Melbourne and gradu-
ated from this institution, securing
all the certificates granted by that
College to commercial students and
also winning the gold medal and
other prizes. In the same year he
was awarded three commercial cer-
tificates by the Melbourne Uni-
versity. After a period spent for
the sake of experience in various
offices and reporting Mr. Matthews
in 1906 entered upon teaching as a
profession, and for twelve months
was identified in this capacity with
the College, where he had himself
received his commercial training. In
1907 he arrived in Western Aus-
tralia and took over the management
of the institution, with which he is
connected at the present time, then
known as the Remington Business
College. In 1910 he joined Mr.
Stott in partnership, and has since
continued to exercise full control
over all the departments connected
with the College. He has passed
many teachers' examinations and is
a Fellow of the Incorporated Phono-
graphic Society (Eng.), Fellow of the
Institute of Commerce (Eng.), Fel-
low of the Commercial and Specialist
Teachers' Society (Eng.), Fellow of
the Association of Bookkeeping
Teachers (Eng.), holder of Mel-
bourne U niversity commercial
diplomas, Associate of the Incor-
porated Society of Commercial
Teachers (Eng.), and Fellow of the
Incorporated Phonographic Society
of Australia. He identifies himself
with the various forms of sport and
is Vice-President of the Mercantile
Cricket Association.
BENJAMIN ROSENSTAMM,
J.P., wholesale leather merchant,
saddler, etc., and proprietor of the
Perth Tannery, is a son of the late
Mr. Elias Rosenstamm, of Norden,
Germany, where the gentleman under
review was born on October 25,
1867. He was educated at the Ger-
man College in his native town and
continued his scholastic studies un-
til sixteen years of age. After pass-
ing examinations which reduced the
period of his compulsory military
service in the Fatherland to one
year he launched out upon a com-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. BENJAMIN ROSENSTAMM.
mercial career in the firm of J.
Daltrop, of Gustrow, Mecklenburg,
and eventually emigrated to Aus-
tralia, landing at Melbourne in Jan-
uary, 1887. After a month's experi-
ence in a boot factory he joined the
firm of Michaelis, Hallenstein, & Co.,
of Melbourne, and continued in the
employ of this Company until 1894.
In August of the latter year Mr.
Rosenstamm came to Western Aus-
tralia and opened in business on his
own behalf as a leather merchant at
Perth, and two years later was joined
in partnership by his former firm of
Michaelis, Hallenstein, & Co. In 1904
the Perth Tannery was purchased
from Mr. F. D. Good, and this con-
cern, one of the landmarks of the
city and originally owned by Messrs.
Ranford Brothers & Simpson, in its
present hands has lost none of the
prestige earned during fifty years of
thriving trade which has marked its
progress since its inception. About
a hundred employes are required for
the conduct of the business, and a
special feature is made of the har-
ness factory, where every kind of
harness is manufactured. The build-
ing in which the head office is situ-
ated was erected in 1904 at a cost of
over £B,OOO, and the establishment
is accounted the leading one of its
kind in the State. In the Franco-
British Exhibition of 1898 the firm
was awarded a diploma and bronze
medal for saddlery and a diploma of
honour for leather work, and in
1906-7 received a certificate of merit
from the Western Australian Cham-
ber of Manufactures. Mr. Rosen-
stamm has held the various positions
of Treasurer, Vice-President, and
Committeeman in the Western Aus-
tralian Chamber of Commerce, and
occupied the presidential chair dur-
ing 1907-8, when his address to the
Chamber at the annual meeting
elicited the most complimentary re-
marks from the local Press. He is
Hon. Treasurer and a member of the
Board of the Children's Hospital,
and is connected with the fraternity
of Freemasons. In 1910 Mr. Rosen-
stamm took a trip to England and
the Continent and revisited the
scenes of his youth after twenty-
three years' absence, combining
pleasure with business during a tour
through most of the principal cities
of the Old World. He is a member
of the Commercial Travellers' Club
and of Perth Club, and in circles of
sport turns his attention chiefly to
fishing, tennis, and golf, holding
membership in the Cottesloe and
Fremantle Golf Clubs. In 1906 he
married Doris, only daughter of Mr.
Charles Fraenkel, Mavor of Bun-
%*
bury, Western Australia, and has
two daughters.
GEORGE WILLS & CO., ship-
owners and general merchants, Aus-
tralia and England. It is now
nearly seventy years ago since the
late Mr. George Wills came from
England to Australia with the ob-
ject of establishing a business and
selected Adelaide as the venue of his
operations. So successful was he in
the carrying out of his enterprise
that at the present day the firm of
George Wills & Co., of London and
Australia, is widely recognized as


one of the leading business houses
which have played so important a
part in the commercial development
of the Australian Continent. At its
inception the business was conducted
in a small establishment in Rundle
Street, which was mainly confined to
the drapery and softgoods trade
The enterprising and progressive
spirit displayed soon resulted in a
rapid expansion of business, and in
1859 the firm found it necessary to
open its own buying-house in Lon-
don. The subsequent record of the
house has been one of practically un-
interrupted progress and expansion,
until to-day it not only controls one
of the most comprehensive wholesale
businesses in South and Western
Australia, but its trading ramifica-
tions extend to New South Wales,
Victoria, and Queensland. The soft-
goods branch of the business at an
early stage of the firm's career was
left in the hands of the twin-firm
of G. & R. Wills & Co., which is a
distinct bus:*ness, though under the
same proprietary, while the transac-
tions of Messrs. George Wills & Co.
are those of shipping and general
merchants. In general shipbroking
and chartering it controls a very ex-
tensive connection, especially be-
tween England and all parts of New
Zealand, as well as in the Australian
trade. In addition to the chartering
and loading of vessels and the vari-
ous duties appertaining to ship-
brokering and chartering Messrs.
George Wills & Co. have pecuniary
interests in several steamers running
between London and Australia. The
firm acts as agent for the well-known
P. & O. Branch service steamers and
Alfred Holt's, of Liverpool, and has
several important sailing-ship agen-
cies. The Australian headquarters
of Messrs. George Wills & Co. are
at Grenfell Street, Adelaide, and the
firm has branch offices in the various
business centres of Australia. The
London buying-house and offices are
at 3, Chapel Street, Whitecross
Street, E.C., where the premises
cover a large area and are divided
into excellently appointed offices for
the various members of the firm con-
trolling its affairs in London, while
for the purely shipping portion of
the business the offices are at 57,
Leadenhall Street, E.C. In 1896 the
Fremantle Branch of the business
was opened by Mr. A. E. Braund,
who acted as Manager for the Com-
pany at this centre for many years.
The premises consisted of offices in
Phillimore Street and a warehouse
in South Street, while now the head
RR
office for Western Australia
is at Murray Street, Perth,
with branches at Fremantle and
Maritana Street, Kalgoorlie. In
Western Australia the firm has
played a leading part in the develop-
ment of the mineral and agricultural
industries. In the earlier days
of its trade relations with
the State, which now extend
back over a period of twenty-
five years, its operations were con-
fined chiefly to the skin and produce
business now being carried on by
Messrs. Henry Wills & Co. at Fre-
mantle, but about 1897 it entered
upon the business of general mer-
MESSRS. GEORGE WILL &. CO.'S PERMISES, MURRAY ST., PERTH.
chants, shipping, Customs, and for-
warding agents, and at the present
time is doing perhaps the largest
general business in Western Aus-
tralia. The financial assistance which
the firm has been able to render to
industries in their infancy has tided
over the critical stage in the career
ot many a struggling enterprise.
Agriculture in particular is heavily
indebted to the firm, which, with
other large merchant houses, has en-
sured to the tillers of the soil a large
and reliable supply of agricultural
machinery, fertilizers, and general
farmers' requirements on extended
terms, and in addition has found
for them a ready and remunerative
market for their produce. In the
mining and pastoral districts the
house bears an equally favourable
reputation, and other transactions
comprise contracts with the Govern-
ment for the sunnly of such com-
modities as railway materials, iron
and steel, galvanized iron, and
for the purposes of export the pur-
chase of shipments of the valuable
timber which is found in various
parts of the State. Another depart-
ment consists of the importation of
softwoods for the demands of the
wholesale trade, and yet another of
premier importance in the numerous
agencies held by
the firm, notable
among which are
Messrs. H. & E.
Albert's English
Thomas phosphates,
the United Alkali
Company's English
superphosp hates,
jute goods, etc.,
special agencies
being that for
Messrs. Lea & Per-
rins' world-famous
Worcester sauce and
Messrs. C. & E.
Morton's grocers'
requisites. To the
late Mr. George
Wills is readily ac-
corded the honour
due to him who
“found a thing to
do and did it," his
particular achieve-
ment having meant
much to the suc-
cessful development
of the young Aus-
tralian nation. It
is the merchant who
by his courage, per-
spicacity, probity,
and enterprise does
more than any other class to
colonize and develop the bounds of
Empire. The late Mr. George Wills
bore the brunt of the development of
the business to its present stupendous
and influential proportions, and his
career may be taken as a typical ex-
ample of that of the eminently sno-
cessful British merchant of the Vic-
torian epoch. At the present time
the personnel of the firm consists of
the late Mr. George Wills' three sons,
Messrs. George Tarlton Wills, John
Henry Wills, and Charles Percy
Wills, and Messrs. George Arthur
Jury and Charles Frederick Risch-
bieth.


G. & R. WILLS & CO., general
warehousemen, Perth, Fremantle,
and Kalgoorlie. A business house
that has played a very important
part in the commercial development
of Australia is the firm of G. & R.
Wills & Co., whose headquarters are
at Adelaide, and who are practically
identical with the firm of George
Wills & Co., of London and Aus-
tralia. It was about 1850 that the
late Mr. George Wills came out to
Australia with the object of estab-
lishing a business and selected
Adelaide as the venue of his opera-
tions. He opened a small establish-
ment in the heart of the City of
Adelaide, confining his trade chiefly
to drapery and softgoods. The
enterprising and courageous spirit
displayed soon resulted in a rapid
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. A. E. KING.
development of business, so much so
that in 1859 the firm found it
necessary to open its own buying
house in London. The subsequent
career of this house furnishes over
fifty years’ record of practically con-
tinuous and uninterrupted progress
and expansion, until to-day it not
only controls one of the most
extensive wholesale softgoods bush
nesses in the Central State and there
occupies one of the largest and most
perfectly-equipped warehouses in the
Commonwealth, but its trading
ramifications have extended over the
whole Continent of Australia. Next,
perhaps, to the establishment in
Adelaide in point of size in the
building and the volume of trade
controlled is the fine warehouse
erected in 1897 in Hay Street,
Perth, and extended to St. George’s
Terrace in 1912. As early as 1866
the firm had its travelling represen-
tative in Western Australia, the
first gentleman so employed being
the late Mr. J. G. Anderson, who
in 1881 was thrown from his horse
and killed at Roebourne, in the
Nor’-West. The position was filled
successively by Messrs. John Cornish
(1881-4), John Holman (1885),
W. J. Stewart (1886), S. P. Saphir
Photo by C. E. Farr .
G. &. R.WILLS & CO.’s PREMISES. HAY STREET, PERTH
(1886-98), and it was during the
lastnamed representative’s period of
service that stock was first perman-
ently held in Western Australia,
headquarters being established at
Fremantle in 1889. Upon the death
of Mr. Saphir his place was taken
by Mr. D. H. Weidenhofer, who
died in 1900, having had control for
about two years. He was succeeded
by Mr. D. Macpherson, who repre-
sen ted the firm to the end of 1907,
and since 1908 the business has been
under the joint management of
Messrs. A. E. King and A. L.
Parker, the former of whom has
been identified with the Western
Australian house since 1892 and
the latter since 1894. In 1897 the
headquarters were transferred from
Fremantle to Perth, where what was
then considered a large warehouse
had been erected in Hay Street,
comprising a
basement and
three floors,
where the
various de-
p a rtments
are stocked
with boots,
m anchester
and linens,
blankets and
rugs, carpets,
furnishings,
woollens and
clothing, mer-
cery, millinery
and laces,
silks and rib-
bons, dresses,
mantles and
costumes, un-
der cl o thing,
haberdashery,
hosiery, sta-
tionery and
leather ware,
per f um e r y,
fancy - goods
and toys, and
light iron-
mongery. The
expansion of
trade in later
years rendered
necessary yet
further accom-
modation, and
in 1912 the
premises were
extended
through to St.
George’s Ter-
race, by means
of which addi-
tions the " former flooring space
was doubled. The new structure
was erected at a cost of about
<£22,000, and with the former
premises comprises the finest ware-
house block in Western Australia,
The new bulk store, 120 ft. long and
40 ft. wide, is located in the base-
ment, and adjoining are the receiv-
ing-room, packing-room, workshop,
a large reinforced concrete strong-
room, and the granolithic-paved


yard. Showrooms, 165 ft. long by
55 ft. wide, comprise the whole of the
second floor, and are connected with
the older part of the building by
reinforced concrete and fireproof
passage-ways, from which open out
ladies’ and gentlemen’s lavatory
suites, this convenience also being
provided in the connecting building
at the flat roof level. The flat roof,
166 ft. long by 56 ft. wide, is
Photo by C . E. Farr .
covered with Trinidad asphalt, and
is fitted with two large lantern lights
to assist the lighting of the show-
rooms below. Every care has been
taken by the architects with the
sanitary arrangements and ventila-
tion, all of which are up to date in
every respect. All the external
window openings are fitted with
Wormald’s patent fire-screens, and
every door opening, both ex-
ku2
ternal and internal, is fitted
with steel roller shutters. Each
showroom has two 30 ft. by
15 ft. light wells, and all the floors
are connected by cedar staircases,
while two electric friction goods
hoists are worked automatically
from each floor of the building, and
there is also a modern electric goods
lift. The original building has also
been fitted with a first-class 200-
G. &. R. WILLS &. CO.’S PREMISES, ST. GEORGE'S TERRACE. PERTH
minute speed electric passenger lift
to serve each floor, and an electric
goods life. The whole of the later
structure is of brick throughout on
cement concrete foundations, the
main floor areas are of jarrah hard-
wood, and the floors of the con-
necting building are of reinforced
concrete finished with tiles of orna-
mental design, while the ceilings are
of art-stamped steel finished with
flat white. The main entrance for
the receiving and dispatch of goods
opens on to St. George’s Terrace by
a wide granolithic-paved cart-way,
and the whole block is a substantial
and handsome addition to the archi-
tecture of the City of Perth. For the
benefit of the Coolgardie goldfields
district the firm erected at Kalgoorlie
in 1899 a permanent sample-room,
where a full range of samples repre-
senting the Perth stock is carried all
the year round. From this centre
the immediate surrounding districts
are worked by a local staff. A
glance at the map of Western Aus-
tralia will show the enormous tract
of country which has to be covered
by means of rail, coach, or boat by
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. A. L. PARKER.
travelling representatives in order to
reach the firm’s clients in localities
extending from Derby in the Nor’-
West to Esperance in the South-
East, and to Laverton in the
Eastern goldfields, and the deter-
mined manner in which all obstacles
to the furtherance of business ends
have been surmounted is only an
additional testimony to the enter-
prise of the firm and its competent
staff, which in the various States
numbers considerably over a thou-
sand. A great deal of the stock is
of Australian manufacture, the
Company having had erected in
South Australia very extensive
clothing, shirt, boot, shoe, and
leather factories which are fitted
up with the most up-to-date ma-
chinery and turn out a superior
class of goods.


GEORGE P. HARRIS, SCARFE,
AND CO., LIMITED. Registered
office for Western Australia, 297 to
303, Murray Street, Perth. This great
firm of wholesale ironmongers, agri-
cultural and general machinery mer-
chants, etc., etc., the largest of its
Photo by C, F. Farr .
GEORGE P. HARRIS, SCARFE, A. CO.’S PREMISES,
HIGH STREET, FREMANTLE.
kind in the Southern Hemisphere,
had its inception in Adelaide, South
Australia, in the year 1862. when
Messrs. George Scarfe, Richard
Smith, and George P. Harris joined
forces in the establishment of a ware-
house in Gawler Place. Mr. Harris,
who subsequently took over the man-
agement of the firm's London office,
died in 1874, in which year Mr.
Thomas R. Scarfe arrived in Ade-
laide and afterwards was admitted
into partnership. In 1900 the busi-
ness was converted into a limited
liability company, with a paid-up
capital of <£700,000, the Directors
being Messrs. George Scarfe (Chair-
man), Richard Smith, and Thomas
R. Scarfe. Three years later Mr.
George Scarfe, to whose ability and
enterprise the success of the concern
was primarily due, died in Adelaide
at the age of seventy-six years, and
the present Directors of the Company
are Messrs. Richard Smith (Chair-
man), Thomas R. Scarfe, Frederick
G. Scarfe, and H. Law Smith. From
the first the business obtained a
reputation for reliability, this being
one of Mr. Scarfe's most marked
characteristics which was early re-
flected in his trading operations. The
scope of the rapidly-increasing con-
nection widened, and as time passed
a large number of contracts were
taken for mining supplies, not only
in South Australia, but also in
Broken Hill and Western Australia.
The bright prospects of the mining
industry in the Western State led the
Directors in 1890 to send a repre-
sentative from Adelaide to take
charge of the firm's interests here, an
honour which was conferred upon
Mr. William Sandover (afterwards
founder of the firm of Sandover and
Co., of Perth), who held the posi-
tion for about twelve
months. Upon the
resignation of this
gentleman at the end
of that period he was
succeeded by the late
Frederick Stacey, who
proved himself pecu-
liarly adapted to die
pioneering work en-
trusted to him.
Through his untiring
efforts and the firm's
satisfactory handling
of the business trade
increased by leaps and
bounds, and with the
increasing activity in
tle go - mining in-
dustry the Adelaide
i- / , , .j j .
directorate decided in
1895 to import direct from overseas,
and the establishment of a branch
house in Western Australia became a
necessary step in the development of
this forward movement. Mr. G. G.
Martin (now manager of the General
Electrical Engineering Company,
Perth) accordingly was deputed to
undertake the responsibility of open-
ing the new branch, and he chose as
the headquarters of the business a
small one-roomed chamber situated
beneath the old "Eureka” Mill, at
Fremantle, where the staff, consist-
ing of the manager and two
assistants, a man and a boy, applied
their energies to the working up of
the trade. Additional storage space
very soon became necessary, and be-
tween 1897 and 1898 suitable land
became available in Newman Street,
Fremantle, where a site was pur-
chased and stores and offices erected.
Owing to the continued steady pro-
gress of the business and the coin-
cident increase of stocks, these pre-
mises sufficed only for a short time,
and further blocks of land were
acquired in High Street and Hender-
son Street, where large stores and
stables were built. During this time
several changes had taken place in
the management. In 1903 the retire-
ment of Mr. Martin took place, and
his successor, Mr. L. K. Lewis, was
appointed to control the business.
The untimely death of the latter
gentleman in the following year ren-
dered the position once more vacant,
and the late Mr. Frederick Stacey
was recalled from Kalgoorlie —where
he had been permanently stationed
for some years as manager of the
firm's business on the goldfields —and
installed as head of affairs at Fre-
mantle. Only three months later one
of the most disastrous fires ever
Photo by C. F. Farr .
GEORGE P. HARRIS, SCARFE. & CO.’S PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH.
known in the history of Western Aus-
tralia devastated the warehouse, an
ordeal which was sufficient to try the
mettle and resources of one of longer
standing in the position now occupied
by Mr. Stacey. Despite this heavy
blow, however, it remains to the ever-
lasting honour and credit of the firm
that although very little of the stock
was left in good order or saleable con


dition orders on hand were executed
in a minimum of time, though at con-
siderable loss to the company, and
during the whole of the trying time
which elapsed until the arrival of new
stock not one of the firm's employes
lost even an hour's pay. As a conse-
quence of this fire new premises were
again required, and this work was
undertaken at once, the result being
the imposing and commodious block
of warehouses that are to be seen in
High Street, Newman Street, Hen-
derson Street, and Queen Street, Fre-
mantle, at the present period. Cover-
ing nearly two acres of ground, these
premises consist of five large stores,
containing a floor space of approxi-
mately 72,000 square ft., and all the
most modern hoisting appliances for
the handling of heavy goods in the
most economical manner, iron racks,
platforms, and other conveniences
have been installed. The progress of
the firm in Western Australia may
fairly be claimed to have proceeded
hand in hand with the remarkable
development of the State during the
past few years, and owing to the ever-
expanding business the immense
stores at Fremantle soon proved quite
inadequate to house the stocks re-
quired to meet the increasing and
pressing demands from all quarters
of the mining, agricultural, and
metropolitan districts. Additional
land was therefore purchased in
Photo by C.E. Farr.
Perth, a good site being chosen in
Murray Street, whereon was erected
the present very fine and commodious
premises which were opened in 1906.
A walk through the well-appointed
departments of this fine warehouse
affords the visitor some idea of the
vast assortment of general hardware
goods imported, consisting of fur-
nishing and general ironmongery,
electroplated ware, mining materials,
saddlery and harness, oils and
colours, paperhangings, guns, rifles,
and ammunition, fancy-goods, sport-
ing materials, etc., etc. The busi-
ness of the agricultural depart-
ment having increased so rapidly
that the space allotted to it proved
quite inadequate for the efficient
handling of the growing trade, and
this experience being repeated in
other departments, room was made
for the latter at headquarters by the
removal of the agricultural ma-
chinery to a store in Wellington
Street, where a full range of ma-
GEORGE P. HARRIS, SCARFE, A. CO.'S PREMISES, WELLINGTON STREET, PERTH.
chinery, implements, engines, pumps,
etc., are exhibited. The firm has
a competent staff of travellers to
uphold its interests throughout the
vast territory of Western Australia,
the coastline from the farthest point
north to south being traversed and
the remote inland districts pene-
trated. At Kalgoorlie the firm
has a special mining representative,
whose district embraces Kalgoorlie
and the surrounding territory to
Norseman in the south and as far
as Laverton in the north. The
complete Western Australian staff at
Photo by C. F. Farr,
GEORGE P. HARRIS, SCARFE, &, CO.’S PREMISES, CORNER OF QUEEN AND
NEWMAN STREETS, FREMANTLE.
the present time numbers 220, and
is under the personal supervision of
Mr. James Eastwood, late of Vic-
toria, who was associated for many
years with the well-known firm of
Messrs. Hawkes Brothers, of Geelong,
and can claim an experience of some
thirty years in the eastern States, his
appointment taking place prior to the
decease of Mr. Stacey, in 1910.
Associated with the management are
Mr. Maclachlan (accountant), also a
Victorian, and Mr. P. Law Smith
(son of Mr. Richard Smith, of Ade-
laide), who has spent some eleven
years with the branch. The firm is
sole agent in Western Australia for
R. Hornsby's & Sons' engines, Eng-
land; the New Way Engines,
U.S.A.; May Brothers' Harvesters
and Strippers; Salman's Chaff cutters
and Horsegears; Monitor Windmills;
Unicorn Twine Manila Rope and
Binder Twine; Red Star Machinery
Oil; Champion and Excelsior Cylin-
der Oil; Peters' English Cement;
Silver Crown Mining Candles; Har-
ris' Shovels and Spades; Western
Shovels and Spades; Copper Queen
Belting, etc. The firm in Western
Australia has risen from a com-
parative “day of small things" to
its present position of proud
eminence. This only has been at-
tained as the result of close applica-
tion and faithful attention to details,
and the watchword of the great
enterprise, “Satisfaction to cus-
tomers," may safely be registered as
the key to success.


McLEAN BROTHERS & RIGG,
Limited, importers, general iron-
mongers, metal and machinery mer-
chants, Murray and Pier Streets,
Perth, and at Maritana Street,
Kalgoorlie. It may with truth be
said that no commercial house is
better known through the Western
State than that of McLean Brothers
and Rigg, Limited. Established in
1896, the first seven years of the
firm's existence were marked by
steady progress, but since 1903 the
prestige of the business has in-
creased in a wonderful manner until
to-day it takes rank as one of the
foremost trading concerns of the
Australian Commonwealth. It was
in the last-mentioned year that the
Western Australian Branch of
McLean Brothers & Rigg, Limited,
was purchased by Messrs. R. P. and
W. H. Vincent, and responding to
the energetic control of the new
regime the business has gone ahead
in a surprising manner. From time
to time extensions have been made,
and in 1907 the stock and agencies
of W. H. Kidston & Co., Limited,
of Perth, were taken over by
purchase and joined to the opera-
tions of the parent establishment.
About the same time a nail
factory was opened at East Perth,
and has since come prominently
before the notice of the public as
the '‘Sampson" Nail Factory. The
building is fitted throughout with
the most up-to-date machinery
known to the trade, the nails
turned out being of unrivalled
quality, and with a continually
increasing demand the future of
this venture appears very bright
indeed. The principal establishment
of McLean Brothers and Rigg,
Limited, is situated in Murray
Street, and covers a large area of
BBartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE R. PRESTON.
ground, and here is displayed in
great variety an immense stock ot
British, Continental, and American
hardware, household furnishings,
guns and ammunition, scales and
mining machinery, saw - milling
machinery, and requisites, and oils
and colours. The firm acts as
representative for many important
manufacturing houses in the Old
World, including Messrs. Babcock
and Wilcox's famous tubular
boilers, expanded steel metals and
lathing, the Cradley Boiler Com-
pany, Harland's English varnishes
and enamels, Blake's American
steam pumps, Milner's celebrated
fireproof safes and strongroom
doors, and Bullivant's wire ropes for
mining and general purposes. The
Pier Street establishment, com-
prising a ground floor and
is heavily stocked with every con-
ceivable class of goods peculiar to
the special trade catered for by the
firm, and is fitted up with all kinds
of labour-saving appliances, lifts,
and cranes, having been installed
for the handling of the
heavy iron and steel goods.
An interesting feature is the tent,
tarpaulin, and waterbag factory,
which is fitted out with the latest
machinery propelled by electric
power. The rapid increase of the
firm's turnover has led to the
directors making provision for the
years to come by the purchase of
land at the rear of the Murray
Street premises, reaching to Wel-
lington Street, where in the course
of time extensive premises will be
erected on the most modern lines,
which will embrace all those features
essential to the successful conduct of
so huge an undertaking. The total
depth from Murray to Wellington
Photo by C. E. Farr.
MCLEAN BROTHERS & RIGG’S PREMISES. PIER STREET, PERTH.


Streets is 375 ft., with a width of
60 ft., which on each floor will
provide an area equal to 22,500 sq.
ft. of space. The representatives of
the firm regularly travel throughout
the settled areas of the State, and
in addition visit the most distant
ports of the great Nor. 7 -West. The
directors of McLean Brothers and
Rigg, Limited, are Mr. Richard
Paul Vincent and Mr. William
Henry Vincent. The former gentle-
man, who is a well-known figure in
public circles, is fully referred to in
the municipal section of this work,
while the latter also receives
extended reference in the next suc-
ceeding article. Mr. George R.
Preston, the General Manager, is an
Englishman by birth, having been
born at Nottingham on June 16,
1862. While still a lad he
was brought to Australia by his
parents, who landed in the
Western State. Shortly afterwards
the family removed to Adelaide,
where Mr. Preston completed his
education, joining Messrs. McLean
Brothers & Rigg in 1876. In 1897
he was transferred to Western
Australia as Assistant Manager.
Since that time he has maintained
an unbroken connection with the
business and was appointed General
Manager in 1904. The claims of the
large concern which he controls fully
occupy his time, and what little
leisure falls to his share he devotes
to gardening pursuits at his resi-
dence, “Stratheden,” Subiaco Road.
WILLIAM HENRY VINCENT,
Ex-President of the Master Builders
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM HENRY VINCENT.
and Contractors 7 Association, is a
son of the late Mr. Richard Paul
of Perth, and formerly of
Melbourne. He was born at Castle-
maine, Victoria, on April 28, 1862,
and received his education at the
Presbyterian School at South Yarra.
Upon leaving that institution he
joined his father in the building
trade and continued in this connec-
tion until 1886, when he left Aus-
tralia on a trip to the United States
of America, which extended over two
years, and of which he made prac-
tical use by studying the latest me-
thods and ideas in his own calling,
as exemplified in the structures of
the new world. Returning to his
native land he undertook, in con-
junction with his father, some very
large contracts in Victoria and New
South Wales, and subsequently
worked on his own behalf in the
latter State, being employed in the
erection of some of the fine pastoral
homesteads in the Riverina district.
He arrived in Western Australia in
1896, and continuing the old part-
nership Messrs. R. P. Vincent and
Son very soon obtained a sure
footing in the building trade, and
carried out the contract for the erec-
tion of the Supreme Court, the
footing in the building trade and
other additions to the viceregal resi-
dence, the Perth Public Hospital,
and a number of the largest commer-
cial houses and warehouse blocks in
the City of Perth. At a later date
Photo by C. E. Farr .
MCLEAN BROTHERS &. RIGG’S PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH


the firm was dissolved and Mr. W.
H. Vincent carried on the business,
becoming responsible, among other
prominent works, for the building of
the Horseshoe Bridge in William
Street and Dalgety's at Fremantle.
In 1904 his brother (Mr. R. P. Vin-
cent) came into the firm as a part-
ner, and purchase was made of the
business of Messrs. McLean Brothers
and Rigg, and also that of Messrs.
Kidston & Co., which were carried
on with other joint concerns, in
addition to the large building opera-
tions by which the name of Vincent
has become well known in the State.
At the present time (1911) the firm is
specializing on railway contracts and
has in hand the construction of the
50-mile section of the Boyup-Kojonup
line and 38 miles in the line from
Katanning to Nampup, in connec-
tion with which the firm has exten-
sive jarrah saw-mills at Noggerupp
and at Benjinupp. Among Mr. W.
H. Vincent's private enterprises are
the Hoffman and Bellevue Brick
Companies, which he carries on suc-
cessfully in conjunction with the
management of other departments of
the business, the scope of which in-
creases every year. He was for three
years President of the Master
Builders' Association, and during his
term of office was mainly instrumen-
tal in founding the Builders' Ex-
change and in furthering other
developments of the Association.
Mr. Vincent takes a keen interest in
the Children's Hospital and acts as
Chairman of the Board. Fie finds
his chief recreation in motoring, and
is a member of the Council of the
Western Australian Automobile
Club. He is also connected
with the Masonic craft and holds
membership in the Masonic and
Western Australian Clubs. In the
year 1899 he was married to
Beatrice, daughter of the late Mr.
Richard Willdridge, of Melbourne,
Victoria.
ALFRED FREDERICK COLL-
YER, produce merchant and in-
dentor, Henry Street, Fremantle, is
a son of the late Mr. Thomas Coll-
yer, of Melbourne, Derbyshire, Eng-
land, where the gentleman under re-
view was born on November 2, 1867.
He received his education at a public
school in the same town and con-
tinued as assistant teacher at this
institution for three years. At nine-
teen years of age he abandoned the
teaching profession in order to enter
the firm of Roberts & Roberts, of
Leicester, who carried on business as
general shippers of American pro-
visions, and during his period of ser-
vice in this firm, which extended
to 1895, he became intimately
acquainted with all the details of the
various branches of this extensive
establishment. Prompted by the
glowing reports which at that period
bBartletto , Perth.
MR. ALFRED FREDERICK COLLYER.
were bringing Western Australia
into prominence, he relinquished his
connection with this house, which he
considered did not give full scope
for advancement, and arriving at
Perth became engaged for a few
months with the firm of Holmes and
Plain. Early in 1896 he established
himself in business at Fremantle on
his own account, and has carried on
successfully from this centre ever
since, his house being one of the re-
cognized channels of commerce with
the Eastern States. Mr. Collyer is
a well-known member of the Fre-
mantle Golf Club, of which he was
one of the founders, and is acknow-
ledged one of Western Australia's
representative players, having taken
part in the final match of the cur-
rent year for the championship of
the State. In 1902 he married
Jeanie, daughter of the late Mr.
Thomas Cole, of Tavistock, Devon-
shire, England, a member of a very
old Devonshire family.
JOHN CHURCPI, merchant, of
High and Packenham Streets, Fre-
mantle, is a son of the late Mr. John
Church, of Easton-Maudit, Nor-
thamptonshire, England, where he
was born on December 27, 1844. He
received his scholastic training at
Oundle Grammar School, in his
native county, and at its conclusion
in the year 1865 came to South Aus-
tralia, where he was associated for
twenty-seven years with the firm of
Harrold Brothers, afterwards known
as Harrold, Colton, & Co., Limited,
which business he managed for a
lengthy period. In 1895 he came to
Western Australia and opened in
Fremantle, where he purchased the
business formerly carried on by the
late Mr. George Edwards. This he
considerably enlarged and extended,
and it is now the principal concern
of its kind in the town, with very
large china and crockery depart-
ments and hardware of every descrip-
tion, household furnishings, and
builders’ materials, while the ramifi-
cations of the firm in the wholesale
and retail trade are found all over
the State. Mr. Church is known in
philanthropic circles, and is a sup-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN CHURCH.
porter of all charitable objects. He
takes his recreation in a quiet way
round his home, where the car© of
the bright blooms of the garden and
flourishing fruit-trees provides him
with healthy exercise and diversion.
In the year 1872 he was married to
Agnes Rachael, daughter of the late
Mr. William Lewis, of Kapunda, in
the State of South Australia, and
has a family of three sons and one
daughter.


LIONEL SAMSON & SON, wine
and spirit merchants and wholesale
grocers, Fremantle. The business of
the above firm was established by
Mr. Lionel Samson, who arrived at
Swan River in one of the first ships
to visit Western Australia in the
year 1829, when the colony was
Bartletto Perth.
MR. JOHN HENRY PAYNE.
first founded. He brought with him
a shipload of merchandise and com-
menced business as a wine and spirit
merchant and wholesale grocer a/C
Fremantle in the same year, and
the business has continued without
interruption or break of any kind
ever since that date, thus constitu-
ting a record so far as the whole of
Australia is concerned. During the
early thirties Mr. Samson was also
Postmaster-General of the colony,
the General Post Office at that time
being located at Fremantle, this
being clearly confirmed by the
evidence of several old newsjoapers
in the Perth Museum containing
advertisements of the closing of
various mails, which may be seen
at the present day. The founder of
the firm died in 1878, and the
business then passed into the hands
of his son, Mr. W. F. Samson, who
in turn died in the year 1900.
Since then it has been conducted in
the interests of the widow and
family of the lastnamed gentleman.
At the present time the firm has
the largest distributing wine and
spirit business in the State and a
fair proportion of the wholesale
grocery trade, while the agencies
controlled by the firm are many
and of the best kind, including
several of the best brands of wines
and spirits, whiskies and stout,
liqueurs, brandies, cordials, ales,
punch and lemon squash, blue,
starch, and grate and metal polish;
and wherever business is likely to be
obtained there their travellers are
to be found. The block of their
premises which appears on this page
gives a fair idea of the large two-
story and basement warehouse in
Cliff Street, and in addition to
these the Bond and Free Stores
situated in Essex Street consist of
three large warehouses filled with
the various stocks of merchandise
always required to be on hand to
fulfil the orders continually claim-
ing attention. JOHN HENRY
PAYNE, Manager of the above
business, was born at Bunbury on
October 7, 1867, and is a son of the
late Mr. George C. Payne, a
member of the Civil Service of the
State. He was educated at the
Fremantle State school, and upon
concluding his studies at the age
of sixteen entered the establishment
of the late Mr. John McCleery,
wine and spirit merchant, with
whom he continued for three years.
He left this employ in order to gain
experience in banking, and became
an officer in the National Bank of
Australasia at Fremantle, three
years later joining the staff of the
Adelaide Steamship Company, in
the service of which he spent eleven
years. Upon his retirement from
the Steamship Company he accepted
the position of accountant with the
firm of Lionel Samson & Son, and
held the post until the death of the
previous manager, the late Mr.
P. C. J. Campbell, in 1902, when
he was appointed to take control of
affairs, and has continued in this
capacity ever since. Outside of
business matters he is Trustee and
Treasurer of the Fremantle Literary
Institute and is a member of the
Committee of the Fremantle
Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Payne
takes a deep interest in matters
connected with the Church of Eng-
land, and is Warden of St. John’s
Church at Fremantle. He is a
Photo by C, E. Farr,
LIONEL SAMSON &, SONS’ PREMISES, FREMANTLE.
member of the Fremantle Club and
is associated as a playing member
with the Fremantle Bowling Club,
In 1892 he married Laura Evelina,
daughter of the late Mr. Thomas
Smith Bond, of Westminster, Eng-
land, and has two sons and a
daughter.


D. & J. FOWLER, Limited. This
immense mercantile firm which had
its inception in South Australia in
the early fifties of the nineteenth
century, and now has its London
Photo by C. E. Farr.
house and ramifications extending
throughout the various States of the
Commonwealth, first opened for bus-
iness in Western Australia at Fre-
mantle on October 1, 1896. Within
ten years its trade had trebled, mak-
ing it necessary to seek larger pre-
mises, and the present fine ware-
house was erected, cover-
ing the whole block of
land reaching from Henry
to Packenham Streets.
The imposing pile of
buildings, with its hand-
some frontage to Henry
Street, presents a valu-
able addition to the
architecture of the town
and besides the main
structure embraces com-
modious stores at the
rear. The interior dis-
plays much beauty of
design coupled with utili-
tarian values, and the
result is a splendid ex-
ample of a thoroughly
well - appointed, up-to-
date building, comprising
entrance hall, counting-
house, offices, sales- and
sample - rooms, and all
other conveniences. Pre-
mier consideration has
been given to the arrange-
ments for light and ven-
tilation, and lifting ap-
pliances of the most
approved design facilitate the hand-
ling of heavy goods. The house is
now recognized as the leading es-
tablishment of its kind in Western
Australia, and branches have been
D & J. FOWLER, LIMITED’S PREMISES AT KALGOORLIE.
opened at Perth and Kalgoorlie,
while the name of D. & J. Fowler,
Limited, has long since become a
household word even in the most
remote regions of the State. The
early history of this important trad-
ing corporation is one of great in*
terest. In the year 1854 it was
founded by the brothers Janies and
David Fowler, in premises situated
in King William Street, Adelaide.
The commencement of the second
decade of the firm's existence wit-
nessed its establishment in a more
commodious building in the vicinity
of the former place of business, and
early in the seventies trading opera-
tions had increased to such an ex-
tent that large stores were erected
on McLaren Wharf, Port Adelaide.
An excellent site, facing the new
docks, subsequently was secured, on
which the present fine building
owned by the firm was reared, and
the city premises were augmented
by the erection of a large warehouse
with a floorage space of 45,000 ft.
In course of time an extensive ship-
ping business was undertaken by
the firm, which also acts as agents
at Port Adelaide for various mer-
cantile trading companies. It has
also large interests in the milling
industry, being part-owners of the
Adelaide Milling Company, Limited,
and has included in the immense
sphere of its operations the cultiva-
tion of the vine over a large area
in the Barossa district of South Aus-
tralia, and the conduct of an exten-
sive winery at Kalimna, near the
town of Angaston. This district be-
ing regarded as a most favoured
locality for the production of wine
grapes and other fruits, the rich
soil and climate bringing them to
Photo by C. E. Farr.
D.& J. FOWLER, LIMITED’S BUSINESS PREMISES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


perfection, the wines produced are
full-bodied and exceedingly pala-
table. In 1906 a well-equipped fac-
tory was erected by the firm on
North Terrace, Adelaide, in close
proximity to the Central Railway
goods-yard, and at this establish-
ment, now so widely known as the
“Lion” Factory, are prepared and
manufactured a large assortment of
household necessities which find their
way into use in the thousands of
homes throughout the Common-
wealth. Among these are the cele-
brated and popular brand of “Am-
goorie” tea, prepared in four grades
(Special, Nos. 1,2, and 3), Red and
White “Paou Chung” and “Owl”
tea, and numerous other brands of
China and Ceylon teas. The cele-
brated “Lion” self-raising flour and
a great number of other foodstuffs
bearing the “Lion” or “Alola”
brands are also manufactured, spices
are ground and packed for the Aus-
tralian markets, and various other
commodities prepared in an attrac-
tive and easily-handled form. The
firm holds many important English
agencies, chief among which are J.
and J. Coleman, Limited, mustards,
etc.; J. S. Fry & Sons, cocoas and
Photo by C. E. Farr .
chocolates; Crosse & Blackwell,
Limited; Gillard & Co., pickles and
qqhpar- ‘Rnvril limited* Cerebos
sauces, ±sovm, inmirea,
Salt, Limited; R. S. Hudson,
Limited, soap extracts; Huntley and
Palmer, Limited, biscuits; the Bur-
nese Alps Milk Co.’s celebrated
D. &. J. FOWLER, LIMITED-S PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH.
“Sledge” brand unsweetened milk;
Fussell & Co.'s Dahl cream; the
“Sunshine” Custard Co.'s vanilla
cream, etc. D. & J. Fowler,
Limited, also represent the Alaska
Packers' Association, being agents
for their well-known “Horseshoe”
and other brands of salmon. They
are agents in Western Australia for
the British Imperial Oil Company,
Limited, “Shell” brand of kerosene,
motor spirit, benzine, engine oil,
etc. “Shell” spirit is most popular
with the owners of motor-cars the
world over. This spirit has an enor-
mous sale, which shows a big in-
crease year by year, and holds numer-
ous world records gained on the roads
and on the racing tracks against the
keenest competition. The wonderful
speed of over two miles a minute,
equal to 127 miles per hour, has been
achieved with the aid of “Shell”
spirit, and on the Brooklands track,
under test conditions, the record dis-
tance of 42 miles was covered by a
20 horse-power car on a single gallon
of the spirit. The vast oil stores
located at North Fremantle provide
accommodation for an immense
stock, which never falls below 60,000
cases. The firm's Australian agen-
cies include the Sydney Meat Pre-
serving Company, tinned meats;
Dyason & Sons, Limited, sauces and
cordials; Laver Brothers, canned
vegetables; W. Arnott, Limited,
specially celebrated milk arrowroot
biscuits and Sao cream crackers; the
D. & J FOWLER, LIMITED’S WAREHOUSE FREMANTLE.


Covent Garden Packing Company;
Maypole soaps, etc. The present
Board of Directors is constituted of
the following gentlemen:—Messrs.
James Richard Fowler (Chairman),
James Fowler, R. J. Phillips, G.
Fowler Stewart, E. Allnutt, E. V.
Joyner, and F. AV. Collingwood, the
Managing Director in Western Aus-
tralia being Mr. E. Allnutt, to
whom personal reference is made in
the section of this work devoted to
the Fremantle Harbour Trust.
when twenty-seven years of age com-
menoed business on his own account
as above, on a site formerly occu-
pied by his father, Mr. Samuel
Moore, who had established himself
in commercial pursuits at the Port
as far back as 1840. In the first
instance the present firm was known
as Messrs. J. IT. Monger & Co., but
in 1867 the other partner, Mr. Mon-
ger, withdrew, and several years
after Mr. Moore took in as partners
Messrs. J. M. Ferguson and A. F.
into a company. The original stone
grinders quarried at Greenraount
are still to be seen at the firm's
house of business. In connection
with the mill the firm owned a
schooner which traded in general
merchandise between Fremantle,
Dongara, and Geraldton, and
brought shipments of wheat and
other produce to the port of Fre-
mantle. In April, 1900, Mr. W. D.
Moore disposed of the business to
his son, Mr. G. F. Moore. Mr. W.
Photo by C. E. Farr.
W. D. MOORE & CO. S HARDWARE STORES, HENRY STREET, FREMANTLE.
W. D. MOORE & CO., general
merchants and importers, wine and
spirit merchants, Henry and Pack-
enham Streets, Fremantle. The
establishment of this enterprise
dates back to 1862, when the late
Mr. William Dalgety Moore, father
of the present proprietor, opened up
in business in unpretentious pre-
raises in Henry Street, which origin-
ally were occupied by the Western
Australian Bank when it first
opened its doors to the general
public. The late Mr. W. D. Moore
was born at the Oakover, in the
Swan district, in 1835. He re-
ceived his education locally, and
Durlacher. After these partners
had retired from the firm Dalgety
and Co., Limited, purchased the
shipping and wool branches of the
concern, Mr. W. D. Moore retain-
ing the general mercantile business,
It was carried on by him until 1900,
and steadily and consistently he in-
creased his operations until it came
to occupy a foremost place among
the best Australian houses. Mr.
Moore was a man of great energy
and enterprise, and about 1876 es-
tablished a flour-mill at Fremantle,
the first of its kind in Western Aus-
tralia, which he kept going for
twenty years, when it was converted
D. Moore’s name is indelibly asso-
ciated with many large commercial
ventures in the State, his purchase
at auction for £22,000 of the splen-
did “Cheriton” property, which he
afterwards sold to Messrs. Harper,
Edgar, & Wedge, being regarded as
one of the most spirited enterprises
of the time. He also became the
proprietor of ‘ Quindalup” jarrah
timber station in Western Australia.
His adventures in the pearling in-
dustry on the Nor.’-West and
Shark Bay coasts make fascinating
history, and the find of one pearl
alone which returned him the large
sum of £1,500 rendered the pur


suit a sufficiently profitable one. At
Cossack and Roebourne he estab-
lished an importing business and
distributing store under the name
of the “North-West Australian Mer-
4.-. r, » i • 1 i jsj.
can tile Company, which he after-
wards sold to his son, Mr. Charles
E. Moore. The premises occupied by
the firm of Messrs. W. D. Moore
and Co. at Fremantle consist of
two large commodious buildings
with frontages of 99 ft. to Henry
tur© of pumps for raising water
from underground. Deserving of
special mention is the famed “Air-
moloo” windmill, the popularity of
which among the pastoralists in the
AT mtt / i • ii ~ a, ,
Nor.-West and in the other States
is something remarkable. The
tower of the windmill is specially
constructed to withstand the fierce
onslaught of the willy-willy common
to the Nor.’-West, and the design
has been very successful. Thousands
and here also is kept a very large
stock of general groceries, wines and
spirits, hardware of every descrip-
t I \ on? household requisites, and Cana-
, ian c airs anc y aD es ’ , ie
latter line being a feature of the
firm , g business to which special
attention is given At the rear
j s located the factory, which is
fitted up with a complete plant for
the preparation of the many pro-
prietary lines turned out by the firm.
J. & W. BATEMAN, wholesale
Photo by C, E. Farr.
W. D. MOORE &. CO.'S PREMISES, HENRY STREET, FREMANTLE.
Street, and reaching back to Pack-
enham Street, a distance of some
300 ft. Th§ building nearer to High
Street is specially designed and fitted
for the handling of heavy goods, and
f /ii?
contains an extensive stock or mer-
, ,
chandise. Part of it is devoted to
a private bond, in which the various
brands of wines and spirits handled
by the firm are stored. Gasolene en-
gines for farming and general irriga-
tion purposes are kept on hand, and a
speciality is made of the manufac-
of these mills have been erected in
the pastoral areas of Western Aus-
tralia, an expert being specially em-
ployed to supervise their erection.
This expert spends most of his time
. i
m the northern country, and was
~ r i 4. j J , j u
the first to proceed overland by
motor-car from Roebourne to Port
ITedland and thence via Onslow and
Carnarvon to Perth. In the main
establishment, a two-storied building
with an imposing frontage to Henry
Street, the firm’s offices are located,
grocers, shipping and insurance
brokers, wine and spirit merchants,
chandlers and general iron-
mongers, Fiemantle, Perth, and
algoorhe, Western Australia. This
old-established business was founded
• IQrrv ■, ~ T u t>
in lobO by the late Mr. John Bate-
man> who came to Western Aus .
traba from England in 1830.
Shortly after its inception he was
joined by his brother, Mr. Walter
Bateman, and in the early days of
its history the firm was engaged
chiefly in a vigorous shipping trade.


The construction of sailing vessels
was successfully undertaken at Fre-
mantle, Western Australian jarrah
being found well suited to this pur-
pose, and launching was effected by
means of a temporary slipway erected
across the roadway to the water side.
Several schooners were also pur-
chased in England, and the firm had
a fleet of nine or ten vessels trading
on the high seas and round the Aus-
tralian coast. Before the advent of
steamers the coastal trade was prac-
tically in their hands, and this led
to their undertaking the transport of
cargoes to and from China, the
Straits Settlements, Java, and
Mauritius. An extensive trade was
also carried on with the Eastern
States, the local products of timber,
MR. JOHN WESLEY BATEMAN, SEN.
sandalwood, horses, etc., finding
ready markets elsewhere, while the
ships came back loaded with sugar,
wheat, flour, and other commodities.
The firm’s vessels also secured almost
the whole of the coastal passenger
traffic of those early days, and a not-
able feature of the service under the
primitive conditions then obtaining
was the small number of mishaps
that occurred. The sugar-laden
brigantine “Bungaree,” on her voy-
age from Java to Fremantle, was
wrecked off Safety Bay, in the
vicinity of which the fore-and-aft
schooner “Star” also went ashore
when returning from a whaling
cruise. Insurance offices being
non-existent in the State at
that time the loss of these
vessels fell entirely on the firm.
The late Mr. John Bateman, besides
being personally concerned in various
whaling enterprises, also engaged in
the pearling industry at an early
stage in the firm’s history. As the
import trade increased the partners
realized their position as importers,
and their vessels became well known
in Australasian and Asiatic ports,
whence valuable cargoes were con-
veyed to Fremantle, and in course
of time they became universal pro-
viders, in a literal sense, to the re-
tail distributers in the Western
State. In 1872 Mr. Walter Bateman
retired from the business which was
carried on until 1900 by his brother,
who in that year disposed of it to
his son, the late Mr. John Wesley
Bateman, who had managed its in-
ternal affairs since the last-mentioned
year. This gentleman continued
sole proprietor until his death in
May, 1907, at the age of fifty-five,
since which date it has been con-
ducted under the original title by
the trustees of his estate, under the
joint management of Messrs. John
Wesley Bateman and Lewis Lindsay
Bateman, sons of the deceased. The
late Mr. J. W. Bateman was Presi-
dent of the Fremantle Chamber of
Commerce during five years of the
most important period of its history,
and on his retirement was presented
with tangible tokens of the apprecia-
tion in which his services were held
Photo by C. E. Farr .
J & W. BATEMAN’S PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH
by his fellow-members. The present
premises occupied by the firm have
frontages to Henry, Croke, and
Mouatt Streets, and cover nearly
3 acres of ground. The main
frontage faces Henry Street, where
the two-storied structure of simple
design presents a substantial appear -
ance. The floor space, which in 1870
consisted of 1,000 sq. ft., now covers
well over 60,000 sq. ft., and the
warehouse includes a manufacturing
department, where the preparation
of coffee, essences, condiments,


baking-powder, etc., is carried on,
and tea is packed for the trade.
Messrs. J. & W. Bateman are pro-
prietors of the “Royal Seal" brand,
under which the firm's proprietaries
are placed on the market and find
their way to all parts of the State.
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN WESLEY BATEMAN.
The staff has increased from four or
five employes in the early period of
the firm's development to over
seventy at the present time. In
order to cope with the extensive
trade done on the goldfields, in 1905
a branch was opened at Kalgoorlie,
and five years later special premises
were erected in Murray Street,
Perth, comprising two floors and a
basement, the latter providing
Photo by C. E. Farr.
sample-rooms, and here a general
stock of the goods regularly dealt in
by the firm is also kept. A special
feature is made of fulfilling the re-
quirements of pastor alists, and a
large connection has been established
with the Nor.'-West. The pearling
industry is also specially catered for
by the firm, which has a resident
agent at Broome and other repre-
sentatives who keep in touch with
every district in the State. The firm’s
reputation as ship chandlers has long
been established and it does a
large business in this department.
Its agencies are numerous and in-
clude the United States Steel Pro-
ducts Company's “Carnegie" X bar-
iron, and the famous steel “Star"
windmill manufactured by Messrs.
Flint & Walling, Kendallville, In-
diana, U.S.A. For the past thirty
years the makers have been giving
every attention to the perfecting of
this windmill, and the “Star" is
specially adapted to suit Australian
conditions, being of great strength
and minimum weight. The special
spread tower is designed for use in
districts subject to cyclonic disturb-
ances, and properly erected always
gives satisfaction. It is constructed
in sections, a valuable feature being
that, by the removal of a few bolts,
every working part may be replaced
with the greatest possible ease with-
out any necessity for dismantling
the mill. Ball-bearings have been
introduced and there is a governing
arrangement to enable the mill to
adjust itself automatically to the
wind conditions. The firm keeps a
full range of duplicate parts, one of
J. &. W. BATEMAN’S PREMISES, HENRY STREET, FREMANTLE.
the advantages which renders the
“Star” windmill so popular among
Western Australian pastoralists.
Other agencies are those of the “Her-
cules” galvanized special steel
fencing wires of fine gauge, com-
bined with high-breaking strain ; the
HolzapfePs Compositions Company,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. LEWIS LINDSAY BATEMAN.
Limited, Newcastle-on-Tyne, “Lago-
line” paints and “International”
anti-fouling and anti-corrosive com-
positions, which are extensively used
in the Royal Navy and by most of
the important shipping companies;
Fison’s sheep-dip, manufactured by
the Chemical Union, Limited, Nor-
wich, England; and “Rainbow”
dyes, the special feature of which is
that they may be used for wool, cot-
ton, and silk alike. The firm is also
agent for Usher’s O.V.G. special re-
serve whisky, which has been selling
in Australian markets for the past
forty years and has a world-wide
reputation; for Ainslie’s Scotch
whisky; A.V.H. Geneva and
Schnapps; Messrs. White, Tomkins,
and Courage, jelly crystals, etc. ;
Messrs. Alfred Bird & Sons, custard
and egg powders; Messrs. Thomas
Hayward & Sons, “Military”
pickles; Messrs. J. Robertson & Sons,
London, “Golden Shred” and “Silver
Shred” marmalade and jams.
Messrs. J. & W. Bateman are the
local representatives for the United
States and Australasia Steamship
Company, Limited, line of steamers,
trading regularly between New
York, Fremantle, and the Eastern
States, and are represented in Lon-
don by Messrs. R. T. Turnbull and
Co., 4, Lloyd’s Avenue, E.C.


THE COLONIAL STORES,
Guildford. The extensive drapery,
grocery, and hardware business car-
ried on by Mr. William Padbury at
Guildford was founded some forty
years ago by Messrs. Padbury,
Loton, & Co., who several years later
disposed of it to Mr. Allpike. Owing
to failing health that gentleman re-
linquished business affairs, and the
concern at Guildford was purchased
by Mr. Padbury. The establishment
in its early days gave no indication
of the magnitude the turnover would
assume in years to come, and
no noticeable increase was vis-
ible until Mr. Padbury took
control. Originally confined
to a single frontage, the pre-
sent roomy structure is the
result of additions made
from time to time in order to
provide room for the ever-
increasing stock of useful
and artistic goods. The firm
transacts an immense busi-
ness throughout the State,
and caters specially for the
requirements of agricul-
turists and pastoralists, even
in the most distant localities.
The conduct of the various
departments is in charge of
experts, who in turn are
responsible to Mr. Padbury,
who exercises a strict supervision over
all. Immense stocks of every con-
ceivable line of goods are carried, the
whole being valued at from £50,000
to £60,000. Groceries of every
description, hardware, drapery, iron-
mongery, oils, colours, paints,
builders’ requisites, agricultural im-
possible figure to the benefit of the
consumer. In season Mr. Padbury
is a large, straight-out buyer of wool
and skins, and also makes advances
on the same commodities for ship-
ment to the London markets. The
growers' interests are specialy studied
and sales are effected at a minimum
expense with considerable saving in
the way of exchange, freight, etc.
The stores adjoining the main build-
ing are heavily stocked with chaff,
oats, barley, etc., locally grown, and
produce of all kinds. The drapery
department carries a large general
stock of up-to-date goods and a fine
assortment of fashionable millinery,
and the firm's prices for all items are
remarkably low, considering the
high-class quality of goods supplied.
Close at hand are the fine bulk stores
at Guildford, and the branches at
Toodyay and Moora are supplied
from here. The Toodyay business,
established early in February, 1909,
is an important concern, employing
fourteen hands and controlled by a
capable manager. The Moora branch
is also under excellent management,
and eight hands are required to meet
the demands of the trade. The Peer-
less Flour-mills at Guildford were
built by Mr. Padbury's uncle in
1899. The most modern machinery
known to the trade has been in-
stalled, and this year (1912) over
100,000 bags of corn will be milled
into flour, bran, and pollard. The
THE COLONIAL STORES, GUILDFORD.
mill is connected with the main rail-
way line by a siding, which enables
the firm to deal in an expeditious
way with the heavy freight daily
passing in and out of the establish-
ment. “Peerless” flour finds a ready
sale in Western Australia, and large
quantities are shipped to buyers’
plernents, roofing and galvanized
iron, fencing wire, etc., are sold, as
well as furniture, the last being
manufactured at Guildford from
well-seasoned timber, of which a big
stock is carried. An unlimited
assortment of French bedsteads, din-
ing and bedroom suites, upholstered
suites, and bedding of all kinds is to
be obtained, and, in fact, everything
from “a needle to an anchor” may
be purchased in this veritable trea-
sure-house. The firm is agent for
Mount Lyell superphosphates, man-
ures, and fertilizers, and Mr. Pad-
bury is a direct importer of jute
goods from Calcutta. The firm has
its own Home-buyer to attend to this
important department, and buys in
the open marts of the world and
direct from the manufacturer,
thereby securing goods at the lowest
INTERIOR VIEW OF DRAPERY DEPARTMENT.


orders to the Eastern States, where
its excellent qualites quickly attract-
ed the attention of the important
buyers of this staple commodity. The
products of the mill are also sent to
Europe, and each year witnesses a
healthy increase in the cargoes for-
warded to the crowded centres of the
Old World. WILLIAM PADBURY
is the eldest son of the late Mr. Wil-
liam Padbury, of Charlbury, Oxford-
shire, England, and came to Western
Australia with his father in the P.
and O. steamer “Oriental.” Land-
ing at Albany, father and son were
met by the late Mr. Walter Padbury,
a well-known merchant and pastora-
list of Western Australia, and im-
mediately proceeded to Koojan,
where Mr. M. T. Padbury has a sta-
tion. Mr. Padbury, sen., continued
to reside with his son at Koojan
until the time of his decease in 1905.
In England he was intimately asso-
ciated with farming pursuits, as were
his forefathers for many generations
before him. The subject of our notice
was born on August 31, 1867, and
educated at the Charlbury Grammar
School. At the age of thirteen he
was apprenticed to the grocery and
provision trade with a Mr. Joseph
Bowl, and when his indentures ex-
pired at the end of four years he
transferred his services to the firm of
Harry Clifford, of Finsbury Park,
with whom he gained much valuable
experience during a period extending
over about eight years. Subsequent
to his arrival in this State, and after
a stay of a month at Koojan, he went
to Guildford and joined the late Mr.
John Allpike, who had purchased the
business from Messrs. Padbury,
Loton, & Co. At the end of two
years, Mr. Allpike’s health failing,
Mr. Padbury bought the concern,
and since that time has continued as
sole proprietor. Mr. Padbury is
closely identified with the affairs of
the Guildford municipality, and
never allows an opportunity of fur-
thering the interests of the district
to evade his vigorous attention. At
the request of a private deputation he
consented to nominate for a seat in
the local Council, and in 1910 was re-
turned as a member of that body.
Among the many honorary offices
held by him may be mentioned that
of Justice of the Peace, which com-
mission he received in June, 1901 :
Vice-President of the Chamber of
Manufactures; Vice-President of the
Royal Agricultural Society and of the
Photo by C. E. Farr .
INTERIOR VIEW OF NO. 1 SHED, SHOWING FLOUR STACKS.
PEERLESS” ROLLER FLOUR MILLS.
Swan Agricultural and Horticultural
Society, of which he was President
for three terms: also Vice-President
of the Moora Agricultural Society,
Tie is a member of the Grain Corn-
rnittee of the Chamber of Commerce,
which fixes the standard for the year,
and is Chairman of the Insurance
Office of Australia. Since its incep-
tion he has acted as Vice-President of
the Y.M.C.A., and as a stanch sup-
porter of the Anglican Church has
been Rector's Warden at Guildford
for many years. He is President of
PEERLESS” ROLLER FLOUR MILLS, GUILDFORD
ss


the Perth Dog and Poultry Society
and a Patron of the Midland Junc-
tion Poultry Society. Though a life
member of the Guildford Bowling
Club, his varied business interests
prevent his indulgence in any especial
form of recreation, the whole of his
time being devoted to the demands of
his commercial life and the varied
societies of which he is a member. He
married in January, 1897, Eveline
Mary, daughter of the late Mr. Wil-
liam Wellman, of “Rosehill,” a very
old farming identity of Guildford,
and has issue a son and four
daughters.
PATERSON & COMPANY,
LIMITED, general merchants and
importers, Leake and Packenham
Streets, Fremantle, and at Northam.
The firm of Paterson & Co. was
established by Mr. Duncan Pater-
son in February, 1905, and in July
of the same year turned into a
limited company. In May, 1909,
Mr. G. G. John took a place on the
Board of Directors, previous to
which he had acted as secretary, the
duties of which post were then taken
over by Mr. Eric Warren. The
Board to-day consists of Mr. Duncan
Paterson and Mr. G. G. John. As
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. DUNCAN PATERSON.
produce merchants the firm holds
pride of place over all others, and
from the very commencement the
concern has been a great success.
Quantities of goods are regularly im-
ported from the East, and the firm
has the sole agency for Lysaght's
wire-netting, which is manufactured
in the mother State and sold all
over Australia, the netting being
favoured by farmers and pastoralists.
English and German wire and wire-
netting is also stocked, and the firm
acts as selling agents for Florida and
Mount Lyell fertilizers, the sales of
which are leaping forward as year
succeeds year. An important agency
which they also hold is for the
“Southern Cross" windmills and
boring plants, great numbers of
which have been installed through-
out the State, particularly in the
agricultural and pastoral areas. The
“Southern Cross" mill is very popu-
lar with farmers and pastoralists, as
to it is attached a patent auto-
matic oiling arrangement which does
away with the necessity of oiling the
plant at frequent intervals. The oil-
box requires filling but once in each
twelve months, and thereafter no
further attention is necessary, as this
automatic feed attachment provides
a regular supply of oil to all bear-
ings. Again, the firm is the largest
exporter of sandalwood from the
State, and many thousands of
tons of this valuable commodity
are annually shipped to the Far-
East markets. Big buyers of all
locally-grown products, the firm has
buying and selling representatives in
almost every town in the State, and
in addition their travelling repre-
sentatives visit every centre of note
and traverse the Nor'-West country.
Daily auction sales of produce are
held at the Perth Metropolitan Mar-
kets, and this arm of the firm's
operations is in the hands of Mr.
Louis Noseda, an auctioneer of great
experience. The firm is well repre-
sented in Melbourne, and regular
shipments of produce and other lines
are made to Fremantle. Paterson
and Co., Limited, hold the agencies
for D. & J. McCal 1 urn's “Perfection"
and “Trophy" whiskies, for which
there is an excellent demand, and
for “Oxymel" oils and paints. The
premises in Leake and Packenham
Streets have a handsome exterior,
while the interior arrangements are
excellently adapted to the easy hand-
ling of goods. The available floor
space is equal to about 20,000 square
ft., and most of this is occupied by
a heavy stock of woolpacks, corn-
sacks, branbags, twines, etc., and
farmers’ and pastoralists’ requisites.
Under the energetic guidance of Mr.
Duncan Paterson the business had
grown to such an extent that within
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GRIFFITH G. JOHN.
recent times it was found advisable
to divide it into several departments.
The principal department is that de-
voted to the handling of general
merchandise, and under the vigorous
management of Mr. Stanley Bur-
ridge this section has gone ahead in
a most satisfactory manner. In each
of the other departments an expert
manager has been appointed, the
whole coming under the direct super-
vision of Mr. Griffith John. DUN-
CAN PATERSON, the governing
director, is the youngest son of the
late D. W. Paterson, solicitor, who
in his time, was one of Scotland’s
foremost lawyers. He was born at
Edinburgh in the sixties, and edu-
cated at a public school and at the
University of Edinburgh, gaining
his early commercial training with
Scott & Co., merchants, of Lon-
don. His abilities soon gained him
promotion and a few years later he
was transferred to Singapore, where
ultimately he was placed in control
of the shipping branch of the firm’s
business at that centre, which was
carried on under the style of
Guthrie & Co. In 1898 Mr. Pater-
son was selected for the important
task of opening a branch of Guthrie
and Co. at Fremantle, and this he
succeeded in doing with conspicuous


success. Under his able direction
the business continued to flourish,
and the prosperity which attended
the venture may safely be attributed
to Mr. Paterson s business acumen,
probity, and strong personal attain-
ments. In 1905 he resigned his
post as manager, and within a few
years of his relinquishing the com-
mand the firm of Guthrie & Co.
ceased to do business in the State.
Shortly after resigning his post Mr.
Paterson established the present
prosperous business, and here again
his attainments were attended by
duce Merchants’ Association, and he
is a warm supporter of the Presby-
terian Church. At one time he
was fifty - mile champion cyclist of
Edinburgh University, and all out-
door sports claim his hearty support.
He is a member of the Fremantle
Golf Club, and takes his recreation
on the links. Mr. Paterson married
the year 1892 Louise Veronica,
daughter of the late Dr. Bethune, of
Toronto, Canada, whose father was
one of the pioneers of the famous
Hudson Bay Company. He has a
family of three daughters. GRIP-
etc. Some six years later he joined
the firm of Guthrie & Co. in a
clerical capacity, and left them in
1905 to act as accountant in the
newly-founded firm of Paterson and
Co. Some time later he was pro-
moted to be Secretary, and in 1908
received appointment to the Board
°f Directors, on which he still con-
tinues to act. He is a Director of the
Fremantle Building and Investment
Society. Business occupies most of
his time, but in earlier days he was
a keen supporter of outdoor sports
and played both cricket and football.
Photo by C. E. Farr.
PATERSON & Co., LIMITED'S PREMISES, LEAKE AND PACKENHAM STREETS. FREMANTLE
characteristic results. The success of
the new venture was assured from
the start, and the concern expands
from day to day. In January, 1910,
Mr. Paterson left for the Far East,
T ~ j -p. i j u •
India, and England, on a business
trip, and returned to Western Aus-
tralia in October of that year, only
to leave again for England three
months later, to further his overseas’
interests. For two terms he was
President of the Fremantle Chamber
of Commerce, and also of the Pro-
ss2
FITH G. JOHN, managing director,
was born at Fremantle in the year
I. 878 , and is a son of the late Wil-
ham Thomas J ° T hn ’ f!° * or fifte ® n
7*™. a ™ mb .f °! tbe Fr ?T.
Municipal Council, during which he
3trongly advocated the municipa li za .
t ,i on G f the tramways and electric-
lighting services for the town. The
subject under review received his
education locally, and entered the
employ of J. M. Ferguson, as junior,
after two years joining his father,
who was in business as a draper,
Mr. John also has to his credit the
‘‘Diamond Jubilee” Sheffield Handi-
cap, which he won in the year 1897.
With the late T ‘ °’ Beirne he found « d
??* th Fremantl f F ootball
of which subsequently he was elected
a liff) m6mber 4 Mr , -j olln is a keen
supporter of the game as it is played
under Australian rules. He was
married in the year 1903 to a daugh-
ter of Mr. F. S. Rickards, of Mel-
bourne, formerly of Bendigo. His
private address is Leake Street,
Cottesloe.


WITTMAN MOTOR SUPPLY
COMPANY, Limited, 1,056, Hay
Street West (opposite Parliament
House), Perth. (J. A. Wittman, A.
Anderson, and A. Adams.) That the
time is rapidly approaching when the
horse will become almost as rare as
the classic “Dodo” can no longer be
denied, as each round of the calendar
witnesses a marked decrease in the
number of animals pressed into ser-
vice both for private and commercial
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. J. A. WITT MAN.
uses and a correspondingly large in-
crease in the mechanical vehicles
brought into requisition. While it
is to be admitted that the march of
events in this direction is much more
noticeable in the busy arenas of the
Old World, yet ample evidence is not
lacking to indicate that the Austra-
lian States are not far behind in the
evolutions of the “Iron Age.” Par-
ticularly noticeable has this been in
the Western State, where the motor
industry has expanded in a manner
little short of miraculous, and shows
a robust growth with every sign of
continuance for many years to come.
Parallel with this fillip to the in-
dustry came the establishment of the
Wittman Motor Company and the
erection and equipment of what
must be one of the most up-to-date
manufactories in the Australian
Commonwealth. Following the re-
turn from England and the Continent
of Mr. J. A. Wittman, bringing with
him the agency for the famous self-
starting S.C.A.T. car, came a com-
bination of interests, resulting in the
formation of the present Company to
take over the S.C.A.T. agency and
the freehold property on which the
extensive garage was afterwards
built. Filled with the determination
to be well abreast of the times, the
directors secured other important
agencies, including the “Itala/'
“Crossley," “Silent Sunbeam/' and
“Overland/' and imported from Eng-
land and America a plant of the most
up-to-date machinery known to the
trade. The plant, especially selected
by Mr. Adams, has been duly in-
stalled in the firm's premises, which
have a frontage to Flay Street of
60 ft. and a depth of 200 ft. The
structure is of brick and iron, and
embraces a showroom (erected to
street levels) 45 by 50 ft., fitted
with large plate-glass windows
and handsomely-decorated interior,
illumination being provided by a
series of electric lights. In the main
garage provision has been made for
years to come, lockers have been in-
stalled for the convenience of cus-
tomers, and a corner set aside for the
storage of parts, tyres, etc. The
workshop occupies the northern
corner, and outside the main build-
ing is the petrol store and lavatories
and a stand for cleaning down cars.
The garage is conveniently arranged
so that entrance may be obtained
either from Hay or George Streets.
The plant includes a large 8-in. centre
lathe for turning out such jobs as
crank shafts, boring cylinders, etc., a
small 6-in. centre lathe for light work,
a milling machine manufactured by
the Cincinnatti Company for bevel
gear cutting, hexagons, squares,
helical gears, etc., with a complete
set of milling cutters, a 22-in. Rock-
ford driller for boring, etc., and an
8-in. power Hack saw, capable of cut-
ting an 8-in. steel bar. Power is sup-
plied by a 5-horsepower electric motor
connected to a 2-in. main driving
shaft fitted with ball-bearings
throughout. A fitter's bench runs
the whole length of the shop, and is
replete with vices, tools, and drawers,
while electric fittings have been
placed over each stand and machine
so that work may be proceeded with
both by night and day. First and
foremost of the several agencies held
by the firm is the self-starting
S.C.A.T. car, the performances of
which are almost too well known
to need recapitulation. In the
construction of the S.C.A.T. the
makers have aimed at producing
a moderately-powered car of high
quality, and if the wonderful in-
crease in the sales each year is any
guide, they have succeeded in render-
ing full satisfaction to the motoring
public. An important self-starting
device, which has proved its efficiency
in a most satisfactory manner, has
been affixed to the car, and the
attachment considerably adds to the
pleasure and comfort of driving.
The S.C.A.T. is built in two
models of 15- and 22-horsepower
respectively, although the R.A.C.
rating is an increase on these
powers. The 15-horsepower 4-
cylinder engine is cast en bloc , the
22-horsepower in pairs, the design
otherwise being the same, and is
noted for its simplicity of construc-
tion and finished appearance. The
chassis is of pressed steel, and the four
forward speeds and reverse are
operated by a single lever, very silent
in action and easy of manipulation.
The carriage work is highly finished
in a variety of designs, detachable
wire wheels are fitted, and in general
equipment and style the car stands
in a class by itself. The S.C.A.T.
was awarded the Grand Prix at the
Turin International Exhibition, and
was the winner of the Targa-Florio
contest in 1911. Next comes the
“Itala” car, famous as the winner of
the Pekin to Paris international con-
test, without doubt the severest test
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ARTHUR ANDERSON.
to which a motor car has ever been
subjected. Leaving Pekin, the
‘Ttala,” a 35-horsepower touring car,
penetrated the unknown interior of
China, crossed snow-capped moun-
tains, forded innumerable rivers, and
reached Paris in forty-four days,
twenty days ahead of the next com-
petitor to arrive. From 1905 to 1912
the “Ttala” registered many fine per-
formances, and placed to its credit
innumerable cups, gold medals, etc.,


both on the road and racing track.
The Ttala” engine is turned out in
half a dozen different models, the
power varying from 14-20 to GO-
-70, the latter engine having six
cylinders. The remaining five have
four cylinders cast en bloc , with the
exception of the 35-horsepower,
which is in pairs. The back axle of
the Ttala’ is of great strength, pro-
viding for the carriage of heavy
weights, and is fixed to strong springs
of ample flexibility. The chassis is
of pressed steel, and the gears,
operated by side lever, run in an oil
bath, carefully protected to exclude
dust. In the 25-horsepower and 35-
horsepower engines the functions of
the ordinary poppet valves have been
superseded by a rotary distributor
worked by a shaft which takes the
place of two cam shafts. Each car
is fitted with four forward speeds and
reverse, and the whole of the
mechanism is so simply constructed
that it can be taken down with the
greatest of ease. The “Silent Sun-
beam” is an English car, and the
makers claim it to be “the embodi-
ment of all that is perfect in motor-
car construction.” The “Sunbeam”
is built in three distinct models, i.e.,
12-16, 16-20, and 25-30-horsepower,
the latter being a 6-cylinder engine.
These cars are so designed that all
parts are accessible for easy and
quick adjustment, and four forward
speeds and reverses, controlled by
clutch and foothold pedals, are pro-
vided. There are many types of
bodies to choose from, all of which are
handsomely designed and finished in
a manner such as would satisfy the
most exacting connossieur. The
“Sunbeam” has been severely tested
on several occasions, and has always
come through with colours flying. In
the Scottish reliability trials, held
from 1903 to 1909, the “Sunbeam”
gained the highest possible points,
never having to stop for mechanical
troubles of any kind. The car won
more than forty cups and medals in
1910, and during 1911 improved on
these performances to the extent of
fifty cups, gold and silver medals,
etc. In the great French con-
tests over the Dieppe circuit in June,
1912 (open to allcomers), the 12-16
“Sunbeam” cars registered a pheno-
menal performance by securing first,
second, and third prizes in the small-
power class, averaging over 60 miles
per hour for the full distance. The
“Crossley” car, manufactured by
Crossley of gas-engine fame, is turned
out in two models of 15-horsepower
and 20-horsepower respectively. The
outstanding features of the 1912
models are simplicity, power, and
flexibility, combined with handsome
coach work and the maximum of
comfort. Recognizing the great de-
mand for a high-power car at a
figure somewhat below the ruling
prices of standard English and Con-
tinental makes led the Company to
secure the agency for the “Overland”
car, turned out by the Willys Over-
land Company, of Ohio, America.
Five different models of this car are
placed on the market, the indicated
horsepower ranging from 25 to 45,
and the seating accommodation from
two to seven persons. The model
catalogued as 58R is a 25-horsepower
two-seated car fitted with planetary
gears, two speeds, forward and re-
verse, worked by foot-levers. The
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ALFRED ADAMS.
engine is cast in four separate
cylinders, and the big bonnet gives
the car a smart and racy appearance.
The chassis is a fine piece of workman-
ship, and the car, being well-sprung,
is most comfortable to ride in. Dual
ignition is provided, hood, screen,
lamps, and tools, and for £285, at
which price this car is sold, it must
be the best value obtainable in the
motoring world. Model 59T is a five-
seater car of 30-horsepower, with
three speeds, forward and reverse,
operated by a side leaver. Close
attention has been given to the
body, which is roomy and finished
in high-class style, the colour
generally being a deep-blue. Model
59R, a two-seater, is built on the
same lines as the model last de-
scribed, both of which are fully
equipped with hood, screen, tools,
etc. Model GOT is practically the
same in construction, except that the
engine power has been raised to 35.
Model 61R is a 45-horsepower
two-passenger torpedo roadster of
great reserve power and flexibility.
This chassis is also fitted as a five-
passenger touring car and with a
torpedo body seating four persons,
these two models being handsomely
finished in Brewster green, with
ivory lines and nickel parts. Al-
though only recently introduced into
Western Australia, the Overlands
have already demonstrated their
worth, and to meet the exceptional
demand for these cars the firm has
arranged for special shipments from
the American house. ARTHUR
ANDERSON was born at Hunting-
don, England, in 1867, and came to
Australia in 1886, after a tour
through the Eastern States, settling
in North Queensland, where he
turned his attention to gold- and tin-
mining and general prospecting for a
few years. At a later date he was
similarly engaged in the Herberton
district, and was one of the original
shareholders of the Muldiva Fields,
now known as Chillagoe. He was
also engaged in other mining ven-
tures, but relinquished all his in-
terests in 1894, in which year he
came to AVestern Australia. Pro-
ceeding to Kalgoorlie, in conjunction
with Mr. Fitzpatrick he established
the firm of Fitzpatrick & Anderson,
contractors, etc., and carried on
business until 1900, when the part-
nership was dissolved, and Mr.
Anderson set up for himself as a
timber merchant and importer.
In 1911 he joined Mr. Wittman
and Mr. Adams in the AVittman
Motor Company, Limited. ALFRED
ADAMS, the Managing Director,
served his time with the firm of
Hawthorn & Leslie, locomotive
builders, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Eng-
land. lie next entered the employ
of the Great AVestern Railway Com-
pany, large builders of vehicles for
commercial purposes, and during his
connection with this company gained
a comprehensive knowledge of every
branch of the motor industry. After
three years he gave up his position,
and in 1905 came to AVestern Aus-
tralia. Subsequently he entered the
service of Mr. S. P. Emanuel, with
whom he proceeded to England, and
made an extended tour of England
and AVales. Early in 1909 Mr.
Adams purchased a half-interest in
the Perth Motor House, and on his
return from a second trip to Eng


land and the Continent with Mr.
Emanuel entered into active manage-
ment of the business. In the year
1911 he sold his share, and later
joined with Mr. J. A. Wittman, the
well-known mineowner, and Mr. A.
Anderson, of Kalgoorlie, in estab-
lishing the present enterprising and
progressive trading concern.
C. H. FIELDING, LIMITED,
wool-, hide-, and skin-brokers and
stock salesmen, Packenharn Street,
Fremantle. Mr. Charles Haider
Fielding, managing director of the
firm of C. H. Fielding, Limited, is
by birth a South Australian. A son
of the late Mr. Edmund Fielding, of
MR. CHARLES HARDER FIELDING.
Adelaide, he was born at the
favourite watering-place of Glenelg,
about 6 miles from the capital, on
September 6, 1868. After a pre-
liminary course of education at the
local public school he attended an
advanced academy in the same town
for some time, and at the close of his
scholastic career entered upon office
life, in which he continued for about
a year. Having obtained some in-
sight into mercantile life during this
period he became connected with the
staff of W. R. Cave & Co., general
merchants, of Adelaide, in his seven-
teenth year. Mr. Fielding was first
identified with the wool department
of this well-known firm, but subse-
quently held other positions, and
during the twelve years that he spent
in the service gained a thorough
acquaintance with all the details of
management. In 1894 he was trans-
ferred to Western Australia to open
a branch of the firm’s business at
Fremantle, which he continued to
control for about three years. Re-
signing at the end of this period he
established himself on his own ac-
count as a wool-broker, etc., in
Photo by C, E. Farr,
INTERIOR OF HIDE DEPARTMENT, C. H. FIELDING, LIMITED
Packenharn Street, and having con-
tinned successfully for seven years
found that his connection had spread
over a very wide area. Accordingly,
in 1904 he floated his business
into a limited liability company,
under the title of C. H. Field-
Photo by C, E. Farr,
SHEEPSKIN DEPARTMENT, C. H. FIELDING, LIMITED, FREMANTLE.
mg, Limited, in which he
retained the position of managing
director. Since that period the busi-
ness has progressed in a most satis-
factory manner, and the field of
operations covered by the company
extends all over the State. As auc-
tioneers the firm is held in high re-
pute, this branch of the business
being personally conducted by Mr.
C. H. Fielding. The claims of his
office are many and exacting, and he
has little leisure in which to devote
himself to any form of public ser-
vice. In the Masonic fraternity he
ranks as Past Master, and during the
lengthy period in which he has been
associated with this body has passed
through the various chairs of the
order. In his youth he was an
enthusiastic participator in manly
outdoor games, and is a well-known
advocate of all forms of clean sport,
Mr. Fielding is a member of the
Commercial Travellers’ Club In
1897 he married Rose, daughter of
the late Mr. Charles Day of Swin-
don, Wilts, England, and’has a son
and three daughters.


FOY & GIBSON Proprietary,
Limited, Hay Street, Perth, and at
Collingwood and Fitzroy (Victoria),
Adelaide, and Brisbane. Conspicuous
among the many fine commercial
structures which have contributed in
so large a measure to the beauty and
dignity of Perth City is Messrs.
Foy & Gibson’s business premises,
extending from Hay Street to St.
George’s Terrace, with imposing
frontages to both thoroughfares.
Situated in the western part of the
city, the establishment has four floors
and a basement, providing over a
quarter of a million square feet of
space, to which must be added the
area of a fifth storey embraced in
the new premises fronting the Ter-
race, where also a flat roof of large
dimensions paved
with Neuchatel
asphalt has been
constructed. The
history of the
firm, the first
lines of which
were inscribed in
the year 1895,
is a triumphant
record of con-
stant progress
and unvarying
success. The
foundation of the
present huge em-
porium was set
by Mr. George
Rae in the year
just mentioned,
the initial offices
being in Murray
Street, but these
were soon vacated
for the more ex-
tensive buildings
in Hay Street,
where the firm
still carries on its immense trading
operations. In the true sense of the
term the firm may be proclaimed
“Universal Providers,” and as such
it has obtained a wonderful reputa-
tion in practically every State in the
Commonwealth, Western Australia
being no exception to the popular
rule. A brilliant beginning was fol-
lowed up by the eminently successful
endeavour to maintain the same
degree of excellence in every depart-
ment, and as season followed season
more and more of the fashionable
trade of the State flowed through the
widely-opened doors. The extraordi-
nary progress made in Western Aiis-
tralia primarily must be attributed
to the fact that the huge stocks car-
ried are obtained from a parent em-
porium which controls immense
capital, and accordingly is able to
buy direct from the manufacturers
of the Old World at bedrock prices.
Further, the firm has its own large
mills and factories, where only the
most up-to-date machinery finds a
place, which with very keen organiza-
tion reduces the cost of manufac-
ture to a very fine point. Within the
establishment are the usual work-
rooms, where dressmaking is carried
on under the supervision of tho-
roughly-trained and highly-paid ex-
perts, and skilful milliners fashion
the beautiful and stylish creations
destined to grace many a lovely head.
A ready-to-wear department is also
catered for, and garments are manu-
factured by the hundred to supply
Photo by C, E. Farr.
PREMISES OF FOY A GIBSON PROPRIETARY, LIMITED, HAY STREET PERTH
the large demand for all kinds of lin-
gerie, children’s clothes, etc., while
immense stocks of mantles and cos-
tumes and ladies’ and children’s un-
derclothing are obtained from the
British and Continental centres
famous for the manufacture of these
classes of goods. The showrooms are
resplendent with beautiful gowns,
coats and skirts of the latest cut,
evening wraps of every description,
while imported millinery models are
here displayed to the greatest pos-
sible advantage. The male ward-
robe has received like careful atten-
tion, and gentlemen may here be
smartly tailored in the latest styles,
while a department of tailor-made
suits for immediate wear has become
very popular. The firm is a large
manufacturer of furniture of all des-
criptions, and its factories are fitted
up with machinery of the latest Eng-
lish and American design. The
showrooms contain a fine selection of
dining and bedroom suites, bed-
steads, sideboards, etc., and every-
thing required for the complete fur-
nishing of a house may be obtained
at a very reasonable outlay. All
kinds of groceries and table dainties,
Continental condiments, preserves,
China, Ceylon, and Indian teas are
stocked, and in the hardware branch
is to be found a large assortment of
ironmongery of all kinds for house-
hold, workshop, or other require-
ments, farming implements, etc.
The building has been enlarged from
time to time to provide the accom-
modation de-
manded by the
expansion of
trade, and in
1912 very large
additions were
made, with a
handsome front-
age to St.
George’s Terrace,
the premises now
covering the full
block from Hay
Street, a depth
of 384 ft. The
frontage to Hay
Street is 125 ft.
and to St.
George’s Terrace
187 ft., including
a block of 62 ft.
on which a re-
frigerator and
bulk stores have
been placed. The
portion of the
building facing
south consists of
five floors, whilst from the flat
roof a fine view of the river and
surrounding country is to be ob-
tained. A series of three light
courts, each 60 feet by 30 feet, pro-
vides splendid lighting, and a supple-
raentary system of electric lights has
been installed for use as occasion
demands. The ceilings, carried out
in Canadian pressed steel, hand-
somely designed, are in excellent
taste, and lavatory accommodation
has been provided on all floors, while
a fireproof staircase makes possible
very rapid egress in the event of fire,
Since the completion of the south
wing of the building all the depart-
ments have been rearranged, and
the immense stock may be viewed
with the greatest comfort.


BOAN BROTHERS, Wellington
Street, Perth. (Harry Boan, pro-
prietor.) Emulating the historical
gourd in the rapidity of its growth,
yet maintaining the stability of an
oak, the business of Messrs. Boan
Brothers must necessarily take its
rightful place in the van of similar
enterprises to-day existing in the
capital cities of the great Australian
Commonwealth. The year 1895
witnessed the foundation of this
immense trading concern, and from
the very commencement success was
assured to the enterprising pro-
prietor. Messrs. Boan Brothers have
ever striven to meet the popular
fancy in the matter of styles,
materials, house-furnishings, and the
thousand and one necessities of
modern civilized life, and that they
have succeeded in striking the nail
on the head is amply demonstrated
by the unfailing and generous
support accorded the firm by the
general public. A glance at the
history of the business is full of
interest for all those to whom the
record of successful business enter-
prise carries stimulus and commands
admiration. In 1895 Mr. Harry
Boan, from the far cry of Broken
Hill, perceived the excellent opening
offered for the establishment of an
emporium of this kind in the capital
city of the West. The mining
industry was booming all over the
State, and all departments of com-
BOAN PREMISES, WELLINGTON STREET. PERTH
merce were reaping the benefit of
the tide of prosperity and the result-
ing increase of population. Borne on
the crest of the surging wave of
humanity rushing pell-mell to the
Tand of promise” Mr. Boan arrived
MR. HARRY BOAN.
at Perth about the middle of the
year and proceeded to select a site
for his premises. This he found in
Wellington Street, at the time only
a sand-track, its only ornamentation
being a large duckpond on its
southern side. He secured the duck-
pond in, with the greater portion of
his present frontage overlooking the
railway station, at the j)rice of £42
per foot, and a few days later
hundreds of men were employed
digging the foundations and rearing
the walls of the future emporium.
The opening day was fixed for
November 7, 1895, and so great was
the crush and excitement that doors
were broken, windows smashed, and
damage done to the value of <£l4o;
the staff was paralysed with the
onrush of the people, and the ware-
house had to be closed until the
following Tuesday. The commercial
wiseacres who had scoffed at the
notion of any such business succeed-
ing out of Hay Street found ample
opportunity for revising their
opinion when the steady trading of
successive weeks and months proved
beyond shadow of doubt that the
new enterprise had come to stay,
and, moreover, to make itself a
quantity to be reckoned with in the
local world of commerce. Within a
year workmen were again summoned
to make extensive additions to the
warehouse, and year by year the
business continued to grow until it
reached dimensions little short of
enormous. Mr. Boan at length
realized that the time had arrived
to replace the first premises, which
were of a temporary character, by
a structure more befitting the dignity
of his large connection and more
suitable in every way to the demands
of the trade. With the object of
making himself conversant with the
latest ideas in warehouse construc-
tion he went abroad and personally
visited all the principal stores of
England and Scotland, Vienna,
Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, New York,
Chicago, and San Francisco, and in
1904 the present handsome building
rose, phoenix-like, on the old site,
the firings business proceeding with-
out interruption during the whole
process of transformation. The
magnificent frontage is modelled on
the style of the most approved Old
World emporiums, and the roomy
interior is equipped with the latest
improvements, is well lighted, lofty,
and splendidly ventilated. In 1911
Mr. Boan purchased a block of land
immediately at the rear of the Wel-
lington Street store at a cost of
£20,000, and erected upon it a hand-
some building with an imposing
frontage to Murray Street. The new
structure contains four stories and a
basement, with a total floor space of
200,000 square feet, access thus
being provided from one street to the
other. Groceries, furnishings, iron


mongery, and several other depart-
ments have been added, so that the
firm can indisputably claim the title
of universal providers. The garden
roof, smokeroom, and refreshment
and retiring rooms are all additional
attractions, while in the various
departments conveniently arranged
on each floor is displayed the
immense and valuable stock of latest
novelties from the best markets of
the world. Expert buyers in Eng-
land, America, and on the Continent
keep well abreast of the constantly
changing fashions, and the exquisite
gowns and chic millinery imported
from Paris have made Messrs. Boan
Brothers the leaders of style in the
western metropolis. Art furniture is
imported from England, and the
beautiful display of drawing- and
bed-room suites in rosewood, walnut,
etc., is a feature in the furnishings
department. The firm also has its
factory at West Perth, equipped
with a modern plant driven by
electric power, where bedding and
furniture of all descriptions are
manufactured, the local article meet-
ing with considerable support. The
country order department is. very
popular and has grown to a remark-
able extent, and altogether some 400
BOAN BROTHERS’ NEW PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH.
hands are employed by the firm, the
business management of which is
in the hands of Mr. Henry Williams,
HARRY BOAN, J.P., was born in
Victoria in 1860 and received his
education at Dunolly, in the same
State. He gained an extensive corn-
mercial experience in Victoria, New
South Wales, and Queensland until
the year 1886, when he joined his
brother in establishing the firm of
Boan Brothers at Broken Hill. This
enterprise proved an immediate suc-
cess, and to-day the firm is acknow-
ledged as the leading drapery
establishment of the Silver City. In
1895 operations were extended to
Perth, and five years later Mr. Boan
sold his interests in the Broken Hill
business and assumed sole proprietor-
ship in Western Australia. Apart
from his important commercial
transactions Mr. Boan devotes most
of his leisure to the “sport of kings/'
He is a true sportsman, and the
pleasure he derives from his racing
string amply recompenses him for
the time and money devoted to its
upkeep. Mr. Boan is a fine judge
of horseflesh and an excellent illus-
tration of his judgment may be
found in “Tanami," which he pur-
chased for £3OO. “Tanami" sub-
sequently won for him over .£5,000
in stakes and placed to his credit the
New South Wales Derby of 1910.
This was Mr. Boan's first attempt to
capture the classic event, and the
victory of his horse was a source of
great gratification and pleasure to
him. Mr. Boan has paid some big
figures for his thoroughbreds, not-
ably £1,750 for “Maltfield” and
£1,250 for “Maltblossom." On the
Victorian turf Mr. Boan captured
MR. HENRY WILLIAMS .
the Grwynne Nursery Handicap in
two successive years, first with
“Tanami" and then with “Sweet-
malt," and he has many other
important races to his credit. Some
years ago “Gunlock" won the first
W.A. Hunt Club Purse, this being
the first occasion on which Mr. Boan's
racing livery was seen on the Aus-
tralian turf. Hitherto he has raced
principally in the Mother State, but
in the future his colours (gold,
pink, hoops and cap) will be often
seen at the meetings of the Western
State. Mr. Boan's name appears on
the membership-roll of the leading
sporting institutions in Australia,
including the V.R.C., the A.J.C.,
and the W.A.T.C., and he is also
a member of the C.T.A. and of the
St. John Lodge of Freemasons.
HENRY WILLIAMS, General
Manager for Messrs. Boan Brothers,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr. Z.
Williams, of Willunga, South Aus-
tralia, where the subject of our re-
view was born on November 10,
1867. He was educated in his native
town and at the Lefevre Peninsula
school, South Australia ; at the con-
clusion of his studies, when about


sixteen years of age, joining the
staff of the National Bank of Aus-
tralasia. He continued in this in-
stitution for ten and a half years,
during which time he filled various
positions, and was relieving account-
ant when he resigned from the ser-
vice in order to enter upon an ap-
pointment in the Western Austra-
lian Bank in 1895. Less than a year
after his arrival Mr. Williams was
offered and accepted the position of
accountant with his present firm and
upon the resignation of Mr. Orton,
the former manager of the establish-
ment, in 1910 he was appointed
Financial Manager. He continued
in this position until early in 1912,
when he was appointed General
Manager, which post he still con-
tinues to occupy. Mr. Williams
recently visited the Old Country,
and, though mainly on pleasure bent,
he availed himself of the oppor-
tunity to study the various up-to-
date business methods in vogue
which might prove useful in further-
ing the interests of his employers in
Australia, with this object in view
inspecting all the great commercial
houses in the principal cities of
Great Britain and the Continent.
He is a member of the Board of
Management of the Children’s Hos-
pital. In 1895 he married Louie,
daughter of the late Mr. J. S. Jones
(of Messrs. Jones Brothers), of Port
Adelaide, and has three sons.
The ECONOMIC STORES,
Limited, Shenton Corner, Hay and
William Streets, Perth. As long as
fifty years ago the present business
was founded by the late Mr. George
Shenton, sen., and carried on by
him up to the time of his death in
the sixties. The control then de-
volved upon his son, Mr. (afterwards
Sir) George Shenton, who at a later
date was joined in partnership by his
brother, Mr. Ernest Shenton, and
WINDOW DISPLAY AT THE ECONOMIC STORES, PERTH
under their joint management the
concern was carried on for several
years, when it was purchased by the
late Captain W. Oates. Shortly
WINDOW DISPLAY AT THE ECONOMIC STORES. PERTH.
afterwards the old name of G. C.
Shenton & Co. was abandoned in
favour of the present title, under
which the firm has become favour-
ably known throughout the length
and breadth of the State. In the
year 1906 Mr. Thomas Bradshaw was
admitted as a shareholder, and coin-
cident with this event the
premises that had hitherto
served were demolished and
the present handsome struc-
ture erected. With the ad-
vent of Mr. Bradshaw the
business methods of the
firm underwent drastic
changes; old methods gave
place to modern ideas, and
an elaborate system installed
to facilitate the workings of
each department. The old
stock was cast out at a great
sacrifice to make way for
the new goods gathered re-
gardless of expense from the
four corners of the globe.
The London representatives
have been given carte
blanche in the selection of
the very latest novelties, and
as a result each incoming
steamer brings an accumu-
lation of the most bewitch-
ing draperies, etc., so dear
to the feminine heart, bought
at the keenest cash prices.
In the counting-house, which
lately has been placed under


the control of Mr. E. S. Champion,
Fellow of the Chartered Institute of
Secretaries, London, an accountant
with a wide experience in the
drapery trade in London and else-
where, and who also acts as Secre-
tary to the Company, sweeping al-
CAPTAIN W. OATES.
terations have been made, and the
credit business in force during the
old regime has been replaced by a
cash system under which customers
receive enhanced value for their out-
lay. Naturally the progressive policy
adopted has led to an immense
increase in the amount of business
transacted, far in excess of the
most sanguine expectations formed
by the management, and the firm is
now seeking means to double the pre-
sent capacity, so that the wonderful
expansion of trade may be expedi-
tiously dealt with. The Economic
Stores have secured a firm hold on
the buying public, and it is the fixed
determination of the proprietors that
this confidence shall not be abated
one iota. The magnificent show win-
dows which have a frontage to both
Hay and William Streets altogether
cover an area of 5,000 sq. ft., and
contain a ravishing display of goods
constantly undergoing changes in ac-
cordance with the dictates of the
fickle goddess “Fashion.” The mil-
linery department always contains
le dernier Cri in smart headgear, and
the creations of the firm are truly
chic. The dress department is pat-
ronized by the elite of Perth, and
the distinctive and original dresses
designed by the firm are quite equal
to the best gowns created in Paris.
The country mail order department
deserves special mention. Orders re-
ceived per medium of the post are
given the most careful attention,
and customers’ requirements are
studied to the smallest detail, the
goods being dispatched with remark-
able celerity. The management is
looking forward to the time when
Western Australia will take her
rightful place in the van of the
Australian States, and is leaving no
stone unturned to secure a fair share
of the increased business which must
necessarily follow the opening up of
the vast areas of the State. The way
to success is not an easy road to
travel, but if perspicacity and busi-
ness acumen count for anything the
Economic Stores will not fail to
come prominently to the fore in the
race for the commercial goal.
THOMAS BRADSHAW, the Man-
aging Director, is a native of Bel-
fast, Ireland, and served an appren-
MR. THOMAS BRADSHAW.
ticeship of six years to the
softgoods trade at Lindsay’s
Arcade, Ulster. He left Ire-
land in 1885, and after a few
years in Melbourne proceeded to
Brisbane, where for ten months he
acted as Manager for Messrs. Dun-
can, Sinclair, & Co. He next pur-
chased a business at Townsville,
which he conducted for some time,
THE ECONOMIC STORES, CORNER OF HAY AND WILLIAM STREETS, PERTH,


eventually coming to Western Aus-
tralia in July, 1902. Subsequently
he acquired a large share in the
business of Messrs. Weidenbach and
Co., Hay Street, and traded under
the name of Bradshaw & Hall; but
disposed of his interests in 1905,
when he became a shareholder in the
Economic Stores, Limited. Mr.
Bradshaw is a keen business man,
and it is his ambition to make his
firm the premier institution of its
kind in Perth.
ture rises to three storys at the rear,
providing an enormous amount of
space in the interior. The frontage
to Hay Street is 132 ft. by a depth
of 187 ft., the ceilings are 17 ft.
high, and the showrooms are many-
windowed, letting in a blaze of light
through the day, while the arrange-
ments for ventilation leave little to
be desired. At night a wonderful
system of flame arc lamps, in-
geniously devised to shed an in-
direct light, illuminates every corner
Bon Marche Stores possess a third
superlative quality. Besides being
the oldest, it is without doubt
the most popular of the drapery
stores of the West, and this
popularity, of which the proprietors
are justly proud, is based not upon
an evanescent pyrotechnic display of
sensational bargain sales, but is a
direct result of the sound commer-
cial integrity which regulates and
sets its mark upon the transactions
of the whole business. The manage-
INTERIOR VIEW OF MILLINERY DEPARTMENT AT THE BON MARCHE STORES. PERTH
The BON MARCHE, Limited,
Hay Street, Perth, is the oldest
purely drapery business in Western
Australia, and to this priority of
age adds the distinction of being
one of the largest drapery stores
in the Western State. The whole
of the original buildings were
recently pulled down and the pre-
sent huge and imposing premises
erected. The two-storied front
elevation is finished with English
pottery glazed tiles in a most effec-
tive shade of blue, and the struc-
of the vast establishment with radi-
ance equal to daylight, which it
counterfeits with amazing success.
In the departments devoted to
drapery, etc., is to be seen an
immense and varied stock, and in
the men's and boys' outfitting de-
partment a big range of the most
up-to-date wearing apparel. The
department for millinery is particu-
larly entrancing, and contains a
ravishing display of models imported
direct from Fashion's centre in the
environs of the old world. The
ment has built up an enormous trade
on the principle of selling only the
most reliable make of goods at the
lowest margin of profit, and thus
has deservedly earned for Bon
Marche the enviable title of
‘‘Quality House." It is a well-known
fact, of which the thousands of pur-
chasers daily show their apprecia-
tion, that only goods of dependable
quality are offered for sale, and mis-
representation is strictly forbidden,
The Bon Marche is fortunate in its
staff of European buyers, who pos


sess that valuable gift of discern-
ment which is able to recognize
Fashion's latest and choicest
creations among the myriad allure-
ments of the British and Con-
tinental markets, and secures the
best values with an unerring de-
cision little short of infallibility.
Their personal experience of the
Australian climate enables them to
achieve remarkable success in select-
ing suitable materials and styles for
local requirements, and every mail-
linery and lace goods is an English-
man of wide Australian experience
and is well qualified for his
responsible duties. The woollen
buyer has been successful in making
highly-satisfactory arrangements by
which the Australian house receives
cut lengths of tweeds for men's
suits from the leading manufac-
turers at a slight advance in makers'
prices, no two suit lengths being of
the same pattern. This arrangement
guarantees to every gentleman pur-
the second largest sewing-machine
manufacturers in America, and the
“Bon Marche" treadle sewing ma-
chine, with automatic drophead, is
rapidly making its way into popular
favour. This agency can be held
only on condition that 500 machines
be distributed throughout the State
every year, and in order to achieve
this average they are sold at a slight
margin above the factory price, viz,,
£6 10s. each, with a written
guarantee until 1921. Bon Marche
Photo by C.E.Farr.
THE BON MARCHE STORES, HAY STREET, PERTH.
boat arriving at Fremantle from
London brings fresh shipments for
the Bon Marche from the best mar-
kets of the world. In this way the
very newest fashions are continually
displayed in Perth, and are worn by
the ladies of the western State
almost before they have found their
way to the world's metropolis. The
London buyer of Manchester goods
(i.e., calicoes, linens, and all cotton
piecegoods) is acknowledged in com-
mercial circles to be the most expert
and highest-salaried buyer in the
British Isles. The gentleman to
whom is entrusted the important
task of suiting the firm with mil-
chaser a suit unique in the design
of its material, and has given great
satisfaction to the smartly-tailored
men of the State. The head cutter
at Bon Marche, an artist of con-
siderable ability, for domestic
reasons resigned his position and
came to Australia after a long ex-
perience as cutter in a leading Bond
Street tailoring establishment. A
very attractive feature of the Bon
Marche is the “Liberty” department,
the management having just com-
pleted arrangements by which it
represents the popular London firm
in Perth. It has also obtained the
sole agency in Western Australia for
holds a contract for supplying all
Government institutions within the
State, including all the hospitals,
with the various drapery goods, car-
pets, mattresses, etc., required, and
makes a speciality of providing for
these necessities. The large staff of
employes forms a very happy family
and some of them have been engaged
in the business for over twenty
years. All the profit made is cir-
culated in Perth, the three Directors
of the Company being Messrs. G. H.
Cargeeg (of Claremont), G. F. Pitch-
ford (Rheola Street, Perth), and A.
E. Joyner (of Palace Court), by whom
practically all the shares are held.


THE “HOUSE OF BRENNAN,”
Hay Street, Perth; Hannan Street,
Kalgoorlie; and Bayley Street, Cool-
gardie. Messrs. Brennan Brothers
first established themselves in busi-
ness in Western Australia in 1896,
when they opened a drapery em-
porium at Kalgoorlie, the famous
mining town being then in its in-
fancy. The concern prospered, and
at a later period several branches
were opened in the surrounding dis-
trict. The Boulder branch proved
very successful, and in 1899 the firm
opened a branch at Coolgardie, and
in 1906 the present business in Perth
was opened. In 1904 Mr. Kyran
Brennan withdrew from the partner-
ship, taking over the Boulder busi-
ness on his own account and relin-
quishing any further interest in the
firm. In December, 1911, Mr. James
Brennan purchased his brother
Patrick's interest in the business for
a substantial consideration, and is
now the sole remaining proprietor of
the firm of Brennan Brothers, of
Perth, Kalgoorlie, and Coolgardie.
The metropolitan business was in-
augurated under favourable auspices,
and being conducted with enterprise
and skill has been developed into one
of the leading concerns of its kind in
the Western State. Its rapid ad-
vancement in face of the keen com-
Photo by C. E. Farr .
WINDOW DRESSING AT THE HOUSE OF BRENNAN,” HAY STREET, PERTH.
petition encountered on all sides has
been little short of phenomenal, and
a very large share of popular
patronage falls to the “House of
Brennan," the recognized home of
beautiful draperies, chic millinery,
and the innumerable and important
accessories of good dressing. The
Photo by C. E. Farr .
premises cover an area of 245 ft. in
depth with 75 ft. frontage to Hay
Street. The magnificent show win-
dows have a glass area of over 3,000
square ft., a novel feature being the
four island windows, in which are
displayed to such splendid advantage
the special attractions of the season
culled from the foremost markets of
the world. The dressing of these
windows is made a veritable “fine
art” and provides a continually
CORNER OF THE SHOWROOM AT THE " HOUSE OF BRENNAN,” PERTH
changing feast for the eye, the har-
monious colour schemes and artistic
disposal of goods having won for the
“House of Brennan” the premier
place in Australia for this depart-
ment. The interior is roomy and
well lighted, and is fitted up with all
the latest arrangements for the dis-
play of wares and the prompt and
convenient despatch of business. The
object of the firm is to keep all the
departments on the ground floor, this
having in the past proved a great
convenience to customers, dispensing
as it does with the necessity for
climbing stairs or awaiting the lift
service. The land at the rear of the
building, reaching to Murray Street,
is owned by the firm, and it is the
intention of Brennan Brothers in the
near future to extend the premises
right through, thus providing the
house with a frontage to both Hay
and Murray Streets, which will prove
a great convenience to the purchasing
public. The firm specializes in
drapery, and the “House of Bren-
nan” is represented in England, the
Continent, and America by one of
the largest buying concerns which
has its headquarters in London.
Each season many cases of samples
are sent out, from which Messrs.
Brennan Brothers make their selec-
tion for the special requirements of
the Western Australian public. In
regard to novelties in millinery and


other ephemeral fancies of an hour,
the choice is entrusted to the London
representative, who makes the pur-
chase on the spot, and is very success-
ful in suiting the fastidious tastes
of the most exacting votaries of
fashion. Purchases are made at
king’s values and best prices, which
make it possible for the “House of
Brennan” to retail at the reasonable
figure which is one of the sources of
their popularity. A glance at the
various departments reveals a high
standard of taste maintained
throughout. The mantle department
revels in a profusion of costumes,
robes, cloaks, and blouses ranging
from great richness to sweet sim-
plicity, the designs being carried out
in costly fabrics of silk and velvet
and dainty cambrics and muslins.
The millinery department is like a
materialized rainbow broken up into
bows and birds and flowers and scat-
tered with charming grace over the
hundreds of elegant models and
shapes which have received the last
touch from expert fingers at home or
abroad. The dressmaking depart-
ment is a very important one, and
has received the greatest possible
attention, the gowns turned out by
the firm being among the most beau-
tiful creations of their kind worn by
the ladies of Perth. There are three
MR. JAMES BRENNAN.
rooms each under the control of an
expert and a large number of
assistants are employed. Upstairs is
a manufacturing department where
a large quantity of costumes, under-
clothing, blouses, and children’s
ready - to - wear garments are
fashioned by skilful hands, these
always commanding a ready sale. A
tailoring department is shortly to be
inaugurated, and this will be placed
under the most efficient management,
the high level of workmanship aimed
at in all other branches of the trade
being made a sine qua non in the
arrangements for this additional at-
traction to the already popular house.
The heads of the various departments
are experts who are secured regard-
less of the salary asked, and the
whole of the large staff is efficient
and appreciative of the courtesy re-
quired in attending to customers’ re-
quirements. Mr. JAMES BREN-
NAN, the Proprietor, was born at
North Kilkenny, Ireland, on Novem-
ber 18, 1872. He is a son of the late
Patrick Joseph Brennan, of County
Kilkenny, and was educated at the
Christian Brothers’ College at Castle
Comer, his birthplace. Mr. Brennan
served his apprenticeship to the
drapery trade in his native place for
five years, and afterwards gained
three years’ experience with Pirn
Brothers, Dublin, one of the largest
drapery houses in Ireland. Here he
Photo by C, E. Farr.
BRENNAN BROTHERS’ PREMISES, HAY STREET, PERTH.


made himself conversant with every
branch of the business, and in 1894
set sail for Queensland, where he
joined his brother in trading opera-
tions until 1896, in which year he
came to Western Australia and set-
tled in business at Kalgoorlie. Mr.
Brennan is a keen supporter of every
kind of sport, and has done much to
futher the interests of trotting in
this State. He has held the office of
President of the Western Australian
Trotting Association since its forma-
tion, and under his able guidance the
association has made rapid strides,
and trotting is well under way to be-
come one of the foremost sports in
the State. At considerable expense
he has imported from the East and
New Zealand several thoroughbred
trotting horses (the well-known
trotting stallion “Lord Dudley/' and
the champion buggy mare “Princess
Derby," as well as others, being his
property), and has devoted much
time to the improvement of the breed
of the utility horse in Western Aus-
tralia. His horses have been very
successful in the show ring, having
carried off several championships, as
well as having won a number of
events on the trotting track in the
State. Mr. Brennan is a member of
the Western Australian Turf Club
and the Kalgoorlie and Boulder
Racing Clubs. His private address
is 2, St. George's Terrace, Perth.
GEORGE HENRY CARGEEG,
J.P., was born at Adelaide on April
13, 1851. He was educated chiefly at
private schools in the city of his
birth, and at the age of thirteen en-
tered a lawyer’s office, spending ten
years in the study of law. He relin-
quished the pursuit of the law to
direct his energies to mastering the
details of the publishing business at
the office of the South Australian
Register. Later he became the first
publisher of The Australian Star , an
enterprise be abandoned to become
an advertising agent. Mr. Cargeeg
next turned his attention to share-
broking on the Stock Exchange of
Adelaide, but in 1894 he came to
Western Australia, where he had
purchased the Bon Marche drapery
business, in which he has retained his
position as chairman of directors ever
since. When The Morning Herald
newspaper went into liquidation he
purchased the plant and established
the Herald Printing House, Limited,
and as chairman of directors has kept
a guiding hand on the helm of this
enterprise also. Mr. Cargeeg takes a
very active interest in religious and
philanthropic movements, is a Board
member of the Blind Asylum, and
fills the position of senior Vice-
President of the Y.M.C.A. He as-
sisted in the foundation of the Bap-
tist Union of Western Australia, and
has acted as a member of the execu-
tive of this body since its inception,
besides undertaking the duties of
Treasurer to the Church Council. In
1876 he married Louisa Jane, daugh-
ter of the late W. H. Selway, of
South Australia, and has five sons
and three daughters.
JULIUS LEWIS GLICK, J.P.,
is a son of the late Mr. Moses Glick,
of Weckshna, Province Kovanah,
Russia, where the gentleman under
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JULIUS LEWIS GLICK.
review was born on January 26,
1869. After the completion of his
education in his native country and
in Germany, at sixteen years of age,
he went to Dublin and there became
attached to the British Army at the
Curragh Camp, County Kildare,
where he spent nearly a couple of
years. At the end of this period he
proceeded to Liverpool and entered
into commercial pursuits, opening
in that city a softgoods store, which
he conducted with unqualified suc-
cess for thirteen years. In 1897 he
decided to come to Australia, and
arriving at Adelaide in September
of that year established himself in
business as a softgoods and furniture
merchant. Here for the first time
he took out his papers of naturali-
zation, by which he was registered as
a citizen of the British Empire, and
seven years later left South Austra-
lia for the Western State. Besides
the establishment of the Adelaide
Tailoring Company in Hay Street,
which he has made one of the fea-
tures of commercial life in Perth,
Mr. Glick has invested a consider-
able amount of capital in city and
suburban properties, as well as in
land for farming purposes, and has
proved himself a most worthy citizen
of his adopted country. In 1907 he
was appointed to the Western Austra-
lian Commission of the Peace, and
in the past occupied the post of Pre-
sident of the Perth Hebrew Philan-
thropic Society, being at the pre-
sent time Treasurer of the Perth
Hebrew Congregation. He is a mem-
ber of the Masonic craft, in which
he has hold various honours, and is a
supporter of all kinds of outdoor
sports. In the latter connection he
is President of the AVestern Austra-
lian Coastal Athletic League and a
Patron of several other clubs, being
himself a player of bowls and bil-
liards. In 1890 Mr. Glick married
at Liverpool Fanny, daughter of
Mr. M. Zeffertt, now of Liverpool,
England, and has a son and three
daughters.
PARKER & CO., tailors and
mercers, 681, Hay Street, Perth.
Telephone 759. In the confines of
the new world it would be difficult
to find a parallel for the remarkable
rise and progress of the AVestern
State, its commerce and industries,
during the score of years commen-
o J
cing with the early nineties of the
last century. The surpassingly rich
mining discoveries of the period
mentioned were followed by an era
of activity and expansion which can
only be considered as bordering on
the miraculous. New business houses
sprang into existence like mush-
rooms, and many were the mercan-
tile firms which set up their shingles
in the most central positions obtain-
able. Concomitant with the com-
mencement of this cycle of progress
was laid the foundation of the pre-
sent tailoring concern under the
name and style of Alfred Morris
and Co., and the establishment may
rightly claim priority over any other
of a similar nature in Perth. In
1901, nine years after its foundation,
the business was purchased outright
by Messrs. Parker & Jones, and for
eight years was carried on by them
as Parker, Jones, & Co., upon the
retirement of Mr. Jones in 1909, the


name having been changed to its
present designation. Parker and
Co. are specialists in tailoring and
outfitting, the former department in
particular receiving close attention.
The firm s cutter has had lengthy ex-
PARKER & CO.'S PREMISES, HAY ST , PERTH
perience of the trade, first in Lon-
don and more recently in Ceylon,
where for many years he held the
position of head cutter to the well-
known firm of CargelPs Ltd., and
maintains a distinctive and stylish
cut for which the house has been
long deservedly noted. Much of
the cutter’s art may be lost in
Photo by C. E. Farr.
the piecing together of suits by
incompetent workmen, to avoid
which the firm has gone to no
inconsiderable trouble and expense
to secure only the most expert
TT
workers, so that the very best re-
sults must naturally follow. Parker
and Co. are also noted for the
effective and wide range of cloth
lengths kept in stock, their London
buyers displaying an excellent taste
in the selection of materials
adapted to local conditions. The
success of this department must be
ascribed to the faculty for specializa-
tion possessed in a high degree by
those responsible for its inner work-
ings. Suits of all kinds are turned
out, some of the most popular
specialties of the firm being dress
suits, Norfolk jackets, and riding
breeches. The outfitting department
is complete in every detail, being
under the superintendence of a prac
tical man who understands his busi-
ness thoroughly and makes it his aim
to satisfy the individual require-
ments of every customer. Hats in
every style, shirts, pyjamas, linen
wear, neckwear, etc., are regularly
imported from London, and fresh
shipments of novelties are received
fortnightly. The firm also manufac-
tures shirts and pyjamas, and retains
the services of a practical hatter for
the manufacture of silk hats, hel-
mets, and caps, which are shaped and
fitted to the lines of the head, pro-
viding perfect comfort to the wearer.
The plateglass windows fronting the
main thoroughfare are always
dressed in the best taste, and the
goods displayed are indicative of the
high quality of the manifold lines
INTERIOR VIEW OF PARKER & CO.’S ESTABLISHMENT, PERTH
kept in stock. Parker & Co. aim to
give satisfaction to every client, and
in this they are efficiently assisted
by a competent staff, whose courtesy
and attention add greatly to the
popularity of the house. The gen-
eral management is in the hands of
the Proprietor, FRANK ROW-
LAND PARKER, who was born at
Ilighgate, London, on May 12, 1872.
He is a son of Mr. William Parker,
of the same place, where also he
received his education and early
business training. In his eighteenth
year he became possessed of the
desire to travel, and taking passage
to Australia he landed at Victoria
in 1890. For the ensuing five years
he occupied himself in gaining ex-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANK ROWLAND PARKER.
perience in his present trade, but
perceiving better opportunities far-
ther afield embarked for Western
Australia, where he arrived in 1895.
Mr. Parker was identified with a
leading firm in Perth for the fol-
lowing six years, having charge of
the men’s department, where he fur-
ther augmented his knowledge, and
upon taking over his present busi-
ness in conjunction with Mr. Jones
was fully qualified to bring it to a
leading place in the ranks of similar
concerns throughout the Common-
wealth. Under his direction the
business has gained pre-eminence,
and is now favourably known far
and wide throughout the State. Mr.
Parker devotes nearly all his time
to the furtherance of his business
interests, but his name is to be
found in the membership lists of
the Cottesloe Golf Club, the Fresh-
water Bay Yacht Club, and the
Commercial Travellers’ Association.
He married in 1903 Ethel, daughter
of Mr. T. W. Ottaway, J.P., of
Armadale, and has two sons and a
daughter. His private address is
Irvine Street, Cottesloe.


“ GREIG,” gentlemen’s tailors
and outfitters and ladies’ habit-
makers, Hay Street, Perth. (Oliver
Adamson Greig and William Arthur
GREIG'S PREMISES, HAY STREET.
Donald.) Established during the
past decade, the firm of Greig has
rapidly won a reputation for high-
class and exclusive work. It was in
1905 that the present central pre-
mises in Hay Street were taken over
by the firm and renovated and fitted
throughout on the most up-to-date
English and Continental lines. The
cutter-in-chief, Mr. O. A. Greig,
has had a lengthy experience of the
trade both in London and in the
Eastern States, and has the as-
sistance of cutters specially obtained
from England. A feature in con-
nection with the firm is the exclusive
design and cut for which it is al-
ready well known. It numbers
among its clientele the leading pro-
fessional and business men of Perth,
and is a favourite house with the
grandes dames requiring the very
latest creations in robes, costumes,
and riding habits, besides which ser-
vants' liveries are also turned out in
the best style. In fancy suiting for
gentlemen the firm imports but one
suit length in each pattern, an inno-
vation introduced into Australia by
Mr. Oliver Greig, and it is by these
means that the firm is able to main-
tain exclusive and fashionable
novelties for its patrons. The firm's
London buyer is commissioned to
secure the latest designs executed by
the large woollen manufacturers of
the Old Country, and these are im-
mediately shipped to Perth, where
they arrive within four or five weeks
of the time of leaving the makers'
hands. “Greig" is thus enabled to
provide the very latest in smart wear
far ahead of the time in which the
designs are displayed in the Eastern
States. The outfitting department
contains an elaborate stock of men's
wear and gentlemen's travelling re-
quisites, including suit cases, kit
bags, rugs, etc., and the neckwear
displayed is the most fashionable to
OUTFITTING DEPARTMENT AT " GREIG’S,” HAY STREET, PERTH.
be had in the metropolis. The pro-
gressive policy of Hie firm is reflected
in the workrooms, which contain
some of the smartest workers in the
MR. OLIVER ADAMSON GREIG.
trade, all specialists in their par-
ticular line, brought together at in-
finite trouble by the management,
There are some thirty hands con-
stantly employed, but the firm does
not claim to turn out large quan-
MR. WILLIAM ARTHUR DONALD.
tities of suits per week, rather con-
fining itself to a higher-class trade
which demands less of quantity, but
where quality is a virtue unto itself.
The general manager of this well-
conducted house is Mr. Donald, who
has had wide experience of the re-
quirements of the trade in London,
America, China, and India, and
several years in the sister States.


COG A N BROTHERS, Paris
House, expert tailors, mercers, hat-
ters and hosiers, and ladies' tailors,
670, Hay Street, Perth, and at
Menzies, Western Australia. Tele-
phone 511. (M. P. Cogan and
C. T. Cogan.) Early in the nineties
of last century this business was
founded in Perth by the firm of
Wilson & Co., trading under the
Photo by C. E. Farr.
style of Paris House. In the
year 1907 it was purchased by
the Messrs. Cogan, who have ap-
plied their energies to the build-
ing up of the trade in such a
manner that not only have they
"deserved success,” they have com-
manded it, the firm holding its place
tt2
among the leading fashionable
tailors and outfitters of Perth. Great
attention has been paid to the
staffing of the establishment with
thoroughly - skilled and competent
hands, chief among whom is the
cutter, an expert in his line, who
before coming to the Western State
had gained a wide and valuable ex-
perience in leading tailoring houses
COGAN BROS,' NEW PREMISES, HAY STREET, PERTH.
in the East for very many years,
This gentleman is ably assisted by
equally skilful tradesmen in the other
departments of work necessary to the
turning out of a really well-fitting
and stylish suit of morning or even-
ing clothes, and the professional or
commercial citizen who, while insist-
ing on comfort, is not insensible to
the artistic merits of first-class cut
and exclusive design in suiting may
command the satisfaction of all his
requirements at the well-known
“Paris House." The high-class trade
catered for by the firm demands the
importation of one only suit-length
in fancy tweeds, and the standard
set in this department is observed
throughout the whole of the care-
fully-chosen stock of materials
worked upon by the Messrs. Cogan.
In 1911 the increase of business
made enlarged accommodation neces-
sary, and new premises were erected
in Hay Street, consisting of a two-
storied building and basement cover-
ing 6,000 square feet of space, with
a handsome frontage forming a wel-
come addition to the architecture of
this popular commercial highway.
These have been fitted up in the most
approved style, and the department
Bartletto , Perth
MR. C. T. COGAN.
allotted to the display of a most re-
plete stock of men’s general wear
and travelling goods is specially
commended to the notice of the pur-
chasing public. The Messrs. Cogan
are both natives of Otago, New
Zealand, where they were brought
up and educated. In 1896 Mr.
M. P. Cogan came to Western Aus-
tralia and founded the firm’s present
large drapery business at Menzies,
at a later date branches being estab-
lished at Leonora and Mt. Morgans.
He was joined by his brother in
the year 1898. In 1907 the former
assumed the management of the
goldfields house and Mr. C. T.
Cogan took over the control of the
Perth business,


HARALD & CO., ladies and
gentlemen's tailors, 36 and 38,
William Street, Perth. (S. M.
Lindquist and C. E. Lindquist.) The
fashionable and progressive tailoring
firm of Harald & Co. was man-
gurated at Hay Street, Perth, Wes-
tern Australia, in the year 1896
under the management of Mr. S. M.
Lindquist, who came from London
for the express purpose of opening
up the business in this city. Besides
having' been engaged as a cutter for
several years in the West End of
London Mr. Lindquist had had a
wide Continental experience, em-
bracing two years in each of the
capital cities of Copenhagen, Berlin,
Brussels, and Paris, commencing his
trade in the first-named city and
eventually being awarded the French
Academical Diploma of Cutting at
Paris. In 1901 he was joined by
his brother, Mr. C. E. Lindquist,
whose assistance was necessary in
order to cope with the rapidly-in-
creasing business occasioned by the
growing popularity of the firm with
the Western Australian public. The
latter gentleman, who has also had
a large and varied experience in
Stockholm and the West End of
London, and is the holder of the
English Academical Diploma for
Cutting, arrived in Western Aus-
tralia direct from Naples, where he
had been engaged with the English
house of Messrs. F. G. Green & Co.,
late Messrs. Lennon & Mac Murray.
In the year following his arrival the
HARALD & CO.'S PREMISES, WILLIAM STREET, PERTH.
partners moved into new premises
in William Street, and from this
centre have commanded the patron-
age of a large section of the profes-
sional and commercial men of the
city, their trade being of an exclu-
sively high-class order. Their exper-
ience in the West End of London,
which is recognized to the farthest
bounds of the British Empire as the
home of fashionable clothing, enables
them to avail themselves of the
latest and most exclusive designs
in suitings, which alone are suitable
to the up-to-date style and fashion-
able cut which is a marked feature
of the establishment. A speciality
is made of the tailor-built costumes
so popular with the well-dressed
woman in all parts of the civilized
world, and great success has been
MR. C. E. LINDQUIST.
achieved in this line, the firm having
been awarded the gold medal for
ladies' costumes in connection with
the Exhibition held by the Western
Australian Chamber of Manufac-
tures in 1906-7. Since its inception
the firm has kept abreast of the rapid
rise of the Western Australian State,
and its popularity not only in the
metropolitan area, but in the large
MR. S. M. LINDQUIST.
rural and mining towns, without
doubt is due to the fact that the
public is keenly appreciative of the
excellent and practical knowledge of
their profession displayed by the
Messrs. Lindquist.


G. D. CTERCTEKO, gentlemen
and ladies' tailor, 30 and 32, Pier
Street (near King Edward Hostel),
Perth. Centrally situated in premises
close to the main artery of traffic in
the city, the business under review
originally was established in 1897.
Beginning on a small scale, even in
the first decade of its existence the
concern made rapid strides and
necessitated a removal to more ex-
tensive premises only two years after
its commencement. Within an in-
credibly short space of time it had
earned the right to be included
among the premier establishments of
its kind in the Western capital, and
in the earlier stages of its existence,
as at the present time, numbered
among its clientele the leading pro-
fessional and commercial men of the
city. The patronage of the wives
and daughters of the leading busi-
ness men who in well-cut costumes
are the cynosures of all eyes at the
various public and society functions
has also served to advance the in-
terests of the well-known and popu-
lar firm, which has ever striven by
close attention to detail and con-
scientious work to be worthy the
trust reposed in it by the different
classes of the community. Another
Photo by C. E. Farr,
MR. G. D. CTERCTEKO’S PREMISES, PIER STREET, PERTH
branch of the trade in which the firm
has been particularly successful is
livery-making, and in all the or-
dinary departments of a tailoring
business the work turned out is of a
superior class. The cutting is done
by Mr. Ctercteko himself, while in
the workrooms a dozen hands are
employed, all of whom are experts
in their especial lines. The suitings
turned out have a distinctive cut,
while the materials are selected with
a view of supplying the diverse
tastes of the numerous customers. A
heavy and varied stock of all the
latest designs turned out by the Eng-
lish manufacturing houses is kept,
and in securing only one suit length
of each fancy material Mr. Ctercteko
is able to meet the requirements of
his patrons who prefer an exclusive
design in these suitings. GEORGE
DAVID CTERCTEKO is a native
of South Australia, having been
born at Rosewater, in the vicinity
of Port Adelaide, in 1870. He is
the eldest son of Mr. Peter William
Ctercteko, of Greece, who came to
Australia in the fifties and took up
his residence in the Central State.
Upon the conclusion of his educa-
tion he had two years' experience in
farming life, followed by a further
two years at sea, and eventually was
apprenticed to the tailoring trade
with the firm of P. Sheehan, of Port
Adelaide, with whom he continued
for three years. At the end of this
period bis employer gave up business
and Mr. Ctercteko
went to Melbourne,
where he com-
pleted his appren-
ticeship with the
firm of Scourfield
and Coultas and
with Mr. J. B. Mil-
ton, both high-class
tailors of Collins
Street. Long before
the expiration of
the six or seven
years which he
spent in the em-
ploy of these firms
he had obtained
proficiency in every
branch of the trade,
and after a subse-
quent twelve months
in South Australia
came to the Wes-
tern State. In 1897
he established his
present flourishing
business in Pier
Street, and now
receives his customers in very con-
venient premises two doors north of
Hay Street. Mr. Ctercteko was for
some years connected with the Wes-
tern Australian Amateur Sports
Club, and was for a considerable
time one of the State's most promi-
nent amateur cyclists. He is a sup-
porter of the Young Men's Christian
Association and other kindred
societies. His chief recreation is
taken on the bowling green, and he
is connected with the Leederville
Bowling Club, prior to joining which
he had been a member of the Muel-
ler Park Club, of Subiaco. In 1900
he married Blanche, daughter of
Richard Tullett, of Walthamstow,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. GEORGE DAVID CTERCTEKO.
England, latterly of Perth, and has
two sons and two daughters. He
resides at Railway Parade, Leeder-
ville.
McBEAN & DEASON, mercan-
tile, shipping, and insurance agents,
land and estate agents, William
Street, Perth, and at Fremantle.
(James Mcßean, John Henry Dea-
son, and Thomas Francis Deason.)
This business was established in the
early nineties by Mr. James Mcßean
in conjunction with Mr. Frank Bow-
ker, and was carried on by these
gentlemen until 1900, when the part-
nership was dissolved. The firm's
offices were originally located on St.
George's Terrace, and were removed
to William Street in 1910, when the
present premises were secured. After
the dissolution already mentioned
Mr. Mcßean continued to trade on
his own behalf until 1905, when Mr.
J. H. Deason was admitted as a
partner, and this arrangement held
until 1910, when the personnel of the
firm was added to by the admission
of Mr. T. F. Deason. The firm acts
as sub-agents for the Ocean and Ac


cident Guarantee Corporation, Lim-
ited, and transacts risks in fire, ac-
cident, and employers’ liability.
They are sole agents in Western
Australia for the popular brand of
Robur tea, and for the Bunyip Soap
Company, Limited, of South Aus-
tralia, the bulk stores being situated
at Fremantle, where an office is also
open. The land and estate depart-
ment is an important branch of the
business, and transactions in house
properties occupy a considerable
share of the firm’s attention.
QUALITY SHOE STORES,
Limited, Hay Street, Perth, and at
Kalgoorlie and Boulder, Western
Australia. Among the many com-
mercial enterprises which have come
prominently to the fore during the
past decade the firm under review
must hold a foremost place. In
May, 1905, the present General
Manager, Mr. F. H. White, reached
Western Australia from Victoria in
search of an outlet for his commer-
cial abilities, and having decided on
the town of Boulder as the venue of
his operations, in August of that
year he established himself in busi-
ness as a boot trader and importer.
The early progress of his enterprise
was not marked by any sensational
trading, but the business steadily
and surely won its way in public
favour, so that in some few years’
time a branch establishment was
opened for the convenience of cus-
tomers at Kalgoorlie. This was in
March, 1909, and evidence was soon
forthcoming that the confidence re-
posed by Mr. White in the new ven-
ture had not been misplaced. Both
businesses now forged ahead in
splendid style, and in 1911 a fur-
ther outlet was found necessary to
absorb the energy displayed by the
management. Accordingly Mr.
White came to Perth and purchased
the Utility Shoe Stores in Hay
Street, and under his successful
management the turnover increased
by leaps and bounds. In October,
1911, the premises formerly occupied
by Mr. Albany Bell (opposite Sand-
over’s) were purchased, and after
being renovated and elaborately
fitted throughout opened for trade
as the Quality Shoe Stores, Limited.
The Stores deal in every kind of
footwear and pay particular atten-
tion to ladies’ boots and shoes. At
the new establishment in Hay Street
an elegant fitting-room has been set
apart for ladies, and in this depart-
ment will be found a choice array
of smart and up-to-date chausserie
in all colours for day and evening
wear. The suede tops and fancy
colours are in great favour in Eng-
land and on the Continent, as also
is the buckle which greatly adds to
the appearance of the shoe when en
promenade. For ladies also Clark’s
favourite English wear is kept, and
dainty shoes of Australian manufac-
ture are ready to hand to suit the
most fastidious tastes. To meet the
demand for high-grade boots for
gentlemen a great variety of makes
is kept in stock, including Florsheim
and Snow, both of American manu-
facture, and Bostock’s English boots;
in fact, all of the very best
makers find representation on the
shelves of this progressive business
house. For the convenience of
country residents a mail-order de-
partment has been inaugurated, and
that this boon has the apprecia-
tion of a wide section of the public
is sufficiently evidenced by the large
number who avail themselves of this
simple method of making purchases
without the necessity of entering the
busy arteries of a commercial city.
INTERIOR VIEW QUALITY SHOE STORES, PERTH
THE QUALITY SHOE STORES, HAY STREET, PERTH.


MACFARLANE & CO.,
Limited, Perth. This progressive
business concern was established at
Fremantle by Mr. James Macfar-
lane in 1902. Operations were at
first confined to the handling of pro-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES MACFARLANE.
duce lines, and trade increased very
rapidly. In the year 1905 Mr. Mac-
far lane’s attention was directed to
the lack of an efficient fresh milk
supply, and he decided to add a milk
branch to his already soundly-
Photo by C, E. Farr.
MCFARLANE & Co. S PREMISES, MURRAY STREET, PERTH.
established business. Proceeding to
Melbourne he investigated the
system adopted by the Wills-
mere Certified Milk Company and
finally purchased a complete plant,
which, later, was installed in the
firm's new premises in Murray
Street, Perth. The business of
Messrs. Macfarlane & Co. was now
turned into a limited company,
operations ceased at Fremantle, and
the whole attention of the Company
was directed to the control and ex-
pansion of the metropolitan under-
taking. The scheme for the supply
of pure milk was prominently
brought before the public attention
for several years, but lack of appre-
ciation ultimately caused the direc-
tors to part with the process.
Thenceforward the energies of the
management were focused on the
produce branch, which had made
considerable headway, and in the fol-
lowing year, upon the opening of the
Murray Street premises, a branch
was established in Barrack Street.
In 1908 a second branch was opened
at the corner of King and Hay
Streets, which was subsequently
transferred to William Street (op-
posite Queen’s Hall), where the firm
had secured a lease of a commodious
shop. During this period of expan-
sion operations had been extended
to embrace the supply of continental
and Australian delicacies, butter,
bacon, hams, eggs, honey, etc., and in
these lines the house has established
an enviable reputation. The firm also
secured the agency for Messrs. Grif-
fiths Brothers’ celebrated teas,
coffees, cocoas, and chocolate, and a
tearoom was opened at the William
Street depot, but in the year
1912 the lease ex-
pired and the shop
was closed down.
These teas, etc.,
have caught the
public fancy and a
large business is
done in Messrs.
Griffiths' commodi-
ties. The firm pur-
chases direct from
the producer, and
specializes in local
dairy produce and
dressed poultry for
table use. Messrs.
Macfarlane & Co.
supply under con-
tract to the prin-
cipal public insti-
tutions in the
State, and house-
holders are waited
on twice a week for orders. In 1902 a
lease was taken of the Vasse Butter
Factory, which had been closed for
some eighteen months, and the manu-
facture of butter was commenced,
the supplies of cream being obtained
from the southern and south-western
districts. Subsequently a second fac-
tory was opened at Perth, districts
on the Midland Railway, Eastern
Railway, and Great Southern Rail-
way and in the south-west as far as
Picton Junction being drawn on for
the necessary cream supplies. In this
and other ways the firm has done
much to place dairy-farming on a
sound footing in the State, but the
industry is very backward, and in
the opinion of the firm will continue
so until the Government sees fit to
pay a bonus, as was done in the sister
State of Victoria, where the condi-
tions are much more favourable to
settlers than they are in Western
Australia. The firm imports large
quantities of dairying machinery,
which is supplied to purchasers on
very easy terms, and acts as agent
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. P. DILES.
tor the Crown “Tiptop" separators
(hand and power driven), Crown
steel churns, Babcock milk testers,
etc. Mr. J. Alvey, who is in charge
of the Perth factory, came originally
from the East to take charge of the
Vasse Butter Factory on behalf of
the Western Australian Government,
and his services were afterwards
secured by the present firm. The
directors of Macfarlane & Co.,
Limited, are Mr. James Macfarlane,
Mr. J. V. Banfield (well known as
the patentee of the Banfield-Lorden
dry blower, which played such an im-
portant part in the opening up of the
mining fields of the State), and Mr.
S. F. Conning (who has control of
the factory at Busselton). The
Secretary is Mr. P. Giles. Mr. James
Macfarlane, the managing director,
is a Victorian, and was born in 1865,
his father, the late Mr. Robert Mac


farlane, having come to Australia
from California in 1852. At the
close of his education the gentleman
under review followed in his parent’s
footsteps for a time, being engaged
in mining pursuits in his native
State. Later he joined the Bacchus
Marsh Concentrated Milk Company
at Melbourne, and in 1897 came to
Western Australia, where he became
a member of the firm of Walker,
Wilson, & Co. at Fremantle. It is
interesting to note in connection with
this business that the first supplies
were brought to Western Australia
in the four-masted sailing vessel
Hinemoa,” which anchored at Gage
Roads for nine months, supplies
being brought ashore as required
from the refrigerator with which the
ship had been specially fitted. Mr.
Macfarlane severed his connection
with the firm of Walker, Wilson,
and Co. at the expiration of three
years and returned to Victoria,
where he remained until 1902, when
he returned to the western State and
established the present concern, as
already recorded. He is one of the
commercial members of the Food
Standards Committee appointed by
the Government under the Pure
Foods Act of 1910. Mr. Macfarlane
still continues to act as representative
in Western Australia for the Bac-
chus Marsh Concentrated Milk Com-
pany of Victoria.
The late JAMES REND ALL was
a son of the late Mr. David
Rendall, of Westry, Scotland. Born
at Port Adelaide, South Australia,
in 1856, at an early age he was
taken to South Melbourne, Victoria,
where he received his education at a
local school. Upon the completion
of his studies he was identified for a
number of years with a manufactur-
ing industry owned by one of the
principal firms of the State. In 1895
he came to Western Australia as
travelling representative for Messrs.
Willshire & Feely, agents in Western
Australia for the well-known firm
of Swallow & Ariel, and continued
in this service for eleven years. At
the end of this period he entered
the employ of Messrs. Clarke & Co.,
at that time agents for the Queens-
land Meat Company, and continued
to travel in its interests up to the
time of his death in August,
1912. Mr. Rendall displayed keen
interest in Friendly Society work,
and was a Past Chief President
of the Australian Natives’ Associa^
tion. For a number of years he held
the position of Chairman of the
United Friendly Societies’ Board in
Perth, and was first President of
the dispensary in connection with
the same united organization. He
occupied a seat on the Board of
Management of the Perth Public
Hospital for a lengthy period and
was a prominent member of the
Liberal League, in which he acted
upon the Executive Council. He was
a Justice of the Peace and a member
of the Perth Bowling Club.
JAMES CHARLES HURST
BLURTON, J.P., storekeeper, Lord
Street, Perth, is a son of the late
Major George Blurton, of the 2nd
Queen’s Own Regiment, who fought
in the Crimean War, the Indian
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. J. C. H. BLURTON.
Mutiny, and in the China War and
the Kaffir Rebellion. He was born
at Port Beaufort, Cap© Colony,
South Africa, on October 2, 1857,
and at an early age was taken to
England by his father, where he re-
ceived his education at Boston and
at St. Mark’s College, Chelsea. He
passed through Woolwich and Sand-
hurst, and subsequently joined the
14th Hussars, at a later date ex-
changing to the Queen’s Own, of
which he was paymaster for five
years. Whilst attached to this regi-
ment he spent the greater part of
twelve years in India, during which
time he was examiner of military ac-
counts, and was a member of Lord
Roberts’ staff in the relief of Kanda-
har. He saw active service in the
Zulu Campaign, South Africa, and
in the Boer Rebellion of 1881, with
the 21st Royal Scots Fusiliers.
In 1882 he retired from the service
and sailed for Australia, where he
practised as an accountant at Ade-
laide for some considerable time. In
1896 he came to Western Australia
to take a position as accountant to
the Great Boulder Main Reef Mine,
which he held for five years. After
spending two years in farming pur-
suits in Victoria Mr. Blurton re-
turned to the Western State, and
established himself in the storekeep-
ing line of business on his present
premises in Lord Street, where he
has continued ever since. He has
made himself active in public affairs,
and in 1907 was appointed Justice
of the Peace for Perth Magisterial
District, also holding office as Postal
Vote Officer for Perth and President
of the Political League. He is a
member of the Masonic fraternity,
ranking as Past District Grand
Master in the craft. His chief re-
creation is found in the game of
bowls, and he is a member of the
Perth Bowling Club. Mr. Blurton
married Elizabeth, daughter of Mr.
Frank Whitfield, farmer, of Shep-
parton, Golden Valley, Victoria,
and has two daughters.
WILLIAM HENRY McCOR-
MACK, is a son of the late Mr.
Robert McCormack, of Lanarkshire,
Scotland, a non-commissioned officer
of the old 42nd Highland Regiment.
He was born at Middlesex, England,
on September 12, 1854, and received
his education in the same county.
Upon leaving school he was engaged
in the contracting business for a
number of years, in 1886 leaving
the Old Country for Western Aus-
tralia. At that period the colony
was practically a penal settlement,
and upon Mr. McCormack’s arrival
he became identified with bush life.
By degrees he was able to purchase
a horse and cart, and was the first
contractor to carry goods between
the various Government offices under
the era of responsible Government,
prior to that time the work having
been done by means of prison labour.
His enterprise and industry in
course of time was crowned with suc-
cess, and prosperity set its seal upon
his various operations. He pur-
chased a fine site in Wellington
Street and erected the Perth Free
Stores, which are the largest of their
kind in the State, and in the course
of his career ha-s undertaken some


notable contracts, among which may
be mentioned the shipping of the
guns, stores, accoutrements, and am-
munition for the Western Australian
contingent bound for the scene of
the war in South Africa. Mr.
McCormack has always been a man
of great public spirit, and it is
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM HENRY MCCORMACK.
worthy of record that upon the first
occasion that he stood for municipal
honours he ran a dead heat with Dr.
Haynes for the South Ward seat in
the Perth Council, the latter gentle-
man being returned by the casting
vote of the returning officer, Mr.
Walter Simpson. From March,
1905, to 1909 he was a member of
the Darling Ranges Roads Board,
being Chairman for three years, and
in 1905 he was chosen to represent
his Board at the General Conference
at Cue, when many important mat-
ters were discussed. He was closely
identified with the Liberal movement
in this State and was a practical
member of the Liberal League,
being also the first to suggest the
formation of the Liberal Club,
which has abundantly justified its
existence. He held office in the
League as member of the Council,
and has also acted on the Recreation
Board. Mr. McCormack received
his commission of Justice of the
Peace for Perth in 1909. He has
seven sons, his wife being deceased.
GEORGE WILLIAM BUR-
KETT, manufacturers’ agent, St.
George’s Terrace, Perth, was born at
Echuca, Victoria, on February 14,
1880, being a son of Mr. James Bur-
kett, of that town. He received his
education at the local Grammar
School, where he continued until
nineteen years of age, when he joined
Messrs. D. Stratton & Co., Limited,
in the flour-milling industry. After
two years in this connection he
directed his attention to Western
Australia, and landing at Fremantle
became connected with the firm of
Messrs. Bewick, Moreing, & Co.,
eventually being appointed head of
their purchasing department at Kal-
goorlie. At a later date Mr. Burkett
visited London and the Continent,
and upon his return to this State
spent six years as shareholder and
director of J. J. Horrocks & Co.,
mining machinery and manufac-
turers’ agents, of Perth. At the end
Bartletto, Perth
MR. GEORGE WILLIAM BURKETT.
of this period he took another trip to
England, and was successful in ob-
taining the management in Western
Australia for Messrs. Hatfield’s Steel
Foundry Company, Limited, of Shef-
field, England, which he still success-
fully conducts at offices on St.
George’s Terrace, Perth. Mr. Bur-
kett saw active service in the Trans-
vaal War in South Africa in 1900-2,
and holds the Queen’s medal and
three clasps. He is a foundation
member of the Naval and Military
Club, and a member of the Military
Lodge, No. 15, W.A.C., in the
Masonic Order. For the past six
years he has served as Lieutenant of
the 18th Australian Light Horse
Regiment, and lias only recently re-
tired on account of pressure of busi-
ness. He is a Vice-President of the
South Australian Soldiers’ Associa-
tion, and takes a keen interest in re-
unions of that body. Mr. Burkett
married in 1905 Maggie, daughter of
the late William Britnall, of Perth,
a Western Australian pioneer, who
arrived in the State in the early
forties. He has one daughter.
JOHN ROSIER SAUNDERS,
clothier and mercer, Wellington
Street, Perth, and at Kalgoorlie, is a
son of the late Mr. E. H. Saunders,
of Devon, England, where he was
born on October 29, 1860. At the age
of thirteen he was apprenticed to the
drapery trad© in his native town,
and four years later became engaged
with the firm of Leaf, Sons, & Co.,
silk merchants, of Old Change, Lon-
don. He remained with this firm
for upwards of three years, resigning
in order to come to Australia, and
arrived in Adelaide, in the Central
State, in 1881. After a short stay
in the capital he went to Sil-
verton and opened in business on his
own account, and met with such suc-
cess that twelve months later he
extended his operations to Broken
Hill, in which town he carried on a
thriving drapery establishment for
about eight years. Selling out at
the end of that period Mr. Saunders
came to Western Australia, and pro-
ceeding direct to Coolgardie began
business operations in the mining
city. Toward the close of the twenty-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN ROSIER SAUNDERS.
two years that he spent in this
centre he was one of the first to
realize that a period of decline was
setting in after the floodtide of pros-
perity which had brought Coolgardie


before the notice of the world; and
removing to the more recently
opened goldfield of Kalgoorlie he
secured suitable premises in Hannan
Street, and for over fifteen years
has conducted one of the best known
and most popular clothing and mer-
eery emporiums in that place. In
1910, relinquishing the management
of the Kalgoorlie business to his son,
Mr. R. Fox Saunders, he came to
Perth and established his present
concern in Wellington Street, which
he has carried on ever since. Mr.
Saunders devotes a portion of his
leisure to the study of works of his-
tory, and finds in the perusal of
these and other standard works
of literature his chief recrea-
tion. He is also a lover of
music and was one of the founders
of the Kalgoorlie Eisteddfodd, in
which he holds the position of Vice-
President. Married in 1883 to Ger-
trude, daughter of the late Mr.
Robert Owen Fox, of Sturt Street,
Adelaide, he has two sons and two
daughters.
SAMUEL MAJOR, Manager for
the head establishment of the Swan
Meat Company, Perth, was born at
Moonta, South Australia, on June
9, 1872, being a son of Mr. Ephraim
Major, coachbuilder, of Yorke
Peninsula, in that State. He was
educated at various public schools,
and when sixteen years of age served
his apprenticeship to the butchering
trade with the well-known firm of L.
Conrad, in Adelaide. Arriving in
Western Australia in 1895, he fol-
lowed in the wake of the goldseekers
on the fields, and for a few months
relinquished trading pursuits in
favour of the mining industry. Re-
turning to his former calling he
spent fifteen years in the conduct of
butchering businesses at Kalgoorlie
and Boulder, and when the last con-
cern with which he was connected
fell into the hands of the Swan Meat
Company Mr. Major received the
apjaointment of Manager. In July,
1911, he was transferred to Perth
to undertake the management of the
firm's chief establishment in Bar-
rack Street, and has continued to
act in this capacity ever since. Mr.
Major has given a great deal of time
and attention to the study of un-
proved methods in the conduct of the
meat trade, and has had little time
to spare for outside interests. He
is, however, a prominent supporter
of the Labour movement, and in his
youth took a leading part in the
foundation of its organization in
South Australia. He is a member
of the Masonic fraternity. In 1892
he married Selina Elizabeth, daugh-
ter of Mr. William Havercroft, of
Ravensthorp, Western Australia,
and has a son and a daughter.
Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration.
In April, 1899, the first Western Australian Trade
Union and Labour Congress sitting in Coolgardie carried
as one of the clauses of its programme of industrial
reform the following resolution: —‘'Compulsory Con-
ciliation and Arbitration Act, for the peaceful settle-
ment of industrial disputes, containing a provision foi
the enforcement of awards. The Act to be on similar
lines to the New Zealand Act.”
Previous to this similar resolutions in favour of the
principle had been carried by numbers of unions and
councils, but the above is the first official record of any-
thing which definitely pledged the labour movement to
the principle of compulsory arbitration.
Before the gold rush of 1893-98 took place Trades
Unionism was a very weak force in Western Australia.
Among the new arrivals from the Eastern States were
many men who had been prominent in trades unionism,
and their coming to the West materially strengthened
the movement; in fact, to them is due its revival in
this State. Very quickly following their arrival there
was a demand for higher wages and better conditions of
living, and as the employers were naturally loth to leave
the low-wage standards which had existed during pre-
rush times, industrial conflicts became more and more
common. Several disastrous strikes occurred in the
building trades; a bitterly-contested strike, lasting for
some six weeks, took place between the Fremantle
lumpers and their employers; and in January, 1900, the
locomotive enginedrivers employed on the Government
railways left their work for a few days. These all
tended to turn the minds of union leaders to the old
problems of how to protect and improve themselves as
wage-earners without resort to the method of declaring
a strike.
On the goldfields, which were industrially a com-
munity apart from the coast, developments of much the
same character had taken place. During the exciting
days following 1892 men did not feel the need of
unionism, as wages-man, as soon as he had gathered
a few joounds together, went off prospecting in the hope
of securing riches. Towards 1898, however, when the
mines round Kalgoorlie began to open up to greater
depths, and a settled population of wage-earners upon
the mines grew up, trades unionism revived, and on
taking stock of their condition men found that though
wages were apparently high, they were really low when
the cost of commodities, particularly water, was taken
into account. On the other hand, the mine manager,
anxious about high mining costs, and driven by share-
holders anxious for dividends, cast covetous eyes at the
wages. The whole position was ripe for a period of bitter
industrial strife. Old unionists, many of whom had had
experience of the maritime, Broken Hill, and Newcastle
strikes, saw the possibilities of the position, and turned
their attention to the idea of compulsory arbitration,
glowing accounts of the success of which in New Zealand
had for some time been attracting attention. When the
second Trades Union Congress assembled at Perth in
August, 1900, the general opinion was voiced that only
by such means could Western Australia escape serious


industrial trouble. In this spirit they approached the
Government. The Premier, Sir John Forrest, was in
one of those delicate situations which render politicians
amenable to argument, even about subjects of which they
do not personally approve. The party he had led for a
long period was beginning to break up; a dangerous
cabal had been formed, the members of which made
no secret of their intentions; and it was to secure their
renewed allegiance and so enable the Premier to get
back into smooth water that the first Compulsory Arbi-
tration Act was passed at the close of the year 1900. It
was inoperative from the beginning. For private reasons
the employers’ representative left the colony, and as the
three members of the Court had to sit together, nothing
was done for over a year.
During 1901 trouble of a serious character was
caused by a railway strike. The abnormal increase in
imports resulting from the population brought by the
gold rush had proved utterly beyond the capacity of
the railway rolling-stock, and as a result a large quantity
of material had to be dumped on a reclaimed area locally
known as ‘‘The Farm.” The temporary hands engaged
there became dissatisfied, the members of the Railway
Association made common cause with them, a strike was
declared, and the whole railway service paralysed. The
seriousness of this may be understood when it is men-
tioned that out on the gold areas —400 miles away —there
were nearly 60,000 people dependent for food and water
upon a single line of railway. Fortunately the strike did
not last long. The point to be explained is ; why was the
Arbitration Court not availed of to settle this dispute ?
One reason —which, however, was not vital —was that a
member of the Court was absent from the State, but the
real stumbling-block was that by the definition of
‘‘worker” in the Act clerical workers were excluded, and
as many members of the Railway Association came under
that category, the Association had not been able to
register under the Act, and could not therefore approach
the Court. This strike, combined with continually
threatening trouble on the goldfields, convinced the
public that a more satisfactory Act was required, and in
1902 the whole matter was reconsidered and the present
Act placed upon the Statute Book, though not without
determined opposition. The fight centred principally
round two proposals —one that of preference to unionists,
and the other that unions should deposit with the appli-
cation for registration a sum of from <£so to £2OO,
according to membership, as security for the observance
of the award. The first passed the Assembly, but was
defeated in the Council; the second, which was a pro-
posed amendment, was fortunately also lost, as it would
have rendered the Act inoperative, no union being in a
strong enough position to lock up its funds in that
manner. In addition, it would have been tantamount
to a denial of justice.
A section of the Act from which much was expected
was that establishing Conciliation Boards. Experience
has shown these Boards to be almost utterly useless.
Their decisions were not final, as either party if dis-
satisfied could take the case to the Arbitration Court,
and as both parties rarely were satisfied, it was soon
found that reference to a Board was merely a waste of
time.
One of the first disputes heard before the Court was
that between the Kalgoorlie and Boulder Miners ’ Union
and the various companies on the Golden Mile. The
award was dated September 2, 1902, and it is one of the
triumphs of the Arbitration Court that this award
formed the basis upon which the wages of every union
in Western Australia have been regulated ever since.
If the most recent award in the mining industry is com-
pared with that of 1902, and allowance made for the
increased cost of living, the differences between the two
will be found to be very small, proving that the members
of the Court, consisting of a Judge, a plumber, and a
shipping manager, after hearing the case submitted to
them by a carpenter on behalf of the men and by a clerk
on behalf of the companies, grasped the essentials of the
mining industry so well that after ten years mining men
have not been able to suggest any serious alteration.
The Act has been in operation for ten years. It is
one which breaks entirely new ground. It fundament-
ally alters the whole relationship between employer and
employe —a relationship around which endless law and
custom has grown —and consequently it is an Act which
inevitably demands frequent revision and alteration to
meet unforeseen developments. It is extremely conten-
tious, however, in almost every clause, and attempts to
amend it or similar Acts in the various States or in the
Commonwealth have been so disastrous to the political
health and reputations of Ministers that politicians have
grown very shy of the measure, and so it comes that an
Act which, more than most, must be kept up to date if it
is to be effective has gone so long unaltered. The
amounts involved in the awards are very large, and in
view of this fact the litigation that has arisen over the
Act is not great. This comparative immunity is said by
some who do not view the intervention of lawyers in
industrial matters with favour to be largely due to the
fact that lawyers are not allowed to practice in the
Arbitration Court in Western Australia. But unfor-
tunately lawyers were permitted to practice before the
New South Wales Court, and appeal after appeal was
taken to the Supreme Court and on to the High Court,
and almost invariably the result had been to curtail the
sphere over which the Arbitration Court may operate.
These decisions, of course, affect the Western Australian
Act, and the result has been that the Court has for a
long time been compelled to do its best with an Act from
which many important provisions have been taken away,


and to which has been added many pages of judicial
speeches. To successfully find a way through a piece of
legislation so cribbed and hampered would tax the
ingenuity of an expert lawyer, and union representatives
have found the task of piloting an industrial dispute
through the Court one of constantly increasing difficulty.
In fact, it may be asserted that if an employer is deter-
mined to take advantage of every possible technical
objection, and employs a skilled agent, then it is prac-
tically impossible for any industrial dispute, no matter
how pressing the grievance, to be carried through the
Court to a definite conclusion. This has caused a great
deal of adverse criticism to be levelled at the Court and
its work, but the constant stream of cases shows that the
principle of compulsory arbitration is not to blame. The
blame must rest upon the cumbersome and highly
technical procedure with which Supreme and High Court
decisions have encrusted the Act. Fortunately in the
great majority of cases the employers, recognizing the
value of the Court as a means of settling wages and
working conditions, have waived technical objections,
and thus enabled an award to be expeditiously and
smoothly arrived at.
Up to the date of writing 291 awards have been
made by the Court, and when it is remembered that
these are for periods of from one to three years, they
form a truly great record of work done. Another very
striking proof of the success of the work of the Court
is the list of industrial agreements arrived at between
employer and employe. Out of a total of seventy-one
such agreements twenty-seven are marked as being
founded on previous awards of the Court, simply
modified at the request of one or both parties to meet
altered conditions.
A critical examination of the list of agreements not
founded upon awards would probably reveal that their
terms and conditions owe much to preceding awards of
the Court, for industries are so closely related one to
another that it is not possible to set up a standard in one
without materially affecting the others.
All critics of the Arbitration Act, friendly or other-
wise, invariably ask what benefit the working of the Act
has conferred. To answer this question statistically or
in money terms is impossible. Great as has been the ser-
vice to the community, the employer, and the worker by
the work done and the awards issued, still greater is the
service rendered by preventing industrial dislocation,
and to estimate this it is necessary to have an intimate
knowledge, extending over ten years, of the fluctuating
prosperity of the State, of the supply and demand of
labour, and, above all, of the fighting strength and spirit
of the unions. On none of these points will any two
observers agree. That the unions have gained by the
Act is proved by the number of cases referred to. The
number contested by the employers before the Court
strictly on their merits as industrial disputes is proof
that the employer recognizes the Court as the best
method of fixing wages and working conditions. This is
also proved by the fact that should any whisper of a
strike be heard, the employers are the first to demand
that the matter be referred to the Court.
During the currency of the Act a number of things
have occurred in contravention of its provisions. The
most notable fact about them all is that after doing their
utmost by means of the old weapons, and inflicting loss
and hardship on all concerned, the unions have found it
necessary, without the enforcement of the penalty clauses
in the Act, to resort to some form of arbitration —a
method of settlement open to them from the beginning.
It would appear from this that the Arbitration Court is
slowly getting behind it a mass of public approval and
confidence which will, as time goes on, render it more
and more effective and powerful in the cause of indus-
trial peace.
There is no doubt that the public demand of the
Arbitration Act a higher standard of effectiveness than
they do of any other Act. Laws upon every possible
subject can be, and are, ignored and evaded every day,
and the public mind is not disturbed in the least. They
see every year large sums voted by Parliament for the
purpose of compelling compliance with the law, but so
long as the law is reasonably effective everyone is satis-
fied. Let, however, any hitch occur in the working of
the Compulsory Arbitration Act, and immediately Press
and platform resound with demands from some for its
repeal, and from others for its amendment. Some de-
nounce it with extravagant condemnation, others exhaust
themselves in excusing and explaining. One reason for
this is that the Act and the principle involved is new,
and there has not yet been sufficient time for settlement
in permanent form. The question is to some extent a
party one. It may be mentioned in passing that the
question —shall wages and working conditions be
regulated by law ? —is no longer a party question in Aus-
tralia. No political party dare move to repeal the ma-
chinery which has been established to do this work. The
party fight is now confined to the details of the machinery
and as to the forms and powers of the Court or Boards.
Other reasons for the fierce light of criticism which occa-
sionally beats upon the proceedings of the Arbitration
Court is the importance of the work done, its difficulty,
and the large numbers of the public who are immediately
affected by any hitch in the smooth working of any in-
dustry. It is only when such a hitch occurs that the
public realize the importance and difficulty of the work.
In normal times any industry may approach the Court
and go away with a code of wages and working condi-
tions fixed for from one to three years, and beyond a
vague idea that the Arbitration Court “fixes things,” the
public have little knowledge of what is done; but when


Mr. Suburbia finds some morning that he has to walk
as his car is not running, he demands in a very angry
voice why the Arbitration Court has not “fixed things.”
In the successful work he has no interest, but everyone
of the few failures affects him very deeply.
When the Arbitration Court was first called into
existence the limit of its activities in the minds of the
public was that it was to be an institution for settling
disputes and so preventing strikes. In other words, it
was intended to act at that stage when negotiations be-
tween employer and employed over some existing griev-
ance had become so acute that without the intervention
of a third party there was danger of a rupture.. This
idea has long since been outgrown, and the Court has
become an institution for the regulation of the relation-
ships between employers and workers in all industries
From this evolutionary growth has arisen most of the
Under the provisions of “The Fremantle Harbour
Trust Act 1902” (2° Edwardii VII., No. 17), which came
into force on January 1, 1903, power was conferred upon
five Commissioners, to be a body corporate, with common
seal, and power
to hold land,
and perpetual
succession, and
to be called the
Fremantle Har-
bour Trust Com-
missioners, who
were to be ap-
pointed by the
Governor and
hold office for a
term of three
years, to exercise
exclusive control
of Fremantle
Harbour, under-
take the main-
tenance and pre-
servation of pro-
perty vested in
them under the
Act, and provide
such facilities and
Photo by C. E. Farr.
charges as maybe most expedient for the trade of the port.
The Act vests in the Commissioners all lands of the
Crown, harbour lights and beacons (excepting the light-
houses on Rottnest Island and at Woodman's Point),
wharves, docks, landing stages, piers, jetties, wharf
sheds, and railways belonging to the Government, lying
Fremantle Harbour Trust.
ROYAL MAIL STEAMERS “ MOOLTAN" AND OSTERLEY" (DEPARTINGL IN FREMANTLE HARBOUR
successful appeals to the Supreme and High Courts, on
the ground that the Arbitration Court has exceeded its
jurisdiction. The Judges have consistently endeavoured
to limit the Arbitration Court to the “settlement of dis-
putes 77 (Section 58). The Court in its work soon found
that in a dispute which has primarily arisen over wages
and hours, many details about which there was no actual
dispute had to be reviewed and fixed. Once this was
done, its advantages were so apparent that all unions
desired similar codes, and so the dispute and its settle-
ment ceased to be the end, and became only the means
by which the Arbitration Court was enabled to lay down
a complete code of wages and conditions, and to-day,
when awards are nearing the time of expiry, unions and
employers negotiate for their renewal in much the same
spirit as the buyer and seller of any commodity do about
their contracts.
within the boundaries of the harbour, and, in addition,
such other property as may be acquired by them or may
be vested in them for the purposes of the Act; a schedule
of all these properties to be made by the Government
and the value
determined and
charged against
the Commission-
ers. All dues,
etc., collected by
the Commission-
ers are to be
paid into the
Treasury to the
credit of an ac-
count, to be
called the “Fre-
mantle Harbour
Trust Account,”
which is to be
annually charged
with all fees,
salaries, wages,
and other ex-
penditure paid
or incurred by
the Commission-
ers, the balance,
subject to certain conditions, being carried to the Con-
solidated Revenue Fund, to be used by the Govern-
ment in payment of interest on capital cost and
sinking fund.
The Commissioners are further empowered to make
regulations for the various purposes specified in the Act.


By Order-in-Council, dated January 7, 1903, the
Honourable the Colonial Secretary was appointed to be
the Minister to administer the Act, the Honourable R.
Laurie, M.L.C., Messrs. A. G. Leeds, C. Hudson, A.
Sandover, and T. Coombe being at the same time ap-
pointed Trust Commissioners, the firstnamed to be Chair-
man of the Commission, and Mr. F. Stevens receiving
his appointment of Secretary.
The first regulations made by the Trust were ap-
proved of by the Governor-in-Council on July 24, and
gazetted on August 13, 1903. The following officers of
the Trust were therein enumerated : —A Secretary, an
Accountant, the Engineer-in-Chief as Consulting
Engineer, the Harbourmaster, the Deputy-Harbour-
master and Surveyor, an Engineer Inspector, and a
Wharf Manager and Berthing Master. The regulations
provide for the “Conduct of Business,” “Control and
Guidance of Officers appointed by the Commissioners, and
the Time and Mode of Accounting by Officers for Moneys
coming into their Hands,” “Management and Conduct of
Business at Meetings of the Commissioners,” “Payment
of Revenue,” “Contracts,” “Signals,” “Harbour Dues,”
“Pilotage and Charges therefor,” “Exemption Certifi-
cates,” “Exemption Flag,” “Tonnage Dues,” “Berthing
Dues,” “Wharfage,” “Special Rates,” “Navigation,”
“Berthing,” “Vessels in Port,” “Handling of Cargo,”
“Explosives and Other Dangerous Materials,” “Licensing
of Vessels and Boats,” “Watermen and Boatmen,” “Bag-
gage Porters,” etc.
These regulations have been altered, amended, and
varied from time to time as the development of the port
required.
The Act itself was amended in 1906 by 6 Edw. VII.,
No. 35, giving extended powers to the Commissioners and
at the same time enabling them to make regulations
governing matters not foreseen at the time of passing the
principal Act. The two Acts were then consolidated, and
no further alteration was made until 1911, when by 1
Geo. V., No. 25, the Commissioners were empowered to
appoint special constables within the limits of the har-
bour and also to make regulations for the removal and
storage of goods.
One of the first matters taken in hand by the Trust
on its appointment was the reorganization of the Pilot
Service, and on August 1, 1903, the sea-pilot station on
Rottnest Island was abolished, and arrangements were
made for the whole service to be worked from the port
of Fremantle, it being proved that the situation of the
pilot station on the island was liable to tempt vessels to
approach it too closely looking for a pilot, and so get
into dangerous water. By the new system the passage
into Gage Roads, South of Rottnest, was closed to all
vessels whose masters do not hold exemption certificates.
In rounding Rottnest vessels are, on no pretence what-
ever, to approach nearer than three miles to the island,
but are to always keep in clear open water, with suffi-
cient sea room to work in.
Other matters were then dealt with, such as the
licensing of boats, proper shed accommodation, facilities
for handling cargo and the conditions under which such
handling should be carried out, harbour lights, wharf
cranes, and the many other details necessary to secure
smoothness of working and efficient control.
The wharves are now equipped with nine large sheds
and rails, and cargo destined for inland is loaded direct
on to the railway waggons at the ships slings, and
consigned from the wharves to destination. Steam and
electric gantry cranes and wharf capstans are in opera-
tion. Electric light is installed throughout. Large
grain sheds equipped with electric elevators and con-
veyors are now in operation to deal with the rapidly
increasing export of wheat. Portable electric elevators
are also in use. Wharfage rates are ss. 9d. and 6s. on
some special lines, 2s. 9d. or 3s. per ton on general cargo,
with lower rates on special lines. Handling charges vary
from Is. 6d. per ton to 3d. per ton on some bulk lines.
A harbour improvement rate of 6d. per ton on cargo
discharged at the port is also charged.
Tonnage of cargo dealt with at the port for year
ending June 30, 1911, has been as follows: —General,
379,400 tons; gold, 1,162 boxes; frozen meat, 21,952
carcasses; live stock, 188,883 head; wool and skins,
75,392 bales; number of hides, 29,069.
Tonnage dues collected by the Harbour Trust: —All
foreign-going vessels, 3d. per ton inwards and 3d. per
ton outwards; if cargo in or out is in excess of one-fourth
of net registered tonnage, then net registered tonnage
is taken, but if cargo is less than one-fourth of net
registered tonnage, then tonnage of cargo is taken.
Inter-State and coastal vessels pay from 2d. downwards
per ton on their net registered tonnage. A vessel part
loading at Fremantle and completing at another Western
Australian port, or vice versa , is charged on the tonnage
of cargo shipped at Fremantle. Vessels calling for coal
supplies, orders, or in distress, and not broaching cargo,
or landing or shipping passengers, pay a maximum sum
of <£s per entry into the port to cover all port dues
whatsoever, including pilotage.
Berthing dues at inner harbour wharves: —All
ocean-going steamers, 2d. per ton on the first 2,400 tons
cargo landed or shipped, Id. per ton on balance
(minimum, £3); coasters up to 200 tons register, 2d.
per ton on cargo landed or shipped (minimum, 55.); all
other vessels, 2d. per ton on the first 2,400 tons cargo
landed or shipped, Id. per ton on balance (minimum,
£3). Vessels using moorings are charged same rates as
if occupying berths at wharves. Vessels loading grain
pay special berthing dues of 4d. per day of twenty-four
hours per ton of their net register for the first six days,
and thereafter £d. per ton per day of twenty-four hours.


Vessels can obtain coal, water, and all other supplies
at low rates, and steam tugs are available. Correct time
is given daily by means of time-ball and gun. Depth of
water in inner harbour and at wharves, 30 feet below
dead low water, which means 33 feet on an average.
The present Harbour Trust Commissioners are:
Messrs. James Thompson, 8.E., M.I.C.E. (chairman),
E. Allnutt, A. M. Oliphant, J. H. G. Taylor, and
Captain C. J. Irvine. The officers of the Trust are as
follows: —Secretary, F. W. B. Stevens; accountant, S.
S. Glyde, A.1.A., W.A.; consulting engineer, Jas,
Thompson, M.lnst. C.E. ; harbourmaster, Captain C.
J. Irvine; deputy harbourmaster, surveyor, and chief
pilot, Captain J. F. Morrison; wharf manager and
berthingmaster, Captain Alex. Cleary.
ERNEST ALLNUTT, J.P., Com-
missioner of the Harbour Trust and
Managing Director of the firm of
D. & J. Fowler, Limited, is a son
of the late Mr. Samuel Lea Allnutt,
of Victoria, and was born at Hamil-
ton, in the western district of Vic-
toria, on June 23, 1865. He re-
ceived his education at the Scotch
College, Melbourne, and sub-
sequently attended a similar institu-
tion at Geelong, completing his
scholastic career at the age of seven-
teen. He then entered upon a com-
mercial career, joining the staff of
Messrs. D. & J. Fowler, Adelaide, in
the clerical department, and during
a period of thirty years' service be-
came closely acquainted with the
workings of all branches of the firm's
operations. Promotion was steadily
accorded him from time to time, and
in 1898 he was admitted as a partner
in the firm soon after his arrival in
Western Australia. Eighteen months
later, when the business was floated
into a Company, Mr. Allnutt was
appointed a Director of the Com-
pany, and has continued to control
the affairs of the house in this State
ever since. He occupies various pub-
lic offices, having held a commission
of Justice of the Peace since 1902,
and in 1905 was appointed by the
Government to the position of Com-
missioner of the Harbour Trust, dis-
charging the duties of chairman for
six months during the absence of the
elected officer, Mr. Leeds, in Eng-
land. He is a member of the Fre-
mantle Chamber of Commerce, and
filled the position of President of
that body in the years 1903-4-5; is
Chairman of Directors of the local
Board of the Alliance Assurance
Company, and Chairman of Direc-
tors of the Western Australian Ship-
ping Association, Limited, a power-
ful body in the State. He is also a
member of the Committee appointed
by the Government to fix the pure
foods standard for Western Aus-
tralia. In church matters Mr. All-
nutt has taken a prominent part, and
is a member of the Church Council
of the Anglican denomination, of
which he is a member. He was re-
cently elected a member of the Dean
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ERNEST ALLNUTT.
and Chapter of the Cathedral of
Perth, and holds the Bishop's licence
of diocesan lay reader for Western
Australia. Golf is the special form
of recreation indulged in by Mr. All-
nutt, and he is at present Captain
of the Fremantle Golf Club, of which
he was a foundation-member. He is
also a member of the Western Aus-
tralian Automobile Club, the Weld
Club, and of the Fremantle and
Commercial Travellers' Clubs of
Western Australia. In 1893 he mar-
The total amount debited to capital account of the
harbour on June 30, 1911, was <£1,477,468; the gross
earnings for the year were <£177,433, showing a surplus
of <£123,258 over working expenses, and of £56,772 over
working expenses, interest, and sinking fund. The
number of vessels using the port was 726 and the net
register tonnage 2,012,536 tons.
The imports and exports for the half-year ending
December 31, 1911, were 445,220 tons, as against
344,100 tons for the corresponding period of the previous
year.
These totals give some idea of the trade of the
principal port of Western Australia, and from them we
are in a measure enabled to estimate the magnitude of
the operations of the Trust.
ried Marion Anderson, daughter of
the late Mr. George Swan Fowler,
one of the founders of the business
of Messrs. D. & J. Fowler, and has
four daughters.
JOHN HENRY GEORGE TAY-
LOR, Harbour Trust Commissioner,
was born at London on July 23, 1873.
At the close of his scholastic career
he entered upon marine pursuits, and
subsequently made many voyages,
practically to all parts of the globe.
In 1896 he settled at Fremantle and
occupied himself with shipping in-
terests on the wharves. During the
earlier years of his career Mr. Tay-
lor was identified with the Seamen’s
Union, and after his arrival in Wes-
tern Australia he became a member
of the Fremantle Lumpers’ Union,
of which body he afterwards became
President. He was also President of
the Fremantle Branch of the Aus-
tralian Labour Council for two
years. In 1912 Mr. Taylor was
elected by his Society as workers’
representative on the Fremantle
Harbour Trust, and has acted in this
capacity ever since. He has occu-
pied a seat in the East Fremantle
Municipal Chamber for four years,
having first been returned as coun-
cillor for West Ward in 1908.
HENRY GELL BARKER, Com-
missioner of the Fremantle Harbour
Trust (1908-1912), was born at Old
Aberdeen, Scotland, in 1864. He
is a son of Mr. Henry M. Barker,
LL.D., late of that city and now of
Banchory, and received his scholastic
training at Chanonry School, Old
Aberdeen, and the High School of
Glasgow. At the age of seventeen
he entered as junior clerk the well


known firm of Berry, Barclay, and
Co., grain merchants, of Glasgow
and London, and three years later
came to Australia as Secretary to the
then General Manager of the Orient
Line of Steamships. After spending
six years with that company and
three years with Messrs. Mcllwraith,
McEacharn, & Co., Mr. Barker took
a trip to England, and upon his
return in 1893 took up his residence
in Western Australia. He in 1894
floated, and for some years after-
wards managed, the Swan River
Shipping Company, and on his re-
signing in 1900 from that concern
commenced business on his own ac-
count under the style of H. G.
Barker & Co., Ship and Insurance
Brokers, at St. George’s Terrace,
Perth, where his firm is still estab-
lished. Mr. Barker occupied a seat
on the Fire Brigades Board for two
years as representative of the Fire
Insurance Companies. In 1908 he
was appointed to a seat on the Har-
bour Trust as the nominee of the
Chamber of Mines. He is a
member of the Weld Club and is
one of the founders of the Perth Golf
Club. In 1903 he married a daugh-
ter of the late Dr. H. Ferguson, of
Glenelg, South Australia.
CHARLES HUDSON, who for
several years was a member of the
Fremantle Harbour Trust, is a son
of the late Mr. William Hudson, mer-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. CHARLES HUDSON.
chant, of Burra, South Australia.
Born at Adelaide on February 24,
1865, he was educated during his
early years in his native town, sub-
sequently attending Whinham Col-
lege, North Adelaide. Leaving this
institution at the age of sixteen he
entered upon a commercial career in
the Central State, which extended
over three years, and in 1884 came
to Western Australia, where he
joined the firm of William Sandover,
hardware merchants, of Hay Street.
Mr. Hudson spent eighteen years
with this well-known firm, being ad-
mitted as a partner in 1890. In 1901
he retired from the connection and
established himself in insurance
business at Fremantle, where he still
carries on, in addition to his local
operations being representative for
various pastoral and other firms in
the Nor.’-West. He is Manager of
the Fremantle Branch of the Com-
mercial Union Assurance Company
and local director of the A.M.P.
Society, and for about twelve years
was connected with the Marine
Underwriters’ Association, during
the whole of which period he acted
on the Committee and for four years
occupied the Chair. He received his
appointment on the Harbour Trust
as one of the original Commissioners,
being nominated by the Fremantle
Chamber of Commerce in 1903. In
1906 he retired for some time and
was reappointed by the Government
in 1907, holding the seat until 1912,
in which year the Trust was recon-
structed. For some considerable time
Mr. Hudson served on the Hospital
Committee. He is a member of the
Royal Agricultural Society and is
connected with the Fremantle and
Commercial Travellers’ Club. He is
interested in both of the time-
honoured games of bowls and golf,
and is a member of the local clubs,
being patron of the Fremantle Bowl-
ing Club. lie married Elizabeth,
daughter of the late Mr. John Snook,
of Fremantle, and has a family of
three sons and two daughters.
Captain CHARLES JAMES
IRVINE, chief Harbourmaster for
the State of Western Australia and
member of the Fremantle Harbour
Trust, is a son of the late Mr. Charles
James Irvine, of Launceston, Tas-
mania, where the subject of our re-
view was born on June 21, 1857. He
was educated at the Church of Eng-
land Grammar School, and at the age
of seventeen went to sea as apprentice
in the ship “Loch Ness,” of the
Glasgow Shipping Company, in
which vessel he completed his inden-
tures and served successively as
third and second mate. After about
nine months as chief officer of the
steamer “Adeline Shall,” trading
between England and the various
Continental ports, he returned to
Australia and joined the barque
Bartletto , Perth.
CAPTAIN CHARLES JAMES IRVINE.
“Kassa” as mate, trading in her on
the China coast for about one and a
half years. He was then offered the
post of mate on the “Rob Roy” by
the Melbourne shipping firm of
Anderson, Marshall, & Lilly, and
when at about 1883 this Company
sold out its interests to the Adelaide
Steamship Company he transferred
his services to the latter firm. Dur-
ing the nine years of his connection
with this Company he was suc-
cessively master of the “Otway,”
the “Flinders,” the “Lubra,” the
“Ferret,” the “Perth,” the “Rob
Roy,” and the “Albany,” and ulti-
mately resigned in order to join the
Western Australian pilot service at
Albany. Seven years later he was
transferred to Fremantle to fill the
position of Assistant Harbourmaster,
and upon the retirement of Captain
C. R. Russell, the then Chief Har-
bourmaster, resident at Fremantle,
Captain Irvine received the appoint-
ment to his present position. His
duties include the supervision of all
the lighthouses on the Western Aus-
tralian coast and the control of all
the outports with the exception of
Fremantle and Bunbury. He also
holds the position of Royal Naval
Registrar and Lieutenant in the
Australian Naval Reserve, and is
one of the best-known figures in
shipping circles in the State. Cap-
tain Irvine is President of the Fre


mantle Swimming Club and has
always taken a keen interest in
yachting matters. A member of the
Fremantle Golf Club, he is fre-
quently to be seen on the links
enjoying the healthy recreation
afforded by that ancient sport. In
1887 he married Flora M., daughter
of the late Mr. H. J. Yelverton, of
Quindalup, Western Australia, and
has a son and a daughter.
Captain JOHN FRANCIS MOR-
RISON, Deputy-Harbourmaster,
Chief Pilot and Surveyor to the Fre-
mantle Boat Licensing Board, In-
spector of Shipping and Shipwright's
Surveyor under the Navigation Act,
Western Australia, was born at
Hobart, Tasmania, on February 12,
1858, being a son of the late Mr.
James Alexander Morrison, of that
town. He was educated at the High
School, now Christ College, in his
native city, and when approaching
fifteen years of age joined, as appren-
tice, the ship “Wagoola,” of London,
in which he sailed for five years,
completing his apprenticeship in
1877. Having obtained his second
mate's certificate he returned to Aus-
tralia in the “Cairnburg,” Aberdeen
line, and after enjoying a well-
earned holiday at Melbourne joined
the barque “Nardoo” in 1878.
Nearly two years passed in a trip to
China, Japan, and adjacent ports
before the return voyage was made
Bartletto , Perth .
CAPTAIN JOHN FRANCIS MORRISON.
to Victoria, when, arriving again on
Australian soil, Mr. Morrison took
his certificate as first mate and made
a second trip in the “Nardoo” as
uu
first officer. In 1882 he obtained his
master's certificate, and after a year,
during which he shipped as mate in
the Currie line, he rejoined the sail-
ing vessel “Nardoo” this time taking
command, and for three years traded
in her in the Southern Hemisphere.
Abandoning the sailing craft, he
then took a position as second officer
on board the steamer “Nemesis,”
and after augmenting his experience
on various steamboats accepted the
position of master of the S.S.
“Lubra,” of the Adelaide Steamship
Company, by whom afterwards he
was transferred to different ships en-
gaged in the coastal trade until 1897,
when he joined the Harbour and
Lights Department at Fremantle as
master of the Government steamer
“Penguin.” Subsequently, in 1900,
he was offered his present position in
the pilot service, and in 1905 he also
obtained the appointments of Deputy-
Harbourmaster, Inspector of Ship-
ping, etc., which he holds in con-
junction with that of Chief Pilot.
Outside of his professional duties he
indulges in the hobby of amateur
carpentry, in which he excels, vary-
ing this form of exercise by an occa-
sional hour on the bowling green.
In 1881 he married a daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Wise, of
Hobart, and has two sons surviving.
Captain ALEXANDER
CLEARY, Wharf Manager and
Berthingmaster, Harbour Trust,
Fremantle, is an Irishman by birth,
having been born near the City of
Dublin, Ireland, on January 13,
1854, and is a son of the late Mr. J.
M. Cleary, of Melbourne, Victoria.
Part of his early youth was spent in
his native place, and subsequently he
removed with his father to Ply-
mouth, England, whence at the age
of fourteen he went to sea. Serving
his apprenticeship in the sailing ves-
sel “Statesman” and other vessels
engaged in the coasting and West
Indian trade, upon its completion
he continued with the Company for
over fifteen years, during which time
he rose through the various offices
from midshipman to master, in 1880
receiving his first permanent com-
mand on board the S.S. “Rosella,”
having previously served a few
months on other steamships in order
to gain the experience required when
transferring from sailing vessels to
steamers. He continued in the com-
mand of this and other vessels for the
same Company —Messrs. J. H. Berry
and Co., of Witty, Yorkshire—dur-
ing seven years, until 1877, when he
joined in commercial enterprise with
his father, who had settled in Mel-
bourne. Sharing in the general loss
resultant upon the land boom in
Bartletto, Perth.
CAPTAIN ALWXANDER CLEARY.
Victoria Captain Cleary relinquished
his business interests and returned
to a seafaring life, entering the service
of Messrs. Mcllwraith, McEacharn,
and Co. as second officer on board the
S.S. “Federal.” Within two years
he was again promoted to a com-
mand, and continued as master of
various vessels in this Company’s
fleet during the ensuing ten years.
In 1900 he was appointed by the
Western Australian Government
Pilot-in-Charge of Rottnest Pilot
Station, and carried out the duties
in connection with this appointment
until the station was abolished upon
the amalgamation of the pilot ser-
vices when the Harbour Trust was
formed, whereupon he was trans-
ferred to Fremantle and remained in
the Pilot Service until June 30,
1910, on which date he entered upon
his present appointment, having
been chosen by the Fremantle
Harbour Trust out of over 200 appli-
cants for the position. He married
in 1895 Amy, daughter of the late
Mr. Edward Atkinson, of Beech-
worth, Victoria.
FRANK WILLIAM BUCK
STEVENS, Secretary to the
Harbour Trust at Fremantle, is a
native of Wellington, New Zealand,
where he was born on December 16,
1867. He is a son of the late Mr.


Francis Stevens, who was for many
years prominently associated with
the Civil Service of the Dominion.
Educated at the Wellington College
in the country of his birth, at the
age of seventeen years the subject of
our memoir became a' law clerk in
the firm of Messrs. Chapman and
Fitzgerald, barristers and solicitors,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. F. W. B. STEVENS.
of Wellington. Having spent five
years with this firm he relinquished
the idea of entering the legal profes-
sion and instead adopted the career
of a journalist, becoming attached to
the staff of The Evening Press news-
paper in the same town. Early in
1892 he was offered and accepted
the post of private secretary to that
engineering genius—the late Mr. C.
Y. O’Connor, elsewhere referred to
in this volume—and came to Wes-
tern Australia to take up his new
duties. It was about this time that
the late gentleman assumed the
appointment as Engineer-in-Chief
and General Manager of Railways
under the then new conditions of
responsible government which had
been granted to the colony of West-
ern Australia in 1891, and for the
ensuing ten years Mr. Stevens
acquired a vast and useful knowledge
of the extensive Public Works then
being carried out in various parts of
the State. With his chief he visited
London to assist the Board of
Engineering Experts specially
created to investigate the final
arrangements to be adopted in con-
nection with the contemplated con-
struction of the goldfields water
supply scheme, a great undertaking
which, as the world has long since
known, was brought to a very suc-
cessful issue. During the years of
his residence in the Western State
Mr. Stevens had become a well-
known figure in the community, and
with the creation of the first
Harbour Trust in the State, at Fre-
mantle in 1903, he was selected as
its chief executive officer, and upon
his shoulders fell the brunt of the
work of organizing and administer-
ing the new departure. In the per-
formance of these duties the experi-
ence gained in the engineering
branch of the Government Service
stood him in good stead, and with
this substantial basis to work upon
it is not surprising that his efforts
have been attended with great suc-
cess. Not being content continually
to remain in the one groove, Mr.
Stevens has paid visits to the Eastern
States of Australia and to the
Old World, and from observations
gathered on these trips he keeps the
shipping facilities of Fremantle well
abreast of the requirements of this
ever-expanding - and important
depot. As the permanent head of
the Harbour Trust the whole of the
work of handling the immense quan-
tities of goods landed and shipped at
the wharves naturally devolves on
his hands, and the systematic way in
which the whole work is expeditiously
dealt with is a tribute to his powers
of organization, and has brought the
port of Fremantle into a very high
position in any comparison made
with other ports of the world.
When he is able to dissociate himself
from his onerous duties Mr. Stevens
derives pleasure from the pursuit of
yachting and boating, and has, with
Mr. Justice Burnside, an interest in
the beautiful "Genesta,” the finest
yacht on the Swan River. His
marriage took place in 1899, when
he was united to a daughter of the
late Mr. Henry Everall, a prominent
figure in mercantile circles at Shang
hai, in the Chinese Empire. He
has a son and a daughter.
SAMUEL STEDMAN GLYDE,
A.LA., W.A., was born at Norwood,
South Australia, on December 3,
1872. He was educated at Prince
Alfred College, and gained his first
experience of commercial life in
the Adelaide office of the National
Mutual Life Assurance Company.
About the year 1891 Mr. Glyde pro-
ceeded to Mildura, on the River Mur-
ray, where he set to work to master
the various industries of the settle-
ment. Three years later he became
secretary to the Mildura Fruit-
growers ’ Association, relinquishing
the post in 1897 in order to come to
Western Australia. Subsequent to
his arrival in this State he spent four
and a half vears as accountant to
Messrs. Gordon & Gotch, during a
portion of that time filling the posi-
tion of joint manager for Western
Australia. In 1901 he accepted the
management of Stirling Brothers
and Co., Limited, and remained with
them for two years, when a change of
ownership took place, and Mr. Glyde
severed his connection with the firm.
On the formation of the Harbour
Trust at Fremantle in 1903 he was ap-
pointed accountant to the new body,
a position he still continues to hold.
He is an Associate of the Institute of
Accountants of Western Australia,
having gained his diploma in 1907,
and with it the Dicksee prize, looked
upon as the blue ribbon of the ac-
countancy profession. Since 1909 he
has been lecturer in advanced ac-
countancy at the Perth Technical
School. Mr. Glyde has a 1,000-acre
plot at Three Springs, which is prin-
cipally devoted to the growing of
cereals. He married in 1896, and
has two sons and one daughter.
JAMES JOHN STRATFORD,
Officer in Charge, Harbour Trust
Office, Perth, is a son of the late
Mr. John Edmund Stratford, of
Bartletto Perth.
MR. JAMES JOHN STRATFORD.
Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, England,
where he was born on January 27,
1859. While still a lad at one of
the public schools in his native


town he turned his attention toward
teaching as a profession, but at the
age of sixteen relinquished the idea
and went to sea, trading on the coast
and to the Continent, afterwards
joining the deep-sea barque “Gar-
nock” trading to Queensland. Ar-
rived at Queensland in 1877, he left
the ship and engaged in farm and
dairy work for twelve months, then
joining the “Corea,” one of Padbury
and Lamb's boats, gained his first
experienc© in the Australian coastal
trade. A year or two later he sailed
for San Francisco in the mail
steamer “Zealandia,” and after con-
tinning in this ship for some twelve
months returned to the coastal trade
of Australia, joining the Richmond
River Steam Navigation Company,
and afterwards was identified with
the old Australian Steam Naviga-
tion Company (now known as the
A.U.S.N. Company) and the
Howard Smith line in various
departments of the service. In
1880 he went to England in the
“Sorata” and there joined the P.
and O. Company, remaining in the
latter employ for about five years,
Settling in New South Wales in
1886 Mr. Stratford filled a posi-
tion for a time with the contractors
for the underground sewerage works
in Sydney, after which he came to
Western Australia in 1891 and
joined the Railways Department,
doing the clerical work in connection
with the shipping industry at Fre-
mantle. Upon the creation of the
Fremantle Harbour Trust in 1903
he was transferred from the Rail-
ways Department to the Fremantle
Harbour Trust and appointed to the
dual position of wharf manager
and berthingmaster, which he filled
until the following year, when the
introduction of the handling of
cargo made the holding of the two
positions an impossibility, and that
of berthingmaster was handed over
to Captain Morrison. Mr. Strat-
ford continued as wharf manager
until June, 1910, when he was
transferred to his present appoint-
ment at Bazaar Terrace, Perth. In
the year 1886 he was married in Syd-
ney to Annie, daughter of the late
Mr. John Kimber, of Otford, Kent,
England.
Bunbury Harbour Trust.
The extensive harbour works at Bunbury, now
under the control of the Bunbury Harbour Trust, are
sufficient evidence that the policy of centralization so
studiously adhered to by some of the Eastern States finds
no counterpart in the policy of the Government of
Western Australia.
When harbour works at Bunbury were first proposed
the late Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. C. Y. O’Connor, M.lnst.
C.E., C.M.G., prepared alternative designs for them as
follows ; —-1. For an inner harbour, similar in concep-
tion to that being constructed at Fremantle, with two
ocean moles, and an entrance to Leschenault Estuary
at the embouchure of the Preston River, estimated cost
.£430,000, 2. For a mole reaching out from Casuarina
Point for a length of 3,000 ft. to shelter, to some extent,
the existing anchorage; estimated cost £lOO,OOO. The
latter alternative was adopted.
The work was commenced on April 27, 1897, when
the first load of stone was tipped into the sea at the root
of the breakwater, the ceremony being performed by the
then Premier, Sir John Forrest, K.C.M.G.
The scheme, so far, is comprised in the construction
of a mole running out into the ocean from Casuarina
Point in a north-north-easterly direction, thus partly
enclosing Koombana Bay, and, to some extent, protect-
ing the shipp-ng from the force of the west to north-
west gales.
The mole is of the “Pierres Perdues’’ type, and
follows generally along a curve of about half a mile
radius. Its foundation for the whole distance is bare
rock, the mole reaching, in 21 feet of water, a length of
3,200 feet.
The total expenditure on this main portion of the
Bunbury harbour works scheme has been £116,705.
uu2
The main jetty is constructed of timber, and con-
sists of a neck or viaduct 1,900 feet long, running from
the shore in a north-easterly direction to a head about
2,000 feet long, running north and south. The head
affords berthage for two steamers and three sailers on the
east and two steamers and three sailers on the west side,
the depth of water at low tide ranging from 15 to 20
feet. A viaduct 2,500 feet long, partly in stone and
partly in timber, connects the lines on the jetty head
with the main railway system of the State. With the
exception of northerly gales the jetty is protected from
all weather.
Further extension of the works has been in abeyance
for some few years, the question as to whether the outer
harbour shall be further developed, or whether works for
an inner harbour should be instituted having been the
subject of not a little controversy. It is expected,
however, that in the forthcoming year a decision will be
come to, and that additional works will thereupon be
undertaken.
In 1909 the Bunbury Harbour Trust Act was passed
under which five Commissioners were appointed by the
Governor-in-Council to control all matters relating to
the harbour and its appurtenances. The powers con-
ferred upon the Trust were much the same as those
conferred upon the similar body at Fremantle.
The first Commissioners, appointed on the proclama-
tion of the Act in May, 1909, were Messrs. H. M. Beigel
(chairman), W. Balston, J. Bolden, F. W. Roberts, and
F. W. Steele, with Mr. E). G. Humphries as secretary.
In October, 1910, Mr. Beigel resigned from membership
and Mr. F. W. Steere was appointed as chairman, the
vacancy on the Board being filled in March, 1911, by
the appointment of Captain J. G. Dodds.


Regulations were issued in November, 1909, and
with slight alterations made during the following year
have been found to work satisfactorily.
The trade returns published in the second annual
report issued in September, 1911, show that the number
of vessels using the port during the year was 165, of a
net registered tonnage of 318,248, being a slight decrease
on the figures of the previous year. The total loads
shipped, consisting principally of timber and coal,
amounted to 199,965, representing 356,010 tons.
Indications point towards a great development in
the south-western portion of the State, the natural
outlet for which is Bunbury. How deeply this fact is
impressing itself on the Trust may be seen from the
following extract from its annual report:—“During
the year the need of extensive harbour improvements has
an enhanced shipping cost to the producer. The Board
realizes that the undertaking will be of an expensive
nature, but feels assured of its ability to find the
necessary interest, sinking, and replacement funds on
the works. The present sea jetty has answered its pur-
pose in demonstrating the importance of this port to the
State. It is also an indisputable fact that in five to
seven years about 1,000 feet of the older portion of the
jetty will have to be renewed, at an estimated cost of
£50,000. In view of this contingency and the increas-
ing export, the Board feels that the time has now arrived
when the exigencies of trade demand considerably
improved facilities, recognizing that the proper develop-
ment of this part of the State and the hinterland
adjacent thereto is absolutely dependent upon a
thoroughly up-to-date harbour equipped with the neces-
Photo by W. J. Ford.
THE HARBOUR AT BUNBURY,
been forced upon the members. The question of future
trade was fully considered by the Board, who arrived at
the decision that in five years hence the Board will
require to make provision to cope with the following
additional annual trade; —70,000 tons coal, 30,000 tons
wheat, 60,000 cases fruit, to say nothing of increases
in imports and other directions. The above quantities
will further, after that period, be of a yearly increasing
nature. The jetty at the present time is usually taxed
to its utmost capacity, so that it will be impossible to
deal with the additional trade named unless considerable
extra wharfage space, as well as more extensive facili-
ties, are provided. It is recognized that any further
extension of the present jetty is out of the question, so
that an entirely new scheme will have to be evolved, which
must of necessity provide for shed accommodation right
alongside the ship, as it is quite impossible to handle
an export produce trade by any other means except at
sary appliances to cope expeditiously and cheaply with
the mineral and agricultural wealth of the district. The
requirements of the Board have been plaeed before the
Government, and it feels assured that its requests
will receive the favourable consideration that their
importance merits.”
The question referred to as a “new scheme” refers
to that of a commodious harbour within the estuary,
where ample accommodation for shipping could be
secured. Trial borings have shown that this would not
be so easy of achievement as was at first expected, as the
rock bottom is reached before sufficient depth could be
secured in the canal cutting between the estuary and
the sea. Whatever means may be ultimately adopted,
it is evident to all with a knowledge of the port and of
the possibilities of the immense district behind it that
in the near future extensive additional accommodation
will be required.


FREDERICK WALTER
STEERE, Chairman of the Bunbury
Harbour Board, was born in 1867,
and educated at the Hope House
School, Richmond. He was articled
to the architectural profession under
FORD . BUNBURY.
MR. FREDERICK WALTER STEERE.
his father, with whom he continued
until his departure for Australia in
1888. After about nine months at
Sydney he proceeded to Queensland,
where he was identified with station
life for three years. Subsequently
he was attracted to Victoria, and
spent a period in Melbourne, leaving
for the Western State in 1898. In
1901 Mr. Steere established himself
in business on his own account, and
since that period has been responsible
for the designs of many important
buildings. Mr. Steere has always
taken a very active part in municipal
and social affairs, and has served the
ratepayers as councillor for some
years, twice holding office as Mayor.
While on the committee of the old
Mechanics’ Institute, he was instru-
mental in transferring that property
to the municipal council and estab-
lishing the first municipalized free
public library in Western Australia.
For the past two years he has occu-
pied the office of Chairman of the
Bunbury Harbour Board. He is a
Justice of the Peace for the district,
and in the past filled the post of Secre-
tary to the Chamber of Commerce,
being a member of the committee of
that body. He holds the rank of
First Lieutenant in the Military
Forces, and has charge of the Senior
Cadet Corps. In the year 1892
Mr. Steere married a daughter of
Mr. Alfred Wells, of England,
and has a family of five sons and
a daughter.
Captain JOHN GEORGE
ABRAHAMSON, Harbourmaster,
Bunbury, was born on March 9,
1848, and is a son of Captain John
Abrahamson, of London. He was
educated at Montrose Academy,
Scotland, and being apprenticed to
marine pursuits became connected
with the Pow and Faucus line of
vessels of North Shields, in which he
was apprenticed for six years. He
passed his first examination in 1866
in London and sailed as second mate
in the “John C. Munro,” of Lon-
don. In 1869 he took his first mate’s
certificate in London, qualifying as
ford , Bunbury.
CAPTAIN JOHN GEORGE ABRAHAMSON.
master in 1873 in London. Captain
Abrahamson had command of one of
the Oliver Wilson, also Trinder An-
derson, line of ships, and was en-
gaged in the early immigration trade
between London and Western Aus-
tralia in command of sailing vessels.
From 1888 onward for many years
he was associated with the Nor.’-
West trade, while in command of the
“Australind” plying between Fre-
mantle and Singapore, via the north-
western ports of this State, prior to
taking the Australian coastal com-
mands being connected with the
China, Japan, African, and Black
Sea trade. In 1891 he joined the
service as pilot at Rottnest, and from
1894 to 1900 occupied the post of
pilot in charge of the station at that
island. In the latter year he re-
ceived his present appointment of
harbourmaster at Bunbury, and he
has the distinction of being the
second senior officer in the service,
Captain Irvine having a priority of
three months. Many improvements
have been made during Captain
Abrahamson’s occupation of the posi-
tion of harbourmaster, the jetty
alone having been extended five
times since the time of his appoint-
ment. Originally it was only 750
ft. in length, drawing 16 ft. of
water, while at the present time it
is 3,536 ft. long, with 2,220 ft. of
berthing space, and at the outer end
has a depth of 27 ft. of water. Cap-
tain Abrahamson is a member of the
Town Bowling Club and an
enthusiastic chess and bridge player.
He married Mary Ann, daughter of
Mr. T. H. Higgins, of London, and
has a surviving family of three
daughters and a son.
DOUGLAS GUY HUM-
PHRIES, Secretary of Bunbury
Harbour Board, is a son of the late
Mr. George Guy Humphries, and
was born at Lewisham, Kent, Eng-
land, on September 24, 1873. He
acquired his scholastic training at
Purley, Surrey, and upon leaving
school entered a shipping office in
London, where he remained for two
and a half years. Subsequently he
proceeded to Germany and con-
FORD, BUN BURY
MR. DOUGLAS GUY HUMPHRIES.
siderably enlarged his experience in
shipping at Hamburg, Antwerp,
and Rotterdam. Having spent five
and a half years on the Continent


he took a trip to London, and in
1896 booked his passage to Western
Australia. After some connection
with the shipping at Fremantle Mr.
Humphries was identified with life
on the goldfields for a short time,
but being obliged for private busi-
ness reasons to take a trip to
England at the end of 1897, upon
his return he accepted a position in
the Jarrah Timber and Wood Pav-
ing Corporation at Bunbury, and
ultimately was appointed Manager
and shipping agent for that Com-
pany. He continued to fill this
position until the post of Secretary
and accountant to BeigeTs Brewery
fell vacant, for which he was the
successful applicant and acted in
this capacity for some little time,
Upon the formation of the Bunbury
Harbour Board he entered upon the
duties of his present appointment in
August, 1909. Mr. Humphries has
taken a prominent part in the found-
mg and subsequent proceedings of the
Shipping Association of Bunbury, in
whicn he held the position of Vice-
President for some years. This
Association played an important
part in the accomplishment of alter-
ations and additions to the Harbour
which are recognized as being a
great improvement to the former
facilities. For some years Mr.
Humphries filled the position of
auditor to the Bunbury Municipal
Council. He is a member of the
Masonic fraternity and has held
various important offices in the
Bunbury Lodge and Grand Lodge,
An enthusiast in yachting pursuits,
he is one of the original members
of the Bunbury Club, and has also
given a good deal of time to lacrosse,
but he finds his chief diversion at
the present time in gardening. He
married Daisy, daughter of the late
Mr. George Teede, of Bunbury, and
has a family of two sons and one
daughter.
Maritime interests must always constitute a very
important factor in the interests of Western Australia,
partly because of its geographical position and length of
coastline ana partly because it must in time grow to be
a large exporter of the results of primary industry.
.Even when the colony was founded in 1829 agriculture
and wool were looked to as possibilities in working up a
lucrative export trade, and when timber, pearlshell,
guano, gold, and other metals were added, Western
Australia became a country worth the while of ships
seeking cargo to visit.
During tne very early years the infant colony, far
from being an exporter, was unable to supply its own
needs in wheat, flour, and other products of agriculture,
and consequently whatever shipping called at Fremantle
did so because the captain had goods to sell, and as he
had no opportunity of securing cargo in return, no
doubt charged for his goods accordingly. Up to the
end of 1833 something like 128 vessels of different sizes
had called at Fremantle, bringing goods to the value of
<£306,426, and not one of them had taken in return
produce to the value of one farthing. As in all the Aus-
tralian States, the first commodity to make its appear-
ance on the export list was wool, 7,585 lb., valued at
£758, being sent away in 1834. Beyond one experi-
mental shipment of hardwoods in 1836, valued at £2,500,
wool stood alone until 1844, when timber (£163), agri-
cultural produce (£258), and livestock and horses
(£464) made their appearance. Perhaps the stimulat-
ing fact bringing this to pass was the depression that
fell upon the colony in the early forties, and the per-
sistent advice of Governor Hutt that only by the cultiva-
tion of the soil could it be overcome. Since 1833 wool
has never been absent from the list of exports, and since
1846 there have been very few years, and these few far
back, when timber (hardwoods and sandalwood) and
livestock, including horses and cattle, have not figured
in the returns. The export of agricultural produce con-
tinued in a desultory manner until 1872, when it dis-
appeared, to return again with increasing output after
the revival of agriculture that took place during the early
years of the present century. During the fifties lead and
copper maae their appearance on the list, and ten years
later pearls and pearlshell appeared, to be followed in
1876 by a regular export of guano, which continued
until it was prohibited by the Government in 1904.
Lastly, in 1886 appeared gold —the talisman which was
to carry Western Australia to the height of prosperity,
and make her envied of all countries. To give some idea
of the growth of the export trade it may be mentioned
that wool exported was valued in 1833 at £758 and in
1911 at £925,450; timber, £163 in 1844 and £986,341
to-day; pearls and pearlshell, starting at £250, are now
valued at £340,714; wheat and flour stand at £441,487 ;
and gold from £1,146 in 1886 had risen in 1911 (and
that by no means the highest figure) to £5,823,075.
Imports have naturally followed upon two deter-
mining factors —development of the country and growth
of population —but they have in Western Australia
more perhaps than in any other country been affected
by the fact that the State is not rich in industrial
manufactures of any kind, and therefore show a greater
value in proportion to population than elsewhere.
Political factors, too, have had an influence, for we find
the periods of great increases are coincident with, for
example, the establishment of the convict system, the
commencement of a loan policy under the representative
Legislative Council, and the abnormal expansion in
every direction that followed the grant of responsible
government.
The following table will show some idea of the
natural expansion of shipping and trade in Western
Shipping.


Ships.
Tonnage.
Imports.
Exports.
1830
39
11,601
£
114,177
£
1840
137
39,850
No record
No record
1850
64
15,088
52,351
22,135
1860
109
51,564
169,075
89,247
1870
127
65,716
213,259
200,985
1880
165
123,985
353,669
499,183
1890
281
484,354
874,447
671,813
1900
769
J, 625,696
5,962,178
6,852,054
1910
733
2,372,303
7,908,386
8,299,781
Australia at the end of each decennial period since the
establishment of the colony in 1829:
In addition to the oversea shipping trade, including
interstate, there is, as might be expected in a country of
such magnificent stretch of seaboard as Western Aus-
tralia, a considerable trade between local ports.
Steamers regularly ply along the north-west coast from
Fremantle, and there is also a service between Albany
and the ports to the East. Into this trade the Govexm-
ment has recently entered, in the hope of in some
measure reducing the cost of meat, most of the cattle
for consumption being grown on stations in the far north.
As to the probable results of the venture, opinions— ■
principally political —are divided, but as to the motives
actuating the authorities there is no room for difference.
A State-owned steamship service is an anomaly in Aus-
tralia, but Australia is a country of experiments, and
most of her experiments have been exceptionally for-
tunate.
With the completion of the Trans-Australian Rail-
way it is expected that shipping interests at Fremantle
will receive a very considerable interest. For a long
time that port has been the first and last port of call for
most of the vessels trading easterly and westerly to and
from the Commonwealth, and with the opening of the
railway it is hoped that it will become for many vessels
the only port of call.
The Chamber of Manufactures.
The Chamber of Manufactures of Western Australia
was established in 1899. Members must be bond fide
manufacturers or directly associated with manufactures.
Honorary members may be elected on same conditions,
but these are not entitled to vote or take part in the
deliberations of the Chamber. The objects of the Asso-
ciation are to promote the development of Western Aus-
tralian manufactures and products —by exhibitions,
certificates of merit, correspondence, collecting and dis-
seminating information, essays and discussions on sub-
jects of advantage to manufacturers and producers, or by
any other means which the Chamber may deem desirable,
and to erect an exhibition building.
Owing to the operation of interstate free trade,
industrial establishments have been somewhat retarded
in the West. The thoroughly-established and fully-
equipped factories of the Eastern States have been able
to land their manufactures in Western Australia on
terms that the local employer found difficult to compete
with. Notwithstanding that fact, however, there are
many industries that are gaining a firm footing, and
year by year sees others being entered upon. In bis
annual address to the Chamber delivered in August, 1912,
the President said that “it was gratifying to know that
the Government was giving the manufacturer a share
of the work of building new waggons for the Railway
Department. He was pleased to note that during the
past year there had been a few more industries added to
the list in Western Australia. The fertilizer factories
at West Guildford and North Fremantle, erected two
years ago, had been, and were still, doing good work.
They had produced something like 40,000 odd tons since
they were estauiished. The capacity of the factories was
much greater, and he hoped farmers would in future
place all their orders with the local factories. The people
of Western Australia should whenever possible buy goods
made in Western Australia, and thus encourage the
industries already established.”
If this advice is adopted it will no doubt have a far-
reaching effect upon the establishment of local industries,
and so provide many avenues for employment not now
open to the people.
According to the official reports there were 859 estab-
lishments in the State in 1911, as against 822 in 1910,
giving employment to 16,672 persons, as against 14,894.
This is itself encouraging, as it shows that the industries
are recovering from the setback which they received from
federation, and that in face of paying better wages than
similar establishments in other States they are able to
hold their own in the open market. The principle of sup-
port for Australian manufactures as against the imported
article is an excellent one for those who would see Aus-
tralia prosper, but support to the local Western Aus-
tralian product is for this State a better principle still,
as it means not only comfort and competence to the
worker, but added wealth to the community.
In these directions the Chamber of Manufactures is
doing a work that deserves every recognition, and in
its endeavours to foster trade in the home-made article
it deserves all possible encouragement.


The officers of the Chamber for the year 1912-13
are as follow:—President, Mr. William Padbury (re-
elected); vice-president, Mr. C. E. Galwey (re-elected);
treasurer, Mr. H. Armstrong (re-elected); auditor,
The EMU BREWERY, Limited,
Mounts Bay Road, Perth, is one of
the oldest and most important con-
cerns in the State. The premises are
situated on the banks of the Swan
River, at the foot of King's Park,
and form a prominent landmark to
river-goers. The business was
founded as far back as 1837, and
from its inception has steadily ex-
panded to its present high estate.
As to the uninitiated the manufac-
ture of beer remains a complete
mystery a brief description of the
processes undergone in the produc-
tion of the amber fluid may prove
of interest to the numerous readers
of this work. Ascending to the top
floor of the familiar tower our initia-
tion commences at
a cylinder - shaped
contrivance known
as a malt-mill, to
which is conveyed
from floors below
by means of eleva-
tors quantities of
malt grain. This
passes into the in-
terior of the mill,
where it is graded
through a sieve and
cleansed from im-
purities by a revol-
ving fan. The malt
is then fed to the
crushers, after
which it passes to
the mash-tub
through a washing-
machine containing
a series of revolving tables, water
being added at the same time
in sufficient quantities to reduce
the starch contained in the malt
to a sugary state. The mixture
is then allowed to soak in the
mash - tub for varying periods up
to a couple of hours, when the malt
liquid or extract is drawn off to an
adjoining copper boiler and the pulp
extracted through a false bottom
with which the tub is fitted, and
shot outside the building to be used
as fodder for stock and for other
purposes. Sugar is then added to
the malt liquid, which is boiled by
means of steam introduced into the
jacketed bottom of the copper, hops
also being introduced to clarify, pre-
serve, and flavour the mixture.
From the copper the liquid flows
through a sieve to a tank known as
a hop-back, to which it makes its
way through a finely-woven gauge
inserted for the purpose of effectu-
ally straining off any stray grains
which may have thus far found their
way. A hundred feet of piping next
conveys the wort, as it is now called,
to the cooler fed from a refrigerator
(direct expansion ammonia coil),
which gradually reduces its temper-
ature and aerates the liquid at the
one time. By an ingenious arrange-
ment the water used is returned to
a well whence it is again taken up
and recirculated through the top
portion of the cooler, over which
the boiling wort is continually fall-
ing, which has the effect of bringing
THE EMU BREWERY, MOUNTS BAY ROAD, PERTH.
it almost to boiling heat, in which
state it is conducted to the cask-
room, where it is used for washing
purposes. From the refrigerator
the wort is run into four huge vats,
where yeast is added, and for the
next 48 hours it is allowed to go
through a process of fermentation
to reduce the specific gravity. During
fermentation the liquid throws off
carbonic gas, familiarly known as
C0 2 , and with the conclusion of this
operation has reached its alcoholic
state. It is now conducted to the
cellars to undergo a through clean-
sing, and after a few days in the
large casks, during which it discards
the yeast, isinglass is added further
to clarify the mixture, which is then
stored for various periods to assume
the condition so dear to the con-
Mr. John Sinclair (re-elected); committee (six vacan-
cies), Messrs. J. Hodgson, Bela Makutz, Lyons,
Locke, Povey, and Ferguson. Mr. John Phair is
the secretary.
noisseur of the seductive beverage.
It is interesting to note that the
yeast thrown off is conserved in
tanks erected under the barrels for
the purpose and is afterwards
brought into use again better for
the transition and available for use
over many years. The beer now
undergoes a process of filtration, dur-
ing which it is not handled by the
men nor is air allowed to reach it.
The filtering commences in a long
cylinder round which brine is cir-
culated, and to maintain the liquid
at an even temperature it is con-
stantly kept in motion by an agi-
tator. The chilled liquid is then
forced through a patent filter con-
sisting of a series of frames on which
papier mache has
been fitted an d
pressed, the whole
being clamped to-
gether and rendered
airtight, whence it
passes to the racker
to be filled into
casks ready for dis-
tribution. By adopt-
ing these methods
it is impossible for
the beer to become
contaminated, the
natural gases and
delicate aroma are
successfully retained
and the maximum
of sterility secured,
the whole resulting
in the production
of a beverage for
which the Emu Brewery has de-
servedly become famous. The
Bottling Department, an important
auxiliary to the firm’s opera-
tions, has recently been fitted up
with the most modern machinery
known to science. From the collect-
ing depot the bottles are auto-
matically passed through the various
stages without being handled by the
staff employed. They are first cast
into soaking bins cleansed and steri-
lized, and then conveyed on an
endless belt to the rotary filler, after
which they are corked and wired.
The beer is then pasteurized by being
placed in water at 100° temperature,
which is gradually raised until an
even temperature of 140° has been
maintained for some time, after


which they are taken out and cooled
off and labelled, all by machinery.
This latter process destroys all bac-
teria and prevents what is commonly
know# as second fermentation, a
frequent fault in beer not treated
in this manner. With this ma-
chinery 1,300 dozen per day of eight
hours may be turned out —a large
increase on the old methods hitherto
in operation. All the casks in use
are made on the premises, the tim-
ber used (oak) being imported, as
also is a large number of the bottles,
but it is the established policy of the
directors bo use local materials when-
ever procurable. The interior of
the casks in use is specially treated
with a compound of resin and oils,
which is heated and blown into the
casks under pressure, forming a thin
veneer of varnish and rendering the
vessel germ-proof. At the rear of
the premises are located two “Her-
cules” refrigerating engines of 20
and 10 tons capacity respectively,
and three immense boilers, which
provide all the steam required for
the performance of the various oper-
ations included in the firm’s work.
Electrically-driven machinery is also
employed and the establishment is
fitted throughout in the most replete
manner. The directors of this pro-
gressive concern, so intimately con-
nected with the rise and progress of
the fair city of Perth, are Dr. M.
O’Connor (Chairman), Messrs. J. R.
McKenzie, E. J. Hayes, J. R. Jones,
and A. D. Rankin, the Secretary
being Mr. R. S. Forbes. The im-
portant part of the brewing, upon
which so much of the success or
failure of the brewery depends, is
in the capable hands of Mr. E.
Terry, who has had twenty years’
experience of the requirements of
the trade, most of that time being
spent in the service of the Carlton
Brewery Company of Victoria, and
for generations before him his people
have fulfilled a similar capacity, so
that it may well be said that the
germs of the trade circulate in his
blood. The hands employed total
well over 100 and the weekly pay-
sheet plays an important part in the
advancement of the Western Metro-
polis.
EDWARD JOSEPH HAYES,
J.P., is a son of Robert Hayes, of
Port Fairy, Victoria, in which dis-
trict the gentleman under review
was born on November 11, 1870.
From a pupil in the State schools he
rose to the teaching profession in
the same institution and spent eight
years in this calling, being the pos-
sessor not only of the certificates re-
quisite for his profession but of
several others testifying to his pro-
ficiency in science, music, and draw-
ing. Being of an enterprising dis-
position he obtained a year’s leave
of absence and came to Western
Australia on January 16, 1898, to
see what prospects offered in the
rising State. He was very favour-
ably impressed with the excellent
opportunities open to a young and
pushing man, and deciding to re-
main entered the Education De-
partment, being appointed to a po-
sition in the Highgate Hill School,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. EDWARD JOSEPH HAYES.
Perth. Four years later he resigned
from the Service, having attained to
the post of first assistant in this
school, and opened in business as a
produce merchant on his own ac-
count in Perth. This he carried on
very successfully in both wholesale
and retail lines for four years, when,
parting with it as a going concern,
he turned his attention in another
direction and became Director of a
number of local Companies, includ-
ing the Stanley and Emu Brewery
Companies, Limited. Mr. Hayes
takes a live interest in municipal
matters and has rendered valuable
service as member for East Ward in
the Perth City Council, his three
years in this office terminating in No-
vember, 1910. In 1907 he received
his Commission of the Peace, in com
nection with which he has a seat on
the City Bench. In matters charit-
able and philanthropic he is ever to
the fore, and hardly a Committee of
Ways and Means is formed without
his practical co-operation. He is a
member of the Cathedral Committee
and is a committeeman of that ex-
cellent unsectarian charitable insti-
tution, the St. Vincent de Paul So-
ciety, being also a Past-President
and valuable worker in the Perth
Catholic Young Men’s Society. A
member of several prominent Clubs
in Perth, his chief interests in this
respect are centred in the Celtic
Club, of which he is a foundation
member, and a past president of
three years’ standing. He has also
acted as President and Vice-
President of various athletic Socie-
ties, and gives his hearty sup-
port to all healthy outdoor sports,
cricket and bowls being perhaps
those in which he takes the keenest
interest. Much of his leisure time
is given to the cultivation of flowers,
making the garden surrounding his
home, “Kincora,” Adelaide Terrace,
“a thing of beauty” to the beholder
and “a joy for ever” to himself
through the health and recreation it
affords him. Mr. Hayes married in
1902 Monica, daughter of the late
Mr. Daniel Connor, of Perth, and
has a son and three daughters.
ERNEST WILLIAM TERRY,
head brewer, Emu Brewery, Limited,
is a son of the late Mr. Alfred Terry,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. ERNEST WILLIAM TERRY.
one of the oldest and most successful
brewers in Victoria. He was born
at Melbourne, Victoria, on Septem-
ber 20, 1875, and educated in the
same city. Leaving school at about
fifteen years of age he entered the


Carlton Brewery under Colonel Bal-
lenger, men Head brewer there, and
completed his articles at the end of
five years. Thence onward for seven-
teen years he filled the position of
under - brewer, ultimately relin-
quishing it to take up pastoral pur-
suits at Croydon, near Healesvillc.
At a subsequent period he sold his
property, and having been offered
the position of head brewer to the
Emu Brewery he accepted it and
took up his new duties in June,
1909. Upon his arrival Mr. Terry
was entrusted with the task of re-
organizing the Brewery, and as a
result the whole place has been re-
novated. New buildings have been
erected, new machinery installed,
and the bottling department, cellars,
and malt store improved, everything
outside the office coming under
Mr. Terry's immediate supervision.
Recently he took a trip to the
Eastern States to make a further
study of the latest improvements in
all the principal breweries in order
to cope yet more successfully with
the increasing demands of the busi-
ness. In his leisure time he makes a
keen study of our equine and canine
friends, and his sports and recrea-
tions are taken in their company.
He has made a name for the breed-
ing of Gordon setters, winning all
the chief prizes in the principal
shows in Australia. He is a member
of the Western Australian Turf
Club. In 1905 Mr. Terry married a
daughter of Mr. John Starr, C.E.,
of Victoria, and has two sons and
two daughters.
REGINALD SLADE FORBES,
Manager of the Emu Brewery, Lim-
ited, is a son of Colonel Charles
D’Oyly Forbes, of the Imperial
Army, and was born at Plymouth,
England, on April 1, 1868. He re-
ceived his scholastic training at the
Galway Grammar School on the
West Coast of Ireland and upon
leaving college was articled to Mr.
T. W. Gilbert, chartered account-
ant, Clements Inn, London, with
whom he remained until he came to
Western Australia in 1886. Upon
arrival at Perth he joined the ser-
vice of the Western Australian Bank
and subsequently managed the
branches of that institution at Don-
garra, Southern Cross, Kalgoorlie,
Menzies, Mount Margaret, and
Marble Bar successively. In 1896
he became associated with the Ven-
ture Corporation, Limited, a min-
ing company formed in England,
and acted as attorney for the
company jointly with Mr. W. H.
Glanville, now resident in England.
Two years later Mr. Forbes went
into partnership with Mr. Glanville
as legal managers and general min-
ing agents, carrying on business
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. REGINALD SLADE FORBES.
under the title of Glanville and
Forbes. He managed the transac-
tions of the Venture Corporation in
Western Australia, as well as all
subsidiary companies, the partner-
ship also representing James Simp-
son & Company, Limited, engineers,
of London and Newark, for whom
they acted as attorneys during the
whole course of the contract for the
supply of pumping machinery for
the Goldfields Water Supply. Upon
the satisfactory completion of the
contract Mr. Forbes was invited by
the firm to England, where he was
appointed commercial manager of
their engineering works at Notting-
ham. After five years in this re-
sponsible position, for family reasons
he decided to return to the land of
his adoption in 1908, and upon his
arrival was offered the post of Man-
ager of the Emu Brewery, Limited.
Mr. Forbes is a member of the
Masonic craft, in which he has held
office. His chief pastimes are boating
and yachting. He was married in
1896 at Dongarra to a daughter of
Mr. Samuel F. Moore, M.L.A., of
Western Australia, and has a son
and a daughter.
JOHN HUGH GRACIE, founder
of the Castlemaine Brewery, Fre-
mantle, was born at Hobart, Tas-
mania, on January 30, 1855, and is
a son of the late Mr. William
Gracie, who was Manager of the
Cascade Brewery in Hobart for a
great many years. He received his
education at the City School, Ho-
bart, under the late Mr. H. M.
Pike, and at the conclusion of his
studies in 1872 was initiated by his
father into the processes of the brew-
ing business. He proved an apt
pupil, and was so successful in his
operations that at thirty years of age
he succeeded to the management
of the Brewery upon the retirement
of his father. He retained this post
about five years, in 1889 being com-
pelled through severe illness to re-
sign, and subsequently went to
Melbourne, where he was engaged in
various brewing businesses for some
years. Afterwards he proceeded to
Bathurst, New South Wales, and
was brewer at the Crown Brewery
in that town, leaving there in 1896
for the Western State, which was
rapidly increasing in popularity. In
conjunction with three partners Mr.
Gracie built and opened a small
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN HUGH GRACIE.
brewery at East Fremantle, and
buying out his partners’ interests at
a later date joined issue with Mr.
W. F. Walkley as working partner.
The business was carried on by these
gentlemen for five years, during
which it made rapid progress, and
in 1907 was floated into a limited
liability company, with a capital of
£60,000. In the newly formed com-
pany Mr. Gracie continued the per-
sonal management of affairs as Man-
aging Director and Chairman of
Directors until 1912, when he disposed


of his interests and retired from the
directorate. He devotes his spare time
to farming interests in the neigh-
bourhood of Kellerberrin, where he
owns a property of considerably over
a thousand acres, which is devoted
chiefly to the growing of cereals.
His picturesque residence is situated
on the river bank at Riverside Road
and commands one of the most beau-
tiful views in the district, and here
he finds recreation in tending the
beautiful blooms which adorn in
their season the well-kept flower-
beds and shed their delicious per-
fume on the air.
RICHARD STANLEY CUMP-
STON, proprietor of the City Elec-
tric Engraving Works, Play Street,
Perth, is a son of Mr. L. P. Cump-
ston, of this city, and was born at
Liverpool, England, on February
23, 1873. He came to Australia
with his parents when twelve years
of age and attended the Echuca
Grammar School, Victoria, for
several years. In 1890 he entered
the office of a lithographic artist,
and subsequently became articled to
Mr. C. G. Roeszler, the proprietor
of the leading engraving works in
Melbourne. He came to Western
Australia in 1897 and joined Mr.
Robert Manning in partnership in
the Commercial Agency Company,
but eventually relinquishing this
Photo by C. F. Farr .
MR. R. S. CUMPSTON'S ENGRAVING WORKS, HAY STREET, PERTH
connection proceeded to the gold-
fields as representative for the
Brownhill Great Southern, the
Railway Venture, and the Britannia
Mining Companies. He also took a
personal part in prospecting for a
hundred miles around Kalgoorlie
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. L. P. CUMPSTON.
with more or less success, and in
conjunction with Mr. H. M. Deakin
took part in the opening up of the
Collie Coal Mines. This enterprise,
begun with a staff of seven hands,
increased to such an extent that at
the time of Mr. Cumpston's
departure there were over 300 men
at work in the mines, and this
Company supplied the Government
with the first 360,000 tons of coal
ever mined in this State. For a
time Mr. Cumpston carried on
business at Kalgoorlie as auctioneer
and jDroduce merchant, but even-
tually returning to Perth he
established his present concern, the
City Electric Engraving Works, and
has conducted it successfully ever
since. The business comprises a
great variety of operations and
turns out excellent work in brass-
plates, stencils, brass, steel, and
rubber stamps, medals, memorial
brasses, raised-letter plates, wood
and metal type blocks, stock brands,
and many other articles in continual
demand in commercial,
and pastoral circles. Mr. Cumpston
has taken a leading part in the
advancement of the various districts
where he has resided, and was a
member of the Hospital Board at
Collie and Trustee of the same
institution. He gave great assist-
ance to the municipal authorities at
Kalgoorlie, showing keen interest in
the various details of their work for
the district. He is also a member of
the Commercial Travellers' Club, and
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. RICHARD STANLEY GUMPSTON.
for recreation resorts to boating on
the River Swan. Tn the year 1911
he was married to Ella, daughter of
Mr. Janies Gibney, printer, of Wes-
tern Australia.


The WEST AUSTRALIAN
BOOT MANUFACTURING COM-
PANY, Newcastle Street, West
Perth. This prosperous and exten-
sive business was established in the
year 1907 in premises situated in
King Street, Perth. Commencing
operations on a small scale the Com-
pany soon obtained a large and
steadily-increasing connection, and
at the end of three years found it
necessary to secure a larger building
to cope with the orders which con-
tinued to flow in in continually
augmented numbers. Accordingly a
substantial block of land in New-
castle Street, West Perth, was pur-
chased, and here was erected a
commodious structure providing an
area of over 4,000 sq. ft. of space.
The factory has been equipped with
a modern plant of machinery driven
by a 5J horse-power electric motor
engine, and the Company is now
turning out boots at the rate of over
100,000 pairs per annum. Attention
is confined to the manufacture of
heavy and medium weight footwear
for men, women, and children, and
the great demand for all these lines
is a striking evidence of its popu-
larity with the buying public. The
well-known “Harvester” brand boot
is made by the Company and finds
a ready sale in the country districts,
where the boots are noted for their
comfort and durability. The whole-
sale trade only is supplied, and as
each day passes the Company finds
itself harder pressed to meet the
demand of the distributing-houses
Photo by C. E. Farr.
in Perth and throughout the State.
In the near future a most up-to-date
plant for the manufacture of gentle-
men’s light footwear will be installed
and for the accommodation of this
department further additions will re-
quire to be made to the factory. In
erecting the present edifice the
Directors wisely provided for an ad-
ditional storey, adequate foundations
having been laid to support the extra
tonnage, while the depth of the land
will allow for the extension of the
building by an extra 30 or 40 ft.
Employment is found for some fifty
hands, but the expansion of this
important industry is handicapped
by the absence of a sufficient number
of skilled workers. The leathers used
in the building of the uppers are
imported from the Eastern States,
and include boxhide, satincalf,
chrome-kid, wax-kip and wax-split,
but the whole of the sole leather
brought into use is procured locally,
the management maintaining the
excellent policy of supporting home
Photo by C. F. Farr.
THE W.A. BOOT MANUFACTURING CO.'S PREMISES, NEWCASTLW STREET, PERTH.
industries whenever possible. In a
cellar at the rear of the factory the
sole leather is stocked and in the
cool atmosphere retains the moisture,
without which it would be rendered
unsuitable for everyday use. The
rapid development of the concern
from the embryo stage to its present
flourishing condition augurs well for
the future of the Company, and
under the energetic control of the
Manager, Mr. Taplin, great things
may be looked for in the years to
come. The Directors of the Com-
pany are Messrs. Edgar, Robinson,
William Arcus, Richard Logan,
William Dudney, William Smith,
and W. R. Taplin. WILLIAM
ROBERT TAPLIN, the Managing
Director of the West Australian
Boot Manufacturing Company, was
born at Bristol, on the West Coast
of England, in the year 1870. He
received his scholastic training in
his native town and at the conclu-
sion of his studies was apprenticed
for five years to the boot trade with
the firm of Hutchinson & May, of
Portland Square, Bristol. During
the period of his indentures he at-
tended the Merchant Venture Tech-
nical School, and by close study
completely mastered the finer details
of the trade which he had chosen
to follow as his life-calling. Deter-
CUTTING AND MACHINE ROOM.


mined to acquire a thorough
knowledge of every branch of the
trade, he vigorously continued his
INTERIOR VIEWS OF FACTORY.
studies and had the satisfaction of
carrying off first prize for pattern-
cutting against sixty competitors,
achieving this while yet in his teens.
In the year 1899 he decided to visit
the Southern Hemisphere, and so took
passage for Victoria, where, subse-
quent to his arrival, he joined the firm
of William Thomson, boot manufac-
turer, later relinquishing this employ
to take up a position in Ballarat,
in which city he remained for seven
years. He next journeyed to Tas-
mania, but in less than a year’s time
returned to England to revisit the
scenes of his youth and witness the
latest developments in the boot man-
ufacturing trade of the Old World.
In 1898 he once more set out for the
land of the Southern Cross, and dis-
embarking at Western Australia
shortly afterwards took over the
management of what was then the
largest boot factory in the State. He
continued in this control until the
firm closed down the manufacturing
section of its business, when he
Buskin , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM BOBERT TALLIN.
founded the present Company, most
of the success of which has been due
bo his untiring energy and indom-
itable will, which has enabled him
to overcome the difficulties insepar-
able from the building up of a
sound and profitable industrial con-
cern. Mr. Taplin married in 1901
Flora, daughter of the late Mr.
Thomas Carruthers, of Victoria, and
resides at Mount Lawley, his home
being surounded by a beautiful gar-
den, to the cultivation of which most
of his leisure is devoted.
Photos by C. E. Farr.


BAKER k MOORE, manufac-
turers of art wicker furniture, go-
carts and general basketware, etc.,
4 and 6, Dyer Street, West Perth.
(George Baker and William H.
Moore.) This business was established
in 1902 in premises situated off
Murray Street, where it was carried
on for some eighteen months with
Photo by C. E. Farr.
most encouraging results. Larger
premises were then secured in Queen
Street, and as trade still continued
to expand with extraordinray ra-
pidity in 1904 the firm secured a
triangular piece of land in Dyer
Street, adjacent to the West Perth
Railway Station, and erected a com-
modious structure on the most ap-
proved and modern lines known to
the trade. The building is of brick,
two-storied, with a handsome front-
age to Dyer Street. The ground-
floor is devoted to showrooms and
offices, and in the space to the rear
upholsterers and ironworkers are
busily employed. Upstairs may be
seen at work the hands engaged in
executing the various designs in
chairs, settees, and other lines
turned out in such large numbers
at this up-to-date factory. The
bulk stores are on the first floor,
where a large stock of finished goods,
ready for immediate despatch, is
kept on hand in anticipation of the
orders which are daily received by
the firm from all parts of the State.
At the rear of the premises is a
broad right-of-way which offers easy
facilities for the loading and dis-
patch of these same large orders,
which are executed, carefully packed,
and sent to their several destin-
ations with all possible promptness.
The wonderful expansion of the
trade that has marked the operations
of this enterprising firm necessitated
further additions being made to the
premises, and these were effected
early in the year 1911, the available
space now exceeding 20,000 sq. ft.
The firm confines its attention to the
manufacture of art-wicker furniture,
BAKER &. MOORE'S FURNITURE WORKS WEST PERTH
perambulators, go-carts, overmantles
and hallstands in bamboo, and gen-
eral basketware, and the work
turned out is the very best obtain-
able. The raw material used in
manufacture is imported from all
parts of the globe, including Japan,
China, Calcutta, Singapore, Eng-
land, and Germany, and the iron
frames utilized in connection with
the work are made upon the pre-
mises. In designing special atten-
tion is paid to local requirements,
and the drawing-room suites, either
upholstered or plain, obtain great
favour among the residents of the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. GEORGE BAKER.
Western State on account of their
cool, light appearance and freedom
from hot, heavy padding, the appro-
priateness of the art-wicker furn-
iture being readily acknowledged
by all dwellers in the warmer climes.
Photo by C. E. Farr.
CORNER OF SHOWROOM AT BAKER A. MOORE'S, WEST PERTH.


The wicker chairs and lounges are
easily handled and in the summer
time especially are a welcome ad-
dition to the furniture of the house,
while to invalids they are an untold
boon. The foundation consists
mostly of Malacca cane, and the use
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM H. MOORE.
of this in preference to willow has
rendered the article immune from
the attacks of insects. Another
feature in which the firm specializes
is the manufacture of collapsible
carriages for children, and in this
line it has secured that acme of com-
Photo by C. E. Parr .
fort combined with beauty of design
which testifies to the possession of
high creative faculties on the part
of the management. These carriages
are the greatest possible boon to
mothers, inasmuch as they are easily
folded up to small proportions and
readily adapt themselves for transit
by tram or rail. Another important
line to which considerable attention
is given is the manufacture of bas-
ketware in great variety of designs.
ART WICKER FUNNITURE IN PROCESS OF MANUFACTURE.
This class of goods is finding great
favour with the travelling public
and is rapidly ousting the old-style
portmanteau. Some thirty em-
ployes, all of whom are skilled
artisans, are engaged in the work
Photo by C. E. Parr .
INTERIOR VIEW OF BULK STORES AT BAKER &, MOORE’S FURNITURE FACTORY
of the factory, and the wholesale
trade is supplied throughout Wes-
tern Australia. Both partners have
had a lengthy connection with
the trade, having gained many
years’ experience in Adelaide
and Melbourne. In 1911 Mr.
Moore proceeded to England and the
Continent, where he spent his time
profitably in gaining an insight into
the latest methods of manufacture
known to his trade.
W. ZIMPEL, furniture manufac-
turer and general importer, 797-801,
Hay Street, Perth. For more than a
quarter of a century the firm of W.
Zimpel has catered for the require-
ments of the Western Australian
public. Originally established in
1884 in premises insignificant in
comparison with the extensive
structure now occupied, the firm has
grown to such an extent that it is
now the most important concern of
its kind in the State, and where
everything required between the
four walls of a house, be it mansion
or cottage, may be obtained at
lowest prices commensurate with
good quality. The magnificent show


rooms fronting the main thorough-
fare cover a space of 15,000 square
ft. and are filled to overflowing with
furniture and house - fittings of
every conceivable description. The
ground-floor is devoted to a fine dis-
play of sideboards, upholstered
suites for drawing- and dining-room
purposes, wicker chairs and lounges,
and cutler desks, the carpets, bed-
steads, etc., being located on the first
floor. Immediately adjoining the
showrooms is a bulk store, every
nook and cranny of which is filled
with goods, with the exception of a
corner set apart for the display of
linoleums and oilcloths, of which
there is a wide range of patterns
to choose from. The factory at the
rear is a veritable hive of indus-
try. It contains four stories and
was erected some nine years ago to
enable the firm to fulfil the increas-
ing demand for household and office
furniture. The most up-to-date
machinery known to the trade has
been installed and furniture of
every description is made, including
sideboards, hallstands, bedroom and
drawing-room suites, tables, desks,
icechests, chairs, and wire mat-
tresses. The whole of the timber
used is seasoned on the premises,
and to prevent green wood being
brought into use the stacks are never
allowed to fall below 100,000 ft.
Special attention is given to the pro-
duction of “art” furniture, and the
showrooms contain many fine speci-
mens turned out by the experts em-
ployed in the factory. The country
order department is a feature of the
CORNER OF THE SHOWROOM AR MR. ZIMPEL’S ESTABLISHMENT.
firm’s operations and is in the hands
of an expert. Orders received in
this department are promptly dis-
patched, the goods being carefully
packed to prevent damage in transit,
and delivered to the nearest railway
MR. W. ZIMPEL'S PREMISES, HAY STREET, PERTH.
station. Among the many lines
stocked may be mentioned perambm
lators, mail-carts, invalid chairs,
kitchen utensils, lampware, and bed-
ding of all kinds. In addition to
transacting a wholesale and retail
trade, including the supply of
goods to country storekeepers, the
firm executes many Government con-
tracts, principally in connection
with the Department of Education.
The premises are erected on freehold
property and extend from Hay Street
to St. George’s Terrace, a depth
of 390 ft., the width of the block
being 60 ft. The proprietor, Mr.
W. Zimpel, is a native of Austria
and a cabinetmaker by trade. Dur-
ing twelve years’ residence in Con-
stantinople, Turkey, he acquired the
rudiments of his trade, and subse-
quently went to London, where he
gained experience for seven years, at
the end of which time he came to
Western Australia. Shortly after
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. W. ZIMPEL.
his arrival he established himself in
business in Hay Street, and by his
commercial acumen has built up the
present prosperous concern and made
his name a household word through-
out the settled areas of the Western
State.


DANIEL AVHITE & CO., carriage
builders and importers, Murray
Street, Perth. This well-known busi-
ness is one of the oldest established
of its kind in AVestern Australia, the
firm of Daniel AVhite & Co. having
commenced operations in Play Street,
Perth, as early as 1887. In 1901 the
proprietorship changed hands, when
the connection and plant were pur-
chased with the whole of the stock in
this State by Mr. J. McMahen, who
had filled the post of manager and
attorney, and Mr. F. D. Good. Since
then the business has been carried on
by these gentlemen under the old
title, and as a AVestern Australian
business relying solely on local manu-
facture, and thus giving permanent
employment to a very large number
of skilled mechanics, it maintains a
solid and well-recognized claim on the
patronage of the State. In 1911 the
site in Hay Street was required for
the purpose of building a large
arcade, and Daniel White & Co.
erected a fine factory on land which
they had acquired in Murray Street,
next the Federal Telephone Ex-
change, and running through to Wel-
lington Street. The area of the fac-
tory and showroom comprises 50,000
square feet, 40,000 of which is under
cover, splendidly lighted, and ven-
tilated. The lofty roof, supported by
brick walls, surmounts a splendid
structure, with ornamental approach
and provided with every facility for
ingress and egress. It is two storeys
in height, and a basement traverses
the whole length of the factory site,
while the showroom (200 ft. long by
40 ft. wide) is surmounted by a large
storeroom, which is used for the
accommodation of the firm's large
stock of seasoned timber and fittings.
Separate departments are allotted to
the body - makers, coach - painters,
INTERIOR VIEW OF D. WHITE A CO'S PREMISES.
vv
wheelwrights, locksmiths, and trim-
mers, and the machinery installed is
of the very latest type, the motive
D. WHITE A CO.’S CARRIAGE FACTORY, MURRAY STREET, PERTH.
power being generated by Hornsby's
up-to-date gas-producer plant. In all
respects the new factory may be
placed as the finest carriage-building
factory in Australia, and it is worthy
of note that the firm has exported
some high-class vehicles to the eastern
States, in addition to carrying off
the highest honours and awards at
Western Australian shows and exhi-
bitions. Over sixty hands are em-
ployed at the factory, and the firm
pays annually in wages <£7,500.
JOSEPH MOORE McMAHEN, the
Managing Partner, was born in Vic-
toria in 1863, and is a son of Mr.
William McMahen, of Armagh, in
the North of Ireland, who came to
Australia in 1820. At the close of
his education the gentleman under
review was apprenticed to the coach-
building trade with Mr. James
Parker, of St. Kilda, Victoria, with
whom he remained
for six years, sub-
sequently entering
the employ of Mr.
J. Bull, of Fitzroy.
He afterwards pro-
ceeded to Hay, New
South Wales, and
spent three years
with the well-known
firm of Sydney Cobb
and Co., who after-
wards offered him
the management of
the Bourke branch
of their business,
which he declined.
He next went to
Melbourne, when
his first connection
with Daniel AVhite
and Co. was formed.
This continued
twelve months, but
was broken by his
acceptance of the post of foreman
to T. Crane for five years, and
renewed at the end of that period,
when he was sent to manage the firm's
MR. JOSEPH MOORE MCMAHEN.
factory in AVestern Australia in 1896.
At a later date he was appointed
Attorney and Manager of the branch,
and in 1902 purchased the business
as above stated. Mr. McMahen is a
member of the Masonic craft, his
lodge being the Lathom, No. 29,
AV.A.C., and he has passed through
various offices in the fraternity. He
married Caroline, daughter of John
Hanlon, of Hay, New South AVales,
and has three sons and a daughter.


BON TON, LIMITED, Perth.
The nucleus of the present extensive
business, so widely and favourably
known as Bon Ton, Limited, was
purchased by the present managing
director, Mr. J. M. Lofthouse, in
1903. At that time the whole busi-
ness of the firm was carried on at the
original Hay Street premises, which
formed part of a building adjoining
the old Bon Marche structure, and
for many years the bakery was
situated in the basement at this
locality. Under the energetic direc-
tion of Mr. Lofthouse the cafe
achieved considerable popularity,
and from time to time various im-
provements were added, the whole
culminating in the present fine and
commodious restaurant. The marked
success which attended the enter-
prise soon made other branches a
necessity, and several establishments
were opened in various parts of the
city, all of which have been exceed-
ingly well patronized, the continuous
stream of daily and casual visitors to
the Bon Ton tea and luncheon rooms
being the best advertisement for
their many attractions. The cafes,
which now number five in all, are
all centrally situated, the parent
shop at 580, Hay Street, being
known as No. 1; No. 2 is situated
at 109, Barrack Street; No. 3 at 147,
Barrack Street; No. 4 at 104, Wil-
liam Street; and No. 5 at 726, Hay
Street. The interiors of the several
Photo by C. F. Farr.
THE BON TON FACTORY, EAST PERTH,
cafes have been tastefully decorated
and the general appointments leave
nothing to be desired. To ensure
a rapid and satisfactory service an
ample staff is maintained at each of
the establishments, and the require-
ments of the manifold patrons are
dealt with most expeditiously. The
continually increasing turnover re-
suiting upon the firm’s extended
operations made it necessary for the
company to secure more commodious
premises for the manufacture of the
various confections and other
dainties, the excellence of which has
ensured to the business its present
wide reputation, and accordingly
the building at East Perth, formerly
occupied by the Swallow Brewing
Company, was purchased, and by
means of extensive alterations and
additions adapted to the require-
ments of the firm’s business. Many
ingenious ideas, for which Mr. Loft-
house’s particularly fertile brain was
responsible, were incorporated in the
general scheme of improvement, the
whole resulting in the process of
manufacture from mixing to dis-
tribution being carried on with a
minimum handling of the goods. The
new factory is a roomy structure
containing two floors, 104 ft. long by
36 ft. wide, surmounted by a five-
story tower, from which an excellent
view of the Darling Ranges is to be
obtained and also a fine panorama
of Perth City. Being built on slop-
ing ground the upper floor is prac-
tically on a level with the surface,
which facilitates the delivery of the
heavy stocks of flour handled by the
firm. On the ground floor and ad-
joining the western wall a series of
chambers have been erected, con-
sisting of a cooling-chamber, a
refrigerator, and another room
specially designed for pastry-making,
where the temperature is always kept
at 60 degrees. The floor in these
rooms is of plastic concrete, in-
sulated, watertight, and non-
conductive, and the walls have been
constructed on a plan of Mr. Loft-
house’s own designing. The pastry
is mixed on a special slab of imita-
tion marble, formed of white cement
and reinforced concrete, the first of
its kind to be used in Western Aus-
tralia. The building stands in two
acres of land, which will allow for
further extensions as the necessities
of the business may demand. The
Bartletto Perth.
MR. JACON MATTHIAS LOFTHOUSE.
machinery includes a Budge re-
frigerator plant, which in addition
to maintaining three different tem-
peratures is capable of turning out
several tons of ice per day, a 30-h.p.
Fairbank & Platt engine, and a 50-
h.p. Crossley gas producer, cake
mixers, egg beaters, etc. Two ovens,
designed by Mr. Lofthouse, have
been added to the main building,
and over the fires boilers have been
installed which produce a copious
supply of hot water for use through-
out the factory. The whole of the
operations are carried on under
cover from the moment of mixing to
the placing in the delivery van, and
perfect cleanliness reigns all over the
factory. Only the best materials
are brought into use in the concoc-
tion of the appetizing cakes, pastry,
and different kinds of bread, etc.,
which are turned out in huge quanti-
ties by the experts employed by the
firm. Preference is always extended
to local products, for which a little
more than market price is paid by
the management, but the limited


local supply necessitates the importa
tion of large stocks from the eastern
markets. Upwards of 400,000 eggs
are annually purchased, and these
are stored until required in huge
concrete baths, the firm also making
its own egg pulp. On the premises
is a fine well containing an unex-
Photos by C. F. Farr.
haustible supply of pure water, and
in the near future this supply will
be drawn from as required. Asso-
ciated with the Bon Ton, Limited, is
the Autogene patent air-gas system,
which undoubtedly has a great
future before it. The gas gives a
brilliant and soft light, and provides
vv2
a perfect medium for all domestic
purposes. Consisting as it does of
per cent, of air and \\ per cent,
of petrol vapour the gas has all the
advantages of coal gas without its
disadvantages. The extraordinary
percentage of air renders it non-
explosive and odourless. It has
Perth.
great heating and illuminating
power, while the cost of production
is estimated as being only one-sixth
the cost of acetylene gas, and less
than half of electricity and gas. By
an ingenious contrivance the supply
of gas is automatically controlled so
that the supply is adjusted to the
demand, and there being no storage
of gas the danger of an explosion is
altogether eliminated. A plant cap-
able of supplying 200 lights occupies
a floor space of 24 by 24 in., and is
to be purchased at a very low figure.
The plant is very simple in con-
struction and, once installed, re-
quires practically no attention apart
from replenishing the supplies of
petrol. The gas may be used for all
domestic purposes and is an ideal
heating medium for furnaces, blow-
pipes, etc., and for work in the
laboratory. The system may be
readily adapted to hospital require-
ments, and in the kitchen and
laundry work will be simplified and
cheapened to a degree hitherto un-
attainable. JACOB MATTHIAS
LOFTHOUSE, Managing Director
of Bon Ton, Limited, is an English-
man by birth, having been born at
Radcliffe, in Lancashire, in the
year 1862. From the age of six
he acted as guide to his father
who was blind, and was thus pre-
vented from pursuing the studies
usual to his years. He gained a
liberal education, however, in the
school of the world, and at length
turned his attention to business pur-
suits in Manchester for some years,
afterwards going to Leeds, where he
spent two years. His knowledge of
the catering trade was obtained first
in his native place, and after sixteen
years’ experience in this line in the
Old Country he went to Canada and
engaged in farming pursuits for a
couple of years. Subsequently he
opened as pastrycook and confec-
tioner in England, and carried on in
business for three years, in the
year 1899 coming to Australia, where
he was first identified with life
on the goldfields. From Kalgoorlie
he took up a vineyard of 200 acres
at Baker’s Hill, and followed the
wine-making industry until 1903,
when he purchased the present busi-
ness, which was turned into a limited
company in 1908. He is connected
with the Masonic fraternity, being a
member of the Abercorn Lodge, No.
28, W.A.C., and has passed through
various chairs, including the office
of junior warden. Mr. Lofthouse
has been twice married. His present
wife, whom he married in 1885, is a
daughter of Mr. Joel Bold, of Rad-
cliffe, England, the issue being two
sons and two daughters. By the
former marriage Mr. Lofthouse had
one daughter who takes an active
part in the management of Bon Ton,
Limited.


ALBANY BELL, manufacturing
confectioner and pastrycook, Dangan
Street, Perth, is a South Australian
by birth, his native place being the
town of Clare, where he was born
in 1871. Upon the conclusion of his
education he entered the employ of
Mr. Richard Honey, timber mer-
chant, of Adelaide, and continued
in this connection until 1887. In
that year he came to Western Aus-
tralia and joined the old Perth
Confectionery Company, and after
about twelve months in the factory
of this Company became associated
with the drapery trade with the firm
of W. G. Hearman, the largest
retail draper of the time in the
western capital. Three years later
he transferred his services to the
drapery department of Mesrs. Pad-
bury, Loton, & Co., but relinquish-
ing this employ in about a year
proceeded to the Upper Murchison
and took a post as station-hand on
the “Coolgardie Station,” spending
about the same period in pastoral
pursuits on this run. A further
connection with the drapery business
followed when he entered the
service of Messrs. Rice, Saunders,
and Co., of Perth, and eighteen
months later, in 1893, he joined his
mother in a small confectionery
business in High Street, Fremantle.
This may be said to have been the
beginning of the large many-
branched concern with which the
name of Albany Bell is linked at
the present day. After a year at
Fremantle he opened a confectionery
shop on his own behalf at Hay
Street, Perth, where he carried on
the manufacture and retail of his
goods at the same establishment. In
twelve months’ time the trade had
increased sufficiently to warrant his
employing an assistant, for which
purpose he engaged Mr. William
Anning, who is still in his service,
now holding the post of foreman of
Mr. BelTs Confectionery Works,
The following year witnessed the
opening of a restaurant and con-
fectionery store in William Street,
Photo by C, F. Farr .
SITE ON THE FUILDFORE ROAD FOR PROPOSED NEW FACTORY FOR ALBANY BELL.
which venture was succeeded by a
third establishment in Barrack
Street, which is undoubtedly one of
the finest and most up to date in the
Commonwealth, the decorations
especially appealing to the artistic
sense by their unique and tasteful
design. In 1897 Mr. Bell decided
to build a factory in Dangan
ALBANY BELL’S ESTABLISHMENTS IN HAY AND BARRACK STREETS,PERTH


Street, and the premises, three
storeys in height and basement,
then erected have been added to
from time to time until it has been
extended to fully four times the
original structure. Here the general
manufacturing operations for his
extensive business are carried on,
but already Mr. Bell’s enterprise has
suggested the supplanting of this
large building by a model factory on
the banks of the Swan River, within
two miles of the Perth Post Office,
where he has purchased nineteen
acres of land, forming an ideal spot
for a factory for the manufacture
and handling of foodstuffs and con-
fectionery. The abundant water
supply is one of the chief advantages
of this site, 100,000 gallons ol
water per day being available from
natural springs on the property.
When the federation of the States
was accomplished Mr. Bell, to
compete with the importation of
cheap confectionery, entered into
the pastry trade, and from that
time has been extending his tea-
rooms, which now number six in the
city area, one in Fremantle, two at
Kalgoorlie, one at Coolgardie, and
one at Bunbury; and about 140
hands are employed in connection
with these branches. The tearooms
now form the largest branch of the
business, and visitors to the gold-
fields especially express their sur-
prise at finding such up-to-date and
artistic rooms in the heart of the
mining districts. In Hay Street
very large new premises have
been recently opened, replacing the
old shop established by Mr. Bell
Photo by C. F. Farr,
seventeen years ago, and the fact
that large crowds are daily supplied
with lunch, afternoon tea, and (in
Photo by J. J. Dwyer.
the summer time) with cool drinks
at this refectory speaks well for the
future of the firm. In 1899 he took
a trip to England and America in
order to gather further experience
in the efficient management of the
various departments of his trade,
and since his return has added an
important feature, viz., the retailing
of soft drinks and ices in the season,
and has given special attention to
the production of all American soda-
fountain beverages, using pure fruit
INTERIOR VIEW OF HAY STREET TEA ROOMS (OPP.SANDOVER'S)
juices for flavourings and maintain-
ing a high standard of excellence
throughout. In particular he has
registered a line to which he has
given the name of “Sundae,” an ice-
cream served with a composition of
fresh fruits, and this has received
Bartletto , Perth
MR. ALBANY BELL.
an instant popularity which seems
likely to continue. Dating from
October, 1911, the business was
formed into a limited liability com-
pany by Mr. Bell, who admitted
into partnership his two former
managers, Messrs. Albert Johnson
and Arthur Allen Lightfoot. The
ALBANY BELL’S TEA ROOMS AT KALGOORLIE


Kalgoorlie hands are all granted a
fortnight’s leave annually on full
pay, when the firm defrays rail
expenses and provides for two weeks'
board at some seaside resort. In
Perth the employes are allowed a
fortnight’s holiday annually and
fares covering 150 miles distance
from the capital. Mr. Bell is a
Justice of the Peace, his commission
dating back to 1909.
JOHN HOBBS, founder of the
business of Plaistowe & Company,
Limited, confectioners, Marquis
Street, Perth, was born at London
in 1863 and received his education
at a public school in that city. At
eleven years of age he entered the
firm of Plaistowe & Co., confec-
tioners, of London, and after re-
maining with them for about nine
years severed the connection, only to
renew it after a period spent in gain-
ing a further knowledge of his calling
in association with various other
firms. Again leaving the firm’s
employ Mr. Hobbs sailed for Wes-
tern Australia, arriving at Perth on
January 13, 1890. Only a few weeks
subsequent to this he began business
on his own account, trading as the
Silver Pan Confectionery Company,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN HOBBS.
and after continuing for some years
was joined by Mr. Hugh Plaistowe,
who assisted him in the successful
conduct of the concern until 1904,
when Mr. Hobbs retired from the
business. In 1908 he once more
entered the firm which has since
traded under the titie of Plaistowe
and Company, Limited, and steadily
maintains its place in popular favour.
Mr. Hobbs is a member of the
Chamber of Manufactures of Wes-
tern Australia, and was the recipient
of an inscribed gold watch presented
by that body in recognition of his
services as President from 1906 to
1907, during which period the Exhi-
bition of Western Australia was
held. During the ten years that he
has held membership he has filled
other offices in the Chamber, and has
always taken the keenest interest in
all its affairs. He was one of the
delegates to represent Western Aus-
tralia at the conference in connec-
tion with the Commonwealth tariff,
held at Sydney during the first year
of Federation. At the Exhibition
referred to the firm was awarded a
certificate of merit and a gold medal
for its high-class confectionery, prior
to which it received an award of
merit at the Western Australian
Exhibition of 1899.
BELA MAKUTZ, general iron-
worker and safe manufacturer, Perth,
is a son of the late Johann Makutz,
of Hungary, and was born in the
town of Felso, Banya, Hungary, on
September 29, 1857. He commenced
his education at the Normal School,
where he continued until nine years
of age, transferring thence to a
college presided over by the Bishop of
the Diocese, at which institution he
continued his studies for three years.
He was then apprenticed to the boot-
making trade with his cousin, and
served a term of five years, during
which he acquired a thorough know-
ledge of the trade. Relinquishing
this connection, Mr. Makutz joined
his uncle, a well-known ironfounder
of Galatz, Roumania, and after seven
years proceeded to Turkey, where he
remained for a short time. He next
left for Alexandria in Egypt, and for
six months was identified with the
Carmus Iron Foundry and Engineer-
ing Company, eventually joining the
staff of the Egyptian Government
Arsenal. In this capacity he refitted
several of the Egyptian mailboats
running between Alexandria and
Constantinople with new engines,
work which took up the better part
of two years. Leaving for Mel-
bourne, where he arrived in 1882,
Mr. Makutz immediately obtained a
position with Mr. Radtke, as safe-
maker, but after four months per-
ceived that there was every encour-
agement to launch out on his own
account. Taking the late Mr. H.
Ehret as a partner he established a
safe-manufacturing business, and
upon the latter gentleman’s retire-
ment in order to return to Germany
formed a new partnership with Mr.
T. Barke. This firm carried on for
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. BELA MAKUTZ.
six years, but was dissolved at the
time of the bank failures in the Eas-
tern States, and Mr. Makutz turned
his attention in the direction of AVes-
tern Australia. In 1893 he came to
the Murchison district and settled at
Cue, opening a blacksmith’s shop,
which he conducted for seven months.
Selling out, he followed the mining
industry with indifferent success for
a time, and again visited Melbourne,
but not being impressed with the
prospects there returned to the AVes-
tern State. In 1895 he opened in
Perth as a general ironworker and
safe-manufacturer, and has met with
much success in the conduct of this
business, having at the present time
a staff of about fifty men in constant
work. He holds interests in the
agricultural industry, owning a pro-
perty of 7,000 acres at Nugadong, on
the AVongan Hill-Mulliwa railway,
where he engages in wheat-growing
on a fairly large scale. Mr. Makutz
married in 1885 Cecelia, daughter of
the late Mr. Peter Albers, of Mel-
bourne, and has two sons and a
daughter. His eldest son, Mr. Ernest
Makutz, is associated with his father
in the iron foundry, and the younger
(Rudolph) assists in the showroom
and locksmith and key-fitting branch
in AVilliam Street, Perth.


The SWAN CAKE & BISCUIT
FACTORY (Mills & Ware, proprie-
tors). This business was estab-
lished in the year 1898 at Cottesloe,
its inception being on a modest scale.
Sufficient encouragement was ac-
corded the young enterprise to
authorize the removal at the end of
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM MILLS.
twelve months to the present fine
manufacturing site on the Man-
durah Road, Fremantle, where a
massive block of buildings indicates
the great establishment, completed
with its well-equipped tinsmith's
shop and case-making factory, which
has been built up within a few
years by Messrs. Mills & Ware.
The floor space of the factory com-
prises 30,000 sq. ft., or three-
quarters of an acre, and the
machinery and general equipment
is on the latest lines. The automatic
wafer machines are an interesting
feature, and four cake ovens, of which
the patent steam “decker” ovens are
the most recent innovation, are
heated from their own furnaces, and
bake continuously for eight hours
each day. The manufacturing
part of the business is done exclu-
sively by men and boys, and as the
factory transmutes into biscuits and
cakes every week from 90 to 100
sacks of flour, one and a half tons
of butter, and 2,000 dozen eggs,
besides oatmeal, fruit, etc., a very
large staff is employed on this
branch, while the labelling and
packing is attended to by girls.
Thorough cleanliness prevails, and
the manipulation of the dough and
cake mixtures is done by machinery,
the human hand not being allowed to
come into contact with any of the
ingredients, and by this means the
utmost purity and freedom from
injurious microbes is attained,
while the thoroughness of the process
ensures a never-failing excellence in
results. The output of the factory
includes over fifty varieties of
biscuits, 30 cwt. of goods being
turned out in an eight-hour day.
The varieties range from the ship’s
bread and cabin biscuit to the
delicate wafer sweetmeat, and
include twenty of the richer kinds,
the “Queen’s Drops” being choice
samples of the latter. The wafer
delicacy was introduced as a result
of a trip to Europe and America
taken by Mr. Mills, during the
course of which he made it a
primary object to acquaint himself
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. NELSON MILLS.
with all the latest developments of
the biscuit trade. At the St. Louis
exhibition he saw the first automatic
wafer machine at work, one factory
alone being equipped with as many
as twenty-five of these up-to-date
machines, one of which now finds a
place in the Swan Cake and Biscuit
Factory. The wafers are put up in
fancy tins and include the chocolate,
ice, lemon, sugar, and vanilla
varieties, in addition to the very
exquisite cup wafer which enhances
the most recherche table decoration
with its delicate colour and fairy-like
shape. The introduction of the
biscuit packet to the retail trade
has met with considerable favour,
as it does away with the necessity
of weighing and packing, with the
too frequent result of breakage to
the fragile wares. Derby cakes in
6-lb. blocks and 1-lb. Canterbury
cakes are put up in hermetically
sealed tins, and are greatly in
demand for the country and gold-
fields trade. The fruit for both
cake and biscuits is imported from
the Eastern States and Southern
Europe, the Renmark elixir raisins
being specially favoured by Mr.
Mills, while large quantities of
lemonpeel are imported from Italy
and consignments of other fruits
are received by almost every German
steamer calling at Fremantle. The
lemonpeel, after being unpacked at,
the factory, is specially treated in
liquor, and when ready for use
conveys a full fruity flavour to the
mixtures. In recent years locally
manufactured flour has been more
largely used in the factory, Mr.
Mills holding that the virgin wheat
of the Western State excels in
nutritive qualities the product of the
Eastern areas, and since the instal-
lation of modern machinery in the
mills the dressing of the flour is
equal to that of the best Adelaide
brands. Constant communication
goes on between the biscuit ovens
and the packing-room, where deft-
handed girls receive and immedi-
ately pack the biscuits into tins
which are sealed down the following
day and transferred to the labelling
rooms. Each tin is then labelled on
a perfect check system, ensuring
Bartletto , Perth
Mr. S. J. Mills.
absolute carefulness among the
operatives and salesmen, secret
marks on the label recording the
whole history of the contents of the
package, date of baking, etc. In
the dispatch department the tins
are cased ready for the wholesale


market, when the firm’s waggons
convey them to a local destination
or deliver to rail, road, or steam-
boat. The Fremantle dispatch de-
partment has always about 3,000
tins of cakes and biscuits in stock,
about half that quantity being
stored at the Perth Branch, situated
in Queen Street. A large trade is
done in Messrs. Mills & Ware’s self-
raising flour and baking-powder,
and underneath the dispatch depart-
ment are capacious cool cellars for
the storage of butter and other
necessities of the business. All tins
are made on the premises, a large
press turning the metal into a
tin by four blows ready to the
hands of the packer. The firm of
Mills & Ware has always preferred
that its wares should sell on their
own merits rather than on the plea
of being locally manufactured, and
the increasing support given to the
industry by the Western Australian
public is sufficient evidence of the
success of this principle. Mr. Mills
is now the sole proprietor, his
partner having died during the
early years of the enterprise.
LYONS & HART, plumbers, san-
itary engineers, galvanizers, iron-
workers, etc., 103, Fitzgerald Street,
Bartletto, Perth
MR. OLIVER CAHRLES LYONS.
Perth. (Oliver Charles Lyons and
Stanley William Hart.) This busi-
ness was established in Perth in May
1901, the firm being registered in the
following year. At the present time
it employs a staff of twenty hands,
who are employed chiefly in
the carrying out of Govern-
ment contract work in con-
nection with the supplying of
sanitary appliances to the order of
the local Boards of Health. It
also undertakes large orders for the
wholesale trade, and engages exten-
sively in various works incidental to
the trade of tinsmiths, copper-
smiths, and blacksmiths. OLIVER
CHARLES LYONS was born at Bal-
larat, Victoria, in 1865, and learned
his trade under Messrs. T. J. Con-
nolly & Son, of Melbourne. He re-
mained with this well-known firm of
galvanizers and ironworkers for some
fourteen years and gradually rose to
the position of foreman of the works.
In 1891 he opened on his own account
at a’Beckett Street, in the same city,
but after a short time abandoned in-
dustrial pursuits in favour of pros-
pecting in Gippsland. In 1894 he
came to Western Australia and ob-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. STANLEY WILLIAM HART.
tained employment as plumber in the
workshojis of the Perth City Council,
at a later period in conjunction with
Mr. Hart establishing the present
business. STANLEY WILLIAM
HART is also a Victorian, having
been born at Richmond in 1873. At
the close of his schooldays he en-
gaged in various occupations and
spent a few years in the plumbing
and coppersmithing trade. In 1896
he came from New South Wales to
Perth, and for a period of seven
months was identified with the firm
of Lapsley & Co. After some subse-
quent experience on the goldfields he
was employed on plumbing work by
the Government authorities and later
on in conjunction with Mr. Lyons,
undertook certain work for the Perth
City Council. This connection re-
sulted in a partnership between the
two gentlemen, who ever since have
carried on successfully under the
above title.
JOHN WILLIAM PORTER,
wheelwright and coachbuilder, Wil-
liam and Newman Streets, Fre-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JOHN WILLIAM PORTER.
mantle, is a son of the late Mr. Mil-
son Porter, of Gloucestershire, Eng-
land, and was born at Coleford, in
that county, on October 2, 1861.
He received his scholastic training
at the Church of England School in
his native town, and coming to Wes-
tern Australia in 1891 took up his
residence at Fremantle, where he
has continued ever since. Mr.
Porter purchased his present business
from his brother-in-law, Mr. R. H.
Tyler, in 1903, and has conducted it
successfully on his own account from
that time onward. He is a member
of over thirty years’ standing in the
Ancient Order of Foresters, and has
three times passed through all the
chairs of that Order. Since the
opening of the Church of England
at Beaconsfield, near Fremantle, he
has taken an active interest in its
management and now holds office as
warden of the Church. He is a
warm advocate of all healthy out-
door sport. Mr. Porter married in
June, 1887, Catherine, daughter of
the late Mr. William Tyler, of Cole-
ford. England, and has a son and a
daughter.


FRANCIS JOHN WAYMAN,
Director of the Ceylon Bureau, Sur-
rey Chambers, St. George's Terrace,
Perth, was born at Liverpool on
March 15, 1869, and is the son of
the late Rev. James Wayman, of
Blackpool, Lancashire, England, one
of the foremost Congregational
ministers in the north of England,
and President of the North Lanca-
shire Liberal Federation. The Rev.
Mr. Wayman was the founder of The
Blackpool Times , now the leading
Liberal organ in the Fylde division
of Lancashire, and also one of the
founders of the National liberal
Club in London. Mr. F. J. Way-
man's mother, who died during his
early boyhood, was a daughter of the
late Captain Francis Eldon Jenkins,
of Dublin, and a member, on her
mother’s side, of the Galway Joyces,
one of the oldest families in the west
of Ireland. Mr. Wayman was edu-
cated in London and abroad. Re-
turning to the Old Country, after
a brief journalistic experience in
Lancashire, he proceeded to London
at the age of twenty-two, and read
with the late Mr. M. Alexander
and Mr. W. J. Lucas, of Wimble-
don, with a view to entering
the Inner Temple as barrister,
but he abandoned law and con-
tinued newspaper work. He later
acted as London correspondent to
The Weekly Irish Times and Even-
ing Telegram , St. John's, Newfound-
land. His attention was next
claimed by the first halfpenny
morning paper in London, The
Morning , now The Daily Express , on
which he occupied the position of
News Editor until 1898, when he
went to Ceylon as Assistant Editor
to The Ceylon Standard . Five
months after, on the death of Mr.
Windus, he was apointed Editor of
the same paper. On account of his
failing health, in 1900 his medical
adviser, Dr, Fairlie, now of Harley
Street, London, recommended a trip
to Western Australia as likely to be
of benefit to him. Mr. Wayman
accordingly visited the Western
State, and was so delighted with the
salubrious climate, at the same time
recognizing the great possibilities of
opening up trade relations between
Western Australia and Colombo,
General.
that upon his return to Ceylon he
commenced an agitation for reduced
fares between the two countries. By
representing the enormous advant-
ages of Western Australia as a health
resort for Anglo-Indians, and by con-
tinuous agitation during the follow-
ing five years for cheap tickets
between Western Australia and
Colombo, Mr. Wayman at length
had the satisfaction of seeing the
mail steamship companies granting
the reduction of fares upon the lines
he urged. In January, 1905, he
resigned his position as Editor of
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. FRANCIS JOHN WAYMAN.
The Ceylon Standard on account of
his health and went on a tour
through Europe, the United States,
and South Africa. Not finding com-
plete restoration to health he was
advised to proceed to Western Aus-
tralia, where he arrived in the latter
part of 1905, joining the literary
staff of The West Australian, of
which he remained an active member
for two years. In 1907 one of
Ceylon’s leading commercial men,
Mr. Walter Shakspeare, F.R.C.L.
visited Australia and suggested that
the work which Mr. Wayman had
carried out in Cevlon could best be
ft/
supplemented by a representative
bureau in Australia. The result was
that in March, 1908, the Ceylon
Bureau was opened with considerable
eclat at Fremantle, Mr. Wayman
becoming Director and giving a
public luncheon to celebrate the
event. Shortly afterwards it was
considered advisable to remove the
offices to the capital, and with the
establishment of the Bureau in Perth
tourist traffic and commercial rela-
tions between Ceylon and Western
Australia increased enormously, this
State sending more visitors in pro-
portion to population to Ceylon than
the rest of Australia combined. Mr.
Wayman was the originator of the
annual Ceylon dinner at Perth, which
at once became one of the social
events of the year. He has entire
control of the Ceylon Bureau in
Australia. He is the representative
in Western Australia for The Times
of Ceylon , one of the leading papers
east of Suez, the editor of which, Mr.
F. Crosbie-Roles, F.R.C.L, is most
keenly and sympathetically in-
terested in Australian-Anglo-Indian
work. Mr. Wayman is a contributor
to The West Australian under the
noms de 'phime "Nauticus,”
' F.J.W.,” and "Anglo-Indian,” is
a Justice of the Peace and a
public speaker, frequently taking the
platform as a lecturer on various
questions. In October, 1906, he
married Miss Helen Louise William-
son, of Croydon, Surrey, England,
a grandniece of General Sir Edward
Huthwaite, long associated with the
famous military colleges at Addis-
combe and Sandhurst. Mr. Way-
man resides at Mount Lawley, where
he named his place “Peradeniya,”
after the famous Royal Botanical
Gardens near Kandy, Ceylon.
HOURIGAN & DEMPSEY,
barristers and solicitors, Samson’s
Buildings, 33, Barrack Street, Perth.
(Richard Edward Hourigan, LL.B.,
and Richard Francis Dempsey,
LL.B.) RICHARD EDWARD
HOURIGAN was born at Geelong,
Victoida, in 1869, and received his
education at the Christian Brothers’
College, Wakefield Street, Adelaide.
At the close of his schooldays he
was articled to the legal profession
under the Hon. P. McMahon Glynn,


barrister and solicitor, of
Adelaide, and also became a student
in law at the University of Adelaide,
where he obtained his LL.B. degree
in 1893. In 1896 he arrived at
Bartletto , Perth.
MRQ RICHARD EDWARD HOURIGAN.
Perth, and was admitted to the Bar
in Western Australia in March of
the following year. For two years
he carried on practice at the mining-
towns of Kalgoorlie and Kanowna,
and in September, 1899, returned to
Bartletto , Perth,
MR. RICHARD FRANCIS DEMPSEY.
his native State, being admitted to
the Victorian Bar in May, 1900. Mr.
Hourigan established himself in his
profession at Geelong, where he re-
mained until March, 1906, when he
again sailed for Western Australia,
and in April resumed practice at
Kalgoorlie. A couple of years later
he came to Perth and opened his
present offices in Samson’s Buildings,
Barrack Street, where he has since
continued. As his practice increased
Mr. Hourigan found it necessary to
obtain assistance, and a correspon-
dence with Mr. R. F. Dempsey ter-
minated in the arrival of that gentle-
man in Western Australia. Mr.
Dempsey had graduated in laws in
the Adelaide University and had
been managing clerk in the office of
the Hon. P. McM. Glynn, M.H.R.,
Adelaide, for eleven years. He left
the office of that gentleman to join
Mr. Hourigan. Following the admis-
sion of Mr. Dempsey to the local
Bar in March, 1911, a partnership
was arranged, and the firm has since
conducted business under the style
of Hourigan & Dempsey.
Captain ADOLPH RUDOLPH
WILLIAM BUTTNER, Adminis-
trative and Instructional Staff
Officer, stationed at Kalgoorlie, was
born at Ravenswood Junction, North
Queensland, on December 4, 1881,
and is the eldest son of Mr. F. W. A.
Buttner, mine manager, of Charters
Towers, Queensland. Lie attended
the Central State School at Charters
Towers, and at thirteen years of age
was appointed a pupil teacher of that
institution. Six years later he re-
ceived the appointment of assistant
teacher in the same school, where he
remained until the early part of
1911. His first military experience
was gained in the Kennedy Infantry
Regiment, which he joined as a pri-
vate in 1901, and by degrees rose to
corporal, sergeant, and colour-ser-
geant. In 1906 he was appointed
provisional second lieutenant, which
promotion was succeeded by a lieu-
tenancy in the following year. Six
months later he passed successfully
his examination for captain and was
duly gazetted to that rank in the
Kennedy Infantry Regiment, in
which he held the appointment of
Adjutant. Before leaving the militia
for the permanent staff he passed for
his Majority. He was transferred
to the permanent staff after passing
the necessary examination in Decem-
ber, 1910, with the rank of Lieuten-
ant and holding the army rank of
Captain. This transfer took place
on February 1, 1911, and Captain
Biittner served on the Instructional
Staff in New South Wales until early
in 1912, when he was further trails-
ferred to Western Australia. Whilst
resident in New South Wales he at-
tended lectures at the University of
Sydney and was awarded from this
institution the Certificate of the
Department of Military Science. He
has had considerable connection with
rifle shooting circles in Queensland,
and was a member of the Kennedy
Rifle Club during the whole of his
period of connection with the Regi-
ment there. He is a lover of outdoor
sport generally and a strong advocate
CAPTAIN A. R. W. BUTTNER.
for healthy athletic exercise. Cap-
tain Buttner is a member of the
Naval and Military Club, Barrack
Street, Perth.
Lieutenant ARTHUR GEORGE
SAUNDERS, of the Physical Train-
ing Instructional Staff of the Com-
monwealth Military Forces, is a son
of Mr. M. J. Saunders, civil engineer
and contractor, of Wicklow and
Dublin, Ireland, where he was born
on May 30, 1884. He received his
educational training at various acade-
mies, concluding his scholastic career
at King's Hospital School, and sub-
sequently entered the Civil Service of
Ireland, where he remained until
1901. He then joined the Hussars,
and at a later date became fencing
and gymnastic instructor in this
Corps, with which he continued for
over seven years. In 1909 he came to
Western Australia and accepted the
post of Physical Director to the
Young Men's Christian Association
in Perth, resigning to enter upon his
present duties of Instructor of Phy-
sical Training in Western Australia


in 1911. He is a competent instruc-
tor in all branches of physical train-
ing, and teaches according to the
most modern methods employed on
the Continent, boxing, fencing,
Bartletto, Perth.
LIEUTENANT ARTHUR GEORGE SAUNDERS.
swimming, and life saving, etc., with
very successful results. He is an
expert rider and a good shot, and
holds the award of merit from the
Royal Life Saving Society. Pie
makes a hobby of his work, and
devotes his spare time to further
study in the various branches of
training, procuring the latest, most
up-to-date works on the subject, and
keeping himself in touch with every-
thing that may promote the ends
towards which he is working.
WILLIAM BOXALL, dental
surgeon, Barrack Street, Perth, is
a son of the late Mr. Alfred Boxall,
brewer, of Lithgow, New South
Wales, and comes of an old English
family. Born at Invercargill, New
Zealand, on November 18, 1861, he
received his education at various
schools in the Victorian capital and
in his early teens became articled to
the well-known Collins Street den-
tist, Mr. D. McGregor. Having as-
siduously applied himself to the
practice of dentistry under this gen-
tleman, he continued with him in
all for eleven years and spent a sub-
sequent three years in Sydney with
Drs. Arthur Cox and Bennett. In
1897 he came to Western Australia,
and proceeding to Kalgoorlie carried
on an extensive practice in this
centre for fourteen years. At the
end of that period he left the gold-
fields and established himself at 134,
Barrack Street, Perth, where he has
since practised his profession and
has built up a good connection. Mr.
Boxall is an honorary life member of
the H.A.C.B.S. He belongs to the
Celtic Club and is Vice-President of
the Perth Rifle Club, his favourite
recreation, however, being motoring,
in connection with which the Auto-
mobile Club claims him as an
adherent. In 1893 he married May
Josephine, daughter of the late Mr.
James O’Brien, of Daylesford, Vic-
toria, and unites with this lady in
the assistance of many charitable
objects. Mrs. Boxall is well known
throughout the community for her
wide sympathies and practical in-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. WILLIAM BOXALL.
terest in charity bazaars, entertain-
ments, etc., which is extended to the
efforts of all communions, although
the Roman Catholic Church claims
her special adherence. Their family
consists of three sons and two daugh-
ters.
JOHN JOSEPH HIGHAM,
J.P., was born at High Street, Fre-
mantle, on September 14, 1856, and
is a son of the late Mr. John Plenry
Higham, who arrived in Western
Australia in 1853. He first attended
a local State school, afterwards con-
tinuing his studies at the Bishops
School, in Perth, and at a later date
was sent to the Camden Collegiate
School of Sydney, New South Wales.
In 1876, having completed his
scholastic course, he returned to his
native State and entered upon a mer-
cantile career in the business house,
then conducted under the style of
M. Higham & Sons, which he, as
surviving partner, carried on until
1890. In that year, disposing of his
interests, he opened business on his
own account at Packenham Street,
Fremantle, establishing a special con-
nection with the newly-discovered
goldfields, and carried this on for
some considerable time. He is now
concerned in house, land, and
general estate agency and valuing
business on a large scale, and has
admitted into partnership his son,
Mr. Frank G. Higham. For many
years Mr. Higham was connected
with the municipal life of Fremantle,
representing the business ward of the
municipality at the Council table;
and in 1896, upon the death of the
late Hon. W. E. Marmion, he be-
came an aspirant for political
honours, and was returned to repre-
sent Fremantle district, retaining
the seat until he withdrew from
active Parliamentary life. He has
always identified himself with public
and educational movements and has
been chairman of the Technical
School Advisory Board for some
considerable time. He has also
acted as Trustee of the Fremantle
Cemetery Board. He received his
commission of Justice of the Peace
from the Forrest Government in
1897. In 1882 he married Edith,
daughter of the late Mr. John Bate-
man, of Fremantle, and has four
sons and a daughter. FRANK
GAYTON HIGHAM, partner in the
business of J. J. Higham, was born
at Fremantle on November 21, 1886.
He received his education at the
Fremantle Grammar School and at
the Scotch College, Claremont, at
the close of his studies joining the
well-known firm of G. Wood, Son,
and Co., with whom he remained for
nearly six years. He then accepted
the position of travelling representa-
tive for the Union Stores, Limited,
which he resigned to enter upon the
duties of accountant to Messrs.
Frank Manford & Co., and two years
later was admitted into partnership
with his father in the land and
estate agency business at Fremantle.
Mr. F. G. Lligham owns his own
motor launch, the ‘Tone,” on which
he spends his leisure hours, and
in earlier days he was very fond of
sailing, but has now given up that
form of diversion in favour of
the motor.


PEET & COMPANY, Limited,
estate and financial agents, 46, St.
George’s Terrace, Perth. This pro-
gressive firm has been associated
with the development of the City of
Perth for a lengthy period. It was
established as far back as 1894 with
offices in William Street and has
steadily extended its operations un-
til at the present time they reach
to the remotest parts of the metro-
politan area. The firm is agent and
attorney for several land companies
and syndicates, the business in con-
nection with which entails the man-
agement and distribution of ninety-
six estates in the city and suburbs,
beside which it is interested in
large areas at Roleystone, Kelm-
scott, Jandakot, the Harvey, and
other localities. In addition to the
ordinary transactions in the sale of
houses and lands it has a special
auctioneer (Mr. W. H. Dunn) to
conduct that department of the busi-
ness and an architect (Mr. A. E.
Clarke), who attends to the planning
and erection of homes which are
financed more or less upon the in-
stalment plan, this feature in con-
nection with land business prac-
tically being introduced into this
State by Mr. Peet when he settled
in Perth. JAMES THOMAS
PEET, the head of the firm, was
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. JAMES THOMAS PEET.
born at Nottingham, England, and
after concluding his scholastic
career at Taunton’s Endowed School
Southampton in 1882 he joined the
Ordnance Survey in the same town,
of which Sir Charles Wilson, K.C.8.,
R.E., was Director-General, South-
ampton being the head office of the
Government survey of the British
Isles. Subsequently he was drafted
to the division of detailed survey
held work at Yeovil, Chard, llmin-
ster, and other districts, gaining val-
uable experience in this way for his
later career. After a period as
draughtsman in the photo-zinco-
graphic department of the Southamp-
ton office, in 1887 Mr. Peet sailed
for Queensland and was employed
for a time as draughtsman in the
Survey Department of that State.
Drawn to Victoria by the attraction
of the Melbourne Exhibition and the
land boom, then at its height, Mr.
Peet joined Messrs. Chaffey Bro-
thers as draughtsman in connection
with their Mildura and Renmark
irrigation schemes. After complet-
ing this agreement he entered upon
land agency business as Manager for
Mr. Callaghan, of Swanston Street,
Melbourne, at that time the leading
land agent of Victoria. In 1891,
while still resident in Melbourne, he
formed a partnership with Mr. Aus-
tin Bastow, J.P., who in after years
became a well-known resident of
Western Australia and sometime
Mayor of Subiaco. Three years
later the present Company was
founded in Perth, the offices at a
later date being transferred from
William Street to St. George's Ter-
race, where it operates at the pre-
sent time. In 1898 Mr. Peet was ap-
pointed sworn valuator and in the
following year Government land
agent, and is now admittedly first in
his line of business in the State,
his knowledge of the land in the
city and surrounding suburbs being
of a most comprehensive character
and including acquaintance with the
fauna and flora of each locality. It
has been aptly said that a day spent
with him as guide is as good as a
Western Australian history lesson
to the intending investor.
HEINRICH WALTER BEVIL-
AQUA, mortgage and investment
broker, sworn valuator, attorney,
and agent for absentees, etc., Weld
Cnambers, Perth, was born at Blum-
berg, South Australia, on March
14, 1868. His boyhood was spent
in the south-eastern districts of the
State and at Lyndoch, where he re-
ceived his early education. Upon
the conclusion of his scholastic career
at Whinham College, North Ade-
laide, he entered the office of his
father, Mr. F. M H. Bevilaqua,
for a few months, and in 1883
joined the staff of the old Bank ol
South Australia, where Mr. H. D.
Holmes, now General Manager of
the Western Australian Bank, Perth,
was engaged in the Branch Inspec-
tor’s Department. After a varied
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. HEINRICH WALTER BEVILAQUA.
experience at the head office and at
country branches he was transferred
in 1891 to the newly-established bus-
iness of the Bank in Melbourne, but
foreseeing the financial crisis which
led to the absorption of that
institution by the Union Bank of
Australia, Limited, and coming
under the spell of Western Austra-
lia through personal and press re-
ports, he relinquished the service in
May, 1891, and came to Perth un-
der engagement to the Western Aus-
tralian Bank, of which Mr. H. D.
Holmes had assumed management.
Determined to make the most of the
forward movement that had begun
in the Western State Mr. Bevilaqua
worked early and late in the inter-
ests of the Bank under the immed-
iate supervision of Mr. Holmes, and
in the course of fourteen years oc-
cupied practically every responsible
position in the head office under that
of General Manager. On account of
a suggestion by the Board of Direc-
tors following the discovery of de-
falcations by one of the staff, that
he should accept the management of
a country branch, he resigned his
position of accountant on June 30,
1905, and joined the firm of Peet &
Co., Limited, estate and financial
agents, Perth. After a close con-
nection with this progressive com


pany, on July 1, 1907, he retired
from the more active management
of the firm's affairs and commenced
business on his own account at For-
rest Chambers, as mortgage and in-
vestment broker, in February of
that year, still retaining an interest
in Peet & Co., Limited, and con-
tinuing to act as one of their direc-
tors. In February, 1909, the in-
crease of the business demanded
larger and more central premises and
removal was made to the front offices
in Weld Chambers, at present oc-
cupied by him. Mr. Bevilaqua
does little advertising, but as the
outcome of his endeavour to give
constituents the best and most
straightforward advice dictated by
his experience the business has gra-
dually expanded and become an im-
portant factor in the development
of the city, suburban, and country
districts. Through the principle of
encouraging the reduction of liabil-
ities on the banking or instalment
plan many of all classes are being
enabled to free their homes and
holdings in a way not generally
found possible heretofore. In ad-
dition to being a Director of Peet
& Co.* Limited* Mr. Bevilaqua is
on the local directorate of the Lon-
don and Lancashire Fire Insurance
Company and of the Western Aus-
tralian Tobacco Manufacturing Com-
pany, Limited.
JAMES BREBBER, J.P., is a
son of Mr. George Forbes Brebber,
general merchant, Glenkindie,
Strathdon, Aberdeenshire, in which
county he was born. He received
his education at a public school, and
at the close of his studies entered
into the building trade. In 1877
he proceeded to Glasgow, and in the
following year was appointed Secre-
tary of the United Trades Com-
mittee. Upon the failure of the
Glasgow Bank in 1879 Mr. Brebber
left for London, where he received
the appointment of Secretary to the
United Trades Council in 1881, and
was elected by the General Council
of the Association to represent them
in Manchester in 1885. During the
winter of 1882-3 he served on the
Islington branch of the Lord Mayor's
Committee for the distribution of a
fund of £91,000 among the poor of
London. In 1887 he took passage
for Western Australia, two years
later leaving the Western State for
Victoria, where he remained for
some four years. In 1893 he re-
turned to Perth and in 1897 entered
into business as a land and estate
agent. Mr. Brebber is also a sworn
valuator, his business address being
656, Hay Street. He early evinced
a strong interest in municipal mat-
ters and received election to the
Perth City Council in 1897, serving
as a member of this body for nine
years, in 1901 filling the office of
Chairman of the City Decorations
Committee at the time of the recep-
tion of the Duke and Duchess of
York, for which service he was
accorded a letter of thanks from the
Council. He entered Parliament as
representative for the North Perth
constituency in 1906, retaining the
seat for three years. He received
his commission of Justice of the
Peace for the Perth magisterial dis-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JAMES BREBBER.
trict in 1906. Mr. Brebber is a
member of the Caledonian Society,
in which he has been Chief for two
years and Secretary for a similar
period.
JOHN GEORGE MILNER,
F.F.1.A., J.P., land and estate
agent, William Street, Perth, was
born at Balmoral, in the western dis-
trict of Victoria, in 1868. He is a
son of the late Mr. John Milner, an
Ex-Mayor of Buninyong, Victoria,
his parents having moved to Ballarat
when he was an infant, and subse-
quently to Buninyong, made famous
by being the first place where gold
was discovered in that State. Mr.
Milner received his primary educa-
tion at a State school and afterwards
at Grenville College, Ballarat, from
which institution he passed the Civil
Service examination in 1885 and the
matriculation examination of the
University of Melbourne in the fol-
lowing year. Shortly after leaving
school ho was successful in the
BARTLETTO , PERTH.
MR. JOHN GEORGE MILNER.
examination for the clerical division
of the Railways Department, but
preferring commercial life obtained
a position with the firm of Mac-
meikan & Co., estate agents, etc., of
Collins Street, Melbourne. He re-
mained for ten years with this firm,
and during this period occupied
several important positions in con-
nection with public companies, and
was elected a Fellow of the Federal
Institute of Accountants. In 1894
he proceeded to Hobart on behalf
of the National Wool Company, and
in 1895 and 1896 visited several dis-
tricts of New South Wales for Golds-
brough, Mort, &■ Co., Limited.
While filling this engagement he re-
ceived an offer to join his old em-
ployers in Perth and arrived at Fre-
mantle in August, 1896. Twelve
months later he accepted the position
of manager for Peet & Co., Limited,
which position he retained for over
seven years, when he founded the
present firm of Milner & Co., estate
and financial agents, in Perth. In
1906 he was appointed a sworn valu-
ator under the Transfer of Land
Act, 1893. Mr. Milner has always
taken considerable interest in politi-
cal and municipal affairs, and was
one of the founders and the first
President of the East Ward Rate-
payers' Association of North Perth,


which inaugurated the Greater Perth
movement and other important mat-
ters. After holding this position for
eighteen months, in November, 1905,
he was elected Mayor of Nortli
Perth, defeating Mr. R. S. Haynes,
K.C., the previous occupant of the
mayoral chair. At the close of his
first term of office Mr. Milner was
re-elected by a large majority, and
in the following year he was again
returned, on this occasion enjoying
a walkover. On March 9, 1906, he
was appointed a Justice of the Peace
for the Perth magisterial district.
He has filled many positions in the
Masonic fraternity and is a Past
Master of the order. A prominent
playing member of the Williams-
town Cricket Club in Victoria he has
always been a supporter of all forms
of outdoor recreation. In 1898 he
married Ellen, youngest daughter of
Mr. George Paine, contractor of
Newport, Victoria, and has two sons
and two daughters.
HENRY CARINGTON
SEWELL, J.P., head of the firm of
H. C. Sewell & Co., land and estate
agents, 42, St. George’s Terrace,
Perth, is a son of the late Mr.
William Sewell, of Cannonbury,
Balwyn, Victoria. He was born at
Hamilton, Victoria, and acquired his
BartlettOy Perth.
MR. HENRY CARIGTON SEWELL.
scholastic training at the Kew High
School and the University in that
State, upon its conclusion entering
the Commissioners’ Branch of the
Melbourne Savings Bank, in which
service he continued until his de-
parture for Western Australia in
1896. Upon arrival he went to
Kalgoorlie, where he commenced
business as a land agent in 1904,
transferring the scene of his oper-
ations to Perth. During the life-
time of Sir Arthur Stepney he held
the Baronet’s power of attorney and
managed his estates in Western
Australia. His first connection with
public life began at Kalgoorlie,
where he was elected a member of
the Roads Board, and in 1904 he
filled the position of Chairman, re-
tiring from the Board upon his de-
parture for Perth. In 1910 he
received his commission of Justice
of the Peace. He is a member of the
Perth Golf Club and finds recreation
in this ancient pastime. He married
Katherine, eldest daughter of the
late Captain Butcher, of Albany.
CHARLES EDMUND STRODE
HALL, agent for the Manning
Estates in Western Australia, is a
son of the late Captain George Hall,
of the 52nd Oxfordshire Light In-
fantry, and Governor of Parkhurst
Prison, where the gentleman under
review was born on February 6, 1861.
His maternal grandfather was
Colonel George Gawler, K.H., the
second Governor of South Australia,
who was the first to combine the
powers and duties of Resident Com-
missioner and Governor, having been
gazetted to both offices. Mr. Strode
Hall was educated at Christ’s Hos-
pital, London, and obtained the pre-
mier pass from the Royal Mathema-
tical School. He has followed vari-
ous callings during the course of his
lifetime, for a number of years being
engaged in marine pursuits. He
holds a master mariner’s certificate
and was connected with the Orient
Company prior to the inauguration
of steamers on that line. He occu-
pied certain public positions in the
Federated Malay States, whence he
first arrived in Western Australia in
May, 1884, on which occasion he re-
mained for six months. In the fol-
lowing year he spent a similar period
in the State, during which time he
was engaged in the pearling in-
dustry in the Nor’-West. His next
visit was in 1894, when he was
travelling between Western Aus-
tralia and Singapore for a Singapore
firm, and in February, 1898, he left
the coast, and from that time on-
ward was resident in the Federated
Malay States and Singapore until
he finally settled in Western Aus-
tralia in March, 1911. Immediately
preceding his arrival here Mr.
Strode Hall was Secretary to the
Selangor Turf Club, and has held
many similar positions. He married
on May 26, 1897, Florence A. Man-
ning, daughter of the late Sir Wal-
Bartletto Perth.
MR. CAHRLES EDMUND STRODE HALL.
lace Bickley, Bart., well known for
many years in Fremantle as Mr.
Wallace Bickley, never having used
the title, and widow of the late Mr.
L. S. Manning, of Davilak, Fre-
mantle.
WALTER MERVYN PETERS,
farmers and land selectors’ agent,
and auctioneer, Cathedral Avenue,
Perth, is a son of Mr. Frederick
Augustus Peters, and was born in
1868. The early years of his life
were spent with his parents in South
Africa, and he was present at the
siege of Pretoria in 1881 as Officer’s
Orderly under command of Major
Bainbridge, being again associated
with military life during the Boer
campaign of 1899-1904, when he was
identified with the Intelligence
Department, subsequently being
selected by the Natal Government
to act as guide to the Transvaal
Cape contingent during its march to
Zululand in connection with the
native rising of 1906. All through
life Mr. Peters has been closely
associated with farming pursuits,
and has had a great deal ot
practical experience in dry-farming
methods, which are claiming the
attention of the agriculturists of
to-day. In 1908 he arrived in


Western Australia and took up
4,000 acres of land in partnership
with another gentleman in the
Kellerberrin district, but ultimately
sold out his share in this property.
Recognizing the growing need for
an advisory head outside of the
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WALTER MERVYN PETERS.
Lands Department, Mr. Peters
established a Farmers and Selectors'
Agency to act in conjunction with
the department and to aid its
efforts in obtaining suitable settlers
for the development of the country.
The Agency takes the newcomer in
hand upon his arrival in the State,
and Mr. Peters' long experience
enables him to give the best possible
advice in regard to land selection.
The many letters of thanks which
he has received from satisfied and
grateful clients testify to the fact
that the Agency is filling an
important niche in the economy of
the State. Mr. Peters holds the
agencies for the Cyclone Fence
Company, the Commercial Union
Assurance Company, the Mount
Lyell Railway and Chemical Com-
pany, Limited, and the National
Mutual Life Association of Austra-
lasia. Outside of business pursuits
he takes a lively interest in the
moral and general welfare of the
community, and holds the office of
Social Secretary to the Y.M.C.A.,
being also Vice-President of the
Cricket and Lacrosse Clubs in con-
nection with the same institution,
the latter club possessing the
premier team in B Grade. He is
also Vice-President of the Perth
Branch of the Overseas Club, and
acts as superintendent of the Burs-
wood Congregational Sunday-school.
Mr. Peters married Frances,
daughter of Mr. A. T. Goodchild,
of Diamond Field fame, who
obtained the 33rd degree in Free-
masonry, and has a son and three
daughters.
UGO EDMONDO BERTOLI,
land selectors' agent, Barrack Street,
Perth, was born in Switzerland in
1865, and received his education in
Victoria, having come to Australia
with his parents at the early age
of four years. He trained for the
teaching profession and for three
years was engaged as junior master
in the State schools of Victoria, re-
linquishing this service to engage in
farming pursuits. In conjunction
with his father he followed this in-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. UGO EDMONDO BERTOLI.
dustry in the Charlton district of
Victoria for about seven years, dur-
ing which period he obtained an
excellent practical knowledge of
agriculture. In 1892, leaving
his adopted State for South
Australia, he took a position
as correspondent to an Adelaide
firm, and five years later came to
the Western State, where he entered
the Lands Department of the
Government Service. After contin-
uing in this connection for fourteen
years in December, 1910, Mr.
Bertoli established himself in
business on his own account.
Having risen from a junior
post to that of Assistant Under-
secretary in the Lands Department
he had gained a wide experience in
business matters connected with land
and his practical knowledge acquired
during earlier years has also stood
him in good stead and fitted him
in a special way for the general de-
mands of his business. Mr. Bertoli
resides at Queen's Park and at one
time occupied the office of councillor
in the local municipal body, which
seat he retained for two years.
S. B. DEVENISH & SON,
auctioneers and accountants, land,
commission, insurance, and financial
agents, James Street, Guildford.
STEPHEN BALDWIN DEVEN-
ISH, Senior Member of the above
progressive firm, is the second son
of the late Mr. Henry Thomas Dev-
enish, of Guildford, Western Aus-
tralia, and was born on October 17,
1852. He was educated at Perth and
Guildford, and upon leaving school
at the early age of fourteen years
entered the service of the late Henry
Gray & Co., merchants, of Gerald-
ton, and subsequently the well-
known firm of Padbury, Loton, and
Co., merchants, of Perth and Guild-
ford, with whom he was connected
for over fourteen years. When quite
a young man Mr. Devenish had some
experience in pearling at Shark Bay
when this industry was in its in-
fancy, and has vivid recollections of
stirring events and hardships en-
dured while there, finishing up with
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. STEPHAN BALDWIN DEVENISH.
a tramp overland from Shark Bay
to Geraldton, a distance of over 230
miles, in company with Messrs. Fred,
and Charles Piesse, of Katanning.
Mr. Devenish established the present
business at Guildford about fourteen


years ago, and by close attention to
the demands of his clientele suc-
ceeded during the ensuing years in
developing the germ of land agency
with which he commenced to a con-
cern of the present comprehensive
character. He is Secretary to the
Swan Building Society, and though
having little time to spare for the
obligations of public life has acted
for many years as auditor to the
local Municipal Council. He is an
enthusiast in the °ulture of roses and
can boast of over 200 varieties in his
beautiful garden at Guildford. Mr.
Devenish married Elizabeth, daugh-
ter of the late Mr. James Brittain,
of Western Australia, and has three
sons and two daughters living.
The BARTLETTO STUDIOS,
673, Hay Street, Perth. The value
of photography as a national asset
cannot be assessed in so many
pounds, shillings, and pence. By
means of its multiple processes the
public mind has been wonderfully
enriched. Light has been shed
upon the history of the years, the
pulses of the world’s inhabi-
tants made to throb, and pos-
terity placed under a heavy debt of
gratitude, from which it has no
desire to escape. The origin of
photography may be traced to the
early part of the nineteenth century,
and upon the foundation thus laid
down has- been raised and perfected
a wonderful structure of art. Photo-
graphy to-day is a combination of
art and science, holding little in
common with the elementary efforts
in black and white which caused our
ancestors to marvel greatly. The
negative received from the hands of
the expert operator is but a skele-
ton, which, passing to the retoucher,
undergoes a transformation almost
as complete as that sustained by the
chrysalis, resulting in the marvellous
portraiture which is a source of con-
stant delight to the beholder. In the
wide field of modern photography no
firm is more worthy of premier posi-
tion than Bartletto, which, since its
inception in Perth in 1897 has mas-
tered the art in all its intricacies
and established an unimpeachable
reputation as the most advanced por-
trait photographers in the Common-
wealth. Bartletto Studios specialize
in every branch of photography, and
their India proof work, printed on
platinum and mounted on vellum, is
particularly beautiful; in fact, the
whole of their productions are
worthy to rank with the best
American, English, and Continental
portraiture. Enlargements and copy
Bartletto, Perth .
MR. F. GUY MANNERING.
ing from old and faded photographs
is work which here is probably car-
ried to a finer point than in any
other part of Australia, and so skil-
fully are the lights and shades
handled by the artist that one finds
THE BARTLETTO STUDIOS.
RECEPTION ROOM, BARTLETTO STUDIOS, PERTH.


it difficult to realize the total absence
of colour. The firm is also an ex-
ponent of fine-art photography in
miniatures and colour work, which
when finished in aqua tint cannot be
surpassed for delicacy and absolute
•charm. The slight photographic basis
is cleverly combined with the skill
of the artist, resulting in a study
•exquisite in its pervading daintiness.
The studio galleries and entrance are
•crowded with examples of the firm's
photographic art, and the directors
always appreciate a visit from per-
sons of culture and taste, at whose
service they readily hold themselves
disposed, knowing full well that the
artistic sense will revel in the per-
sonal observation and gather a more
•comprehensive view of the delicate
nuances than it is possible to out-
line in cold type. F. GUY MAN-
NERING, in whose hands is centred
the general management, is a Vic-
torian, having been born in that
State in 1870. He joined the firm
of Bartlett Brothers, photographers,
Bendigo, in 1885, since when he has
been actively connected with photo-
graphy with various firms. In 1898
he came to Western Australia, and
in conjunction with Mr. Bartlett
founded the present firm, which
early became recognized as the lead-
ing studio in Perth.
ALBERT CLERK, Government
Auctioneer, Trustee Chambers,
Perth, was born in Victoria in 1850.
He was educated at Haileybury Col-
lege, England, and at the close of
his schooldays engaged in pastoral
pursuits, with which he was con-
nected for many years. In 1888
he came to Western Australia and
took over the management of a large
livery and letting stables, which he
conducted successfully until 1893.
At this period he joined in part-
nership with Mr. Theo. Lowe and
continued in this connection for
about three years, subsequently
being associated with Mr. Samuel
Grimwood in business in Tattersall's
Horse Bazaar. On April 5, 1900,
he was appointed Government Auc-
tioneer in the above concern, and
having dissolved partnership with
Mr. Grimwood carried on his own
business as stock and station agent
in conjunction with the duties
attached to this position. Since his
appointment Mr. Clerk has con-
ducted many large sales, which have
included important opening sales at
centres where townships have since
ww
sprung up in different parts of the
State. Mr. Clerk also holds the
appointment of Auctioneer in Wes-
tern Australia for the Common-
wealth Government, and has charge
of the sales in connection with the
Post Office and the Customs Depart-
ment.
AUGUST KNAPP, 8.0. A.,
optician, 25, Barrack Street, Perth,
is a son of the late Mr. Hermann
Knapp, Professor of Languages and
Mathematics at the Brisbane Gram-
mar School. He was born at Man-
chester, England, on August 31,
1873, and at an early age left for
Queensland, where he received bis
education. Upon leaving school he
was articled to Mr. Alfred Clarke,
optician, of the firm of Messrs.
Flavelle Brothers & Roberts, of
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. AUGUST KNAPP.
Brisbane, with whom he remained
for three years, during which period
he obtained a thorough acquaintance
with all the details of the mechanical
part of the business. Suffering from
indifferent health he relinquished his
studies and proceeded to the Darling
Downs, where for six years he was
identified with pastoral life on a sheep
station. Having regained his nor-
mal strength he entered Campbell's
Steam Joinery Yard as machinist,
and continued in this connection for
about six months. Mr. Alfred Clarke
having decided to establish himself
in practice in Perth, Western Aus-
tralia, at about this time, invited
Mr. Knapp to accompany him, and
the latter accepting the offer arrived
in this State in 1897. Two years
later Mr. Clarke admitted him into
partnership, and in April, 1900,
upon the departure of his principal
from Western Australia, Mr. Knapp
took over the business on his own
account, and has conducted it suc-
cessfully ever since. He is thor-
oughty conversant with all branches
of his profession, having an expert
knowledge of refraction and all
anomalies connected with the sight,
and occupies a position in the fore-
front ranks of similar practitioners
in Western Australia. He was
elected a member of the British
Optical Association in 1900, and is
optician to the Home of Peace,
Subiaco; to the National Rifle Asso-
ciation ; and to the Hospital foi
Sick Children, Perth. In 1904 Mr.
Knapp married Maude Willis, sister
of Mrs. C. S. Toppin, of Perth.
JAMES NEILSON, optician,
747, Hay Street, Perth, was born
at Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1860,
where also he received his scholastic
training. At the close of his school-
days he served a seven years' ajDpren-
ticeship with Messrs. Marshall and
Co., of Edinburgh, with which firm
he continued for several years.
Coming to South Australia in 1888
he was connected with Mr. F.
Basse's establishment until leaving
Bartletto, Perth .
MR. JAMES NEILSON.
for Western Australia in 1903.
Opening at his present address in
Hay Street he has successfully car-
ried on the practice of his profession,
his comprehensive training having
given him a practical knowledge of


every department of his business.
Mr. Neilson is honorary optician to
the Perth Children’s Hospital and
to the Waifs’ Home, and attends to
a considerable amount of honorary
work in addition to these appoint-
ments and the demands of his ever-
increasing connection.
WILLIAM HENRY MON-
TAGUE BROWNE, optician, Wel-
lington Buildings, Perth, is a son of
Mr. W. T. Browne, a chemist of
Dirnboola, Victoria, and was born at
Ballarat, Victoria, on June 16, 1884.
He pursued his educational studies
in his native State, and at their con-
clusion entered his father’s business
with a view of studying pharmacy.
In conjunction with this he also
studied under Dr. W. Chisholm Ross,
ophthalmic surgeon, with the inten-
tion of uniting the two professions,
and continued his course of training
until 1901. He then entered the
service of Messrs. Edward Tobin and
Co., opticians, of Melbourne, where
he was specially instructed in the
subjective and objective methods of
sight-testing. During this period he
made himself proficient in retino-
scopy and ophthalmoscopy, two most
important methods of determining
errors of refraction. In 1903 he pro-
ceeded to Sydney to extend his ex-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. W. H. M. BROWNE.
perience, and here became connected
with the well-known firm of Fairfax
and Roberts, of that city, relieving
Mr. Arthur Roberts, who was start-
ing on a holiday trip. Subsequently
Mr. Browne opened in business on
his own account, but ill-health forced
him to relinquish operations, and he
spent some time in Queensland with
the firm of Berliners, Limited, opti-
cians, from which service he resigned
to enter upon pastoral pursuits in
the Northern Territory tablelands,
hoping by an open-air life to regain
his full vigour. In 1907 he arrived
in Wyndham from the cattle country
and accepted a position with Messrs.
Frost & Shipham, of Perth, and
after opening consulting-rooms at
various country pharmacies and
arranging systematic visits decided
once more to start business on his
own behalf. His rooms in Welling-
ton Buildings, Perth, are fitted with
all the latest appliances in connec-
tion with the most up-to-date
methods of sight-testing and
spectacle-fitting. During his wide
experience Mr. Browne has devoted
particular attention to the study of
defects of the refractive media of the
eye, whereby brain fag, insomnia,
and neuralgia are produced. He also
gives special care to the strengthen-
ing of children’s vision by means of
properly-prescribed glasses, thus pre-
venting squint and obviating the
necessity in later life of an opera-
tion, which in many instances proves
abortive. Mr. Browne is a member
of the Commercial Travellers’ Asso-
ciation. In 1911 he married Milli-
cent, daughter of the late Mr.
Joseph Keech, of Redhill, South
Australia.
DONALD JOHN CHIPPER,
funeral director, Hay Street, Perth,
and Adelaide Street, Fremantle, was
born at the former city in 1868, and
pursued his scholastic studies at the
Government Boys’ School. Subse-
quently he apprenticed himself to
Mr. John Summers, coachbuilder,
wheelwright, and undertaker, and
after continuing with this gentleman
for five years began business on his
own account in 1888. In the first
instance opening as a coachbuilder
and undertaker, in 1892 he relin-
quished the former branch of the
business and has since carried on
solely as a funeral director. For the
past twenty-three years Mr. Chipper
has occupied the same premises
where he now conducts his busi-
ness, and which are situated in
Hay Street, Perth, and in 1892 he
established a branch business at Fre-
mantle. Besides being a member of
the Masonic craft and a Past Grand
Lodge officer he is Senior Grand
Trustee of the Grand Lodge of the
United Ancient Order of Druids, of
which also he was first Grand Presi-
dent when the Charter was granted
for a Grand Lodge in Western Aus-
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. DONALD JOHN CHIPPER.
tralia in 1901, having been
foundation member of the order
since its inception in 1891.
WILLIAM CHARLES BOWRA,
of the firm of Bowra & O’Dea, was
born in Perth on September 9, 1856 r
and is third son of the late Mr.
John William Atlee Bowra, watch-
maker and jeweller, of Ho wick
Street (now Hay Street East),
Perth. The late gentleman at one
time was connected with Her late
Majesty Queen Victoria’s Indian
forces, and came on service to Wes-
tern Australia, afterwards purchas-
ing his discharge in India and
settling down in this State. He
married a lady who had seen the
Swan River Settlement in its in-
fancy, having arrived as an infant
in 1829 by the “Caroline,” the
fourth vessel to land emigrants at
the Western Australian port. The
subject of this memoir pursued his
scholastic studies under the late Mr.
W. Adkinson in the State School on
St. George’s Terrace, which has
since developed into the Perth
Technical School. At fourteen years
of age he was apprenticed to the
wheelwright trade at the now de-
funct Vulcan Foundry, and con-
tinued about ten years, becoming
well versed in different branches of
foundry work. In his early twenties
he left this employ to undertake the


-duties of foreman for the Western
Australian Manufacturing Com-
pany, retiring from this position
when the firm relinquished its oper-
ations about ten years later. In 1890
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM CHARLES BOWRA.
he accepted the management of the
late Mr. Joseph Sowden's foundry
in Hay Street, from which he re-
signed a year later to enter upon a
similar appointment in the Pioneer
Carriage Works owned by Mrs. W.
Wimbridge. He was fond of apply-
ing his expert knowledge of
machinery in the direction of ori-
ginal experiment, and invented a
machine which was used in the
manufacture of a bottling rack.
Owing to a defective clamp while
working this machine he lost two
fingers of his left hand, and on ac-
count of this disablement was forced
to discontinue the work to which he
had hitherto devoted the whole of
his life. He therefore started in
business as a coachbuilder and un-
dertaker, and met with such marked
success in this line of trade that
within a couple of months he joined
issue with Mr. O'Dea, and has since
pursued a very prosperous career.
Ultimately the firm disposed of the
coachbuilding branch of the business
and since has devoted its attention
solely to the work of undertakers.
Mr. Bowra is an enthusiast in the
matter of fruit culture, and his
orchard at Cannington, known as
“Brooklyn Farm," which is under
the management of his second son,
is sufficient testimony to the success
of his methods. He has over 1,000
trees, chiefly apples and stone fruits,
which have proved most profitable,
and also grows vegetables with satis-
factory results. He combines poultry
farming with his other industries,
and spends what leisure he can
command in the garden surrounding
his home at Clifton Street, North
Perth, where choice varieties of
roses, sweet-peas, etc., credit him
with exceptional skill as a floricul-
turist. Pie is a member of the
Perth Horticultural, the Royal
Agricultural, and the Cannington
Agricultural Societies and is also
connected with the Free Gardeners
and the Independent Order of Odd-
fellows. A member of the Masonic
craft and Club he has held office in
the fraternity. In 1878 Mr. Bowra
married Hannah Tichbon, daughter
of Mr. Henry Tichbon, one of the
oldest pioneers of the State, now
residing at East Perth. He has two
sons and four daughters.
MICHAEL O’DEA, of the firm of
Bowra & O’Dea, which has been
established for over twenty years in
the City of Perth, was born at
Ennis, County Clare, Ireland, on
September 16, 1863. He is the second
son of the late Sergeant M. O’Dea,
of Plis Majesty’s 44th Regiment of
Foot, who served through the Crim-
ean war and was twice wounded.
Coming to Australia with his parents
in the year 1865 the gentleman
under review received his education
at the Roman Catholic School in
Perth, and at twelve years of age
was apprenticed to the blacksmithing
trade. After continuing in this call-
ing for some time he joined Mr.
Bowra in the coachbuilding business,
with which, like many others at that
time, they combined the business of
undertakers. The partnership was
formed in 1892, and within a few
years the growth of the latter branch
of the concern had assumed such
large proportions that, by mutual
consent, the coachbuilding business
was disposed of and the firm has
since devoted all its energies to the
directing of mortuary arangements.
Apart from his business Mr. O’Dea
has gained considerable distinction
as a marksman, and was a member
of the first Western Australian rifle
team to visit Victoria, besides being
champion rifle shot of the State on
three different occasions. Pie was
one of the early members of the
Metropolitan Rifle Volunteers which
subsequently became the Perth In-
fantry, and saw over a score of
years' service in connection with
this corps. He has been the winner
of a large number of trophies for
rifle-shooting and is always re-
cognized as one of the authorities in
this department of sport. At the
time of the Diamond Jubilee festiv-
ities in connection with the reign
of Queen Victoria Mr. O’Dea was
among those chosen to represent this
State in England, on which occasion
with his commanding officer, he had
the distinguished honour of being
presented by Lord Roberts to Her
late Majesty at Windsor. Upon his
return to Western Australia, owing
to pressure of business affairs, he re-
signed from the volunteer service and
has since devoted his leisure chiefly
to advancing the interests of the
Hibernian Society in this State, his
membership in this body having ex-
tended over twenty years. He has
held the highest offices in this
Society, whose representative he has
been on various occasions in Victoria,
South Australia, and Tasmania, and
was also one of the founders of
the Celtic Club, at the present
time (1912) filling the presidential
chair. With that love of country
which marks the true “Sons of
Erin" he is ever ready to hold out
a helping hand to any of his com-
patriots in time of need. A
prominent adherent of the Roman
Catholic Church he was closely iden-
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. MJCHAEL O’DEA.
tified with the building up of the
many important institutions which
have marked the progress of the
denomination in this State. He is a
warm supporter of those athletic


sports in which as a youth he
excelled and is a splendid judge of
amateur “form.” Mr. O'Dea mar-
ried in 1888 Mary, eldest daughter
of the late Mr. George Hayman, of
Perth, and has a family of five
daughters and three sons.
WILLIAM JONAS GREEN, of
the firm of Arthur E. Davies & Co.,
undertakers, of Fremantle, is a son
of the late Mr. John William Green,
an early pioneer of the Victorian
State, who was a prominent figure
in Ballarat at the time of the
Stockade Riots. Born at Mel-
bourne, Victoria, on June 24, in the
year 1850, the gentleman under re-
view received his education at the
Collegiate School of Ballarat, and
after a concluding course of study
at the capital turned his attention
to land surveying. He passed the
necessary examinations entitling him
Bartletto, Perth.
MR. WILLIAM JONAS GREEN.
to a certificate of competency, but
subsequently abandoned this profes-
sion in order to join his father in
business pursuits. Owing to the
disastrous results of the Victorian
land boom, he left that State for
Western Australia in 1898 and set-
tled in Perth for a couple of years.
Eventually Mr. Green arranged to
take over the business of Messrs.
Arthur E. Davies & Co., of Fre-
mantle, which he has since conducted
at that centre. The claims of this
concern absorb almost the whole of
his time and attention and leave him
but little leisure to devote to outside
affairs, but in the past he identified
himself with most of the leading
movements of his time in Victoria.
The Literary Institute of Fremantle,
however, has secured his services as
Vice-President and member of its
Bartletto, Perth,
MR. JASPER GREEN.
Council, and in this institution he
evinces the deepest interest. The St.
Kilda Trades Club claims him as one
of its founders and owes to him in
conjunction with others its position
as one of the most progressive and
successful organizations of its kind in
the State. In his youth Mr. Green
found recreation on the cricket field,
and was a batsman of no mean
ability. He is a Vice-President of the
Fremantle Cricket and Football
Clubs, and takes his own recreation
on the bowling green, being a member
of the Fremantle Bowling Club. In
1880 Mr. Green married Selina,
daughter of the late Mr. Samuel
Florence, of Melbourne, and has
four sons and eight daughters. His
son, Jasper, who is in the business
with his father, was born in Mel-
bourne, and after concluding his
education in Perth spent six and a
half years with the firm of Messrs.
G. Wood, Son, & Co., wholesale mer-
chants, where he received a good
commercial training, eventually be-
coming connected with Mr. Green,
sen., as already stated.
GEORGE ARTHUR BATE-
MAN, successor to Messrs. Dunn and
Co., carriers, St. George's Terrace,
Perth, is a son of Mr. George Barnes
Bateman, of London, England,
where the subject of this sketch was
born on March 18, 1867. He re-
ceived his preliminary education in
his native city, concluding his
studies at Tunbridge Wells, and at
the close of his schooldays engaged
in seafaring life for eighteen months.
At a subsequent period he went to
Canada and applied himself to horse-
breeding and cattle-raising pursuits
for five years. In 1888, after a short
visit to London, he came to Western
Australia, and soon after arrival left
Perth for the Greenbushes district,
where he commenced prospecting in
the tin-mining area between Green-
bushes and the Collie River. Mr.
Bateman continued in this line of life
until 1895, when he proceeded to the
goldfields, and was among the early
arrivals at Kannalinung, about 25
miles from Coolgardie, becoming as-
sociated with many mining ventures
in the district. Returning to Green-
bushes in 1900 he established a
carrying business between that centre
and the nearest railway station, and
also took over the mail contract,
which he held for ten years. Mr.
Bateman always displayed a very
keen interest in local affairs and was
a member of the first Progress Asso-
ciation, being elected President at
the inception of this body. When
the Roads Board was formed he was
elected Chairman, and held this office
for a number of years. He was also
for two years Chairman of the
Health Board, and occupied a simi-
lar office in connection with the
Cemetery Board. He was a member
of the Water Supply Board and of
the Recreation Committee, always
lending his support to all movements
for the promotion of healthy outdoor
sport. He is also interested in
Friendly Society work and is asso-
ciated with the Masonic craft and
with the Order of Oddfellows and
the Druids' Lodge. Mr. Bateman
was married to Helen, daughter
of Mr. Thomas Bank, of Fremantle,
son of Captain Bank, the first
pilot of that port, and has a
family of five sons and four
daughters.


DENIS KEANE, East Perth, is
a son of Mr. John Keane, of Cur-
rans, near Tralee, County Kerry,
Ireland, where he was born on
March 1, 1870. He was educated at
the National School in his native
town and spent his youth in
farming pursuits on his father's pro-
perty. Owing to the agrarian strife
in that part of Ireland, of which Mr.
Keane, sen., , was a victim, he de-
cided to try his fortunes under the
Southern Cross, and arrived in
Western Australia early in 1892.
He turned his attention to agricul-
tural pursuits, but upon the out-
break of the Coolgardie goldfields
twas one of the foremost to proceed
to the scene of the find. Here he
laboured in quest of the precious
metal for a few months, when the
later find at Hannan's was reported.
One of the first ten prospectors on
this field he followed up alluvial-
digging, dryblowing, etc., with fair
success for some time, but owing to
the water famine of 1893 he de-
serted the nlace in common with
hundreds of others. About this
time a find was reported at Siberia,
in this State, and Mr. Keane
joined a party journeying thither.
Great hardships and privations,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. DENIS KEANE.
however, chiefly from want of
water, caused them to relinquish the
enterprise and a return was made
to Coolgardie, where the subject of
our notice continued the develop-
ment of a lease. For three years
from 1905 he de'voted himself to
prospecting through the northern
Coolgardie goldfields, covering many
hundreds of miles in this way, mak-
ing small finds, securing interests,
and otherwise operating in the min-
ing industry. The rough life, poor
food, and exposure in all extremes
of weather finally affected his health,
and taking up his abode at Cool-
gardie he opened the first dairy to
be established east of Northam. The
townspeople numbering at that time
about 5,000, this enterprise met with
decisive encouragement and he car-
ried on a thriving business for two
years. The population then dimin-
ishing, he sold his interests and
came to East Perth, where he pur-
chased a similar business, which he
has since enlarged and still conducts
with considerable success. Among
other ventures in which he has em-
barked are a good grazing property
within a score of miles of the city
and various real estate investments
about the suburbs. Mr. Keane is
a member of the Wanneroo Roads
Board and takes a deep interest in
the affairs of that body. He is a
foundation-member of the Celtic
Club and has served on the Com-
mittee of this body for several years.
In 1899 he married Minnie, daughter
of the late Mr. John Leahy, of
Middleton, County Cork, Ireland,
and has a family of three sons and
three daughters.
PETER GEORGE MAC-
NAMARA is a son of the
late Mr. Peter Joseph Macnamara,
of Limerick City, Ireland. He
was born at Bendigo, Victoria,
on June 8, 1876, and received
his education at St. Francis School,
Melbourne, and at the Chris-
tian Brothers’ College, East Mel-
bourne. Leaving school at the age
of eighteen he entered upon a com-
mercial career in a general store and
hotel at Elmore, where he remained
for five years, during which period
ho mastered every detail of the bus-
iness of country storekeeping. In
1898, believing that brighter pros-
pects awaited the man bold enough
to strike out for himself in the
rising State of Western Australia,
he left his native State for newer
shores, and upon arrival proceeded
at once to Kalgoorlie, where he
secured a position with the well-
known firm of Bricknell & Sons.
Three years later he came to Perth
and opened business on his own ac-
count in Newcastle Street having
purchased one of the branch houses
of Messrs. Hughes & Dohemy. This
Bartlett o, Perth.
MR. PETER GEORGE MACNAMARA.
enterprise was rewarded with bril-
liant success and resulted in the es-
tablishment of first one and then
another branch until eventually he
had three other concerns of the same
nature in the city and its vicinity,
all in full swing. At a later date
he disposed of all these businesses
and purchased the Newcastle Club
Hotel, which he has carried on with
marked success, and of which he is
still proprietor. The same spirit
which in his youth prompted him
to strike out for himself and later
led him to seek his fortune on the
far-distant goldfields of the West
has also operated in his subsequent
business ventures, and he has made
a bid for Fortune's smile in the
agricultural industry of his adopted
State. Upon his 3,000-acre farm at
Booralaming, near Dowerin, he is.
giving his attention to wool-growing
and the raising of cereal crops, and
is also experimenting with artesian
bores. The boon to the district gen-
erally, should this scheme of irri-
gation prove successful, can hardly
be estimated, and the settlers will
be under a great debt of gratitude
to its inaugurator. Mr. Macnamara
is building his country home on this
estate, and is Vice-President of the
Progress Association of Booralaming
and the surrounding districts. He is


a keen horseman, and in circles of
sport is always to the fore where
hunting is concerned. He likes a
well-bred animal of whatever class,
and usually has a couple of horses
or a champion dog to exhibit at the
various shows held to encourage
high-class breeding. In 1910 he took
a trip to the land of his progenitors
and visited all the principal cities of
the Continent where he saw much to
delight and interest him. Mr.
Macnamara is a member of the
■Celtic Club.
The HOTEL ESPLANADE. It
has been frequently asserted —and
with a good deal of truth—that the
Swiss are a “nation of hotel-
keepers,” but that they no longer
hold a monopoly of the rare science
of ministering to the requirements
of the itinerant traveller is to-day
evident in the fair City of Perth.
Conducted on the most approved
Continental lines, the Hotel Espla-
nade has inaugurated a new era in
the art of hotelkeeping. Facing the
magnificent reaches of the Swan
River, the beauties of which have
long since made Western Australia
famous, the setting might well have
been chosen by “the wise men of the
East,” so gorgeous is the surround-
Photo by C. E. Farr,
VIEW OF RICER SWAN AND MOUNT ELIZA FROM BALCONY, HOTEL ESPLANADE.
Photo by C, E. Farr .
VIEW FROM THE BALCONY, HOTEL ESPLANADE.
■ scenery . To the v i sitor the
picturesque surroundings are a
source of constant delight, and the
general feeling of restfulness so
eagerly sought by the jaded traveller
remains undisturbed by the jarring
discord peculiar to the progress of a
thriving commercial city. In the
summer months the hotel is swept by
the refreshing ozone from the broad
reaches of the Indian Ocean but a
few miles distant, making it a
delightful retreat even in the hottest
of weather. The establishment re-
cently has been extensively added
to, thoroughly renovated, and fur-
nished most sumptuously. Exten-
sive additions, including thirty-four
well-lighted and airy bedrooms, two
new lounges, commercial room and
electric lift, have been made, the
dining-room on the first floor has
been extended and the balcony
lengthened to 160 ft., making a very
fine promenade. The view from
here is superb. To the west the
Swan flows lazily under the shadow
of Mount Eliza, while to the east
woodland vistas greet the eye,
flanked by the distant low-lying hills
of the Darling Ranges. Bathing,
fishing, boating, yachting, and in-
numerable other forms of sport may
be indulged in on the River and
facilities are provided so that visitors
may enjoy these health-giving recrea-
tions with the maximum of com-
fort. Access to the lounges, writ-
ing- and reading-rooms, billiard-
room and lavatories is gained from
the reception-hall, the entrance to
which is from the Esplanade. The
dining-room is handsomely decorated
and furnished on the Continental


plan, the napery
and cutlery in use
being of the very
best. The drawing-
room is luxurious
to a degree, and
it is here that the
acme of elegance
and comfort has
been attained. The
cuisine, arbiter of
the fate of most
hotels, has received
special attention,
and is in the hands
of a highly com-
petent chef . The
daily table d’hote
is a distinctive fea-
ture, and the house
is a favourite ren-
dezvous of the elite
of the State. With
all these advan-
tages the popu-
larity of the establishment is not to
be wondered at. In the past it has
accommodated many distinguished
—even Royal—visitors, among them
the Duke of Teck and suite.
Madame Melba, Madame Calve,
Photo by C. E. Farr.
BALCONY OF THE HOTEL ESPLANADE.
Madame Clara Butt and Mr. Ken-
nedy Rumford, Monsieur Kubelik,
and other stars in the musical firma-
ment have also expressed their
appreciation of the comforts to be
had at this modern hostelry. The
close proximity of
the hotel to the
stately Law Courts
has made it the
home of the Fed-
eral Judges during
their periodic visits
to the State, and
it has been made
the headquarters,
of the members of
the official staff of
the Commonwealth
military forces.
The Hotel Esplan-
ade is centrally
situated and with-
in a few minutes’"
drive of the Perth
Railway Station.
The management
is under the per-
sonal supervision
of Mrs. Beavor,
who has had much
experience in catering for the re-
quirements of the travelling public,
having devoted the greater part of
her life to mastering the million
details so essential to the successful
conduct of a really first-class hotel.
Photo by C. E. Farr.
HOTEL ESPLANADE, FROM THE BOWLING GREEN.


The AUSTRALIAN HOTEL,
Murray Street, Perth. Originally
known as the Oddfellows’ Hall, and
utilized by that body for their frater-
nal meetings, this building eventu-
ally was purchased by Mr. Guilfoyle,
who obtained a hotel licence in 1892,
and has since expended about <£4,000
in extending and renovating the pre-
mises. Under the direction of the
genial boniface the house has at-
tained considerable popularity, and
in order to keep pace both with his
rapidly increasing connection and
with the progressive spirit abroad in
ate in this direction, and this central
area become the hub of the city of
Perth. On the eastern side of the
hotel stand the magnificent commer-
cial premises of Messrs. Boan
Brothers’ drapery establishment, to
which the proprietors have made
large additions, and it is to bring his
enterprise into line with these im-
portant improvements that Mr.
Guilfoyle has determined to erect a
new and palatial hotel in keeping
with the general aspect of the ad-
jaoent buildings, and which shall add
its own quota to the architectural
struction of which is now being un-
dertaken, and which will undoub-
tedly lead to a great influx of visitors
from the Eastern States, has broug it
home to Mr. Guilfoyle s progressne
mind the necessity of a really first-
class hotel where tourists and others
may secure all those modern comforts
which the traveller of the twentieth
century expects to find in the capital
cities of the world. The projected
tramway-line along Murray Street
will lead to a convergence of traffic
in this direction, and its advantage
in width should lead to its becoming
Photo by C, E. Farr.
MR. J. GUILFOYLE'S AUSTRALIAN HOTEL, MURRAU STREET. PERTH.
public and private enterprise, Mr.
Guilfoyle has decided to launch out
on a still more extended scale. In
1911 the Commonwealth Government
selected for the site of the new post
office building and Government
offices that block of land adjoining
the Australian Hotel, and reaching
from Wellington to Murray Streets,
where in due course handsome build-
ings will be erected for Government
purposes at an outlay of many thou-
sands of pounds. With the comple-
lion of these important structures
there can be no doubt that the
general stream of traffic will gravit-
value of the quarter of the metropolis
which it graces. It is intended that
the new hotel shall be known under
the old and time-honoured name of
the Australian Hotel, which was
selected in the first place by the pro-
prietor with a view to its national
significance and also to the import-
ance of having a title which might be
recalled with ease by visitors to the
Western Australian State. The
close proximity of the Perth Railway
Station, which at no distant date will
immensely increase in importance as
the western terminus of the great
Transcontinental Railway, the con-
the main thoroughfare of the metro-
polis. Mr. Guilfoyle’s property is
freehold, and to make way for the
proposed new hotel the old structure
will be entirely demolished, and in its
place will rise a fine building of
five storeys, in addition to a base-
ment 10 feet deep. This erection will
have a frontage of 52 feet to Murray
Street with a depth of 157 feet. En-
trance will be gained from the latter
street by a broad inviting hallway,
from which an imposing staircase
will lead to the upper floors. Three
electric lifts will be installed, one to
be entirely reserved for the use of


guests, a second for the management
and the staff, while the third will be
utilized for the handling of goods.
On the ground floor, but entirely
apart from the residential side of the
house, will be situated the bars,
handsomely fitted out and stocked
with the finest variety of liquors ob-
tainable. The basement will be de-
voted to a bond store and a free
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN GUILFOYLE.
store, and in its cool recesses the
stock will find suitable storage. The
drawing-rooms will be on the first
floor, luxuriously furnished and ap-
pointed, likewise sitting-rooms and
a number of bedrooms; while the
second, third, and fourth floors will
comprise solely sitting-rooms and
bedrooms. On the fifth floor an in-
teresting innovation for Australia
will bo made. Here at the rear of
the building is to be installed the
kitchen, which will be fitted with
gas-stoves and coal ovens and the
hundred and one utensils and re-
quisites necessary to the preparation
of the present-day menu, an arrange-
ment which will banish all objection-
able odours. To the front of the
fifth floor and extending the whole
length of the building will be the
dining-room, appointed on Contin-
ental lines with tables for two or
more up to a dozen, while a special
table d'hote will be available for the
professional and commercial men of
the city. The room will be hand-
somely decorated and furnished, and
the table napery, cutlery, and china
will be the finest of their kind. For
guests desiring to dine privately four
rooms will be set aside on the other
xx
floors, and these will be served by
means of a dumb waiter. There will
be a garden roof covered with grano-
lithic, where in the summer months
guests will be able to inhale the life-
giving breezes which wend their way
inland from the broad expanses of
the Indian Ocean. Smoke-rooms
will be available for gentlemen, and
every floor except the fifth will have
its own bathrooms, beautifully
finished in tiles and white enamel
and provided with hot and cold water
and all conveniences. The lavatories
will be in keeping with all the rest
of the establishment and will leave
nothing to be desired in their appur-
tenances. The kitchen staff will
occupy apartments on the top floor,
and the services will be secured of a
first-class chef , who will have a suite
of rooms adjoining the kitchen. The
handsome scheme of decoration and
furnishing will embody the most
modern ideas, and in order that the
consummation of the whole project
may lack nothing to render it second
to none in the Commonwealth Mr.
Guilfoyle shortly intends to take a
trip to England, the Continent, and
America, where the great hotels of
the older countries will receive his
special attention, and all that arrests
him as worthy of imitation or modifi-
cation to suit the exigencies of our
southern clime will be incorporated
into his plans for the great enter-
prise. In the erection of the hotel
Mr. Guilfoyle is making every allow-
ance for the possibilities of the
future, and the colossal nature of the
undertaking proves how strong is his
faith in the ultimate development of
the Western Australian State. The
fa9ade of the building, which will
comprise about 180 rooms in all, will
be a handsome design in cement, and
to some extent will be made to har-
monize with the frontage of Messrs.
Bo an Brothers’ great emporium,
adjacent to the hotel. JOHN
GUILFOYLE is a son of the late
Mr. Michael Guilfoyle, of Scarriff,
County Clare, Ireland, and was
born at that place on September
27, 1858. He received his educa-
tion in Whitegate School, County
Galway, under Mr. Quirk, and
at fourteen years of age went
on his father’s farm, where he be-
came acquainted with all the prac-
tical side of farming. Before attain-
ing his majority he left the place
of his nativity and came to Western
Australia in company with a younger
brother, Mr. Michael Guilfoyle, of
Perth. His first employment was
found on the railway line, which
was then in course of construction
between Champion Bay (now
Geraldton) and Northampton, his
duty being to take charge of the
explosives which were used in con-
nection with such work. Two years
later he became attached to the saw-
milling trade in Jarrahdale, and
afterwards joined the staff employed
in the construction of the railway
between Fremantle and Guildford
and thence on to York. After some
time in the service of the Govern-
ment Railways Department, in 1885
he resigned this connection and took
over the Victoria Hotel on Mel-
bourne Road, which business he con-
ducted for four years, giving it up
to open in business as a general con-
tractor. For three years he carried
on this business in Perth, and
erected many of the early cottage
homes round about the metropolis.
In 1892 Mr. Guilfoyle was ap-
proached by Mr. Charles McNess with
a suggestion to apply for an hotel
licence for what was then the Odd-
fellows’ Hall in Murray Street, and
thus he ultimately became the pro-
prietor of his present successful
house, the “Australian,” which is-
now one of the best known and lead-
ing hotels in the State. After two-
years Mr. Guilfoyle relinquished
the personal conduct of the business
Bartletio, Perth .
MR. W. T. GUILFOYLE.
and took a contract from the
Government to erect a telegraph line
between Beverley and Broome Hill.
This completed he embarked on an
enterprise of purchasing stock, pro-
visions, and general merchandise in
the Perth markets, and transporting


them to the new goldfields of Cool-
gardie and Kalgoorlie which were
then being opened up. Having suc-
cessfully tendered for the Govern-
ment mail service of Fremantle he
carried on in this line for three years,
and in 1902 again took over the
management of the hotel, which he
had leased for eight years. Under
Mr. Guilfoyle’s able supervision the
popularity of his house rapidly in-
creased, and arangements are now
being completed by which the hotel
will be reconstructed at a cost of
about £IB,OOO. Mr. Guilfoyle is a
member of the Celtic and Tatter-
salbs Clubs, Perth, and is a sup-
porter of most manly outdoor
diversions. In 1885 he married
Mary Ann, daughter of the late Mr.
William Carr, of Ballymena, County
Antrim, Ireland, and has six sons
and a daughter surviving. His
eldest son secured the B.A. degree
at Oxford, and is now a medical
student at Middlesex Hospital, Lon-
don, while the second is connected
with him in the business.
HENRY GREVILLE, Metro-
politan Hotel, Perth, is a son of the
late Mr. Henry Greville, of Shankill
Castle, County Dublin, Ireland, and
Warwick Castle, England. He was
born at Ballarat, Victoria, on March
17, 1872, and received his scholastic
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. HENRY GRECILLE.
training in his native city and at
Echuca and Melbourne, where he
started his commercial career. He
gained a valuable experience in the
catering business in Victoria and
took control of some of the leading
concerns of the kind in that State
before leaving for Western Australia
in 1896. The establishment of a
business on similar approved lines at
the Murchison soon spread his re-
putation in the rising country, and
a subsequent ten years at Kalgoorlie
and Boulder placed him among the
leading business men on the gold-
fields. He was instrumental in
forming the syndicate in which he
is still largely interested, which
built the Cremorne Gardens, the
Stadium, and other places of public
amusement in the gold-mining cen-
tres, and purchased the lease of the
Duke of Cornwall Hotel at Hannan
Street, Kalgoorlie, the proprietorship
of which he retains at the present
time. Coming to Perth in 1903 Mr.
Greville at once secured the contract
for catering for the Western Aus-
tralia Turf Club, and subsequently
he took over the lease of the Metro-
politan Hotel, Flay Street, and by his
first-class conduct of the business is
now doing perhaps the largest hotel
trade in Western Australia. The
gentleman under review is a strong
supporter of the mining industry and
has large interests in various develop-
ing propositions all over the State,
particularly on the Yilgarn, where he
is the largest shareholder in the Lady
Edeline Gold Mine. He is well
known as a sporting man and holds
membership in the Kalgoorlie and
Boulder Racing Clubs, TattersalFs,
the Western Australian Turf Club,
and the blunt Club, and is Vice-
President of the Mandurah blunt
Club and of the Boulder City Foot-
ball Club. Mr. Greville married
Olga, daughter of Mr. Alfred Mar-
tins, of Bendigo, and has a son and
two daughters.
CHRISTIAN FREDERICK
MOURITZEN, of the Perth Hotel,
is a son of the late Mr. John Mour-
itzen, of Copenhagen, Denmark, in
which town the subject of our notice
was born in 1862. Until the age of
nineteen he pursued a varied course
of study in his native place, where
he completed his scholastic and tech-
nical education. He became a stu-
dent of architecture at the well-
known Technical College at Copen-
hagen and obtained the medal for
efficiency. After three years in this
institution he proceeded to South
Africa, where he spent a couple of
years in the railway service of that
country. At the end of that period
he set sail for Australia, and landing
at Queensland proceeded straight to
Charters Towers, from which centre
he engaged in the practice of his pro-
fession and carried out some large
contracts. About this time the Croy-
don goldfield was discovered, and
Mr. Mouritzen following the rush
erected a saw-mill in the vicinity of
the find and took contracts for the
supply of milled timber for the
mines. Tiring of this occupation, he
left Northern Queensland and paid
a visit to the southern portion of the
State, where he continued for a few
Bartletto , Perth .
MR. CHRISTIAN FREDERICK MOURITZEN.
months. In the early part of 1892
he came to Western Australia and
entered the Civil Service as draughts-
man, subsequently being promoted
to Inspector of Works in the Archi-
tectural Division. Having served
about seven years in this department
he resigned and entered once more
upon contracting work, and super-
vised the erection of various im-
portant buildings, among which may
be mentioned the large Government
Printing Offices in Murray Street.
In 1901 Mr. Mouritzen took over the
lease of the Federal Hotel at Fre-
mantle. In 1907 he revisited the land
of his birth, returning to Australia
in 1909. He next, in conjunction
with Mr. Jolly, purchased the Perth
Hotel, of which he is now the sole
proprietor, his partner having retired
in 1911. Mr. Mouritzen is a man of
many and varied interests, and has
lately purchased a sheep-run at
Burracoppin which bids fair to be-
come a very profitable investment.
He has also a large stake in the
mining industry in the Yilgarn dis


trict. He is a member of the
Masonic fraternity and of the Mount
Lawley Bowling Cl b. In 1887
he married Jenny, daughter of the
late Mr. Peter Berg, of Copen-
hagen, and has a family of two sons
and two daughters.
The ROYAL HOTEL, situated at
the corner of Wellington and
William Streets, Perth, within a
stone’s throw of the Central Rail-
way Station, is a handsome brick
structure two storeys high. Its cen-
tral situation makes it very popular
with visitors from the various agri-
cultural centres of the State, and
this attract
tion is en-
hanced by
the excellent
t r e a tm ent
they receive
during the
period, long
or short, of
their stay.
The hotel
contains 53
bedrooms,
with three
reception-
rooms on the
first floor and
smokeroom
and dining-
room on the
ground floor.
The furnish-
ings are elab-
orate and in
good taste,
Photo by C. F. Farr.
all is spotlessly clean throughout, and
a sense of comfort pervades the whole
atmosphere. The house is fitted
with the most modern conveniences,
among other advantages hot and
cold water being always obtainable,
and the yard has been completely
covered with granolithic pavement.
The domestic arrangements are
entirely in the hands of Mrs. Jones,
who is an adept in ministering to
the requirements of her guests. The
cuisine is under her direct super-
vision, and everything possible is
done to make the hotel “a home
from home/' There are three bars,
and only the very best liquors are
kept in stock. A special feature
xxa
in connection with the wholesale de-
partment is the delivery of orders
direct to the home. WILL I A M
HENRY JONES, the proprietor, has
had considerable experience in the
hotel trade. He is a South Austra-
lian, having been born at Salisbury,
in that State, on March 16, 1865,
and is a son of Mr. Thomas Jones,
of Somerset, England, now resident
at Geraldton. At the close of his
schooldays he entered the office of
Mr. W. L. Dickson, of Port Ade-
laide, with whom he remained for
four and a half years. He then
came to Western Australia, arriving
in 1886, and for about four years
filled the position of purser on ves-
MR W H. JONES ROYAL HOTEL, CORNER WELLINGTON AND WILLIAM STREETS, PERTH.
sels of the Adelaide Steamship Com-
pany running between Albany and
Port Darwin. He then joined the
firm of Tolley & Co., wine and spirit
merchants, being their nor'-west re-
presentative for twelve months, dur-
ing which time he gained a thorough
knowledge of the great nor'-west
and subsequently took over the
management of the Geraldton Hotel,
which he retained for three years.
In partnership with Mr. J. Inglis
he carried on the Freemasons' Hotel
for five years, a period followed
by eighteen months at the Club
Hotel, when he purchased Mr. Inglis'
interest in the Miners' Arms Hotel
at Peak Hill. After conducting this
house for sixteen months Mr. Jones
sold out and came to Perth. In the
metropolis he conducted succes-
sively the Globe Hotel and the
Grand Hotel (now the Hotel Perth),
and then purchased the lease of the
Royal Hotel, over which he now pre-
sides. Shortly after he entered into
possession the present handsome
building was erected—a considerable
addition to the architecture of the
city. Mr. Jones has been a member
of the Perth Roads Board for eight
years and is connected with the
Masonic fraternity, his mother lodge
being the Geraldton Lodge, No. 3,
W.A.C. He is a Past President of
the Board of Benevolence and is now
Hon. Trea-
surer of the
Perseverance
Lodge, No.
45, W.A.C.,
and Past
First Princi-
pal of the
Perth Royal
Arch Chap-
ter. He
the founder
of football
at Geraldton
and for four
years was
playing Cap-
tain of his
team, besides
which he
took a lead-
ing part in
sporting mat-
ters there and
was a popular
townsman. He married for the
second time in 1895, his present wife
being Rose Anna, daughter of the
late Mr. George Simpson, of Gerald-
ton, by whom he has two sons. By
his first marriage he had issue a
son.
MICHAEL MULCAHY, of the
National Hotel, Fremantle, is a son
of the late Mr. Daniel Mulcahy, of
Kingswell, Tipperary, Ireland,
where also he was born on October
31, 1862. His education, com-
menced at Tipperary, was concluded
in Limerick under the tuition of


Messrs. Fitzgerald and O’Grady,
noted for their success in training
students for the Civil Service of Ire-
land. Leaving school he assisted his
father in stock-dealing pursuits in
Ireland for three or four years, and
in 1885 came to Queensland, where
he settled on the Darling Downs for
a short time and considerably en-
larged his knowledge of stock. Mr.
Mulcahy next spent two and a half,
years on "‘Alice Downs Station,” 12
miles distant from Blackall, and
owned by the Messrs. Whittingham
Brothers, and here he gained an in-
sight into the general management
of sheep, cattle, and horses as
handled on an Australian station,
The opportunity having arisen to
take a large fencing contract on
“Broadmeare Station,” near Taroom,
on the Dawson, he accepted it, and
upon the completion of this work
proceeded to Brisbane, where he en-
tered the Telegraph Department for
a time. With a view of acquainting
himself with the hotel business, he
spent nearly three years in the Im-
perial, Royal, and Queensland Club
Hotels in Brisbane, but being at-
tracted by the mineral discoveries of
Western Australia left Queensland
in 1892 and proceeded via Perth to
Photo by C. E. Farr.
the Murchison goldfields, where he
spent some time prospecting round
the Nannine district. Returning to
Perth he was among the first to find
his way to Coolgardie upon the re-
port of the rich find in that locality,
and followed all the subsequent
rushes with considerable success. In
1892 Mr. Mulcahy joined his bro-
ther, Mr. Daniel Mulcahy, who, a
year subsequently, had nurchased an
interest in the Commercial Hotel,
Fremantle, and prospered in the
hotel-keeping trade. The brothers
afterwards assumed proprietorship of
several thriving hotel businesses, and
also entered into pastoral pursuits in
the Murchison district as joint pro-
prietors of “Milly Milly Station,” the
area of which exceeds one and a half
million acres. The Messrs. Mulcahy
continued in partnership in these
varied enterprises until 1911, when
by mutual consent the connection
was dissolved, the gentleman under
review retaining the sole ownership
of the National Hotel, Fremantle,
This is one of the best-known houses
in the port, the premises being of a
palatial character and the catering
and general management (under Mr.
F. T. Farrelly) bearing a first-class
reputation. In 1912 Mr. Mulcahy
MR M. MULCAHY'S NATIONAL HOTEL. FREMANTEL.
took a lease of the Shamrock Hotel,
Hay Street, Perth. He is a promi-
nent figure in sporting circles in
Western Australia and has owned
horses of the best blood, one noted
performer being “Bete Noire” by
“Haut Brion” (imp.) ‘"Spite”
(imp.) At the present time (1911)
he has two very promising yearling
colts in “Old Tipperary” and “New
Tipperary,” by “Positano” from
“Bete Noire” and “’Frisco Queen.”
He also owns the brood mare “Lady
Flo,” which at time of writing is in
Bartlefto, Perth.
MR. MICHAEL MULCAHY.
foal to the successful South Austra-
lian sire “Pistol” (imp.) by “Car-
bine.” The national characteristic
of patriotism is very strongly de-
veloped in Mr. Mulcahy, and no
movement for the betterment of Ire-
land is carried on without his gener-
ous support. He is a life member
of the Celtic Club, Perth, and was
one of the founders of this popular
institution. In 1898 he married in
Donohill, Ireland, Margaret, daugh-
ter of Mr. Timothy Cranley, of
Gurtnacoola, in Tipperary, and has
four daughters and two sons.
HOTEL MELVILLE, Apple-
cross. Few hotels in the Australian
Commonwealth can boast of a pan-
orama such as greets the eye from
the gentle slopes of the Peninsula,
the crown of which is taken up with
the fine pile of buildings familiarly
known as the Hotel Melville. From
the spacious verandahs facing the
western reaches of the Swan magnifi-
cent vistas unroll themselves in all


directions, and when the eye has
satiated itself with the entrancing
river views it can turn to the beauti-
ful woodland scenery which runs for
miles inland, only to lose itself in the
hills and valleys of the distant Dar-
ling Ranges. Across the beautiful
translucent bosom of Melville Bay
the frowning cliffs of King’s Park
rear themselves, while to the north
the spires and rooftops of the city of
Perth conspire to make the scene one
of almost Oriental grandeur. On
the left hand Lucky Bay opens out in
glorious vistas, which in turn give
way to wooded banks, the softening
hues of which are a source of endless
delight to the roving eye. Around
the eastern corner flows the sluggish
Canning River, with its manifold
glimpses of kaleidoscopic beauty, the
whole presenting a scene of incom-
parable loveliness. The structure
which now does service as the hotel
was originally intended as a summer
residence for Governor Sir Arthur
Lawley, but in the end was not used
for that purpose. This was in 1902,
and some time later, it having been
decided to use the premises as an
hotel, a licence was obtained and ex-
tensive alterations and additions
made to bring the building into line
with the most up-to-date require-
ments. The Hotel Melville embraces
some forty rooms in all, thirty being
devoted to bedrooms, and is one of
the finest and best-appointed residen-
tial hotels in the Commonwealth.
The building is handsomely fur-
nished, is well lighted by acetylene
to the goldfields and country resi-
dents impart new life. The bracing
air and the multiplicity of other ad-
vantages tend to render the Hotel
Melville one of the finest riverside
resorts in the Commonwealth. The
dining-room is capable of seating 100
people, and comfortable drawing,
reading, and smoking-rooms are
available to visitors. The spacious
grounds surrounding the hotel are
largely availed of by picnic parties,
Applecross being a popular rendez-
vous with Westralians. In the sum-
mer months concerts are held on the
lawn every Sunday evening, and on
the evenings of all holidays, and a
the yachting and swimming carnivals
and motor-boat races during the sea-
son. The domestic arrangements of
the Hotel Melville are in the capable
hands of Mrs. Evans, and under her
Photo by C. E. Farr.
VIEW OF HOTEL MELVILLE FROM LANDING STAGE, APPLECROSS
excellent supervision nothing is
wanting. A splendid table is kept,
the menu being prepared by a first-
class chef. A vegetable garden is
cultivated, ensuring a plentiful
supply for table uses, and a cow is
also kept. The sanitary arrange-
ments are most complete, a septic
tank having been installed and
water laid on throughout the estab-
lishment. The bar is heavily stocked
with the best liquors and spirits, and
photo by C. E. Farr,
GENERAL VIEW OF HOTEL NELVILLE FROM MELVILLE WATER,
gas, and stands in its own grounds,
comprising 7 acres. The walks and
drives which lead up to this pictur-
esque hotel afford in themselves
relief to the jaded city dweller and
xxa2
first-class programme is provided by
the best local artists. Swimming,
boating, and fishing may be indulged
in ad lih., while many a pleasant
hour may be whiled away watching
the general management, in the
hands of Mr. Richard Evans, the
proprietor, leaves nothing to be
desired. Billiards also may be in-
dulged in, two of Alcock’s tables


being provided for the purpose. The
Hotel Melville may be reached
either by road or river, the former
mode of transit providing a most
enjoyable drive of about seven miles,
via the Causeway. The distance by
river is five miles, and a regular ser-
vice of speedy motor-boats is always
available, the journey occupying less
than thirty minutes. A telephone
service is also available, the hotel
being linked with the Perth Ex-
change via Applecross.
HOTEL CONTINENTAL, Clare-
mont. This well-known and popular
hotel is situated on the banks of the
Swan River, about midway between
Perth and Fremantle, the driving
distance from the metropolis being
about six miles. It is a two-storey
building constructed of solid brick
and stone, and stands on its own
grounds, which cover an area of four
acres. From the balconies, which
overlook Freshwater Bay, a magni-
ficent view may be commanded of the
fine river reach extending from Pep-
permint Grove on the west to Apple-
cross and Point Walter in a south-
easterly direction. The approach is
made attractive by the presence of a
large and well-kept lawn, with
borders of luxuriant floral growth,
and cyprus-trees of thick and heavy
foliage afford a grateful shade from
the fierce rays of the sun during hot
summer days. The interior contains
about thirty-five bedrooms, with two
MR. T. DUNN'S HOTEL CONTINENTAL, CLAREMONT.
sitting-rooms, drawing-room, smoke-
room, and a large dining-room with
seating capacity for eighty-five per-
sons. Adjacent to the hotel and
situated in the grounds is a bungalow
for the use of married people with
families, where the accommodation
MR. THOMAS DUNN.
comprises ten bedrooms, a lounge,
and sitting-room. The entire hotel
recently has been renovated and re-
furnished throughout on a sumptu-
ous and lavish scale, special attention
being paid to artistic effect, while
every detail necessary to personal
comfort has been considered, the re-
suit being satisfactory in the highest
degree. In the rear of the main
building about an acre of ground has
been applied to the cultivation of
vegetables, fruit-trees, and vines,
the products of which keep the table
bountifully supplied with fresh fruit
and garden stuffs. There is also a
large and airy fowl-run, while an ad-
joining paddock provides ample pas-
ture for the cow, from which whole-
some supplies of milk are obtained
for the use of the house. The table
appointments and cuisine are of ex-
cellent quality and agreeably varied,
cleanliness being the keynote
throughout, and the whole domestic
menage is under the supervision of
Mrs. Dunn, who overlooks nothing
which may minister to the comfort of
her guests. The stable and motor
accommodation is large and well-
arranged, and a new motor-car for
the convenience of hotel residents is
liberally patronized by the many
guests who have given the hotel its
premier reputation in the metropoli-
tan area either as a permanent resid-
ence or a holiday resort. Recreation
of a diversified nature may be ob-
tained in the vicinity of the hotel,
the river affording splendid facili-
ties for swimming, boating, etc.,
whilst tennis and other sports may be
indulged in within easy distance.
The Hotel Continental recently had
been taken over and is now under the
proprietorship of Mr. Thomas Dunn,
late of St. George’s Terrace, Perth,
who for over twenty years has been
well known in Western Australia as
the successful conductor of the busi-
ness of Messrs. Dunn & Co., carriers,
of Perth.
JAMES JOSEPH HAGERTY,
of “Quamby,” Bernard Street,
Claremont, was born at Quamby,
Tasmania, on April 6, 1869, being a
son of the late Mr. Patrick Hagerty,
of County Cork, Ireland. He re-
ceived his education at the State
School in his native village and at
the age of thirteen went to work on
his father’s farm, since which period
he has devoted the greater part of
his life to agricultural and pastoral
pursuits. At twenty-five years of
age he left the “Apple State,” de-
termined to avail himself of the pos-
sibilities offering in the Golden
West, where for nearly three years
he turned his hand to various kinds
of work. Eventually Mr. Hagerty
settled down on the eastern gold-
fields, and in partnership with Mr.
S. Bryan carried on the business of


condensing water for the miners and
general public before the water sup-
ply scheme to the fields was consum-
mated. Upon the completion of this
system about five years later, in
1893, he left the mining districts and
purchased a farm at Caballing, and
has continued the development of
this property almost up to the pre-
sent time, devoting his energies to
mixed farming pursuits. In 1911
he disposed of this estate and is now
living in retirement at Claremont,
but he still retains a large landed
interest round the Kellerberrin and
Quairading districts, and owns an
hotel in the latter place, the first
in the settlement, which was erected
by him some three years ago. For
many years Mr. Hagerty was a lead-
Bartletto, Perth
MR. JAMES JOSEPH HAGERTY.
ing member of the Irish National
Foresters and is a member of the
Celtic Club of Perth. Mr. Hagerty
married in the year 1904 Margaret,
daughter of the late Mr. Thomas
Murphy, of Cashel, County Tip-
perary, Ireland.
ANSELL FREECORNE, "Aber-
feldie,” West Perth, was born at
Misckowie, Poland, on the first day
of the Jewish new year in 1849, and
is a son of the late Mr. Joseph Free-
come, of that place. He was edu-
cated in his native country, but while
yet in his early teens, owing to the
death of both parents, was thrown
upon his own resources and pro-
ceeded to London, where he spent
some years in acquiring the language.
In 1880 he emigrated to Sydney,
New South Wales, and went to work
at the tailoring trade, which he had
learned while in London. After five
years in the Mother State he came
to Western Australia, arriving in
Perth in August, 1885. Here he
established a tailoring business, and
was the first merchant in the wes-
tern metropolis to place a plateglass
window in his shop. For fifteen years
he carried on in this line, and retired
in 1900 after a successful business
career. Mr. Freecorne has always
been a keen investor, and has shown
his faith in the possibilities of his
adopted State by placing all his in-
vestments in Western Australia. He
has large landed interests all over the
city and suburbs and at Esperance,
and among other profitable ventures
was the purchase of ground at Clare-
mont, upon which he built the Con-
tinental Hotel about fifteen years
ago —now one of the most pictur-
esque hostels in the State. Mr. Free-
corne gives his generous support to
all charitable institutions, and is
known in connection with various
public movements. He was one of
the founders of the Helena Vale
Race Club, and acted on the com-
mittee of that organization for some
years. In 1884 he married Joan,
daughter of the late Mr. W. Allister,
of Dunfermline, Scotland, and has a
son and three daughters.
WILLIAM CLAUDE WITTE
was born at Fremantle, Western
Australia, on February 9, 1885,
being a son of the late Carl Witte, of
Hamburg, Germany, who died soon
after his arrival in this State, at
which period the gentleman under
review was in his early infancy. Mr.
W. C. Witte received his scholastic
training at the Christian Brothers'
College and the Scotch College,
Perth, and at nineteen years of age
entered the Imperial Service by join-
ing the clerical division at the Royal
Mint in the same city. A couple of
years later he turned his attention
to pastoral pursuits, and in order to
obtain experience proceeded to the
Nor'-West, where he spent some time
on various stations in that district.
In 1907 he purchased a property
comprising 4,500 acres on the Arthur
River in the South-West, and car-
ried on mixed farming pursuits for
about two years, when he received
an advantageous offer and decided to
dispose of his interests in the estate.
He has since passed his time in
travelling, and has visited all the
States of the Commonwealth during
the past two or three years. Though
taking a warm interest in most forms
of sport, his special attention has
been given to rowing, and for three
years he represented Western Aus-
tralia in the Eastern States as a
member of the Interstate Eights. He
has been winner of many trophies,
his first triumphs dating back to the
days when, as a lad at school, he
showed his prowess with the oars on
the blue waters of the Swan. He is
a member of the Western Australian
Hunt Club, and a recognized fol-
lower of the hounds, his fondness for
horses leading him to those haunts
where our equine friends occupy
pride of place. In 1908 Mr. Witte
married Grace, daughter of Mr. R.
A. Friedrich, of Perth, Western
Australia, and has one daughter.
ANDREW MALCOLM
McKNIGHT was born at Maryport,
England, on January 21, 1868, and
educated at the Oakbank School,
Glasgow. He gained his first in-
sight of commercial work with the
firm of Robert Kirk, family grocers,
etc., at a later date becoming
associated with his father in the
grocery business. In 1888 he came
to South Australia and found em-
ployment with the firm of Huddle-
stone & Co., grocers, of North Ade-
laide, but soon he proceeded to the
"Silver City,” where he spent three
years as manager for Walsh & Sons.
Leaving Broken Hill he added to his
store of experience during the next
two years, and in 1896 wended his
way to Western Australia. For the
ensuing four years he held a number
of positions with various firms,
finally accepting the position of
wholesale traveller to the New
South Wales Fresh Food and Ice
Company at Perth, which he filled
for five years, when he transferred
his services to the well-known firm of
Henry Berry & Co. In the municipal
life of the district in which he resides
Mr. McKnight has always evinced
a keen interest, and in' 1910 was
elected to represent South Ward in
the local council. He makes a study
of all matters affecting the welfare
of the municipality, and is a strong
supporter of all movements tending
to its advancement. The Masonic
community claims him as a member,
and he was the first Secretary to the
Commercial Travellers' Lodge of
Western Australia. He married in
1899, and has a son and a daughter.


THE CITY MEWS LIVERY
AND BAIT STABLES, 876, Hay
Street, Perth. Proprietor, J. W.
Croasdale. This well-known busi-
ness was established in the year 1905,
the original premises occupied being
located in William Street, and from
a small beginning has grown to its
present dimensions, which entitle it
to premier position among similar
business enterprises in Perth City.
From its inception the firm obtained
a strong hold upon public patronage,
and in a very little while the pro-
prietor was compelled to seek larger
quarters. For this purpose the site
in Hay Street (opposite the Star
Skating Rink) was secured, and on it
was erected the present commodious
and convenient headquarters, which
were taken possession of in January,
1906. This central position has en-
abled Mr. Croasdale satisfactorily to
cope with the requirements of the
travelling public, and as a result his
business connection has steadily ex-
panded as year succeeded year. The
equipment is extensive and complete
in all the details necessary to main-
tain the well-earned reputation of
the stables as the depot of stylish and
up-to-date turnouts. The plant com-
prises four waggonettes, two vic-
torias, two landaus, two broughams,
one hansom (all of which are fitted
with rubber tyres), and a drag cap-
able of seating twenty-four persons.
The horses, nine in number, are
stabled in roomy boxes, and their
well-groomed coats and healthy ap-
pearance indicate the attention which
has been given to their welfare. To
meet the demand for faster means of
transit Mr. Croasdale in February,
1911, purchased two 20-h.p. “Ford”
Photo by C, F. Farr,
motor-cars, an innovation which met
with considerable favour amongst
his patrons. Subsequently he dis-
posed of one of the “Fords” and pur-
chased two 30-h.p. “E.M.F.” motor-
cars, and these powerful and com-
fortably-upholstered cars are avail-
able to the public both day and night
at the ruling rate of Is. per mile,
while for long distances special terms
may be arranged. Expert chaffeurs
are provided and the comfort of
travellers is considered to the last
degree. The vehicles sent out by the
firm are perfectly equipped, and none
but thoroughly capable men are em-
played as drivers. A specialty is
made of arrangements for weddings
and similar occasions and theatre and
picnic parties are also catered for.
“The City Mews” bears an enviable
MR. J. W CROASDALE’S 30-H.P. E.M.F. MOTOR CAR.
reputation for its reliable and punc-
tual attention to engagements, and
the whole concern is conducted on
such business-like lines as are bound
to ensure its continual success and
LANDAU FROM THE CITY MEWS LIVERY STABLES
popularity. JOHN WILLIAM
CROASDALE, the proprietor, is a
native of Lancashire, England ai
came to Australia m
spending two yeais in Melbour ,
Bartletto , Perth.
MR. JOHN WILLIAM CROASDALE.
Victoria, he settled in Western Aus-
tralia, which he now looks upon as his
adopted State. In 1912, finding his
health in an indifferent state, Mr.
Croasdale took a trip to England,
leaving his business under the control
of his son John, who for some time
past has actively assisted in the man-
agement of the concern.


BIOGRAPHICAL INDEX.




BIOGRAPHICAL INDEX
page
Abbott, Captain J 666
Abrahamson, Captain J. G. 725
Adams, A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 693
Addenbrooke, J. B 575
Albany Bell 740
Aldrich, F 513
Alexander, S. B 649
Allen, F. 8., M.A., B.Sc 488
Allen, F. 8., M.A 489
Allen, J. F 566
Allnutt, E 719
Anderson, A 693
Anderson, J. T., L.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., L.F.P.S. ... 520
Andrews, C. R. P., M.A 488
Angwin, Hon. W. C., M.L.A 323
Ardagh, Hon. R. S., M.L.C. 324
Arnold, Councillor W. J. ... ... ... ... ... 558
Atkins, L. F. 649
Atkinson, R. C. E., M.A., M. 8.. Ch.B., D.P.H.,
F.R.I.P.H 524
Australian Hotel, The ... ... ... ... ... 760
Baker & Moore ... ... ... ... ... ... 734
Baker, Councillor G. C. ... ... ... ... ... 559
Barker, H. G 719
Barlee, A. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 426
Barrett, P. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 567
Bartlett, N. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... 435
Bartletto Studios, The ... ... ... ... ... 752
Bateman, G. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... 766
Bateman, J. & W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 685
Bath, Hon. T. H., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 319
Battye, J. S., 8.A., LL.B. ... ... ... ... ... 532
Battye, Major C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 400
Beasley, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 499
Beatty, T. J 382
Bell, Albany ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 740
Bennett, S. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 514
Bentley, J., M. 8., Ch.B 520
Bertoli, U. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 751
Bessell-Browne, Major A. J., D.S.O. ... ... ... 402
Bevilaqua, H. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 748
Bird, A. G 621
Birks, A. N. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 606
Black, E. A 432
Blanchard, D. F., L.R.C.P. & S., L.F.P.S 525
Bleasby, Lieutenant R. ... ... ... ... ... 471
Blurton, J. C. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 712
Boan Brothers 696
Boan, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 697
Boas, H 633
Bold, W. E 540
Bolton, H. E., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... 340
Bon Marche, The, Limited 700
PAGE
Bon Ton Limited 738
Bowra, W. C 754
Boxall, W 747
Bradley, B. T. 649
Bradshaw, T. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 699
Brady, R. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 576
Braidwood, Councillor D. H 541
Brebber, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 749
Brennan, Councillor J. C. ... ... ... ... ... 548
Brennan, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 703
Brennan, The House of 702
Briggs, Hon. H., M.L.C 324
Briggs, H. F 576
Brimage, T. F. 0 334
Broadbent, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 546
Brockway, W. St. C 562
Broomhall, J. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 413
Brophy, Inspector M. H. ... ... ... ... ... 528
Broun, F. T., M.L.A 340
Brown, A. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 649
Brown, Councillor D. ... ... ... ... ... 564
Brown, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 355
Brown, W. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 475
Brown, W. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 476
Browne, W. H. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 754
Brownlie, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 650
Bruning, Councillor B. D. ... ... ... ... ... 559
Buchanan, Major W. M., V.D. ... ... ... ... 400
Burke, U. W , 592
Burkett, G. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 713
Burnside, Hon. R. B. ... ... ... ... ... 366
Burt, A. E., R.M 370
Burt, A. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 481
Burt, 0., 1.5.0 514
Butcher, W. J 356
Butt, Councillor L. R. ... ... ... ... ... 541
Blittner, Captain A. R. W. ... ... ... ... 746
Buzacott, Senator R. ... ... ... ... ... 305
Cameron, A. D. ... ... ... ... ... 630
Campbell, J. R. ... ... ••• ••• ••• 514
Campbell, Lieutenant-Colonel J. A. ... ... ... 408
Campbell, Major J. ... ... ... ... ■ ... 409
Campbell, T. C. ... ... ... ■ 566
Canning, A. W. ... ... ... • •• ••• 4:35
Cargeeg, G. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 704
Cargeeg, R. • ••• ••• ••• ••• 560
Carpenter, W. H., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... 340
Carter, Captain F. B. ... ... ... ... ... 405
Carter, Councillor R. B. ... ... ■ ... ... 549
Carter, F. W. 604
Carter, T 664
Cavanagh & Cavanagh ... ... ... ... ... 625


PAGE
Cavanagh, J. C. 627
Chinn, H. 478
Chipper, D. J. 754
Church, J 680
City Mews Livery & Bait Stables, The ... ... 768
Clare, Captain C. J., C.M.G 389
Clarke, Hon. E. M., M.L.C 324
Cleary, Captain A 721
Clerk, A 753
Clifton, G 480
Clifton, J. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 414
Clifton, R. C., 1.5.0. 431
Cogan Brothers 707
Colebatch, Hon. H. P., M.L.C 325
Collett, F. W. 608
Collett, Lieutenant-Colonel H. B. ... ... ... 398
Collier, Hon. P., M.L.A 320
Collins, W. McK. ... ... ... ... ... ... 644
Collyer, A. F. 680
Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society, Limited, The 616
Colonial Stores, The 688
Conigrave, J. Fairfax 662
Connell, R 527
Connolly, Hon. J. D., M.L.C 325
Connor, Hon. F., M.L.C 325
Connor, J. M. B 441
Conway, J. T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 431
Cooke, Councillor J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 549
Cooke, F. V. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 445
Cornell, Hon. J., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... ... 326
Cowan, J., P.M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 367
Cox, A. E 628
Croasdale, J. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 768
Ctercteko, G. D. ... ... ... ... ... ... 709
Cullen, Hon. J. F., M.L.C. 326
Cumpston, L. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 634
Cumpston, R. S. 731
Curlewis, H. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 376
Daglish, H 356
Daly, Councillor B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 550
Darker, J. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 499
Davies, D. R., M.A.C.D. ... ... 601
Davis, Hankinson, & Co. ... ... ... ... ... 650
Davis, Hon. F., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... ... 326
Dean & Co., E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 608
De Gruchy, P. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 384
De Largie, Senator H. ... ... ... ... ... 305
Dennehy, R. J. 632
Despeissis, A. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 442
Devenish, Councillor H. A. ... ... ... ... 571
Devenish, S. 8., & Son ... ... ... ... ... 751
Dickson, J. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 414
Dodd, Hon. J. E., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... ... 322
Doland, J. A 335
Dooley, B. W., M.L.A 341
Doscas, Councillor J. ... ... ... ... ... 564
Douglas, Councillor A. ... ... ... ... ... 560
Douglas, N 469
Dowley, E. P., R.M. 369
Downes, R. H. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 632
Downey, Councillor W. J. C. ... ... ... ... 560
Downing, H. P. ... ... ... . . ... ... 592
Dowson, Lieutenant H. ... ... ... ... ... 471
Drabble, Councillor W. ... ... ... ... ... 563
Drake-Brockman, Major E. A. ... ... ... ... 401
PAGE
Drew, Hon. J. M., M.L.C 322
Duffy, F. J 577
Dunn, W. H 646
Dwyer, W., LL.B., M.L.A 34J
Fugle, R 382
Dales, J. Herbert ... ... .. ••• ••• ••• 631
Eaton & Lamb ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 644
Economic Stores Limited ... ... ... ... ••• 698
Eden, S. D. ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 601
Edwards, Lieutenant P. M. ... ... ... ••• 406
Elder, Shenton, & Co., Limited ... ... ... ... 665
Eliot, L. S., 1.5.0 425
Ellery, Councillor A. ... ... ... ... ... 568
Emery, G 454
Emu Brewery, The ... ... ... ... ... ... 728
Evans, E. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 470
Evans, E. S 473
Evans, Lieutenant W. D. ... ... ... ... ... 569
Everett, Captain R. W. ... ... ... ... ... 404
Everett, Lieutenant G. C. ... ... ... ... ... 406
Eves, G. L 617
Ewing, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 638
Fairbairn, R., 1.5.0. ... ... ... ... ... 370
Fairweather, W. ... . . ... ... ... ... 652
Farrar, G. E 498
Faulkner, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 501
Fielding, C. H., Limited ... ... ... ... ... 694
Findlay, A. C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 652
Finlay, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 652
Fitzmaurice, J. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... 385
Flintoff, Major T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 400
Foley, G. J., M.L.A 341
Forbes, R. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 730
Forbes, W. J. Waldie ... ... ... ... ... 624
Ford, Rhodes, Carter, & Davies ... ... ... ... 642
Forrest, Right Hon. Sir J., P.C., G.C.M.G., LL.D.,
M.H.R 308
Forster, G. C. D. ... ... ... ... ... ... 601
Foster, Councillor J. C. ... ... ... ... ... 541
Fothergill, E. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 666
Fowler, D. & J., Limited ... ... ... ... ... 682
Fowler, Hon. J. M., M.H.R. ... ... ... ... 309
Foxworthy, Lieutenant J. H. ... ... ... ... 645
Foy & Gibson Proprietary Limited ... ... ... 695
Franklin, Councillor J. T. ... ... ... ... ... 541
Fraser, Hon. C. E., M.P. ... ... ... ... ... 310
Fraser, M. A. C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 515
Freecorne, A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 767
Gale, C. F 515
Gamble, R. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 653
Gardiner, J. P., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 342
Garland, Captain R. R. ... ... ... ... ... 404
Gawler, Hon. D. G., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... 326
George, Councillor J. ... ... ... ... ... 542
George, W. J., M.L.A. ... 342
Gibbs, H. D. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 475
Gibson, Councillor S. ... ... ... ... ... 542
Gill, F., M.L.A 342
Glaskin, J. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... 635
Glick, J. L. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 704
Glover, A. W. .. ... ... ... 620
Glyde, G. F 433


PAGE
Glyde, S. S 722
Good, F. D 373
Gordon, A. T. M 420
Gracie, J. H 730
Green, A. ... ... ... ... . . ... ... 375
Green, A. E., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 343
Green, W. J 756
Gregory, Hon. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 357
“Greig” 706
Greville, H 762
Guilfoyle, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 761
Guthrie, H. ... ... .. ... ... ... ... 653
Gwynne, L. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 472
Hackett, Sir J. W., M.A., LL.D., M.L.C. ... 327,583
Hagerty, J. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 766
Haines, O. L., & Co. ... ... ... ... ... ... 643
Hall, C. E. S 750
Hamersley, Hon. V., M.L.C 327
Hampton, H. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 479
Hankinson, F. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 651
Hann, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 516
Harald & Co 708
Hardman, R. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 380
Hardy, H. T. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 636
Hare, Captain F. A. ... ... ... ... ... 527
Harper, C. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 561
Harper, N. W., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 343
Harrison, P. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 623
Harris, Scarfe, George P., & Co., Limited ... ... 676
Hatswell, C. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 653
Hawke, G. R. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 501
Hawkins, J., & Son ... ... ... ... ... 654
Hawtin, J. V. ... ... ... ... ... ... 501
Hayes, E. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 729
Haynes, A. R., M. 8., Ch. M.... ... ... ... 598
Haynes, Hon. S. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 335
Haynes, R. S., K.C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 593
Healy, Councillor J. ... ... ... ... ... 550
Hoarder, Councillor D. ... ... ... ... ... 568
Hedges, W. N., M.H.R 310
Heitmann, E. E., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 344
Henderson, J. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 638
Henderson, Senator G. ... ... ... ... ... 306
Henning, H. McA. ... ... ... ... ... ... 593
Hevron, P. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 569
Hewby, A. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 446
Hicks, J. S., M.D. (Lond.), L.S.A 357
Hickson, G. F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 499
Higham, F. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 747
Higham, J. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 747
Hill, Councillor G. W 564
Hine, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 630
Hiscox, G. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 570
Hitchcock, J, K. ... ... ... ... ... ... 664
Hobbs, J 742
Hobbs, Lieutenant-Colonel J. J. T., V.D., A.D.C. ... 398
Hobbs, Smith, & Forbes ... ... ... ... ... 624
Hocking, H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 619
Hocking, S. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 590
Holland, Councillor H. J 558
Holman, J. 8., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 344
Holmes, R. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 669
Hope, J. W., F.R.C.P 523
Hope, W. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 471
Horner, F 476
PAGE
Hossack, J. D. ... ... ... ... ... ... 654
Hotel Continental ... ... ... ... ... ... 766
Hotel Esplanade, The ... ... ... ... ... 758
Hotel Melville ... ... ... ... ... ... 764
Hotel, The Australian ... ... ... ... ... 760
Hotel, The Royal ... ... ... ... ... ... 763
Hourigan & Dempsey ... ... ... ... ... 745
Hudson, C. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 720
Hudson, C. A., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 345
Humble, The late Major J. A. E. ... ... ... 409
Hume, E. S 468
Humphries, D. G 725
Irvine, Captain C. J. ... ... ... ... ... 720
Irving, Colonel G. G. H 397
Jackson, Lieutenant R. E. ... ... ... ... 407
James, Councillor J. H. ... ... ... ... ... 565
James, Q. H 646
Jamieson, Councillor A. ... ... ... ... ... 570
Jenkins, Hon. A. G., M.L.C 327
John, G. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 691
John, The late W. T. ... ... ... ... ... 553
Johnson, Hon. W. D., M.L.A 321
Johnson, The late G. ... ... ... ... ... 571
Johnson, W. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 572
Johnston, E. 8., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 345
Johnston, G. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 617
Johnston, H. F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 434
Jones, Councillor F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 551
Jones, W. H. ... ... ... . . ... ... ... 763
Jull, M. E 419
Keane, D. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 757
Kennedy, W. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 376
Kessell, A. Colenso ... ... ... ... ... ... 417
King, H. S 451
Kingsmill, Hon. W., 13. A., M.L.C 328
Kirwan, Hon. J. W., M.L.C 328
Knapi A 753
Kopke, F 651
Lander, T., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... ... 346
Langsford, J. W 336
Law, R. O * 655
Lawrence, W. C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 629
Lawson, F. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 497
Layman, C. H., M.L.A 346
Leane, Captain A. W. ... ... ... ... ... 405
Lefroy, Hon. H. 8., C.M.G., M.L.A 346
Leschen, C. P. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 427
Leslie & Co. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 667
Le Souef, Major E. A. ... ... ... ... 402
Lewis, C. J., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 347
Liebe, F. W. G 655
Light, E. E 469
Lloyd, J. J 381
Lofthouse, J. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 739
Longmore, J 516
Lynch, Senator P. J. ... ... ... ... ... 306
Lynn, Hon. R. J., M.L.C 329
Lyons & Hart 744


PAGE
Mcßean & Deason ... ... ... ... ... ... 709
McCormack, W. H 712
McDonald, J. J., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 347
McDowall, C., M.L.A. 348
McGibbon, S. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 640
McKenzie, Hon. C., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... 329
McKenzie, Hon. R. D., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... 330
McKnight, A. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 767
McLaren, F. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 548
McLarty, E. A. 446
McLarty, Hon. E., M.L.C 330
McLean Brothers & Rigg ... ... ... ... ... 678
McMahen, J. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 737
McMaster, Captain R. T. ... ... ... ... ... 410
McMillan, Hon. R. F. ... ... ... ... ... 365
McNeece & Son, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 635
McNulty, T. S. 440
Macaulay, S., L.R.C.P., L.F.P.S.G., L.M 597
Macfarlane & Co., Limited ... ... ... ... 711
Macnamara, P. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 757
Maddocks, O. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... 412
Mahon, Hon. H., M.H.R. ... ... ... ... ... 311
Maitland, A. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 458
Major, S. 714
Makutz, B. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 742
Male, A., M.L.A 348
Manford, Captain F. ... ... ... ... ... 409
Manford, F., & Co 668
Mann, E. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 463
Mannering, F. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 753
Manning, Councillor J. D. ... ... ... ... ... 561
Marwick, W 336
Mason, The late Clayton T., T.S.O. ... ... ... 412
Massey, W 655
Mathews, C. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 453
Matthews, V. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 672
Mellor, A. J 620
Mills, Captain J. B. ... ... ... ... ... 404
Mills, Lieutenant G. A. ... ... ... ... ... 411
Mills, Lieutenant W. C. ... ... ... ... ... 406
Mills, W 552
Milner, J. G 749
Milner, P. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 526
Mitchell, Hon. J., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 348
Mizen Bros. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 656
Mofflin, H. E. 562
Molloy, T. G. A 539
Monger, F. C., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 349
Montgomery, A., M.A. ... ... ... ... ... 452
Montgomery, S. H. R., M. 8., Ch. B.... 519
Moody, J. F 440
Moore, Sir N. J., K.C.M.G 358
Moore, S. J. F., M.L.A 349
Moore, W. D., & Co. 684
Morris, C. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 431
Morris, W. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 475
Morrison, Captain J. F. ... ... ... ... ... 721
Moseley, F. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... 480
Moss, Hon. M. L., K.C., M.L.C. ... .. ... ... 331
Mouritzen, C. F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 762
Moxon, W. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 664
Muir, J. 496
Muir, J. C 387
Mulcahy, M 763
Mullany, J. F., M.L.A 349
PAGE
Munro, A. C. ... ... ... ... ... • ••• 670
Munsie, S. W., M.L.A. ... ... ... • ••• 350
Munt, C. A. 494
Mutton, E. S. ... ••• ... ••• ••• 389
Nanson, J. L., M.L.A. ... ... ... •• ... 350
National Bank of Australasia, Limited, The ... ... 612
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia, Lim-
ited, The 613
Needham, Senator E. ... ... ... ... ... 307
Neilson, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 753
Nelson, A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 656
Nelson, W. A 631
Noble, J. H 594
North, F. D., C.M.G 513
O’Brien, Hon. B. C., M.L.C 331
O’Brien, P. V 452
Ochiltree, Councillor J. L. ... ... ... ... 542
O’Connor, C. Y., C.M.G 495
O’Connor, M., 8.A., M.D., B.Ch., 8.A.0 597
O’Dea, M 755
Odell, W. P. ... 432
O’Donoghue, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 657
Oldham & Cox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 628
Oldham, H -. 497
Oliphant, A. M. ... ... ... ... ... ... 669
O’Loghlen, P., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 350
Ord, D. B. 516
O’Reilly, M. F 473
Orr, O. T 413
Otto, M. H. J 646
Owen, E. T 426
Owen, W. Lambden, R.M. ... ... ... ... ... 369
Padbury, W. ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 689
Paget, O. F., M.D., B.C 552
Parker & Co. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 704
Parker, F. R. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 705
Parker, IT. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 567
Parker, Major F. M. W., D.S.O 399
Parker, Sir Stephen H. ... ... ... ... ... 365
Parry, G. H 633
Paterson & Co., Limited ... ... ... ... ... 690
Paterson, D. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 690
Paterson, W. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 445
Patrick, Hon. W., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... 332
Payne, G. F 594
Payne, J. H 681
Pearce, Hon. G. F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 308
Pearson, J. S. 594
Peet & Co., Limited ... ... ... ... ... 748
Pennefather, Hon. R. W., 8.A., LL.B., M.L.C. ... 332
Peters, W. M. 750
Pether, IT. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 428
Pidgeon, J 470
Piercy, F. J 571
Piesse, A. E., M.L.A. 351
Piesse, A. N., M.L.A. 351
Piesse, A. W. 331
Piesse, Hon. C. A., M.L.C. 333
Piesse, Lieutenant H. V. ... ... ... ... ... 407
Piesse, The late Hon. F. H., C.M.G 358
Pitman, H. C. 657
Platt, H. J 645


page
Plummer, F. R ... 604
Poole, G. T ... ... 624
Porter, J. W. ... 744
Pottenger, J. G 616
Price, W., M.L.A. ... 352
Prockter, H. J. ... 633
Prout, G. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 645
Pye, Burkett, & Co. ... ... .. ... 643
Quality Shoe Stores 710
Quinlan, Hon. T. F. ... ... ... .. ... 359
Randell, Hon. G 337
Randell, S. J. ... ... ... .. ... ... 426
Randell, W. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 562
Rankin, A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 557
Rankin, Morrison, <fe Co. ... ... ... ... ... 641
Ratazzi, C. P. L. ... ... ... ... ... ... 594
Rea, Councillor F. R. 1. ... ... ... ... ... 543
Rendall, The late J. ... .. ... ... ... 712
Reynoldson, W. C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 502
Richardson, A. R. ... ... ... ... ... 444
Richardson, C. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 433
Richardson, J. .. ... ... ... ... ... 657
Ridley, B. W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 637
Ridley, P 664
Rigg, H. 470
Roberts, W. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 658
Robertson, Major J. E. ... ... ... ... ... 401
Robertson, R. Hope, M.A. ... ... ... ... ... 489
Robertson, W. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 634
Robinson, Councillor W. D. ... ... ... ... 572
Robinson, P. F. ... ... ... ... ... ... 570
Robinson, R. T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 575
Robinson, W. C. ... ... ... ... ... ... 472
Robson, Councillor C. H. B. ... ... . . ... 551
Roche, Councillor A. ... ... ... ... ... 561
Roe, A. S. K., P.M 368
Rolland, R. A. ... ... ... ... . . ... 498
Rooney, W. J., B.A. ... ... ... ... ... 489
Rooth, Hon. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 366
Rosenstamm, B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 672
Rowley, H 545
Royal Hotel, The ... ... ... ... ... ... 763
Royal Insurance Co., Limited, The ... ... ... 617
Rudderham, E. ... ... ... ... ... ... 658
Rushton, C. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 468
Ryan, M. 384
Samson, L., & Son ... ... ... ... ... ... 681
Sanders, J. D. ... ... ... ... ... ... 659
Sanderson, Hon. A., M.L.C. ... ... ... ... 333
Sandover, A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 663
Saunders, J. R. ... ... ... ... ... ... 713
Saunders, Lieutenant A. G. ... ... ... ... 746
Saw' & Grimwood, jun. ... ... ... ... ... 618
Saw, W. A 481
Sawkins, Councillor W. ... ... ... ... ... 565
Sayer, W. F., K.C 479
Scaddan, Hon. J., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... 318
Scott, A. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 442
Scott, James ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 659
PAGE
Sedgley, F. E. 659
Seed, W. P., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P 544
Sewell, H. C 750
Shafto, T. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 545
Shenton, E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 558
Sherard, C. A. ... ... ... ... ... ... 480
Sherwood, A. T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 414
Sherwood, Major T. ... ... 408
Shillington, J. ... ... ... ... ... 474
Sholl, R. A., T.S.O 380
Short, J. T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 407
Siebenhaar, W. ... ... ... ... ... 517
Simpson, Councillor W. ... ... ... ... ... 543
Simpson, E. S. ... ... ... ... ... ... 460
Simpson, F. W. 427
Smith & Goyder ... ... ... ... ... ... 641
Smith, C. A. ... ... . ... ... ... 473
Somerville, W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 373
Sommers, Hon. C., M.L.C. 333
Stang, A 595
Steere, F. W . 725
Stevens, F. W. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... 721
Stevens, G. P. ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 386
Stewart, Captain J. E. Ferguson 404
Stone, Hon. Sir Edward A. ... ... ... ... 364
Stott & Co.’s Business College ... ... ... ... 671
Stott, E. C., & Co. 670
Stow, F. L., LL.D. ... ... ... ... ... 480
Stratford, J. J. 722
Strelitz Bros. ... ... ... ... ... 665
Strelitz, P 595
Strelitz, R 596
Strickland, Lieutenant-Colonel J. C., V.D 397
Strickland, Sir Gerald, K.C.M.G. 301
Stubbs, B. J., M.L.A. 352
Stubbs, S., M.L.A 353
Summerhayes, E. ... ... ... ... ... 625
Sumpton, Councillor W. J. 55]
Sutton, G. L. ... ... ... ... ... . 441
Swan Cake & Biscuit Factory, The ... ... ... 743
Swan, H. G., M.L.A. 353
Taggart, H. P. 428
Taplin, W. R. ... ... ... ... ... . 739
Tatham, Councillor J. ... ... 544
Taylor, G., M.L.A 353
Taylor, J. H. G ... 719
Terry, E. W. ... ... ... ... ... 729
Thomas, W. L., M.L.A 354
Thompson, J., B.E. ... ... ... ... 495
Thomson, A. ... ... ... ... ... 333
Tindale, J. H. ... ... ... ... 609
Todd, Captain T. J., D.S.O ... 499
Tomkinson, E. H. ... ... ... . . 568
Toppin, C. S. 420
Trethowan, H. C. ... ... ... ... ... 599
Troode, E. S. P. ... ... ... ... 415
Trott, J. I). ... ... ... ... 576
Troy, Hon. M. F., M.L.A 333
Tuckfield, Councillor H. J. ... ... .. . 533
Turkey, P. J., M.L.A 354
Turville, Councillor C. E. ... ... 566
Underwood, R. H., M.L.A. 355


PAGE
Vincent, R. P. ... 544
Vincent, W. H ... 679
Vowles, T 382
Walker, C. W. 669
Walker, Hon. T., M.L.A 320
Walsh, H. R. ... ... ... ... ... ... 621
Walsh, J. 660
Walsh, Sub-Inspector J. J. ... ... ... ... 528
Watson, A ... 668
Waugh, E. W. 647
Wayman, F. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 745
Weir, R. E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 443
West Australian Boot Manufacturing Co., The ... 732
Western Australian Bank, The ... ... ... ... 611
White, Captain A. R. ... ... ... ... 410
White, D., & Co 737
White, Lieutenant-Colonel A. T., V.D. ... ... 399
White, S. 648
Whitely, J. F. 376
Whysall, F 379
Wicken, P. G. ... ... ... ... ... ... 432
Wigglesworth, J 546
Wilding, Hon. T. H., M.L.C 334
Wilkinson, Captain H. A. F., A.D.C 403
Wilkinson, Councillor H. ... ... ... ... ... 552
PAGE
Williams, D. E., L.R.C.S. & P 524
Williams, H 697
Wills, Geo., & Co 672
Wills, G. & R., & Co 674
Willson, G. E 377
Wilson, A. A., M.L.A 355
Wilson, Captain T. C. ... ... ... ... • • 403
Wilson, Hon. F., C.M.G., M.L.A 338
Wilson, J. A. C., M.A.C.D., D.U.S 600
Wisdom, Major E. A., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... 355
Withnell, W. G 573
Witte, W. C 767
Wittenoom, Hon. Sir E. H., K.C.M.G., M.L.C. ... 334
Wittman Motor Supply Co., Limited ... ... ... 692
Wolf, W * 636
Woodward, B. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... 533
Woodward, H. P. ... ... ... ... ... ... 459
Wright, A. J., L.D.S 599
Wright, Powell, & Cameron ... ... ... 629
Yeo, S. J 620
Young, G. M 471
Zimpel, W. .. . ... ... ... ... 735
A2s22l—Hussey & Gillingham Limited, General Printers, 106 and 108, Currie Street, Adelaide, South Australia.










