

RCUtoIOJ* PAHf
THE ftox . 5
if VICTORIAN PROPHECY II
M M
H ' OF THE H
I END 01- THE WOKl.l>: |
I VISIONS I
0 n
H seen by M.
1 JOHN WILLIAM MADISON. |
||n -MELBOURNE : rM
|g|f W ‘ H ' WILLIAMS > PRINTER, 94 BOURKE ST. EAST. J|||


■


r\x I (--■
VICTORIAN PROPHECY
OF THE
END OF THE WORLD
VISI 0 N 8
SEEN BY
JOHN WILLIAM MADISON.
MELBOURNE:
W. H. WILLIAMS, PRINTER, 94 BOURKE STREET EAST.
1857.




THE
VICTORIAN PROPHECY.
OF THE
END OF THE WORLD.
Victoria, Australia, August 24th, A.D. 1856.
A VISION OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD.
I John, truly did see in spirit a vision of the resurrection of the dead. I saw a great
grove opened before me, and it was strewed over with dry human bones, and I did look
on it with great amazement; and said, Can these dry human bones ever retain flesh
again, and become as natural as ever they were ?
And my back was turned to them by the spirit, and I was turned to look upon them
again, and I saw they were all human beings. And my back was turned to them again;
and I was turned to look upon them again the second time, and then I saw them all
standing up. And my back was turned to them again the third time; I was to look
upon them again ; I saw them all walking about, and conversing with each other. And
after this all disappeared from me.
And the great grove that I saw was the whole world.
JOHN.
A VISION OF THE LAST DAY OF THE GREAT GENERAL JUDGMENT OF
ALL THE WORLD,
Opened before me in the year A.D. 1852 : I was at that time in the South Seas.
A great and marvellous vision came before me, and I saw myself in a field, and a lady
by my side. And the field was the whole world, and the lady vanished from me at the
great sight. And I saw a great black burning cloud rising up out of the western hori-
zon ; and it was so quick, and dreadful, and great, I had no chance to run for a shelter;
for it was quick and great. And I saw shining fowls in the burning clouds, which fire
had no power to hurt. And I saw great drops of blazing brimstone falling from out of
these burning clouds ; and the sun was darkened, and shined not, by reason of the great
woe ; and all green grass was burnt up ; and every green tree, and every green herb or
plant, was burnt up all over the world. And all wicked and sinful unjust people, both
great and small, of this world were burnt with great heat by the burning brimstone
which fell out of the cloud. And all just people and righteous children who feared and
served the Lord our living God in spirit and truth, I, John, truly saw that their gar-
ments the fire had no power to burn ; for, they were not even singed by the great woe
which had just passed over the whole earth ; and neither were any of them scorched.
And the whole world was in one solitary darkness. And this was the first great woe of
trial of the sons and daughters of men of this world.
And the second woe did quickly follow on after this. And I saw the world all restored
back to its former state. It opened in verdure of green. And all unbelievers, and un-
just and wicked people, both sons and daughters of men, I saw them all return back to
their former sins and wicked ways again ; and they would not believe that the great day
was at hand, neither keep themselves clean before the Lord our living God. And I saw the
second and the last woe quickly come on all the world, both the living and the dead,
both great and small, and fearful was the day.
And I, John, had power to prophesy in those days unto all people of the world, con-
cerning that great day, by the spirit.
And after the first woe a great city opened before me, and this great city was the
whole world. And I entered in the city, and I saw the righteous people all assembled


to themselves, and worshipping the Lord our Living God; and I also saw all manner of
sin going on as ever in the world.
1 saw murderers, and robbers, and gamblers, and drunkards, and slave-holders, and
thieves, and harlots, all come out of public-houses, where they sold strong drinks of
spirituous liquors, and these houses are the seat of sin, where Satan dwelleth at large.
And I also saw all manner of merchandise, all manner of sin going on at such an excess
that I was amazed when I beheld the wickedness of the people.
And yet I had no power to speak unto the people until I saw some slave-holders take
a poor slave, and bind him, and strip him of his garments, and commence whipping
him. and I saw the blood running from his body : then I had power to speak to the
people, as I passed through the city; and I cried out, with a loud voice, to all people,
both great and small, saying, “ 0, sons and daughters of men, do ye not fear our Living
G°d ? Behold! the first woe has just passed on all the world, a trial of your sins; and
the second one will quickly come. Fear ye the Living God, and quit your wickedness,
for the time is at hand.”
And all the people heard my voice. And at this time I w r as led out in the spirit at
the edge of the city, and I entered in a house, and I saw some females therein ; and they
looked on me with great wonder and amazement, and said unto me, “ Why and how is
it that you have entered into a harlots’ house, for we are harlots?” And I said unto them,
Nevertheless ye own what ye be, lam hungry and thirsty.” And they spread a white
cloth on the table, and set sweet wine and sweet cake for me to eat and drink, and I did
eat and drink.
And after this I went out with the spirit on a high hill, and I saw many kingdoms;
and there was a spirit meeting me, crying out, in a loud voice, and pointing upwards
with his right hand, and looking up in the heavens; and I saw worlds upon worlds
melting and falling down on this earth; and all the heavens were moved, and every
island and mountain was moved out of its place. And I heard all people, both great
and small, cry out in one loud voice, saying, “ Woe unto us ; the great day of the wrath
of our Lord and our God has come ujjon us, and wiio is able to stand?”
And, behold ! the fearful sight was so marvellous and great that I fainted, and remem-
ber no more.
I also saw a great multitude of people, the sign of tens of thousands, and thousands of
thousands, standing before the temple of God; and I heard a great and a loud voice out
of the temple of God, saying, “ 0 daughters of Zion, thy sins are forgiven thee !” • And
aftei this I heard all people cyj out, and they did glorify the Lord and our living God of
all things ; and they were all dressed in blue and white; and their outward garments
were blue, a token of love ; and their under garments were before me also, and they
were as white as snow, a token of righteousness. And after this I was led by three
angels, hand in hand, and it all disappeared from before me. Amen,
A TOKEN OF SPIRITUAL COMMUNICATIONS
Was opened and appeared to me in British North America, in the year of our Lord 1843.
A great and marvellous wonder opened before me.
I was led by the spirit, and I saw a crystal world open before me, and a dark wilder-
ness world also.
i was looking upwards in the heavens, and I saw a great straight line running through
the midst of the heavens : and I was direct under the line, standing up, looking up-
wards, with a wife at my left hand side. And I did not speak to the wife, and neither
did she speak to me ; for we had no power to speak to each other at that time. And one
side of this great line was a crystal world, as clear as glass; and on the other side was a
dark wilderness world.
And the spirit turned me round, and led me on the dark side of this great line, run-
ning from east to west; and it all disappeared from me.
&§*And this is a token or interpretation thereof, that I shall live and dwell in the
wilderness of sin in this world one half of my days in great tribulation ; and the other
half of my days of this world the Lord my God shall call me out of the wilderness of
this world to the light, to repent of my many sins, and to serve him in spirit and truth.
And a wife shall be sent at the time to me, to make me sensible of the call; and that
X mast take a wife at that time, and serve the Lord, me and her, in righteousness.


Victoria, Australia, 1856.—Tlie above mentioned call lias been fulfilled, and has come
to pass.
A GREAT SPIRITUAL COMMUNICATION
Opened with me in full, in November last, the 4th day. A.D. 1855, at Ballarat diggings.
And the wife came unto me in May last, the 17th, A.D. 1856, with great power over
me, and authority also, at Castlemaine; and she said she was my wife, and said the
great mistress sent her to me, and she called me “ Blessed John,” and disappeared.
And this did truly happen on the seventeenth night of last May, at Castlemaine, and
there were three men in the tent at the time, and they all heard an infant cry out by me
in the tent; and they heard nothing else but the baby; and I would not tell them the
things that came to pass. And these things are true!!
THE FIRST TOKEN OF MY CALL OUT OF THE WILDERNESS OF SIN
AND GREAT TRIBULATION
Took place in July, A.D. 1855, I found myself one night, just before day-break,
praising, and shouting, and rejoicing in the Lord our living God; and at that time I
was a Gentile, and a great sinner, and the Lord my God was a stranger to me, and I truly
did not know my Master; indeed, I was truly not in any church of the world, and
neither did I condemn any church ; but I was only a free thinker of the world in regard
of the Lord my G od.
A VISITATION OF ANGELS
Came before me also in the latter part of the same month, and I did not take any notice,
but waded further into sin, and did not understand the Lord.
I was travelling in spirit, and I found myself with a host of wicked spirits: and there
flew a host of angels and the devils made war with the angels ; and the angels did
overthrow the devils ; and two of them sat down on me, one on my right shoulder, and
one on my left shoulder, and they led me out from the devils.
And yet I did not take any notice of these great things, but remained in deadly sins.
And in the month of September last, A.D. 1855, at Ballarat, a great white temple
opened before me, and I entered through it; and as I passed through I saw two angels,
one on my right hand, and one on my left hand; and the one on the right hand door
said unto me, “The Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, does not sleep yet, but will soon
sleep.” Interpretation: the Governor is not dead yet, but will soon die. And this did
come to pass ; for, in three months after this, the Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, did
truly die on January Ist, A.D. 1855'.
In the month of November, the 4th, A.D. 1855, at Ballarat, a great and marvellous
wonder opened before me. A great vault of crystal waters; and the surface of these
great waters was full of eyes. I looked on them with amazement, and I could not know
or understand the wonder; and it disappeared from me. And after this I saw an angel
standing before me, and I asked him to shew the vision unto me ; and he said, “It is a
token unto you that whatsoever you desire great of this world it shall be granted unto
you.” After this the angel disappeared.
And these mighty crystal waters that I saw are life, and the eyes on the surface which
1 saw are the seven spirits of God, which goeth and keepeth watch all over the whole
world. Amen.
And these great and marvellous mysteries are the great calls to me, and tokens for me
to come out from the wilderness of sins and great tribulation of this world, and repent
for my many sins, and serve the Lord my God in spirit and truth. Amen.
And 1 was yet so confounded I could not take any notice of these things at that time,
I only said, “ What are great with men are not great with God.” Righteousness is great
with the Lord and our living God. Be upright, and just, and clean, and serve the Lord
and our Godin spirit and truth.
And I also left Ballarat in the month of November for Mount Ararat; and there, at
Jones’ Creek diggings, I did arrive in the month of December, A.D. 1855. And it was
my intention only to remain at Jones’ Creek for a short time in order to raise a few
pounds for a prospecting journey out in the wild ranges to the north-west of those diggings.
1 only had been at that place a few days when a great wonder came before me. A cer-
tain part of Jones’ Creek did open to me, laid off in canvass cloth, and 1 heard a mighty


voice saying, “ This is Nuggetty Gully;” and I saw no person, but only heard the voice;
and I took no notice of this yet. And shortly after this I saw three angels come before
me, who said unto me, “ There is the greatest lotted of round gold on Jones’ Creek for
you.” And I asked them where it was. And they said unto me, “At Nuggetty Gully.”
And this is the place where I heard the voice, which I knew very well; and several
questions passed between me and the angels concerning the gold; and the angels said
I must go again for the gold; and yet I took no notice of this, and I joined a mate.
And I and my mate did work together for a fortnight; and after this we went to the
ground where I was ordered by the angels, and it was on a Saturday I did commence a
hole ; and that Saturday night the hole opened to me, and I saw three angels standing
on the reef, with two nuggets of gold; and one of the nuggets was as much as three men
could raise up, of pure gold: and the other one was a small one; and there is more
than half a ton weight of pure gold about the reef.
And the angels that I saw were at one end of the reef, and the gold was at the other
end; and this was a token to me that I shall first persevere with faith for the blessed
kingdom of heaven, and make peace with my Lord and my God, for my sins were many
and grievous before the Lord; and after this, then, persevere for the earthly gold, that I
may have bread to eat, and serve the Lord our God in righteousness. Amen.
And after all these great things, I did not understand or take heed; and all this
ground was adorned with great glory of our living God, and I saw my spirits ascend-
ing upwards before the angels, adorned with all earthly glory; and one of my spirits
passed back from the angels by me, and shewed me a sign that they were my spirits,
because I was in threes at that time. It all disappeared from me when the spirits
shewed me the sign.
And after this I saw myself and my mate bottom the hole and leave it in a vision; we
left it in a hurry, and we were blown up on a support in the air as high as the tree-tops;
and the rope would not let go from the windlass of the hole, and it drew me back to it
again. And I also saw the gold when we were blown upwards from the mouth of the
hole, and I saw that the treasures were great; and I was very much afraid of falling in
on them. And after this I saw myself close to the hole ; and I saw a dwelling tent;
and I saw a lady and a child (a little lad it appeared to me to be); and the young boy
did look to me exceedingly beautiful and fair, and the mother also; and I fell in love-
with the child, and made to it to take it in my arms. And I saw an animal like unto a
cat, and it advanced between me and the mistress’s son ; and the little animal did frown,
at me, but soon did make friends with me. And all disappeared from me.
INTERPRETATION FOR THE ABOVE MENTIONED.
This great golden ground is the place where the Lord put me under arrest for to re-
pent of my many sins, and to serve him; and the Lord and our God did arrest me with
a great golden nugget, because I would not hear the Lord and my God at any other
place, and, though so many tokens had been sent before me, yet I would not hear them ;
but with a truth the Lord did catch me with great treasures of gold. By working this
ground for a great nugget of gold, I found out that the Lord had called me with a truth
to repent for my many sins and serve Him.
And the mistress that I saw was the Queen of Heaven, and the son that I saw was
the Son of the Living God, most truly our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, who did
shew his anger at me in the cat for the hardness of my heart. Amen. Matt, ii., 11.
“And when they (Gentiles) were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary
his mother, and they fell down and worshipped him; and when they had opened their
treasures they presented unto him gifts of gold.” Amen.
And the Gentiles’ gifts are not forgotten; and now, in the last days, behold ! of
this world, the Lord and our God has called a Gentile out from the wilderness of sins,
and made him great gifts of eternal life and great earthly treasures of gold.
And for this and other reasons I do truly actually believe that the great general judg-
ment day is close at hand upon all of this world ; because this great call came to pass;
which I saw in British America, A.D. 1843, that I should be called to repent of my sins
and serve the Lord, when half of my days of this world were passed; and it did come
to pass in full in the month of May, the 17th, A.D. 185(1.
And another reason: Because I saw in a vision, in the year of 1852, the great day
and last day of this world. I saw myself have power to speak to the people, and also
had power to prophecy unto all people concerning that great day.


Ami I do firmly believe that I will live in this world to see that great day, and ac-
cording to tokens, my life of this world was half-spent last May, the 17th, A.D, 1850.
And I, John, do truly declare the coming of our Lord and our God to this world to
judge all mankind less than forty years hence; and do hereby declare to all people
of this world, both great and small, both rich and poor, both free and bond, according
to the things that I have heard, and according to the things which have come to pass,
that the judgment day is at hand. No man can tell the day or the hour; but Ido
declare that it is close at hand by a good authority, not of men, but of angels of the Lord
our God. Amen.
And therefore I will and do fore-warn all people under the heavens, both great and
small, both rich and poor, both free and bond, to prepare themselves and make their
paths straight, and keep themselves clean before the Lord our God. Amen.
And the blessed virgin Mary, from what I have seen and heard, I do declare her to
be the great Queen of Heavens and Earth, and the great advocate of all the children that
cry unto the living God for pardon of their sins. And Ido say unto all people under
the heavens that every child ought to be taught to implore her most gracious interces-
sions for them with the Lord our God. Amen.
O, sons and daughters of men of all the world, please to take my advice and warning,
and make yourselves ready for the great day of the wrath of our God. For forty years
will not pass again of this world, with a truth.
Now I will commence again on the great wonders of the great garden ground that I
saw after my mate and I left this mighty hole, when I saw the great nugget of gold
that is for me by the gift of the Lord. We bottomed it on a reef for a shicer, and my
mate would not help me to drive it off the reef; and for this reason my mate and I fell
out and parted. And I did shepherd the hole two weeks after we sunk it before I went
to work at it by myself; and during the time that I was shepherding, it come to pass
that
A GREAT WONDER OPENED BEFORE ME.
I saw a church open before me, and I saw a great priest standing at the altar; and
the church was full of young virgins, all of them being alike both in size and dress; it
was on the Lord’s day, and I was at work on my cradle, so I thought; and the priest
said unto me, “Peace, and profane not the Sabbath-day, and do your labor on other
days.” And at this saying of the priest I fled from the sight of the church unto the
ground where I was shepherding, and sat myself down at this great place of marvellous
wonders; and while I was sitting there I looked in the direction of the church, and I
beheld a virgin angel coming to me: and she came to me and said, “ There are treasures
buried here, belonging to the Teacher, and he has given them to you; and if you will
tend this place and persevere for them, you shall get them by-and-bye; and the angel
did announce that the trial of tribulation should be great, but that she would help me.
And I was amazed at this great wonder, and it all disappeared from me. And after this
I did commence working on the ground with great faith and perseverance, and I also
saw the Lord with me on that great ground, and I also saw the devil on the ground,
working against me; and the contention of the devil was so great, I saw the great arch-
angel several times feeding my spirit on unclean flesh to give it ambition to fight against
the devil; and I saw the angel cutting off* all the fat of it before me before I received it,
and the angel showed the fat to me, and said thatJ should not eat any fat while I was
working that ground. But it was very little that 1 did eat; it was not good for me,
because the devil had more power over me by eating the fat, while I was forbidden to
do so.
And the first week I was working after the annunciation of the Virgin, this great
nugget opened before me again, as large as a bushel measure; and this did give me
great courage again, and I did work like a madman for this great gold; and the third
hole I did put down on this ground of wonder to me these great treasures were opened
to me again, and I valued them at several thousand pounds.
I saw a wholesale and retail store, containing some of all merchandise of this world, and
a large public-house, with all the necessaries of life in it, and well furnished; and these
two great houses joined each other. And they were as high and great as the highest
trees I saw in this world, which stood by them; and the tops of these mighty trees were
cut off out of the way of these two great houses, and there was another small yellow


house built on the centre of the two great houses, and on the. top of the centre house
there stood two human beings, and altogether they were exceedingly high; and I saw
myself higher than them all; I was on a pillar of cloud higher than any earthly grath,
supported by the great winds of the heavens ; and I was the happiest man in this world
while this great glory did last with me ; and I was again to the eastward. And around
these two mighty bouses there was stacked up some of all manner of grain.
INTERPRETATION FOR THE ABOVE.
And this great wonder shewed unto me what manner of treasures I was working for;
these great buildings and tbeir contents which I saw are earthly gold, that is on the
ground for me.
And where I saw myself so high, flying on a pillar of cloud, these are the treasures of
eternal life, which I shall gain by working that place with faith and perseverance, ac-
cording as I was commanded by the Lord our God. Amen.
And after this I saw many wonders come before me, and all of them were concerning
that ground of wonder to me. >
And I could see many things at that time before they came to pass ; and I could see
these two great nuggets almost every night; and I was working the place with great
courage, expecting to sink or drive on them every hole that I put down ; but I could
not lift on them, and so I did gully on the ground, and left it as a place of imagination.
But the angel of the Lord did warn me back again, who also upbraided me, saying to me,
“ Do you say that I have lied?” and the archangel upbraided me for the hardness of my
heart and my unbelief, and said that I had been tried every way, and it was no use. And
at this time I was as wide awake from sleep as I am now at this time of writing these
marvellous mysteries; and great fear fell on me, and I was afraid to speak, and I
trembled witlTfear, and yet dared not to speak, because so many great wonders had
previously come before me and I would not take notice of them.
And after this I surrendered myself to my God, and fought against all manner of sins,
gnd I was afraid to work the ground, and I was afraid to leave it, and so I did sunender
mvself up to the will of our living God, and did work out the time of trial; and the time
of trial was three months hard labor under the earth for penance of my many sins.
After the time of trial was up the angel of the Lord could not open the treasures
to me, because I doubted on them; and the Lord shewed me where I doubted before
the trial was up. I saw all that place in a gulf of waters, and I saw a mighty and great
sea captain walking across this rolling gulf upon the waters, and who did not look one
way nor the other, but straightforward he went, neither did he look back ; but when he
had reached within three steps of the shore I saw him sink about waist deep; the waters
did give away and could not bear him up : and I saw him go on the land; and I was
on the same gulf of waters, in a ship, and the steward of‘the ship was with me; and
after this I saw the tide of waters go down quickly, and the ship was close in on shore,
and the banks were long and steep, and she was high upon the steep piecipice, and the
ship did give way, because the tide had gone down, and there was no water to hold it
up ; and we had no hawser tied to it to hold it up, as we ought to have had. And I
saw the ship go down to the leeward with such violence that it pitched me out head-
foremost; and I would have been smothered to death if the steward of the ship had not
come to me and got me out.
INTERPRETATION EOR THE ABOVE.
The mighty and great captain that I saw walking on the waters was the Lord; and
where he sunk in the waters close to the bank .this was where I did doubt when I was
close on the gold, and could not get it because I doubted; and the ship that I was in
is the hole, and the steward was the archangel which did tend to me and the ground;
and the ship which fell down the precipice for the want of a support, it is the hole that
I was about to drive all of the pillars out, without putting in props to hold it up, and
which would have fallen in and buried me in the drive of it, if the angel of the Lord
had not warned me out of the hole; and the tide which I saw holding up the ship was
the pillars which held up the hole ; and where I saw that I had no hawser to hold up
the ship on the precipice, this is where I had no props for the hole to hold it up.


And after this the time was nearly up of trial; for this was the third month with me
of working on that ground; and I also saw that the time was nearly up by the great
signs, which were made to draw me from the ground to the church. And after this
ANOTHER MIGHTY WONDER
Did open before me again : I saw a mighty great queen, and another person, most mar*
vellous and great, coming to a great white dwelling; and their whole raiment w r as pure
gold ; and the queen wore a great golden crown, with one golden cross in the centre ;
and the other person, who sat on her left hand, wore a crown of crosses ; and the two
persons were not alike, neither were their crowns alike ; but yet I had power by the
spirit to know that one of these blessed persons was a great queen, and I was her head
servant, to take her horse and tend on her.
And the coach was all pure gold, also all the harness of the great horse that drew it;
and I was her servant, and she was my queen; and I was not at the dwelling where she
visited, and for this reason I was out of my right place, where she desired me to be.
INTERPRETATION FOR THE ABOVE MENTIONED WONDER.
The great queen that I saw is the blessed Virgin, Queen of Heaven and Earth; and
the person who sat on her left hand, who had a crown of crosses on his head, is the Son
of the Living God; with a truth ; Amen. And where I had power to know by the
spirit that I was her right-hand servant, this was the great blessing which was about to
be bestowed upon me, through her most gracious intercessions for my many sins of this
world. Amen. And where I was not at the white dwelling where she did visit, and I was
found out of place, this is I was yet a sinner, a Gentile, and had not joined the church ;
for the time was not yet up, being on the first Tuesday in April, A.D. 1856. And this
wonder and the next were to draw me from that ground to the church.
And on the next Tuesday following
A MIGHTY MARVELLOUS AND GREAT WONDER
Opened before me again. I saw a mighty great priest coming to meet me just as the
great queen did ; and at first I took him to be a mighty and great prince of the world;
and one of so great and mighty a stature has not been seen upon all the earth among
the sons and daughters of men. And he was drawn by a great horse and a sulky; and
all things around and about him were shining, and marvellous, and mighty, and great ;
and I also saw him come to a halt. And then I saw a large dwelling opening before
me; and this mighty and great priest got out of his sulky, and went into the dwelling;
and I saw that the house was full of people, within and without; and this was a house
where the people went to eat and drink; and I looked on the house with lust, because I
was hungry and thirsty : and I was ashamed to go in, because I had no money to buy;
and yet I saw my spirit in the house, and was chief mistress to wait on all people that
came into it. And this mighty priest or prince was the master of the house ; and I
saw him come out of the house, and go the same way he came, with a truth.
INTERPRETATION FOR THE ABOVE.
This mighty marvellous and great priest or prince was the spirit of the Lord, which
visits all the churches of the world where the sons and daughters of men do worship the
Lord and our living God in spirit and truth, when they are open for the people to
meet. And the house or great dwelling that I saw was a church, and the people were
gathering; and where I did want to go in and was ashamed, because I had no money,
this is that I went to the church and'was ashamed to go in because I did not know how
to act, and neither did I know the Catholic faith at that time, and I had no clothes fit
for church, and no prayer book. And truly did this come to pass with me in a short
time after I had left the ground. And where I saw my spirit was chief mistress waiter
on the people in the house, is the church wherein I have entered and have been bap-
tised in the holy catholic church, and shall become great in the church, because I have
been brought into the church by the Lord and our God, and not by man. And these
writings are a great testimony of true witness to the holy catholic church to all the
world, both great and small, rich and poor, free and bond. The like before has never
been known by the sons and daughters of men since the days of old.
And I, John, do truly declare that these things are true.


And the next week following I saw two burning lamps, one at the time burning over
these great treasures of gold that I was working for; and after this the great nugget was
opened before me again, and I was promised that I should have it.
And after this a great wonder opened before me again: I was led up by the spirit
from the great nugget of gold, and I saw a great and beautiful white temple opened
before me, and a grove : and I saw two or three angels walking out from the temple ;
and I entered a narrow and clean path, which led to the temple ; and I also saw in the
outer court of the temple great books, which were opened; and it appeared to me to be
a judgment hall of records, and a sign of many people, and it disappeared. And after
this there did open before me a dark-looking room, which I cannot describe; and
there appeared before me a contradictor, who was black, and he said to me, “ Are you
going to receive these things ?” And I said unto him, “ Yes.” He said unto me that I
had the wrong view of these things, and that they were no good; and I told him that I
would receive them and would try them ; and if they were no good I would exchange
them ; and he said unto me again, “When you once receive them it is hard to get rid of
them ;’’ and he said again to me that these things are not true. And I asked him how
he knew; and he said, “ Because there is no lock on any of these holes.” At this say-
ing I became afraid that I should lose the gold; and I asked him could he swear that
these things were not true.
Then he did consult, and did not want to swear against them; and it was at my
tongue end to ask him to touch his kingdom with the end of his finger, and see if
he could turn it white; but before I could get the word out of my mouth, he did swear
by the living God that these things were true. And I said unto him, “ What things ?”
And he looked at me and cracked a smile, and said he was a little bit of a lawyer as well
as I; and he jumped up, and off he went, and-would not say what things. Amen.
Let all people of this world look at this, and think on it: when the devil is afraid to swear
to a lie by the living God, will not this put a stop to the people of this world from taking
up the Bible book, and swearing to a bare-faced lie, which is the same, wherein the
devil durst not to do. Some people of this world have such vain thoughs as to say
that the devil Las not power to call on God’s name ; but I, John, according to what I
have seen and heard, and what has come to pass, do truly contradict all such vain
imaginations of the people; and I do say that the devil has got power to call on God’s
name ; and these writings are all truth, and nothing else but truth, and truth cannot
be doubted.
And after this I left the place for the space of three days; and when I was out of the
place I heard the voice of the angel of the Lord call me three times to come to the hole
again, for he wanted to close it up ; but I did not go at the call as I ought to have done;
but I came back on the 21st April, and put down the last hole of trial, and I also saw
mvself bottom it, and the first bucket-full of washing dirt I undertook to wash; I did
not see any gold at first, and not till I poured it out in a wash-dish, and then I saw
small golden nuggets, like unto hens’ eggs, in my wash-dish; and all at once there
came upon me three persons, and one of them was white, and the other two were black;
and they laid hold of me, and the white gentleman said that I had sold myself to him ;
and I looked at them with great amazement in the face, and with fear, and said to him
that I was not aware that I had sold myself, and I did cry out in a loud voice unto the
livino’ God; but they forced me to hold my peace, and the arrest was uncertain and
quick, and I was so frightened at them that they could not help laughing at me. And
after this they showed unto me my nakedness and poverty at that time, by going outside
of the hole and asking one another for a shirt to put on while they washed those they
had on. And this did come to pass with me, for I truly did try to get credit for a shirt
to put on, because I had but one that was fit to wear, and it was dirty. And after thi&
I saw a great tierce of butter, and a long pair of boots laying at the side of it; and this
was for me to leave that ground, and go to the church, this being on Friday, the 25th
of April; and I did give up the ground with great agony because I had worked it so
long, and had not got anything out of it* I had expected every hole that I put down
to come on the mighty great nugget; and my very heart trembled with agony and I
gave up all hopes of this life. I left the next day for a small township that is called
Castlemaine; there I intended trying to get some work for a little while, and then I
would go to the city of Melbourne.


And the next day after I had left these diggings for good, on a Sunday night, I saw
A GREAT AND MIGHTY MARVELLOUS WONDER
Open before me ; this was the third day after I had given up the ground. I saw a
great temple open before me, into which I entered; before me I saw a gentleman, and
two sons, and a mistress ; and the mistress said unto me, “Pull off your hat when you
are in the house of God.” And my hat was quickly off my head; and the mistress said
unto me, “Do you desire to follow the Son of God ?” And I did say unto the mistress,
“I do desire to follow the Son of God.” Then she said unto me again, “ Being that
you have left a great nugget of gold to follow the Son of God, you shall be his right-
hand servant.” And at this time the father had disappeared in some other part of the
temple, and I heard a voice say that I was too small to carry the Son of God. And the
Son said, “ I think I can make him large enough ;” and he cried out to the Father, and,
afterwards, he raised me up in his arms, and I became a great giant in stature; then I
did raise up my Lord in my arms, and walked with him; and I also saw a great golden
nugget in the temple, at my right hand, and it disappeared from me. Amen.
And the next day, as I was on my journey to Castlemaine, I thought on this great
wonder with amazement, and I did not know what to make of it. I said to myself,
“ Has God a wife and two sons, and the people all do not know these things? and can
this be the Lord? and then I thought again upon the lady that I saw, who said unto
me, “ The house of God,” and she also called the Son of God, and yet she was mis-
tress : and this excited in me the greatest wonder that I ever felt in my life, because I
was so ignorant of the scriptures, and most especially the catholic faith. I did not
know at that time that there were three divine persons distinct in God, and I did not
know the blessed and holy Trinity of our living God, neither did I ever think upon the
blessed Virgin Mary. But when I reached Castlemaine, by chance, I got hold of a
catholic book from a young man stopping where I did, and I opened it, and read in it ;
and when I had read it, then my eyes were opened, and I saw and understood what had
come before me, at which I had been so much amazed on the way.’ 1 saw that it was
the blessed Trinity of our living God that had come before me in an outward sign: the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and the blessed Virgin. Amen.
And I, John, do declare unto all people that these mighty great things are true.
And in three days after this an angel came to me in a vision, and I held, up my
right arm, and the angel lighted upon it between the elbow and wrist, and said to me,
“ Thou shalt not fall.” And I also saw at the same time a streak of crystal waters pass
by me as quick as lightning.
And after this, in a few days, a virgin angel came unto me, and said unto me, “ Mis-
tress has sent me to say to you that you are not making the supper ready, and why do
you not go about it ?” This was because I had not yet gone to the church.
And in a few days after this I went to the church, and went a second time to the
catholic church before I said anything to the priest about my wish to be baptised in the
church.
And when I went to the priest to ask him to baptise me, he asked me what reason
and why I came to join the catholic church, to which I answered that I had seen many
things come before me; and I told him that I had been warned by the Lord to come to
the catholic church ; that I saw the catholic cross come before me the second time, on
crystal waters ; and also a church, and a great priest, and many young virgins in it;
and I told him many things: but he would not believe any of them, or hear any more
of them, and said unto me, “Take no notice of all these things, for they might be
wicked spirits transformed into angels ; and that I must make the sign of the cross,
and say unto the Lord that I did not want these great things; and he would not bap-
tise me at that time, because I was so ignorant of the scriptures, and that I did not
know the holy catholic faith.
And that same night I saw a vision come before me. I saw myself and the priest
passing through a house, in the same manner as I had taken leave of him that same
day; and I saw an angel cross before him and me. This was a token unto me by the
angel to follow the Lord my God, and follow not man. Amen.
And a few days after this a mighty wonder opened before me again.
The devil came before me, and grinned at me; he took a piece of paper, and rubbed


his gums with it, and afterwards threw it in my face. And after that gross insult, I
pulled otf my coat, and did pitch into him, fist-fight; and after every blow that I gave
him I saw a bloody wound, and his head was nearly wounded to death as I thought,
but be would not give in ; and he did hoist a great rock over his head for me to hit on
with my tender fist, in order to save his wounded head from the heavy blows which I
had power to give him ; and as soon as he did hoist the great stone over his head, lo I
I beheld the angel of the Lord standing by me, with the cross on him ; and immedi-
ately there was a sharp axe, with a short handle in my hand, which I did let in on the
devil’s great rock ; and his rock could not stand before my axe, and it did give way like
soft wood before an earthly axe; and the fourth blow with the axe would have taken his
head, if he had not sung out and give in. And the angel of the Lord bid me east down
the axe on the floor; and I washed my hands in a small blue margin of water, and said
to the devil that I did not want to have anything more to do with him. But he chal-
lenged me for another fight; but the Lord upbraided me, and we fought not.
And this is, the devil tells me that I shall sin again, and will have him to fight again.
But the Lord said I shall not sin again, for the Lord keepeth me from it. Victory over
death and hell, under the cross, at che holy catholic church door. Amen.
And after this great victory nine fowls came down from heaven by threes to me, each
three bound together by their feet; and I raised up my right hand and received them ;
and the first three I cast on the ground, and the second three I did let go in the air,
and the third three I let go in the air likewise; and the first three were not like the
others, nor so large as they were.
Interpretation: this is a token to me that the Lord my God is with me down on
the earth; and the three distinct fowls and their feet bound together, this is that there
are three divine distinct Persons, and one only God, Amen.
And a few days after this another great wonder opened before me: I saw a great
temple open before me and two angels standing outwards; and one of them held up a
great bunch of keys at mo,-and said unto me, “ Tell all priests and all people to keep
themselves clean; behffid! the Lord cometh unawares. And at this time I saw the
temple open, and irr spirit I entered into it, and I saw a great jar, which held the con-
tents of prophecy of this world; and my spirit had power given it to go to this great
jar; and, there Whs a cup in his hand, and he turned the jar bottom upwards, and poured
out the last drop of prophecy into the cup; and the cup was filled up to the brim, and
none of it was wasted; and I saw the wrath of three in one cup, and it was set on the
right hand couhter of the temple, and covered up ; and the jar had been full of pro-
phecy, but this Wa,s the last cup of prophecy to this world,
I, John, do truls say that I have seen a mighty prophet in spirit down on the earth,
among the sons and daughters of men; but lam not able to tell whence he came, or
anything more of him, yet; but the time is close at hand, and he is the last prophet
to this world.
And I must say to all people, both great and small of this world, that I do declare
these things are true, and the last vial of prophecy is poured out down on the earth from
the temple of our living God, according to the things which I have seen, and the things
which I have heard, and the things which have actually come to pass with me; and
through these things I do truly prophecy for the coming of the Lord our God to this
world, in less than forty years hence, to judge all people, both great and small; and
moreover, I was again to write less than thirty-five years hence; but while I was
studying on these things the angel of the Lord said unto me, “ Write less than forty
years hence ;” and I have written accordingly.
And all people who read or hear this prophecy, if you will recollect the great mystery
of the general judgment where I have written that I had power to speak to the people,
and did also prophecy to them; for the second and last woe will quickly come, wherein
I said to them, “ Fear the living God.”
According to the tokens to me my years of this world are half gone, and my allotted
years of this world are three score and six; and according to these things I shall live in
this world to see the end of this world. For this reason I was going to write for the end
of time less than thirty-five years hence : but the angel of the Lord said unto me,
♦‘Write less than forty years hence,” and so I have written accordingly.
And I, John, through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, do beseech and forewarn all
people of this world to prepare themselves for the coming of our Lord, and to make


their path straight and clean, for the time is at hand, with a truth, that we shall soon
all stand before the great judge of all things, to be judged of our works; and we all must,
indeed, quit the ways of sin, and fear the living God, and serve him in spirit and truth *
Amen.
A LITTLE MORE CONCERNING THE GREAT NUGGET OF GOLD.
When I left the great place of wonders (that is the ground of trial) I left it for cv o od
and did not intend going any more. I came to Castlemaine; and I was telling s^ome
friends how hard up I was, and how that I had no money to buy provisions to live on,
and was forced to work the ground, and could not leave it, they would not credit me for
anything to eat.
same night a vision came before me, shewing me that the angels of the Lord
would have brought me provisions to eat before I should have perished for something
to eat.
And after this I said to some friends again that I would serve the Lord our God above
all things in this world, even if I had nothing to eat but grass of the earth; and it came
to pass the same night that a mighty vision opened before me. This same ground
opened to me : I saw a dray full of provisions, and three horses hitched to it, as much
as the horses could draw ; and every chain of the three horses was as taut as it could be,
the load was so great.
Interpretation for the above.—The dray that I saw was the hole; and the provisions
which I saw on the dray were the gold that is in the hole ; and the three horses which
I saw hitched to the dray were three men: and the taut chains which I saw were the
lashing tor the gold, as much as three men can draw up out of the hole.
# And in a few days after this I wrote a letter to a friend, in which I stated that I was
in great tribulation, and without money; and that same night this great ground opened
to me a great junk of silver ore; and this was a token to me that there was a great
nugget of gold in that ground for me, and that I would not be poor, if I were to go back
A d after this I was baptised, and I went back to the ground; but I was not clean
enough to get it as yet; so I left it again, in the month of July, 1856.
But again the angel of the Lord has warned me to go back again to renew it.
In the month of July, A.D. 1856, a great river of clean water opened before me; its
banks and bed were white sand, and it was half dried up.
Interpretation for the above: the river that I saw was life; and where I saw it half
dried up of its waters, that was to me that the tide of my life of this world is half spent
or that the years of my life of this world are half gone; and where I saw the waters
clear, that is that the remainder of my life shall be good; and the white sand I saw is
a token that the years and days of a man or men of this world shall waste away or pass
away. This is true. J r J
And I must truly say to all people that the tokens of this great place of wonders were
truly amazement to me, so much as to make me marvel with surprise; and I was not
aware that the devil was on the ground until I did galley on the ground, and left it
under the imagination that the things that I saw at that place were not true.
But the angel of the Lord appeared unto me, and turned me back to it again, and he
showed me how that I was led from the ground by the devil; and the angel pointed the
devil out to me, and said that he was the Lord’s dog, and that all people are tried by
this mighty dog. J
Having returned to the ground I saw a mighty wonder, a mistress and master, on the
ground, and both of them wearing the holy catholic cross on them. Amen. And I
John, truly saw the devil on the ground, at the same time contending with me by threes ,
the contention being great and severe, but nevertheless I saw the Lord my God with me!
Am on*
A GREAT AND MARVELLOUS WAR.
At sinking the third hole on that ground I saw a great dragon, like a mighty great
bull, and he did outrage a wild lion, and I saw three angels had power over him ; and I
g f'l i ngh ‘. from h ™’ hecause 1 was not yet clean of sin. At sinking the last
hole of trial, before the angel of the Lord turned me off from the ground, to go to the


church and he baptised, and to put on the holy cross, the great dragon fought in three
visions against the archangels by threes, and the archangels overthrew the devil; be-
cause the Lord our God is greater and stronger than all. Amen.
And the devil did use every plan that he could think of to run me off the ground
before the time of trial was up; three months was the time of trial, during which I did
work the place for three grains of gold, that being all that I got for that space of time,
and I did work hard and daily. This I can prove by upwards of three hundred diggers,
that I truly did work that ground three months, and that I truly only got three grains
of gold ; and yet there is a half of a ton weight, or more than that, of pure gold about
that place.
Woe be unto him who shall make confusion, and scatter the flock from the kingdom
of God. Amen.
A GREAT AND MARVELLOUS WONDER
Opened before me in the month of April, in the year of our Lord, 1856.
I saw myself in a great golden hole : I was in. the dark, and could not see how to
work it properly: and I went and bought two candles to give me light to see how to
work it; I purchased these candles at a store, on entering which I saw a mistress stand-
ing behind the counter, and two young virgins sitting upon the counter, as they appeared
to me to be; and the mistress held up to me two kinds of treasures; but I did not
receive them; I asked for two candles, and one of them (the virgins) went to the drawer
and did give me them. At that time I saw the father quickly appear in sight and as
quickly disappear again. The two candles were both in one drawer; they were just
alike, and one length and one size, and they both would bum well.
Interpretation for the candles that I bought: the two candles were two bible-books,
which I did truly buy afterwards, a catholic book and a protestant book; that is a token
that both these bible-books are alike; both are pointing to the kingdom of God, and
leading all people to the blessed kingdom of heaven who do follow them. Amen.
I, John, must truly say to all people these great wonders or mysteries which
appeared previous to all those of 1856.
A mighty great and marvellous wonder opened before me: I saw a ship of angels on
a world of waters, and a great city and a mighty multitude of people; and I saw myself
at the water’s edge, on the land, between the mighty ship of angels and the people and
city, and I saw that the angels were keeping watch over me more so than on any other
person on the land, and I also saw myself trying to hide from them, because I was
ashamed to be seen by them, for they were so marvellous and great, and there was no
place found for me to hide from them.
Interpretation for the above: the great ship of angels and world of waters which I
saw were the temple of the Lord our God; and the great city and people which I saw
are this world; and where I saw myself at the water’s edge, on the land, between the
great ship of angels and the city and people, this is that I am chosen by the Lord our
God to be his right-hand and nearest man of ail men in this world in these days. Amen.
I am truly chosen by the Lord our God to serve him in spirit and truth, and prophesy
to the sons and daughters of this world in these days. Amen. My God has truly called
me out from among the Gentiles, and out of the wilderness of sins and great tribulations
of this world to his service; he has also made me a royal gift of eternal life, and great
treasures of earthly gold, that I may have bread to eat, without being tied to the hard
labor of this world for my living. Blessed be the Lord our God. Amen.
And I, John, truly desire all people, who doubt that I am called by the Lord our God
to the prophesy service, to read, and study, and make well known all these mysteries;
and they can easily see that, by the tokens of them, that I am called to this service.
On the 17th of September, A.D. 1856,
THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY, THE GREAT QUEEN OF HEAVEN AND
EARTH,
Appeared to me in a vision ; and I heard her voice say unto me, “ You shall for ever
serve the Lord your God above all things;” and her voice also said unto me, “If the
people are so obstinate, and will not believe these things, nevertheless you must remain
in our church.” And after this the mistress disappeared.


And after these things I, John, truly heard the voice of the Lord saying unto me,
“No slave-holders shall enter into the kingdom of God.” To whomsoever traffic in the
souls of men in this world; this is a warning to all people who do deal in the inhuman
trade of buying and selling the souls of men and daughters as chattels; and I, John, do
truly say unto all slaves of this world that the voice of the Lord said unto me that the
chains of your bondage are close at an end, and all other evils of this world ; for the
sins of the people have waxed gross before the Lord our God; and the Lord has shor-
tened the days of this world; and the end of time is close at hand, I truly do declare.
And I, John, forewarn all slave-holders of this world to put an end to slavery in accor-
dance with the voice of the Lord, to refrain all other evils, and to repent of their many
sins before our God; I do not forewarn slaveholders alone, hut all people, both great
and small, rich and poor, free and bond, to return from their wicked ways of sins, and
repent of them before the Lord our God; for the great judge will soon visit this world
to execute judgment upon all, both great and small, the living and the dead. Amen.
And I, John, do truly forewarn all people of this world that they do not make any
great preparations for worldly glory of vanities beyond the limits of which I have stated
the time, according to the voice of the angel of the Lord which said unto me, “ Write
the end of time less than forty years hence.” Amen;
And the Lord has shewed unto me that the sins of the people of this land are waxed
gross before the Lord, though they abundantly and excessively drink; and the Lord
our God desires that all people quit drinking of ardent liquors and getting drunk ; and
the Lord did show unto me that the people must all drink beer instead of intoxicating
liquors.
0, dear people, one and all, through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, I do beseech
all you who are of this world to take heed to these writings; for they are truth and
nothing else but truth; therefore, let them be translated, and throughout the whole
world in all languages and tongues, that all people may hear what the Spirit says to the
world; and believe me and with a truth, that these are the greatest celestial writings
that ever were found on all the face of the earth, since the new law of God was recorded;
and I, John, do not lie unto the world; and therefore all people of this world may read
these great mysteries, or hear them read, and meditate on them as truth, because they
have not been written under the imagination or authority of a man or men of this world ;
but I, John, do truly write them from on High. Amen.
In the month of September, 1856,
THE BLESSED VIRGIN, QUEEN OF HEAVEN AND EARTH
Appeared unto me in a vision, and said unto me, “If the people are so obstinate, and
will not believe these things, nevertheless you must remain in our church ;” and her
words are to me, that I shall serve the Lord all my days, above all things, and sin no
more. Amen.
And after this
A MIGHTY WONDER CAME BEFORE ME
Again : I saw three men on the earth, and a Holy one on high. I, John, truly did see,
in a vision, a cranky man on the earth, and I saw two men with him and standing by
him, one on his left hand, and the other on his right hand; and the two men I saw
were of a different country to the cranky man. And I also saw a Holy one on high,
standing between the earth and the sun, on the western horizon, looking down on the
.earth at the cranky man.
Interpretation for the above : the cranky man I saw is an earthly man, whom the
Lord our God has chosen to serve him ; and where I saw him cranky he was rejoicing
in the Lord and praising the God of all things ; and the two men that I saw standing
one each side the cranky man, are two angels; and where I saw they were of a different
nature and different country, this was because the cranky man is an earthly man of this
world; and the two angels are angels of a spiritual world; and where I saw the mighty
Holy one on high, standing between the earth and the sun, on the western horizon,
watching down on the cranky man, this is a token that the Lord is on high, and down
on the earth with the people, also; and where I saw this mighty great and holy angel
standing between the earth and the sun, low down on the western horizon, this is a token
that the light of this world is come near to a close. Amen.
P.S. I, John, do call it after mid-day at two o’clock, when the sun is on the western
horizon.


I, John William Madison, am truly the prophesier and writer of this prophecy, and
it is not written under and by the authority of men of this world, but by authority from
on high ; and it is the only true prophecy and last prophecy to the sons and daughters
of this world, saving the great prophet which is close at hand, which is the great holy
spirit of the Lord, and which will come down on earthly man, and will write many
Wonders by his hand unto all the world. Amen.
And I, John, through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, do beseech all people to
return from their wickedness and sinful ways unto the Lord our God, and serve him in
spirit and truth. Amen.
And I, John, duly and hereby declare to all people of this world, both small and great,
and between God and man, that the great end of time of this world is close at hand, and
will be less than forty years hence, according to the things which I have seen, and ac-
cording to the things which I have heard, and according to the things which have
actually come to pass with me.
I was going to write to the whole world, declaring that the end of the present world
will be in less than thirty-five years hence; but while I was thinking on this the angel
of the Lord said unto me, “Write less than forty years hence.” And I
have written less than forty years hence accordingly. And this is the only true
spiritual prophecy that can be found on the earth in these days, among the sons
and daughters of men, to show the coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ to this world to judge all mankind of their works in a few years more ; and all
people, both great and small, must know that no prophecy can be good but spiritual
prophecy from God on high ; that, if it is not spiritual prophecy, it cannot be good,
neither true; and this is the only true spiritual prophecy since the days of old, the end
of the old prophets ; spiritual communications have truly opened to the inhabitants of
this world beforehand. And I, John, do declare to all people that the Lord our God has
sent a great witness to this effect: a great nugget of gold, as much as three men can
raise up, is to bear witness to these things which I have written; and, through my Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ, I can at any time after this go to the place, and uncover it and
have it raised up put of the earth before the eyes of men, in order that the people of this
world may believe these things; and yet this great nugget of gold has not been seen by
any man of this world with bodily eyes, but with spiritual eyes it has been seen. Amen.
And I, John, who am the interpreter and prophesier of these things, do truly declare
unto all people that it shall shortly be proved whether these things be of the voice of
the living God, or of the imagination of man. Amen.
The great spirit of Justice has spoken to the ruling people of this world, Victoria, con-
cerning the Chinese people, 0 ! rulers of this land, the mighty and great spirit of jus-
tice has said, “ Are all ye people not of a foreign land, saving those that are born here?
Then, why do ye not hold a bench of justice ?” This is a caution to all legislative halls
and judges of this world. The Lord our God doth know every thought that comes in
your bosoms, and for this reason ye shall give all people justice where ye see it is
needed ; no matter what color or what grade. The Lord has shown unto me that there
is no distinction of colors and grades of people with the Lord our God; for our living
God has created all people and all things, and all are his; and we must not walk in
wickedness; if we do we shall be punished, and, therefore, all ye rulers and judges, and
all people of this world, ought to keep yourselves clean in righteousness and in truth
before the Lord our God, being that we know wickedness, and sin, and unjust ways, are
a hatred to the holy spirit of our great God.
The Lord our God has called unto so many prophets to speak to the sons and daugh-
ters of men, to check them in their wickedness and sinful ways, and to serve their Lord
and their God in righteousness ; and they would not fear their living God, and neither
would they hear nor believe the prophets ; and then the true and only living Son of our
true living God came down from heaven, and dwelt with the sons and daughters of men
on the earth thirty-three years a corporeal life, to show us the way to the kingdom of God
by his examples and righteousness, and the holy scriptures are his testimony before us;
and yet we do not follow them as we ought, neither do we fear the living God, nor obey
his commandments as we ought; but we dwell in wickedness and sin, more so than in
righteousness, without fearing the God of all things : and for this reason the Lord our
God’s wrath is kindled against this world for its continuance of iniquity, and he has


lTt n ts“ed.°imeL WOl ' ld ’ *“ ° rdel ' l ° PUt ““ “* t 0 the wickedness * all people
„^“ d ’ the efore > I. Jo\n. through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, do warn all
people of this world, both great and small, to be in brotherly love with or towards each
other, and prepare themselves; and that we all shall keep ourselves clean, and make
oul- SS-raft m ° rd ", tl ; at We ™ tty enter in the kingdom of God before the Lord
our God, and be happy with him ; for truly the great Judge of all things will come to
less tllau fort / years hence, to judge both the living and the dead,
ese aie true sayings of the spirit of prophecy, and the testimony of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ is the great spirit of prophecy. Amen. *
. Lord ll . as *f Ugbt “f t 0 wear the cross > and for this reason Ido say that it is good
for all people in this world to wear the cross of our Saviour. Amen.
e Lord brought me from all manner of sins, and says I must not drink anything
stronger than ginger-beer or beer; and the sins of the people of this land have waxed
fnvfc l; etol 'r tLe U ' l , < ”’ r C i°‘ 1 ’ tbrough abundance and excess of the drinking of bi-
rr leat tng liquors, and the Lord says that the people ought not to drink strong drinks
ear these words, all people, and see that ye take heed to them, because it is the voice
of our Lord who speaketh these words. Amen.
And I, John, the interpreter and prophecier of this prophecy, do forewarn all people
from making light and laughing at these things which are written in this prophecy be-
sea people must know that spiritual power is the beginning and ’ and
An tlimgS; theSe WrUings are trul y spiritual testimonies; and we must
know that theie is nothing impossible with our living God. Therefore let these writ-
heayens tbroughout
** en°r; f n Lt e of?hisTorid HS less
Peace and grace be with you m, through Amen.
JOHN.
I, John, did prophecy for the great Mexican war, in the year of our Lord 1840- I
also prophesied for the great gold-fields of California, A.D. 1846 ; and I also prophesied
for the great gold-field of Australia, A.D. 1849; and these have tmly come to pass before
a people. But I did not prophesy these things publicly; and the people whom I spoke
these things to sard I was cranky. Who would believe me in those 1 days ? And yet all
of them have truly come to pass, and I must have been born with the spirit of prophecy
seeing that I have prophesied earthly things which have come to pass, and in those days
I was a wicked man in sin But now the Lord my God has called me out of the wil-
W hlm m SpWt and trUtb ’ and people Of
And I truly say to all people that I have not a full prohet’s power until I do receive
.°f g«> ld which I have spoken of; for great power is with the gold,
vZ of Amem 0 ““ “ C&U g6t tWs gold but
lnoreoVer, Xt 18 a Wltness to all things which I have written in this prophecy,
“ “ y bU ‘ pkCe Wbere h
I omitted to say to ail people, in that part where I said an angel came to me or ap-
peared to me in a few days after I had arrived at Castlemaine from that ground of won-
der, and where it said unto me that the mistress sent her to say that I was not getting
the supper ready, and to ask why I did not go about it, that the following is the
INTE RPBE TATION :
Because ! had not made any movements to be baptised and join the church, and to show
these things unto all people, in order that they might believe them, and prepare them
selves, and make themselves ready to meet that awful and fearful day, which is close at


hand upon all of this world: and the great and general judgment-day is the great
supper of our great God. Amen.
JOHN.
The blessed Virgin is the great queen of heaven and earth, and is truly the great ad-
vocate for all us creatures to the Son of the living God, and the Son to the Father.
Amen.
I, John, who am the interpreter and prophesier, wish to say unto all people, that I am
not the false prophet, Miller, who did rise up out of New York, in America, a few years
ago, and who raised great confusion among many, and deceived many people of the
world concerning the end of time of this world. Miller’s prophecies were not spiritual
prophecies, and for this reason the people ought not to have heard them and taken heed
to them ; as all people must know that no prophecy concerning celestial power can be
good, neither can it he true, unless it is spiritual, because all things on high are
spiritual. This is the only true and first and last spiritual prophecy to this world, to
show unto all people that the end of all things of this world and the great day are close
at hand.
And I, John, do truly forewarn all powers and governments of this world, and all
people, that they may not make any great preparations for great worldly glories of
vanities beyond the limits of thirty-three years hence from this date ; and yet the voice
of the angel of the Lord said untome, “Write less than forty years hence for the end
of time.” Amen.
Take notice here to this, all people, that the hour, nor the day, nor the week, nor the
month, nor the year, are revealed to man of this world, neither will it be revealed. But,
less than forty years hence are revealed only. And now all people do know, whosoever
shall read these writings or hear them read, that forty years will no more pass of this
world, and for that reason and all other reasons of righteousness I do beseech all people,
through my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to let the pride and malice of sin go out of
their bosoms, and serve the Lord our God in spirit and truth, and raise up all children
strictly to fear the Lord, and teach them the commandments of our living God, in order
that they may not be vile before the Lord our God, for I truly say to all people the end
of time is close at hand. Amen.
Peace and grace of our God be with the saints of the world, through my Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
JOHN.
January 26th, A.D. 1857.
In the name of the Lord, I will make it known to all people that this prophecy has
been lying in the printer’s office from the 11th of November last, 1856, for the want of
treasures to commence the work, so as to get it out before the people ; and for the reason
that I had not the money, I drew out a donation paper, and carried it in the Town
Hall on the sth of January, A.D., 1857, with hopes of getting aid, in order to bring the
prophecy out before the world; but I was refused aid from the Town Hall, and after
this I found no aid in the Town Hall for the Lord.
I did not attempt to proceed any further with it, but tore up the donation paper in
Great Collins Street, and made my way out in the highway of the country, and there I
wept bitterly before the Lord our great God, by reason of my many troubles and trials of
tribulation; and said, “ Please to withdraw the prophecy from me, and let it come on some
other of thy servants who is more worthy than I; for lam not fit, I am not worthy to
carry it out; and please not to prolong my days of this world, for all people have lift up
their hearts and minds against me, and the whole world is a disgust to me, and it is not
worthy to receive notice that thou will shortly come to judge the living and the dead, by
reason of the hardness of the hearts of the sons and daughters of men; and please not
to prolong my days of this world, in order that I may rest from my many sorrows and
troubles, which are great. But, omy God ! may thy holy will be done with me ; not
my will, may I do thy holy will.”
And my cries went up t before the* Lord and our God of all things, and they were
answered; and after this a sign of chastisement came before me, and said unto me.
“ Will you do as you please ? or will you do as you are commanded ? for the rod of cor-
rection is at hand.”
And after this the earth opened unto me, and I was led by the spirit of the Lord
downwards to look upon these great treasures of gold f and after this it all disappeared
from me.|pAmen,


And this is to me that I shall get this prophecy out before the people, and afterwards
go for the treasures, and they will and shall be opened unto me, for they are a witness
that the prophecy of this book is from God, and it shall be true and made manifest to
all the world, in the name of the Lord, Amen.
And it is truly time for all people to return from their wicked and sinful ways of this
world, and serve our only true and living God in spirit and truth; and all churches
ought to open three times every day, and all people ought to go who are able, and all
people, whatsoever their business is or may be, ought to kneel down to prayer three
times every day to our Creator and sovereign God; all prisoners of the world should
have time three times a day to kneel to prayer also ; and this ought not to be omitted
by the sons and daughters of men, for unto our living God all we creatures must sub-
mit Amen. " /
I am truly called as a messenger or a prophet unto all people of this world.
Peace and grace be with us all, through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
JOHN WILLIAM MADISON.
P.S. Every family of this world ought to have one of these books, and keep it, and
go by it also, for it is a spiritual book.
W. H. Williams, Printer, 94 Bourke Street East, Melbourne,




•
♦


k: <
