

Lite and Work of
Miss Vida Goldstein








LIFE AND WORK
OF
MISS VIDA GOLDSTEIN




Life and Work
OF
Miss Vida Goldstein.
MISS VIDA GOLDSTEIN having been
nominated by the Women’s Political Asso-
ciation as a candidate for the Kooyong con-
stituency of the House of Representatives,
it has been thought that a short account of
her work in aid of women and children
would be acceptable to many, for this work
is her highest and best claim to represent them in Par-
liament, where her efforts would be facilitated and take
wider issues. This account of Miss Goldstein’s career
is more especially needed, since her work for the public
has never received its rightful meed of public recognition,
as usually happens when one works not in the interests
of party, but for the good of the community.
BIRTH AND PARENTAGE.
Miss Goldstein was born at Portland, Victoria. Her
paternal grandfather was a Polish Jew, a fighter for
Polish liberty, who was ultimately compelled to seek re-
fuge in England. Later he settled in Ireland, became a
Unitarian and married Mary Pulvertaft, a descendant of
one of the Dutch invaders. They had one son, an only
child, the late Lieut.-Colonel J. R. Y. Goldstein, who
was born at Cork, but was brought up in Belfast. He
came to Australia as a youth in 1858, and lived for
many years in Portland, where he married Isabella


Hawkins, a daughter of a squatter, one of the earliest
arrivals from Lowland Scotland, whose wife, Jeanie
Hutcheson, also belonged to a pioneer squatting family,
and many were the thrilling incidents they could relate of
the stirring Victorian forties. Even as a girl Vida’s
mother pondered over the labour problem and the in-
equalities of human life, contrasting the conditions .in
the men’s quarters and in the lonely shepherds’ huts with
the luxury of the homestead.
CHILDHOOD AND EDUCATION.
From Portland Mr. and Mrs. Goldstein removed to
Warrnambool, and, eight years later, to Melbourne, where
they have resided ever since. From her earliest years
the utmost care was taken of Miss Goldstein’s education.
No one could have been more fortunate in the selection
of teachers made for her. At the most critical time in
her educational career she had the great good fortune
to come under the influence of Miss Julia Sutherland,
the talented sister of the late Alexander Sutherland, who
prepared her for the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, which
she entered at the close of Mr., now Professor, Harper’s
regime. Mr. Harper paid a high tribute to Miss Julia
Sutherland when he said that Vida Goldstein was one
of the most thoroughly grounded pupils he had ever re-
ceived in the college.
Heavily handicapped by a physical breakdown, owing
to the strain of study, she prepared for the Matriculation
examination at the University, passed in all her subjects,
with honours in English and French.
CONTRASTS.
Then came a period of great gaiety, during which she
tasted all the sweets of society. Full of life and spirits
she went to ball after ball; excelled in lawn tennis, win-
ning many prizes at the game; played billiards with skill;
drove spirited horses; was the life and sou! of every kind
of harmless pleasure, and enjoyed it all to the full.
Meanwhile the other side of life was beginning to force
itself upon her. Her parents were among those who fol


lowed the Rev. Charles Strong, D.D., in his founding
of the Australian Church, and, with her mother, she,
young as she was, look a leading part in the anti-slum
crusade organised by Dr. Strong. Here indeed was civi-
lised society under a very different aspect. The bursting
of “the boom” in Melbourne looked very different when
seen from the point of view of the toiler in a Colling-
wood slum, helpless, out of work, and no man heeding
him. Social and industrial problems surged around Miss
Goldstein, and she turned to the study of sociology and
economics.
While Miss Goldstein was thus engaged her family
was caught in the financial misfortunes of twenty years
ago, and she determined to earn her own living as a
teacher. Later, she and her sisters opened a boys’ and
girls’ preparatory school at East St. Kilda. Knowing
what a blessing a good grounding had been to them,
they resolutely refused every suggestion to extend their
school beyond the preparatory limit, and to-day they re-
joice in the fact that a large number of their pupils of
whom they have been able to keep trace are doing bril-
liantly in the professions they have adopted.
ENTERS SUFFRAGE RANKS.
Meanwhile Miss Goldstein was thinking hard on social
and industrial questions, giving all her spare lime to investi-
gating slum conditions, and assisting her mother in the
Woman Suffrage movement, which was just beginning to
make headway under the leadership of Miss Annette Bear,
afterwards Mrs. Bear Crawford, having been ably
pioneered by Mrs. Johnson, Mrs. Lowe, Mrs. Langdale,
Mrs. Smythe, Mrs. Rennick, Mrs. Elliott, and Miss
Simmons. Mrs. Bear Crawford had had valuable
experience in England as a social reform worker, and
she put the woman movement in Victoria on a foundation
of absolute security. Dr. Constance Stone, the first
woman doctor in Australia, had been drawn into the
general work for women, and was a close ally of Mrs.
Bear Crawford and Mrs. Goldstein, the three of whom
in 1897 organised the Committee that collected the


Queen’s Jubilee Fund for the establishment of the Queen
Victoria Hospital for Women and Children, where women
could be attended by women doctors.
BECOMES SUFFRAGE LEADER.
In 1899 Mrs. Bear Crawford died. Miss Goldstein
became her successor, closing her school in order to give
all her time to working in the woman movement. Feeling
that nothing could be accomplished for women and chil-
dren without the vote (a conclusion already come to by
M rs. Bear Crawford) Miss Goldstein concentrated her
efforts on securing the enfranchisement of women. The
battle had been won in the Lower House, but nine years
more work was required before the Upper House capi-
tulated.
Miss Goldstein’s first speech on a public platform was
made in 1899 at a Woman Suffrage Meeting, in the
Prahran Town Hall, and a month later she addressed
a crowded meeting in the Melbourne Town Hall at which
Mr. Deakin was also a speaker. Her address, which was
easily heard in every corner of the hall, was received with
admiration and enthusiasm. Her ease and fluency of
speech were united with a charm of manner essentially
womanly, and this, together with the clearness and pre-
cision of her arguments, carried the audience irresistibly
with her.
During the long struggle for the suffrage. Miss Gold-
stein worked with unswerving patience. Hour after hour
she would sit in the galleries of either House when the
Suffrage Bill was being debated or any measure affecting
women and children, interviewing members, urging them
to move amendments, make alterations, delete a word,
and all the time gaining a close acquaintance with the
intricacies of Parliamentary procedure.
CALL FROM AMERICA.
In 1902, the year the Federal Parliament enfranchised
the women of Australia, Miss Goldstein visited America
at the invitation of the American Woman Suffrage As-
sociation to attend a conference at which it was intended


to found an International Woman Suffrage Society.
Miss Goldstein was appointed Secretary of the Confer-
ence, and greatly impressed her colleagues, the representa-
tives of nine nations, by her business-like capacity.
During six months she visited the principal Stales, from
New York to San Francisco, speaking on the Suffrage
question, inquiring into .the methods of dealing with
neglected and delinquent children, into the prison systems,
and labour problems. She met the foremost men and
women in American public life, and friendships thus
formed, and still continued, have been of lasting benefit;
keeping her in constant touch with the leaders of all
forward movements throughout the world.
COMMONWEALTH AND STATE POLITICS.
In 1903 Miss'Goldstein formed the Women’s Federal
Political Association with the object of educating the
women voters in the cause of democracy, but a very brief
experience showed her that the Association was being
made use of for party purposes by members and would-
be members of Parliament. She called the women
together, and made them realise they were being made
fools of, and there and then it was decided to change
the policy of the Association from a Liberal to a non-
party one. The wisdom of "this course was soon ap-
parent, when the men who had previously attempted to
direct the activities of the organisation deserted it. For
two years the Association confined itself to Federal
Politics, but the continued delay in winning the State
Vote was becoming such a serious matter that the move-
ment was going backward instead of forward, and in
February, 1905, the W.F.P.A. assumed control of the
State Suffrage movement, became the Women’s Political
Association, and devoted itself to the interests of women
in both the Commonwealth and State Parliaments. A
Stale Campaign on new lines was organised,, and all
efforts were directed towards compelling the State
Government to make woman suffrage a Government
measure. With the assistance of a Men’s League for
Woman Suffrage this object was achieved in September,


1908, and the following November the Victorian Woman
Suffrage Bill was passed into law.
CANDIDATE FOR THE SENATE.
In 1903 came the first election of the Commonwealth
Parliament, at which women throughout Australia Voted,
and the question arose whether women should not have
a representative' of their own. The suffragists decided
that the running of a candidate in Victoria would do an
immense deal to further their cause, and the choice fell
unanimously upon Miss Goldstein.
After much serious deliberation she consented to
stand, and a contest for the Senate was decided upon,
which would allow meetings all over the State. This
decision aroused, as was to be expected, a storm of anger
and ridicule. But Miss Goldstein went quietly down
to her native Portland, and there delivered her first political
speech to a crowded assembly of men and women, whose
attention was very soon completely absorbed in following
the speaker’s clear and able exposition of her political
opinions. Many who came to scoff joined in the en-
thusiastic applause which greeted the end of her speech.
The success of this first meeting was most gratifying to
the candidate and her supporters, and it was followed
by equally successful meetings in various parts of
the State. Though success at the polls was known
to be unattainable, this first attempt resulted in winning
51,497 votes, a total which surprised her fiercest political
opponents and commanded their respect.
SECOND CONTEST.
The contest over, Miss Goldstein plunged again into
the fight for State Suffrage. Day and night her work
was unending. X^ e battle being won at the close of
1908, the following year was devoted to planning State,
National and International work, and getting ready for
another Senate contest in 1910. In the meantime there
occurred a political crisis of the greatest magnitude in
Australian history, which resulted in the Liberal and Con-
servative forces making common cause against the Labour
Party. The 1910 election was the fiercest and bitterest


party fight Australia has seen. It was a marvel that the
one non-party candidate, and that a woman, was not
mutilated beyond recognition, but Miss Goldstein emerged
triumphant in spite of defeat
Miss Goldstein opened a vigorous campaign on Feb-
ruary 14th at Casterton, and wound up at the Hawthorn
Town Hall on April 12th. For those two months she
addressed in town and country, sometimes twice a day,
.crowded meetings, to which hundred! could not get ad-
mittance. . ,• .
To the many who heard her for the first time, her
speeches were a revelation. Inadequate press reports
had not prepared the audience fof a clear and clever ex-
position of a definite platform. She gave excellent reasons
for women taking their place beside men in Parliament,
and on general political questions showed a thorough
grasp of current politics.
A most interesting sight was tlje “meeting in the Mel l
bourne Town Hall on April 7th, when Miss Goldstein
held the packed house (the doors being closed twenty
minutes before the hour advertised .for beginning) for
nearly two hours. As invariably happened, within a few
minutes the audience was entirely with her, and applaud-
ing enthusiastically her brief, telling arguments. She made
an eloquent protest against the Financial Agreement, and,
in replying to questions pul by the audience on technical
issues of the subject, showed that she had thoroughly
grasped a question that puzzled many a male candidate.
Most of those present left the hall convinced that Miss
Goldstein had a better claim to be heard in Parliament
than nine-tenths of the other candidates. Though at-
tacked bitterly by certain sections o'f the party press. Miss
Goldstein replied to all attacks with unfailing moderation
and dignity. In a campaign which was marked by re-
crimination, abuse and personalities by party candidates
and their supporters, the woman candidate never lost her
head nor her public spirit. The impersonal character of
her speeches, her persistent demaqd for conscience and
principle in public affairs greatly impressed her audiences.


Even her opponents publicly acknowledged “her splendid
courage, her tenacity of purpose.”
The enormous attendances at her meetings; the en-
thusiasm aroused wherever she went; the inability of her
opponents to find fault with her programme frightened
both sides into believing that Miss Goldstein’s success was
a certainty, and no'stone was left unturned to secure her
defeat. That alone showed the great gain in our woman
movement made since 1903. Then, none of the party
adherents believed Miss Goldstein had a chance of suc-
cess. -They looked upon her candidature as an amusing
interlude, and she got many throw-away votes, for there
were three party “tickets” in the field, each with four
candidates, five independent candidates, and the non-
party woman candidate—eighteen in all. In 1910 Miss
Goldstein’s candidature was taken perfectly seriously;
prophecies of success were universal; there were only two
party “tickets,” and she got no throw-away votes. The
widespread enthusiasm for our cause so alarmed the party
forces that on every occasion their followers were drilled
into believing that if they voted for the woman candidate
they would annihilate their party. Miss Goldstein’s
53.583 votes were a magnificent tribute from the people
of Victoria to a great principle. The huge army repre-
sented by that 54,000 voles stood solid against the bitter
party haired and the parly threats hurled at them for
daring to “split the ticket.” They stood true to a prin-
ciple—they put justice to women before the triumph of
party.
CALL FROM ENGLAND.
Before the close of 1910 came an honour to the women
of Victoria which cannot be overrated. Miss Goldstein
received a call from the Women’s Social and Political
Union, inviting her to visit England and lake part in the
campaign of 191 I for Woman Suffrage. Miss Goldstein
left Melbourne on February 14, 1911, arriving in Eng-
land on March 191h.*
Miss Agnes Murphy, business manager of the Quinlan
Opera Company, thus describes Miss Goldstein’s visit:—
“When Miss Goldstein visited England in 1911, the


reception she received at the hands of the various women’s
organisations throughout the United Kingdom bore elo-
quent testimony to the warm appreciation of her loyal
and able services to the woman movement. At the
Euston station thousands of women, including several of
the great suffrage leaders, assembled to bid her welcome,
and the Women’s Social and Political Union, of which
Mrs. Pankhurst is President, made a special demonstra-
tion in her honour. It was a greeting of which any
public personage might be proud.
“The policy of the Women’s Social and Political
Union made a strong appeal to Miss Goldstein; the
political foresight of the leaders, their ready sacrifice,
splendid courage and ideal comradeship—qualities all
possessed in a remarkable degree by the rank and file—
were an inspiration to the Australian visitor. She made
her first public appearance in England at a vast meet-
ing organised by this body and held in the Royal Albert
Hall, London, the audience being over ten thousand. In
this spacious auditorium many statesmen and other world-
famed orators have ‘failed to get over the footlights,
but Miss Goldstein’s success was instantaneous and em-
phatic. The matter of her able and lucid political re-
view was no less brilliant than its manner of delivery,
and her voice carried clearly to the utmost recesses o(
the hall.
“So distinct a success achieved on the trying occasion
of a first appearance in a strange country, in a colossal
building and on the same platform with gfeat popular
leaders like Mrs. Pankhurst, Mrs. Pethick Lawrence and
Miss Christabel Pankhurst was a great gratification to
the crowds of Australians who had come from all parts
cf London to hear her.
“On that evening Miss Goldstein demonstrated her
right to be classed among the noted orators such as the
Pankhursts, Mrs. Besant, Bernard Shaw, Israel-Zang-
will, Elizabeth Robins, Mrs. Pethick Lawrence, Henry
Nevinson, Tim. Healy, Lawrence Housman, Lord
Lytton, Dr. Garrett Anderson, Lady Constance Lytton,
Mary Leigh, Dr. Ethel Smyth, Dr. Anna Shaw and


other lights whose utterances have glorified the meetings
of the Women’s Social and Political Union.”
During the succeeding months of her sojourn in the
old country. Miss Goldstein spoke throughout the United
Kingdom for all the great suffrage organisations, both
constitutional and militant. She formed the Australian
and New Zealand Women Voters’ Association (Lon-
don) for the purpose of safeguarding the interests of
Australian and New Zealand women in the Imperial
Parliament, and with the hope that the enfranchised
women of the overseas dominions would help the women
of England in their brave fight for political freedom: she
contributed articles to “Votes for Women” on the woman
movement in Australia, and compiled a pamphlet which
has been widely used for propagandist purposes in the
United Kingdom, Europe and America. In short, her
splendid help is recorded as among the most interesting
arfd valuable contributions to the English Suffrage Cam-
paign.
AS JOURNALIST.
Miss Goldstein’s journalistic work has been consider-
able. From 1899 till 1905 she owned and managed
and edited The Woman's Sphere, a bright monthlj’
paper devoted to women’s questions. The business side
of the paper occupied much time and energy, which
Miss Goldstein thought should be given to the ever-in-
creasing pressure of the State Suffrage Campaign, and
in 1905 she discontinued The Woman's Sphere. With
the winning of State Suffrage, the need for a woman’s
political paper became more and more insistent, and in
August, 1909, the W.P.A. launched The Woman t
Voter, a weekly letter to its members, which, small as it,\i
goes to every corner of the world where women are work-
ing for political liberty.
Miss Goldstein has contrir .ted to Australian, English,
American and French magazines and. papers, two excel-
lent articles being accepted by the 'Nineteenth Century,
one on “The Political Woman in Australia” and the
other on “Socialism in Australia.” In the latter article
Miss Goldstein gave a list of the normal expenses of an


Australian working man with a wife and- five children.
This article reached Melbourne while Mr. Justice Higgins
was conducting the Harvester Case in the Arbitration
Court, and it was the reading of this list which led him
to have working men and women brought before him to
give evidence as to the living expenses of the working
community. Such was the beginning of the famous
Arbitration Court awards, based on the normal needs of
a working man and his family, which are breathing the
spirit of humanity into industrial legislation all over the
world.
AS PENOLOGIST.
As member and officer of the Criminology Society, Miss
Goldstein has done splendid work in securing belter con-
ditions for the inmates of our penal institutions. Her agi-
tation for police matrons from the time the reform was
first advocated by an American visitor at a meeting of
the Women's CJiristian Temperance Union was unceas-
ing. It was entirely due to her personal work at the
Central lockup that the men arrests were placed at one
end of the lockup and the women at the other. Certain
of the authorities considered the matter trivial, and op-
posed it, but women know that “trifles make the sum
of human things,” and this seemingly trivial wrong prac-
tice was one that led to serious trouble in many cases. Not
sickly sentimentality, as critics assert, but scientific under-
standing of cause and effect in the manufacture of crime,
inspires Miss Goldstein’s earnest efforts for reform in the
methods of dealing with criminals.
AS "LEGISLATOR ”
But most important and far-reaching of all Miss Gold-
stein’s work has been that in connection with Bills in
Commonwealth and State Parliaments, affecting women
and children, and it is the work of which least is known.
No one except those intimately associated with her know
of the hours given in and outside Parliament to safe-
guarding the interests of women and children in Bills


brought forward specially in their interests, in preventing
the Introduction of principles which would injuriously affect
thejr interests in others, which, on the surface, do not ap-
pear to affect them at all. Space forbids us giving de-
tails of the work done, but the following reforms were
all personally watched by Miss Goldstein. Wherever
they were likely to touch women and children, they
formed part of the policy of the W.P.A., and so alive
was the Association to Miss Goldstein’s insight into and
knowledge of Parliamentary law and methods, that she
was entrusted with supreme power in all the Association s
legislative work. The following are some of the reforms
dealt with by Miss Goldstein:—
Commonwealth and State Franchise Acts.
Food Adulteration Act.
Old Age Pensions Act.
Conciliation and Arbitration Act.
Commonwealth Public Service Act.
Commonwealth Naturalisation Act.
Children’s Emigration Act.
Commonwealth and State Electoral Acts.
Widows’ Maintenance Act.
Children’s Court Act.
Indeterminate Sentence Act.
Appointment of Women as Inspectors of Boarded
Out Children.
Appointment of Trained Nurses as Inspectors of
Boarded Out Children.
Appointment of Police Matrons.
Legislation Dealing with Deserting Husbands and
Fathers.
Equal Pay for Equal Work in Commonwealth and
Stale Public Service and in Private Employ-
ment ,


The last named reform has been won in the Common-
wealth Public Service, in the Junior Grade in the Stale
Education Department, and in several trades. It is to-
day a foremost question in politics, but for years the
women suffragists, headed by Miss Goldstein, stood ab-
solutely alone in working for it.
With Messrs. Mackley and Groom, Miss Goldstein
formed the Children’s Courts Committee. She lec-
tured on the system in town and country, and
drafted the manifesto, which later formed the basis
of the Children’s Courts Act. Miss Goldstein may be
said to have piloted the Bill through the House, though
it did not emerge in quite the shape she would have had
it had she been engineering it inside the Chamber in-
stead of outside it. The iniquitous clause in the Bill,
rendering it possible to imprison a child seven years of
age, was defeated solely through Miss Goldstein’s efforts.
Other reforms specially identified with Miss Gold-
stein’s name, and that of the Women’s Political Associa-
tion, and which are»rapidly gaining headway, are:—
Equal Marriage and Divorce Laws.
Equal Custody and Guardianship of Children.
Raising the Age of Consent for Boys and Girls to
1 wenty-one.
Election of Women as Mayors and Councillors.
Elective Ministries and the Abolition of Party
Government.
Miss Goldstein was the first candidate for the Com-
monwealth Parliament who urged the abolition of the
Ticket System and of Party Government.
A true democrat by training and conviction, imbued
with a public spirit that is rare, Miss Goldstein’s first con-
cern is Principle. If private and public affairs do not
coincide with right and justice, she knows that there is no
power, human or divine, to make them work out har-
moniously. Because she is devoted to the cause of women
and children, because she stands for all that is best in


human affairs, we urge those, women especially, who care
more for principle than for party, more for making social
and industrial conditions belter for men', women and chil-
dren to vote for our Woman Candidate,
BELLA LAVENDER, M.A.
LUCY PALING
HILDA MOODY
DORIS KERR ,
SELINA HOOPER, B.A.
DORIS HORDERN
For Central Committee.
Women's Political Association..
Arlington Chambers,
229 Collins Street
Prater & Jenkinton, Printer*, 343*5 Queen Si., Melbourne.
Authorised by S. Hooper and D. Hordern, Secs.
Published by Australasian Authors’ Agency, Melbourne.
