

The Labor Difficulty
MEETING OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF
Australasian (Bmj)T tigers'
HELD IN SYDNEY,
ON TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY, AND FRIDAY,
gth, ioth, nth, and 12th SEPTEMBER, iBgo.
Brisbanc:
WARWICK & SAPS FOR I), Printers and Bookbinders Adelaide Street.
iBQO.




THE LABOR DIFFICULTY.
Meeting of Representatives
of
Australasian omplogn*s , Associations,
HELD IN SYDNEY,
On Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday,
gth, 10th, nth, and 12th SEPTEMBER, iBgo.
MUnTTJTE.
Representatives from the Associations of Employers of
Labor in the Australasian Colonies met in Conference in
Sydney on 9th, 10th, nth and 12th Sept., 1890, to
discuss :
(1) The Strike of Labor.
{2) The Claims made by Employes.
(3) The Extraordinary methods and efforts made to
enforce those Claims.
(4) The steps necessary to be taken to counteract the
evils of the Strike.
(5) The possibility of terminating the present unsatis-
factory state of affairs.
(6) The Basis upon which Labor will hereafter be
engaged.
It was resolved to publish the following Minute express-
ing the result of the Conference, unanimously adopted by
the representatives present: —
It is fit and proper that the representatives should ex-
press their sincere regret that, owing to the unreasonable
and antagonistic attitude assumed by Labor, as directed by
the leaders of their Unions, a strike so far-reaching in its


effects and so severe in character should exist. It is never-
theless their duty to assert that the causes leading to the
strike cannot, in the remotest degree, be traced to any
action by the Employers.
The alleged incidents given as the reasons for the origin
of the strike are two in number:—
ist. That the Captain of an Intercolonial Steamer dis-
missed a fireman for reasons, to his mind, fully
justifiable by the facts of the case,
2nd. That Employers refused to discuss demands made
by Marine Officers of Intercolonial and Coasting
Steamers while under duress of those Officers
being affiliated to Labor Unions.
As to the first, it is alleged by the Unions of Labor that
the Fireman was dismissed for the reason that he was
a Delegate of his Union. This is contrary to fact; his
being the mouthpiece of or Delegate from his Union was
merely a coincidence, and the Captain would have been
wanting in his duty to his Owners had he not dismissed
him. The fact of the man being a Delegate does not raise
him to a level higher than any other member of the crew,
and it cannot be denied that, to properly maintain disci-
pline on board of a vessel, a Captain has a right to dismiss
any man whose presence on board is inimical to the dis-
cipline necessary to the safety of the ship. [See Adden-
dum A.]
As to the second, it will be admitted by all right-thinking
unbiassed persons that it would be impossible to maintain
that discipline essential to safety of life and property, if
marine officers and men serving under them were allied by
union. The Marine Officers were informed that the
Owners were prepared to meet their demands by substan-
tial concessions, but with the condition that, placed as they
were as representatives of the Owners, any association by
them in union with the men serving under them could not
be permitted, and their demands were rightly excluded
from consideration by the Owners until the Officers dis-
solved their alliance with other Unions.
Having dealt particularly with the two alleged immediate
causes for the strike, it is necessary to notice a cause
contributing to it.


In the rules of Trades’ Unions, it is sought, by stringent
regulations, to secure a monopoly of work and to limit
membership. This is not only an injustice to the large
amount of labor outside their ranks, but contributes to the
undue interference by labor organisations with the trade of
the Colonies.
The tactics adopted deserve severe condemnation.
Foremost is the unjust combination of various Unions to
boycott trade so as to enforce the demands of the particular
Union concerned. The means adopted in combination are
various and far-reaching in their character. Edicts are
issued that the produce of these Colonies, coal and other
minerals, wool, wheat and other products from the land
must not be carried or shipped if at any period of its
production or transit labor is employed outside the trade
organisations. And as to the internal trade efforts are
made to prevent supplies of the raw material to manufac-
tories employing free labor, and, in the disposal of the
manufactured article, every opposition is given to legiti-
mate realisation. But still more extraordinary, the neces-
saries of life are, in some instances, refused to those who
withhold compliance with the demands of Trades Unions.
Intimidation is practised by Trades Unionists. Free
laborers are prevented by threats and acts of personal
violence from following their lawful occupation. To en-
force the edicts mentioned, members of Labor Unions,
whether directly concerned or not, are compelled by their
leaders to leave their employment, frequently contrary to
their own desire and in disregard of their legal obligations.
Employers, in the course of their trade, have to contend
with the fact that Labor Unions ignore agreements made
by them in their corporate capacity with Employers, if it
suit the purpose of the moment to repudiate them. The
incidents of the present strike give abundant proof of this
assertion. A paper has been delivered to the repre-
sentatives in conference, explaining the breach of agree-
ment made by the miners in the Northern Collieries of
N.S.W., and is published together with a second paper
furnished by the Chairman of the Mount Kembla Colliery
(Addendum B), The various decisions of the Courts in
the Colonies in respect to the violation, by the seamen, of


their agreements with their Employers is further proof.
The agreement lately made by the Wharf Laborers in
Sydney was openly violated within a few days of its
completion.
Sufficient has been said to prove that the present strike
has been forced on Employers. In opposing it, passive
resistance only has been offered, and, while Employers have
endeavoured to conduct their business by the aid of free
labor, they have not sought, in any way, to assail Unionism,
although they have striven to counteract its abuses.
The proceedings of the Conference are set forth in the
following Resolutions, which were unanimously adopted by
the representatives present.
ist Resolution—
“ That this Conference reaffirms the principle of “ free-
dom of contract ”between individual employers and
employes, and asserts that any infringement of that
principle is not only destructive to commerce, but is
also inimical to the best interests of the working
classes/’
2nd Resolution— >
<l That any attempt to apply force, or the threat of force
or any persuason other than that permitted and de-
fined by law, to men who are not Unionists, or any
other form of boycotting, should in the opinion of
this Conference be resisted by united action.”
3rd Resolution —
“ This Conference is of opinion that Employers should
declare that they will not be coerced in the dismissal
of any labor that has taken service with them in the
oresent emergency, and in the event of any attempt
Deing made to coerce such labor to join any trade
organisation, or to interfere with them in the dis-
charge of their daily work, the combined Associa-
tions represented at this Conference will take all
possible means to insure their personal safety.”
4th Resolution —
“ That this Conference declares that to maintain discipline,
and thus protect life and property, owners of ship-
ping in the Coastal and Intercolonial trades should


not engage or retain in their employ any Captains
or Officers who may be members of a Union
affiliated with any labor organisations.”
sth Resolution —
“ That, with a view to the extension of the various
Employers’ Unions, it is desirable to encourage
Employers and others connected with all Trades,
Businesses and Interests, to join existing Employers’
Unions and form other Unions where necessary for
mutual protection and defence upon the basis of
Resolutions passed. That such Unions form Federal
Councils for each Colony. That all such Federal
Councils be affiliated and confederated.”
This Conference desires a speedy termination of the
present unsatisfactory state of affairs, and to facilitate a
resumption of work Employers are urged to proclaim as
soon as possible the terms upon which engagements will
be made.
Signed by representatives present:
E. E. Smith, Chairman.
Henry Hudson, President N.S.W. Employers’ Union.
A. W. Meeks, Vice-President „ ~
Alfred Lamb ~ „ „ „
J, P. Franki, Executive ~ ~
George J. Cohen ~ ~ „
W. C. Willis, Chairman S.S. Owners’ Association of
Australasia.
James Burns ~ ~
F. W. Jackson ~
A. G. Turner ~ ~
C. J. Byrnes, Chairman Southern Colliery Association.
Hon. E. Vickery „ ~ „
Jesse Gregson, Chairman Associated Northern Collieries.
A. Shannon „ „ ~ „
W. Cope, Executive of Pastoralists’ Union of N.S.W.
A. A. Dangar ~ ~ ~
George Maiden „ „ ~
E, E. Smith, President Victorian Employers’ Union.
Henry Dodds, Vice ~ ~ ~
John Mair, Executive ~ „ ~


Chas. Shannon, President Employers’ Union, Geelong.
E. E. Smith, Chairman Victorian S.S. Owners’ Association.
James Huddart ~ ~ J}
M. D. McEacharn ~ ~ })
John Mcllwraith ~ ~ „
R. A. Molesworth, Vice-President Victorian Pastoralists’
Union.
E. M. Young „
J. H. White, Melbourne Shipping Agents’ Association.
Henry Dodds, Victorian Ironmasters’ Union.
C. W. Midson, President Federated Employers’ Union of
Queensland.
Francis R. Murphy, Vice-President ~ ~
William Allan, Executive Trustee ~ ~
A. L. Harrold, President Employers’ Union of S.A.
John Darling, junr., Vice-President „ ~
J. W, Colton, Executive ~ ~
A. L. Harrold, President Shipowners’ Association of S.A.
John Turnbull ~ ~ ~
F. C. Howard ~ ~
J. W, Ferguson ") T • o
Fredk. Humphries j Secretaries.


Addendum A.
THE “ CORINNA ” CASE.
Sydney, nth Sept., 1890.
The Chairman Committee Pan-Australian Employers’
Conference.
“CORINNA” CASE.
Sir, —We enclose statement and copy of correspondence
with the Seamen’s Union. We may mention that in a
personal interview with Mr. Davis, Secretary of the Sea-
men’s Union, he stated the stand they were taking in the
matter was because the man discharged was their delegate
on the ship.
The Seamen’s Union constituted themselves, as cus-
tomarv with them, sole arbiter in the matter and asked for
no enquiry, but insisted on their demands being carried
out. —We are, yours truly,
T. & W. Willis,
Agents Tasmanian Steam Navigation Co.
A fireman was discharged by the Captain. The Seamen’s
Union demanded his reinstatement, stating that he had
been victimised by the Chief Steward, and that either the
Chief Stew r ard be dismissed or the man reinstated. The
Cooks’ and Stewards’ Union took the matter up in the
interests of the Chief Steward and held an enquiry in con-
junction with the Seamen’s Union, to which the fireman
belonged, the result being that there was no charge to
attach to the Chief Steward.
Having dropped the Chief Steward as the
Seamen’s Union constituted themselves in their usual
manner judge, jury and sole arbiter, and made the Captain
the scapegoat, and threatened to take all the men out of
the ship. No enquiry was asked of the Owners.
As a matter of fact, the owners of the “ Corinna ” exer-
cised their right to discharge the man or any other man in
their service, when they considered it in their interests to
do so, and to prove the man was not victimised the Sea-
men’s Union were informed there was no objection to his
joining one of the other of the Company’s boats, first
vacancy.


About a month after their threat to withdraw all their
men, the men gave notice and were at once paid off.
The Chief Steward made no complaint to the Captain,
and the fact of the man being Delegate of the Union in no
way entered into the cause of his discharge.
Federated Seamen’s Union of Australasia,
Sydney, July Bth, 1890.
Capt. Sharpe, s.s. Corinna.
Dear Sir, —I am instructed by the members of the above
Society to state that we intend to have our delegate (P.
Magan) reinstated on board the Corinna. If he is not
reinstated by the return of ship to Sydney, the crew will
be given their 24 hours’ notice. We intend to protect our
members from being victimised by chief stewards and
others, and intend at all hazards to have P. Magan rein-
stated.—Yours truly,
(Signed) Wm. Musto,
President and Acting Secretary.
Sydney, Bth July, 1890.
The Secretary Federated Seamen’s Union, Sydney.
Sir, —With reference to Mr. Musto’s visit about the
discharge of a fireman named Magan from the Corinna,
Captain Sharpe informs us that the chief steward had
nothing whatever to do with the man’s discharge. Magan
made no complaint to the Captain about the food, so you
have evidently been misinformed.
We may mention the man was discharged from the
Corinna because a change was considered desirable in the
Company’s interests, but there is no objection to his join-
ing one of the other vessels of the Company.
Captain Sharpe states that he was not aware the man
was delegate for the Union, and that had nothing to do
with his discharge.
It seems strange that the men leave the Company when
it suits them without any explanation, and yet one would
infer you wish to deny the same right to the employer. —
We are, yours truly,
(Signed) T. & W. Willis.
We have not received reply to our letter 2nd June, with
reference to the three extra hands in the stokehole Corinna.


Addendum B.
BREACH OF AGREEMENT BY COAL MINERS.
Statement by Mr. Jesse Gregson.
The Newcastle Coal Miners have been working for years
under a year to year agreement, terminable by either party
at 31st December on three months’ previous notice. That
was the case in August last. The agreement gives the
miners no right to interfere with the sale of coal, much less
to dictate to whom the supply shall be given or from whom
it shall be withheld. After the maritime dispute came to a
crisis the steamship owners were manning some of their
vessels with non-Union crews, and on this becoming known
to the miners their committee of management passed a
resolution that no coal should be produced for vessels
manned by non-Union Crews. This resolution was com-
municated to the Chairman and the Secretary of Associated
Northern Collieries by the General Secretary of the Miners’
Association under date 25th August, 1890. On the follow-
ing morning the s.s. “ Corinna,” belonging to the Tasmanian
Steam Navigation Company, came to the A.A. Company for
a cargo. The boat and her owners had been and were at
the time regular customers of the A.A. Company. The
A.A. Company’s sea pit was at the time at work, and the
miners employed there on being informed that the coal
they were sending out was intended for the “ Corinna,”
immediately came out of the pit. This confirmation of the
official resolution was held by the Associated Northern
Colliery Owners to be such a breach of the agreement as
to leave them no option but to immediately stop work at
the whole of the collieries under their control.
Statement by the Hon. E. Vickery, Chairman of
the Mount Kembla Colliery.
“ Miners at two Southern Collieries were employed under
Special Rules approved by the Executive Council and pub-
lished in the Government Gazette. Also under printed
Colliery Regulations.
“ Both these provide that fourteen days’ notice shall be
given or received before termination of work.


“ For three years such notice has in all cases been acted
upon.
“ In the present strike there was no known grievance or
quarrel between master and men. Yet at the instance of
some outside person the men came out and abandoned
their employment without notice.’'


Addendum O.
Semi-official Statement issued by the N.S.W.
Employers’ Union in Reply to the Strike Com-
mittee’s Request for a Conference, Sept. 26th.
" The employers have no desire to prolong unnecessarily
the conflict into which they have been forced at great loss,
and if a conference with the labor leaders, as offered, had
the slightest prospect of a satisfactory settlement, they
would readily join in one. They see, however, many diffi-
culties in the way, and contend that the tactics pursued by
the labor leaders render a conference, under present circum-
stances, quite out of the question. It may be pointed out,
in the first instance, that the material difficulties of the
position, already sufficiently serious, have been aggravated
by the labor leaders, who while speaking of a conference on
one hand, have been preparing a mine for immediate ex-
plosion on the other. Measures clearly intended to bring
the employers to an unconditional surrender have been
adopted without stint or compunction of any kind, and the
latest example of unscrupulous coercion was afforded by
the calling out of the shearers in this and the adjoining
colonies. The employers have all along been approached
under threat, and have been told that unless they grant the
desired conference, still greater penalties than those already
enforced will be imposed upon them. Even while negotia-
tions were still passing between the employers and the
representatives of labor with a view to a conference, final
instructions to the shearers and station hands to come out
was circulating by telegraph throughout the country, and
this is merely a repetition of what the steamship owners
and others have had to submit to for years past. It is
scarcely necessary to say that the violent treatment meted
out to the employers is hardly calculated to foster a con-
ciliatory spirit. Apart altogether from these circumstances,
however, it is contended by the employers that the views
of the two parties, as expressed in their respective mani-
festoes, are so widely divergent on questions of vital
principle that until either one side or the other is pre-


pared to modify its attitude no conference can be
attended with beneficial results, or tend in any way
to reduce the breach. The employers hold that the
willingness to go into a conference implies readiness to
make concessions, and consequently, if they were to meet
the labor delegates with a full determination to yield
nothing, their action would give rise to false hopes, and
unwittingly, perhaps, deceive the public as to the real
position of affairs. They have carefully laid down the
principles the maintenance of which they regard as
absolutely necessary to their existence as employers, and
they are not prepared to yield upon these points until all
their resources are exhausted. These principles must be
accepted before any prospect of a settlement will appear to
the employers, and when they are acknowledged there will
scarcely be anything left to consider. The employers ask
what encouragement to a conference they can detect from
recent experience of the labor leaders. The natural out-
come of a conference, presuming the views of the parties
could be reconciled, would be some sort of agreement for a
fixed term; but recent events may fairly suggest a doubt
as to the value of any agreement or arrangement entered
into with the labor unions. What ground, based on past
experience, have the employers for supposing that any
agreement made at the suggested conference should be
observed any more faithfully than those entered into
recently and broken with impunity ? What security has
been offered or could be offered against a repetition of their
experience with the shearers, wharf laborers and miners,
who have broken their agreements without any notice, and
without any regard for either moral or legal obligations ?
The public may rest assured that the employers are not
carrying on the present struggle with any idea of humili-
ating the labor bodies, or with any desire to avenge the
indignities to which they have been subjected at the hands
of the labor party in the past. They are compelled to take
an eminently practical view cf the whole situation, and,
while doing so, are unable to see that any good purposes
would be served by conferring with the labor bodies at the
present juncture. The position they have taken up is
closely set forth in the minutes passed at the recent inter-


colonial conference of the employers, and until the principles
embodied in the resolutions there recorded are accepted,
there can be no hope of a settlement. If these principles
are ever endorsed, all obstacles in the way of work will
have been removed."
Warwick & Sapsford, Printers, Adelaide Street, Brisbane.


