

~~~ ’
NEW AND REVISED EDITION. 18TH THOUSAND.
THE
LIFE AND ADVENTURES
O F THE
KELLY OUTLAWS,
THE DARING AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGERS,
FROM THE COMMENCEMENT TO THE END
OF THEIR CAREER.
INCLUDING THEIR
EXTRAORDINARY DEEDS,
CAPTURE & DEATH.
ALSO, COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE KELLY FAMILY.
COMPILED FROM AUTHENTIC SOURCES.
k..
WITH THE FOLLOWING
ILLTJ.STBATIOITS;
A Sketch Plan of the Country Infested by the Outlaws.
Portraits of Ned Kelly
Dan Kelly, Katp Kelly, Sergeant
Kennedy, Sergt. Sadlier, Guard
Dowsett, Senior Constable Kelly
Sergt. Steel, Aaron Sherrett, Steve
Hart, Supt. Hare, Supt, Nicholson,
Mrs. Skilliou, (Kelly’s Sister,)
Tom Lloyd, (Relative of Ned Kelly.)
Incidents Sketched at Glenrowan.
An Apparition,
Scene on the Railway where it was
' proposed to wreck the special train.
Shooting of Sherritt.
Township of Greta.
The Outlaws at Bay.
'
Dance at the Hotel.
Capture of Ned Kelly.
Ned Kelly’s arrival in Melbourne.
Ned Kelly in the Hospital.
Ned Kelly in Dock,
Ned Kelly going for trial by train.
Preliminary Trial.
Finding Byrne’s Body.
Photo, of Joe Byrne after Death.
Trial of Ned Kelly.
Scene at Wake.
Sketches at Trial,
Jones’ Hotel after the fire.
Birdseye view of Glenrowan.
Monument to the Police at Mansfield.
The end of Kellyism—the Execution.
■,_, : ' T ~^
GRAVEUR, Bookseller Stationer,
46S HMEIS OTIIT, WtfiM, STOTIT.
—™r -=-* * ' —- . ■ - 1,-),;,: „„ ■ -s— I


ESTABLISHED 1846.
p|w.«p»
;. v
ES
66 & 67, HINDLEY STREET, 66 & 67.
The CHEAPEST House in Town for Drapery and
Clothing of every Description.
-j
t
m
m
A
a
A
I
m
mm
m
ninraui
2E
MRRA HOUSE
65
■
/
i
v"
mat
m
•m
y
t*
fit
I >
Q
i
o
i
NX'
i
O
O
Ir--s£’,
o
i
5 i
«
w
aas
\
X
SUITS made to ORDER on the Shortest Rot ice.
A large Assertment of BUSH HUGS, CARPET BAGS, and COLONIAL-
MADE PORTMANTEAUS always on hand.
SMIIMBWIWIMMHBi
MOTE THE ADDRESS-
S. SOLOMON,
BURRA BURRA HCUS?
N.B.—No Connection with the next fe~op


LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OF THE
KELLY OUTLAWS,
THE DARING AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGERS.
MONUMENT TO THE POLICE AT MANSFIELD.
FRE ARSON & BROTHER,
Printers,
STB AXED ADELAVr E NEWS AND FI.E ARSON’S WEEKLY OFFICE,
™ Kind r "j illi/m Steel r, Adbi aide.




THE KELLY OUTLAWS.
THE Australian Colonies have been for years infested with bushrangers. From
the earliest period up to the present, lawless men have arisen to strike terror to
the hearts of order-loving and peaceful colonists, setting laws at defiance, and ulti-
mately reaching that untimely end which overtakes evildoers. Glancing over the
annals of the past we find the largest number, and most daring bushranging exploits
are recorded from New South Wales and Victoria. This is probably accounted for by
those colonies affording greater facilities than the rest, in mountainous and inaccessible
country for hiding-places for criminals fleeing from the myrmidoms of the law. In
the days when convictism was rife, and fleet after fleet of prison ships landed their
living freight on the shores of Botany Bay ; when cruel taskmasters used the cat un-
sparingly, and rations were so scarce that food which now would hardly be given to
dogs was greedily devoured ; when men were forced to toil in a half-nude state under
the burning sun, exposed to severe discipline and hardships of the direst kind, there
was at least some excuse for their “ taking to the bush ” to escape such, and entering
on a career more congenial to their tastes. Hundreds of bushrangers were then extant
at one time, many of them quite as daring as those of the present day, but never so
bloodthirsty or dastardly in the means taken to accomplish their ends. Every year
since the foundation of the colonies some new bushranger has arisen, and every suc-
ceeding year has witnessed either his downfall or of the gang connected with him ;
and so will it be to the end, till the appropriation of other men’s goods by violent
means is no longer attempted, and a resume of the dark scenes we are called on to
record have been utterly stamped out and obliterated. The object of this work is not
to deal with the history of bushranging, but with the lives, crimes, and exploits of
the most daring outlaws who have perhaps ever existed in the world, viz., the noted
and infamous Kelly gang.
Prior to the year 1878 the Kellys were not known beyond the neighborhood of
Greta, a small township on the King River, near Beechworth, Victoria, where they
had long resided, and followed the pursuit of stock-breeding, or rather u cattle
duffing,” as the appropriation of animals from the herds of one’s neighbour is
designated. They were several times in prison for this otfence, and though young in
years gradually grew old in crime. No outrages like those which have since marked
their career could then be charged against them, and the family were even regarded
by some as persecuted by the police. The first crime of any magnitude, and which
developed the latent evil propensities of the Kellys, was their brutal conduct towards
Constable Fitzpatrick, who, in April, 1878, attempted to arrest Daniel Kelly, then but
17 years of age, at the house of his mother, at Greta, on a charge of horsestealing,
The officer was attacked by the other members of the family,-beaten unmercifully,
and then allowed to depart. He had scarcely mounted his horse than the whole party
pursued him, and he had to gallop for his life. The mother (Mrs. Kelly), with her
sons Ned and Dan, were subsequently convicted of the assault at the Beechworth
Sessions, but the two men absconded, and a reward of £lOO was thereupon offered by
the Government for their apprehension. Nothing was heard of their whereabouts till
October, when intelligence was received at Mansfield that the Kellys had been seen in
company with two others named Hart and Byrne, near Stringybark Creek, in the
Wombat Ranges, about twenty miles from Mansfield. Hearing this Sub-Inspector
Pewtress despatched a party of four, comprising Sergeant Kennedy and Constables
Lanigan, Scanlon, and Mclntyre to arrest the brothers. Arrived at the scene of
operations, in a thickly-timbered country, the police party camped for the night, and
on the following morning were attacked by four armed men, of whom two were
recognised as the brothers Kelly. The intention of the police to effect the capture of
these two ruffians must have been known by the murderers; who were thus enabled to
attack the constables at a disadvantage. Lanigan and Mclntyre were in charge of
the camp, the other two officers being engaged in searching for the Stringybark Creek.
The four suddenly made their appearance, and ordered Lanigan and Mclntyre to
deliver up their arms. Mclntyre was unarmed, but Lanigan bravely attempted to
draw his revolver from behind his back, and was shot dead by the ruffianly band.
Soon afterwards Kennedy and Scanlon approached the camp, and on their arrival were


Senior-constable Kelly
Superintendent Sadlier
The First Attack on the Police.
THE KELLY OUTLAWS


The Gang at Enroa


confronted by the murderers. Scanlon, on being ordered to deliver up his arms,
rushed for the shelter of a tree, attempting to draw his revolver as be ran, but he, too,
was shot dead. Mclntyre caught a horse, and dashing off at full speed managed to
escape. As he left Sergeant Kennedy was exchanging shots with the bushrangers.
Mclntyre reached Mansfield on foot, and communicated the startling intelligence of
the terrible tragedy. A strong and well-armed search party instantly accompanied
Sub-Inspector Pewtress to the scene of the murders, and found the bodies of Scanlon
and Lanigan, pierced with bullets and their pockets rifled. About ten days’ supply
of provisions, ammunition, and horses also fell into the hands of the robbers, The
body of Sergeant Kennedy was not discovered for several days after, and when found
was observed to be riddled with bullets. It was strongly suspected that the gang kept
him a prisoner as long as it suited their caprice, and then blew out his brains. This is
a popular opinion, notwithstanding Ned Kelly’s statement that Sergeant Kennedy was
killed by him in a fair fight,
A handsome monument has been erected in the main thoroughfare at Mansfield,
Victoria, to commemorate this tragic event, and was unveiled by Captain Standish,
Chief Commissioner of Police, on the 21st April. 1880. It stands 25 feet high, is
ornamental and artistic, and bears the following inscriptions :
On the east side : —“ In Memoriam, Michael Kennedy, born at Westmeath, Ireland,
aged 36 years; Thomas Lanigan, born at Sligo, Ireland, aged 31 years ; Michael
Scanlon, born at Kerry, Ireland, aged 35 years. This monument is erected by sub-
scriptions from the inhabitants of Victoria and New South Wales A.d. 1880.” On
the west side —“ To the memory of three brave men, who lost their lives while
endeavoring to capture a band of armed criminals in the Wombat Ranges, near Mans-
field, 26th October, 1878.” On the north and south sides the inscriptions detail the
number of years which the murdered men served in the police force.
Public excitement in Melbourne and all towns throughout Victoria reached its
height when the tidings of these terrible murders were fully known, and it was felt
that stringent measures were necessary to check the career of the bloodthirsty villains
who had so successfully escaped their deserts. All sections and grades of society were
strongly interested, and constantly on the qui-vive in anticipation of hearing of the
arrest or death of the Kellys.
The Victorian Parliament, feeling it imperative to take prompt steps to bring the
murderers of the police to justice, in November, 1878, passed an Outlawry Bill, the
provisions of which declared the Kelly gang outlaws, and permitted any one to shoot
them wherever they might be found. A reward of £5OO each for their capture was
considered sufficient stimulus to effect it, but this sum was after a few months increased
to double the amount, and later on to £2,000, or £B,OOO in all, for the whole of the
gang—dead or alive.
It’ was not till December 9, 1878, that any reliable information as to the movements
of the Kellys could be obtained. They were supposed to have reached shelter in the
inaccessible ranges which stretch far away in the background past Longwood, Euroa,
Violet Town* and with few intermissions of level country unite with the mountainous
region of Gippsland. A view of this appeared in the Illustrated Adelaide News, and
depicted the romantic character of the scenery, in which a wilderness of precipices,
forming natural fortresses and insurmountable barriers, are prominent features. From
these vast and beetling heights every movement or advance of hostile parties along
the verdant valleys below can be observed, and an army, however brave, could be
successfully routed or slaughtered by a handful of men. No wonder the Kellys, with
the knowledge they possessed of this locality, were able so long to elude pursuit and
capture, or that their friends were able to convey provisions and necessaries to them
without detection,
On the date just mentioned two daring and skilfully-planned robberies were perpe-
trated by the outlaws at Mr. Younghusband’s Faithful Creek Station, and at the
branch of the National Bank of Australasia, Euroa. The particulars are as follows :
At about half-past 12 in the day a man went to the homestead at Mr, Younghus-
band’s Faithful Creek Station, about four miles from Euroa. Accosting a station
hand (Fitzpatrick) he learned that the manager, Mr. Macauley, was from home, and
then signalled to three companions, who had remained at some distance. When they
came up he announced himself as Ned Kelly, and demanded refreshments for the four,
and fodder for their horses. After enquiring about the number of hands on the station,
Kelly locked Fitzpatrick and a lad who was present up in a storeroom, and three other
men who came in soon after to dinner were added to them. Mr. Macauley next
arrived, and had to surrender, and then the outlaws sat down to dinner, two at a time,
6
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


but refused to eat or drink anything that some of the others did not first partake of.
Their horses were stabled and fed, and when Kelly and his gang had had enough the
imprisoned men were allowed some food. Towards evening a hawker drove to the
outskirts of the station and prepared to encamp for the night. He and his boy were
also secured in like manner, and placed with the other prisoners. The contents of the
hawker’s cart were next taken out and strewn about the ground, and the outlaws
treated themselves to an entirely new outfit from head to foot, with soaps and per-
fumery. They kept one of their number constantly on guard, and by the time all had
completed their toilet it was nearly dark. Shortly afterwards they went to sleep, two
at a time, the other two keeping watch. Those who were awake conversed freely
with their prisoners even respecting the murder of constables near Mansfield ; thus the
night passed away.
In the morning they broke down all the line of telegraph on both sides of the North-
Eastern Railway, which was near to and in sight of the homestead. This prevented
communication with Benalla, where there was a large force of police. Breakfast was
had, and then a spring cart drove up to the station containing two neighboring
selectors and two visitors from Melbourne, who had been kangarooing. These four
were also bailed up, and placed with the other captives in the storeroom. A cheque
bearing Mr. Macauley’s signature was next taken from the desk, and between 3 and
4 o’clock p.m. the two Kellys and Hart started for Euroa, leaving Byrne to guard the
prisoners. They took two carts with them, the hawker’s boy driving a vehicle, and
Hart riding a horse. It was scarcely 4 o’clock p.m. when they drove to the door of
the bank, and Ned Kelly obtained entrance from the bank clerk on the pretence of
wanting cash for a cheque. When inside he and Hart made the clerks surrender by
presenting revolvers, and they all went into the room of Mr. Scott, the manager,
and placed him under arrest, They next obtaine i the keys by intimidation, and
bundled all the notes and specie into a sack, the amount being about £2,000, an ingot
of 31 ozs. of smelted gold, 260 ozs. of gold, and a number of securities. They drank
whisky with Mr. Scott, and made Mrs, Scott, with her children and two maid servants,
get ready to ride out. The horse was put into Mr. Scott’s buggy, which his s wife had
to drive, the occupants being herself, her mother, and some children. The clerks,
servants, Mr. Scott, and other children were placed in carts, and the cavalcade started
for Faithfull’s Creek Station, the hawker’s cart being first with Ned Kelly in charge,
then the buggy, followed by the selector’s spring-cart, driven by Dan Kelly, the rear
brought up by Steve Hart on horseback. Passing out of the place they had to gq close h
to the one policeman who kept order in the town, the railway officials, and a number
of men employed in building a new station, but they were unheeded, and went on, and
reached Mr. Younghusband’s station in time to take tea. Byrne had increased the
number of his prisoners by capturing a line-repairer, who had been sent to put the
wires in order, and who on arrival found them in such a state that he had to seek aid,
and went to the homestead for that purpose. The outlaws did not hurry themselves,
but waited until 9 o’clock p.m., when they took their departure. Previous to doing so 4
they liberated Mr. Macauley, and directed him to keep the other men shut up till they
had gone three hours, but he let them out a quarter of an hour after they left. Informa-
tion was then conveyed to the police, and efforts made to follow the gang, who made
off to the Strathbogie Ranges.
After this successful exploit the Kellys remained quiet in their lair, doubtless
carousing over their ill-gotten gains, and laughing at the inability of their pursuers to
reach them. A month, however, of idleness, if spent amid romantic scenery, with
conversation relative to dark deeds only, would be more than sufficient even for a
bushranger ; and it is not surprising that we hear of their entrance once more into
public life, and of another step towards notoriety on February 8, 1879.
About midnight on that date, having crossed the Border from Victoria to New
South Wales, they stuck up the township of Jerilderie, thirty miles from the Murray,
made prisoners of two constables (Devine and Richards) at the Police Station, put on
police uniforms, went round the town boldly, and reconnoitred. Next day they had
their horses shod at the local blacksmith’s shop, took possession of the Royal Hotel,
bailed up the Bank of New South Wales officials, and obtained from them £2,000.
Jerilderie contains upwards of 200 inhabitants, and it seems astounding that four men
could so completely paralyse their efforts as to prevent their making the least
resistance.
The constables and their families were kept under strict surveillance from Saturday
night till Monday at noon, without anyone in the township supposing for a moment
that dangerous individuals were in the locality. The sticking up of the bank proved
7
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


Aaron Sherritt.
Kate Kelly.
Sticking up Police Station at Jerilderie.


The Township of Greta.
Wild Wright making a vow over Dan Kelly’s remains


a simple matter. Mr. Tarleton, the manager, had just returned from a long ride, and
was enjoying a cold bath. Mr. Lyving heard the noise of approaching footsteps from
the rear, but thinking it was the manager paid no attention until aroused by the
entrance of Byrne, who immediately ordered him to bail up, stating, at the same time,
that he was Ned Kelly, and presenting a revolver. Mr. Lyving and his fellow-
assistant saw resistance was useless, and surrendered. They were marched to the
Royal Hotel, where they found the Kellys had placed a number of persons in a room,
whom they threatened to shoot if they offered the least resistance. Kelly inquired for
Mr. Tarleton, and brought back Mr. Lyving to the bank' to find him. The manager
was surprised in his bath, and bailed up after the usual fashion. He was utterly in-
capable of doing anything other than directed. The bushrangers proceeded to rob
the safe, and'after some little trouble succeeded in securing over £2,000, principally in
gold. The money was placed in a sack and conveyed away, the bank officials being
brought back to the hotel. While in the bank two men named Raokine and Gill
entered, and Kelly ordered them to bail up, whereupon they turned and fled pre-
cipitately, Ned Kelly following in close pursuit. Gill contrived to escape, and re-
mained hidden in a creek adjacent until the danger had passed ; but Rankiue was not
so fortunate. He was overtaken by the outlaws,, and roughly handled. Indeed, his
chances of life were not worth much, as Kelly seemed in a terrible rage, and desirous
of shooting him. His life was only saved by the intercession of those in the hotel.
Constable Richards seemed a special object of revenge to the desperadoes. Ned Kelly
resolutely declared he should die, as he had been engaged in pursuing him. However,
Mr. Tarleton’s good offices saved the man’s life, as the outlaw gradually relented, and
did not carry his threat into execution. The telegraph operator and his assistant were
next waited on ; the wires cut and the insulators destroyed. These officials were also
conveyed to the hotel, where there were about twenty-five persons, expecting every
moment something might occur to cause bloodshed. The men were so disposed that
in the event of resistance, and one being overcome, another stood ready with a loaded
rifle ready to fire. Ned Kelly “ shouted ” for several persons, and became quite con-
versational. He expressed a desire to have a document printed giving a sketch of his
life, and sought Mr. Gill, publisher of a local paper, for that purpose. But Mr. Gill
remained non est , and his wife was consulted. She expressed her unwillingness to
comply with the request, and the document was then given to Mr. Lyving, who under-
took to have it published. In the meantime Byrne'had mounted his horse, and with
the money taken from the bank in his possession took his departure in the direction of
the Murray. To facilitate his escape with the plunder, the Kellys and Hart
remained about the hotel for several hours. Before leaving they directed the
telegraph stationmaster not to connect the wires before morning, or he might expect
condign punishment. Towards dusk the remainder of the gang followed Byrne
stating that they were going to stick up the bank at Tirana. They had no sooner left
the township than steps were taken to restore telegraphic communication, and in the
course of a few hours Sydney and Melbourne were in possession of* the startling intel-
ligence.
After this daring outrage the search for the Kellys became hotter than ever, and
native police, well-known for their skill in tracking, were brought from Queensland to
trace their hiding-place. These men, however, having no commencing clue to guide
them, failed in accomplishing the desired end, and admitted their inability to find the
slightest trace of aught indicating the spot in which the outlaws lay perdu. Prom
February, 1879, up to June, 1880, they were never seen or heard of, and so impressed
were many persons* with the belief they had got safely out of the colonies that the
police force was reduced in the suspected district, and the Governments of New
South Wales and Victoria decided to withdraw the large reward promised for their
capture.
The first tidings of the reappearance of the Kellys was telegraphed to the metropolis
of each of the colonies on the 27th June, 1880, and the tale of crime, revealed in a
few words, created a profound sensation. In Adelaide especially the history of the
past, in which these bloodthirsty villains figured so prominently, was unforgotten, and
the direful tidings added thereto only served to swell the catalogue of horrors with
which memory was laden. . A police watch-party, headed by Constable Sherritt, were
located in a slab house at Sebastapol, seven miles from Beechworth, and near the
residence of the mother of one of the outlaws, their orders being to watch for com-
munication between her and the gang. On Saturday evening, June 26, the four
outlaws, having' surrounded the hut under cover of darkness, and having a German
named Antonio Weekes with them as a decoy, made him go to the door and call out


“ Sherritt.” The constable, naturally concluding it to be a friend, opened the door,
when Byrne, who was close to it, shot him dead, exclaiming as he did so, “ You’ll not
blow any more what you’ll do with us.” The other police were then asked to sur-
render, but refused to do so, and the hut was in a state of siege for hours, during
which shots were fired into it, and threats of burning it down and committing
other atrocities were uttered by the gang. At early morn the villains withdrew to
perform sanguinary exploits in a new direction, and the besieged constables were
enabled to reach Beechworth and relate their experiences and the death of their
comrade.
Glenrowan, on the North-Eastern Railway line, 139 miles from Melbourne, was the
next and final scehe in their desperate career, and the tragedy there enacted equals all
conjectured by the wildest imagination in the hemisphere of romance. There has been
nothing to compare with it in the annals of Australia, and nothing approaching it
will, we trust, ever again be chronicled. The doings of bushrangers in the olden time
fade into insignificance before those of the demoniac Kellys which are on a par only
with the violent acts of the madman Morgan.
Arrived at Glenrowan, the door of the station-master’s house was burst open, and
Mr. Stanistreet, who was in bed with his wife and children, was subjected to the in-
dignity of having to rise immediately and dress. Ned Kelly then bade him accompany
him and take up the rails on the line as a special train was expected ; but the station-
master having stated his inability to assist in the bushranger’s requests, was left in
charge of Steve Hart, whilst the rest went down towards Wangaratta to obtain
assistance to demolish the rails. During their absence Hart broke the chest in which
were some workmen’s tools The rails were eventually taken up by the gang, assisted
by Reardon, the line-repairer, for fully a mile ; and but for the precaution of a pilot-
engine being sent ahead of the special train, a serious accident would have occurred,
and the latter wrecked by these miscreants.
Having completed their work they went to Jones’ Hotel to wait results, and passed
the time in drinking and making prisoners, adding to the number at intervals of every
person who came in their way. It may be considered a merciful interposition of
Providence that the police, under Superintendent Hare and Sub-Inspector O’Connor,
reached Glenrowan safe, and were, on arrival, informed by Mr. Curnow, the local
schoolmaster, of the true state of affairs. He is certainly deserving of the highest
praise for his prompt action and courage in stopping the train and preventing a fatal
catastrophe. The local constable had been made prisoner, but had escaped, and the
information he gave showed there was no time to lose. Jones’ Hotel was instantly
surrounded, and fighting promptly commenced, the police acting with considerable
coolness and decision, and the outlaws showing a determined and defiant front
Within the house at this time there were over thirty prisoners, who at a later period
succeeded in effecting their escape by the front door whilst Hart and Dan Kelly were
firing from the verandah at the back. Bullets whizzed on all sides, and the fight
waxed long and furious, the only spot for safety for the besiegers being found behind
some trees, from which shelter the least movement exposed them to danger. In the
early part of the fray Superintendent Hare was shot in the left wrist, and though
desirous to stay, was ultimately compelled from the serious character of his wound to
quit the spot and return to Benalla. Mr. Rawlins, a volunteer, is also highly spoken
of, and his conduct is characterised as brave in the extreme. *
After Superintendent Hare’s departure, Sub-Inspector O'Connor and Senior-constable
Kelly continued the attack, in which they were ably assisted by the Queensland
trackers. Fighting went on all night, and at daylight police reinforcements arrived,
under Superintendent Sadlier and Sergeant Steele.
Shortly before day-dawn the women and children were allowed to quitthe hotel, and
Mrs. Jones, the landlady, with her son and daughter (both shot in the melee) were
removed. The son was sent down to Benalla Hospital, and died of his wounds on the
29th June, The girl recovered, but a lad named Reardon, who was wounded severely,
died soon after.
How Ned Kelly succeeded in leaving the hotel unobserved is unknown, but at early
morn he appeared at the rear of the police, and attacked them with a revolver. After
some brief skirmishing he was brought to the earth by a well-aimed shot from Sergeant
Steele, who had discovered that the outlaw wore armour, and fired at a vulnerable
part of his body. The result was that Ned was at once placed hors de combat, and fell,
exclaiming, “I’m done! I’m done 1” A rush towards him was instantly made by
Sergeant Steele and others, and notwithstanding his struggles for freedom, he was
firmly secured. On examination it was found he had received several wounds, the
11
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


Joe Byrne.
Steve Hart
The dance at Glenrowan


Dan Kelly
Ned Kelly.
A Strange Apparition.
His head, chest, and sides were all protected with heavy plates of
quarter inch iron. Many shots hit him. and yet he always recovered
himself, and tapping his breast, laughed derisively, as hie coolly returned
their fire. It appeared as if lie were a fiend with a charmed life,”— Age -.


most important being one in the region of the groin. He was clad in a complete suit
of armour of a most substantial kind, as will be understood when it is stated that it
comprised breast-plates, shoulder-plates, helmet, &c., weighing no less than 97 lbs. The
other members of the gang also wore armour of the same sort, and as it was bullet-
proof, doubtless they had nothing to fear from the accuracy of the weapons used by
the police.
The sanguinary fray lasted till near 3 o’clock in the afternoon of Monday, June 28th.
A cannon was despatched to the battlefield, and would have been used to blow down
the hotel in which the outlaws were if necessary, but such extreme measures were not
requisite. As the last volley from the police-party was fired, Senior-Constable
Johnston having stealthily approached, set fire to a bundle of straw near the house,
and succeeded in reaching shelter unhurt. At this moment Mrs. Skillion, sister of the
Kellys, appeared, and stated she wished to induce her relatives to surrender, but she
was not permitted to approach the burning building, which from its combustible*
character was soon in flames. No sign of life being visible within, the Rev. M. Gibney,
R.C., of Perth, W.A., who had accidentally reached the spot, rushed forward and
entered the now fiercely blazing structure, where he found the bodies of the bush-
rangers. Life was extinct. Hart and Han Kelly lay on the ground side by side, and
Byrne was found lifeless near the bar-room. It is reported that the latter received
the fatal wound which caused his death by a random shot during the contest ; the
others are supposed to have committed suicide and died together. In the kitchen, at
the rear, Martin Cherry, an old man, in his 60th year, was discovered in a dying con-
dition. He had been a prisoner of the gang, and fatally wounded. Shortly after
receiving the last offices of religion from Father Gibney, he expired. After the hotel
had been burned to the ground, amid the ruins the charred remains of the outlaws
were found, and near them the armour they wore. Byrne’s body was the least injured,
but presented nevertheless a horrid spectacle to all beholders, On one of the fingers
of the right hand was a ring once owned by the unfortunate Constable Scanlan, whose
fate we have already recounted.
Inquests on the bodies of Sherritt, the constable, the boy Jones, and Byrne were
held, but it was considered that no inquest was necessary on the remains of Dan Kelly
and Hart. Byrne was buried quietly at night in the Benalla Cemetery.
After the bodies of Dan Kelly and Steve Hart were given up to their relatives, they
were removed to Mrs. Skillian’s hut, which was rushed by a crowd, and a drunken
orgie or wake ensued.
The constables in Sherritt’s hut at the time he was shot were named Armstrong,
Alexander, Ducross, and Dowling. Sherritt was an ex-policeman, an athlete, and
only in his 24th year. For some months he supplied information as to the movements
of the gang, of which they eventually became aware, hence their shooting him for
revenge.
Dick Hart, Wild Wright, and other of the Kelly fraternity have often since used
threats of vengeance, and mischief will probably yet be done by these sympathisers.
On Saturday, July 31st, Mr. Call, the Police Magistrate, of Melbourne, visited the
Gaol and formally remanded Ned Kelly to appear at Beechworth on the Saturday
following. He was accordingly forwarded thither by special train on Monday, August
Ist, in custody of Sergeant Steele and three armed troopers. On the way he was
somewhat noisy, sang bushranging songs, boasted of his exploits, and conducted him-
self with great bravado. On arrival at Beechworth Gaol his wounds were dressed by
Dr. O’Brien. The operation took some time as there were twenty-three in all.
Constable Mclntyre with another policeman slept in the cell with the prisoner that
night.
THE TRIAL OF NED KELLY
Was commenced on Friday, August 6th, 1880, at the Beechworth Court-House, which
was besieged at an early hour by a crowd of persons eager to gain admittance. The
building though large was unable to hold the half, and every part was densely packed.
Mr. Gaunson, who had come from Melbourne to take charge of the defence, applied at
the usual time of opening for a brief adjournment in order that he might make him-
self thoroughly conversant with its various aspects. This was granted, and the
proceedings did not commence till 2 o’clock p.m„ when Kelly was placed at the bar,
and after some preliminary dillydallying on the part of Mr. Gaunson, the following
evidence was taken.
Mr. Foster said Mr, Gaunson had expressed a desire to do his duty, and had


admitted that the counsel on the other side were actuated by a similar desire. He
(Mr. Foster) hoped Mr. Gaunson would concede to him a like desire to do his duty to
the Crown and the prisoner. As regarded application made for further adjournment,
he did not think that this concession would prejudice the interests of the prisoner;
personally he was willing to grant it, but he could not see what good would be served
by delay, and in the meantime the case must go on,
Mr. C. A. Smythe on behalf of the Crown said he would treat the case in a general
manner,'and gave a short outline of the outrages alleged to have been committed by
the gang from the 25th of October, 1879, up to the time of the tragedy at Glenrowan.
Witnesses were then called, the first placed in the box being,
Thos. Mclntyre, who deposed—l am a mounted constable of police. Remember the
morning of the 25th October, 1878. I left Mansfield that morning with Constables
Lonigan, Scanlon, and Sergeant Kennedy at 5 o’clock, We were going to search for
Edward and Daniel Kelly, The prisoner now in the dock is the man I refer to as
Edward Kelly. We camped at Stringybark Creek, twenty miles from Mansfield.
We were all on horseback, and were armed, It was thickly-timbered country. The
photograph produced shows the character of the country. There was an old
hut there. We camped behind the old hut in a tent, and stopped there
that night, but nothing occurred. We were up at daylight on the morning of the 26th.
After breakfast Sergeant Kennedy with Constable Scanlon left, leaving me and
Lonigan at the hut. They were each armed with a revolver, and Sergeant Kennedy
had a repeating rifle, Lonigan and myself had each a revolver and double-barrelled
fowling piece. I was baking bread during a portion of the day, while Lonigan looked
after the horses, which were hobbled. We had two horses and a packhorse. Kennedy
and Scanlon left us about 6 o’clock in the morning. Between 12 and 1 o’clock Lonigan
told me he heard a noise in the creek. Mr. Smythe—You cannot say what he told
you, Witness —I heard a noise myself, and with Lonigan went to the creek, but could
see nothing. We returned to the tent, and I fired two shots at some parrots; I
reloaded the gun with small shots. About 4 o’clock in the afternoon Lonigan and
myself built a large fire. We did so in order that Kennedy and Scanlon might see it
to guide them to our tent in the event of their being bushed. The fire was 20 yards
from the tent. There were two logs close to it. It was nearly 5 o’clock when we
built the fire —about 10 minutes to 5. I went to the tent for a billy to make tea I
had to make, and Lonigan was standing on the opposite side of the fire. I was stand-
ing, and suddenly I heard a voice crying out, “ Bail up ; hold up your hands.” I
quickly turned round and saw four men, each armed with a gun, and pointing their
weapons at us. I noticed the man on the right of the party particularly. He was
aiming his weapon at my chest, and I held out my arms because I was unarmed.
When I did so the same man moved his gun and fired at Lonigan who had started to
run, Lonigan was about 12 feet from me. The outlaw was about 40 yards from Loni-
gan when he fired. Lonigan fell, havicg only run four or five yards when he was hit.
I heard Lonigan breathing in a heavy and stentorious manner. The man at the right
of the party to whom I refer was Ned Kelly, the prisoner. The other men were close
to us, and about two or three yards separated them. When Kelly fired he changed
the gun which he had fired with his left* hand, and putting his hand behind his back
he drew his revolver. I told him I was unarmed, and he said, “ keep your hands up.”
At this time my revolver and fowling-piece were in the tent. The prisoner and his
mates ran towards me and stood at a distance of three yards from me. They covered
my chest with their firearms, three of them having guns and the prisoner a revolver.
Prisoner said, “ have you got any firearms?” I said, ‘ I have not,” Lonigan up
to this time had been struggling, but he then ceased to struggle and breathe. Lonigan
was about ten yards from me, and I heard him say, “ Oh, Christ, I am shot.” That
was about two seconds after the shot was fired. He only staggered for half a minute
and a few minutes afterwards I saw that he was stretched out on his back and motion-
less. I concluded that he was dead. Kelly asked me, •“ Where is your revolver ?” I
replied, at the tent.” He said to his mates, “ Keep him covered, lads,” and they kept
me covered whilst the prisoner himself searched me by putting his hands over my
body. He found no firearms on me, and then jumped across the log going in the
direction of Lonigan. Almost immediately he came back with Lonigan’s revolver. I
was under cover all the time. Prisoner said, “Oh dear, what a pity this man tried to
get away.” One of the others said, “ What a plucky fellow ! Did you see how he
caught at his revolver ?” At the same time he indicated by moving his hand how Loni-
gan had acted. That was Dan Kelly, the prisoner’s brother. Prisoner then went to
the tent, the other three remaining with me. When he came back he had my revolver,


The attack on Jones Hotel.
16
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


SUPERINTENDENT HARE.
The Railway track where the special train was to be wrecked.


which I had left hanging in the hut. He told his mates to let me go, and they did so,
and then walked in the direction of the tent, and one of them, Dan Kelly, came back
with a pair of handcuffs. He said, “We will put them on the b ” I appealed
to prisoner, saying, “ Why put these on me? What can Ido when you are all armed?”
He said, “ All right, don’t put them on. This, Dan, “tapping, his rifle, “is better than
handcuffs.” Then, speaking directly to me, he said, “ Mind, don’t try to go away, for
if I had to follow you to the police station I would shoot you.” They then went to the
tent. I knew Ned and Dan Kelly by description. I did not know who the other two
were. I saw a photograph of prisoner previously—but not of Dan Kelly. When they
went to the tent they called me. Prisoner sat with a gun across his knees. It was
the same with which he shot Lonigan. He remarked, •• This is a curious weapon with
which to travel the country.” I replied, “It is, but perhaps it is better than it looks.”
He replied, “ You might well say that; I can shoot a kangaroo with it at 100 yards.”
From its appearance I took it to be a short-barreled rifle with waxed string near to
the trigger. He said, nodding his head towards Lonigan’s body, “ Who is that man
there ?” I said, “ That is Lonigan.” He replied, “I am glad of that; the b gave
it to me in Beuallaone day.” Dan laughingly remarked, “He will lock no more poor
b sup.” I have since learned that the other two men were Joseph Byrne and
Steve Hart. I identified Byrne’s body at Glenrowan. After Kelly had been speaking
to me in the Wombat Ranges, Byrne &ame to me and ordered me to drink some tea,
none of them had previously done so, and after they had seen me take the tea
they also drank it, with the exception of the prisoner, who remarked, “ Is there any
poison about here ?” I said “No ! why should we have poison ?” Whilst Hart, Dan
Kelly, and Byrne were having some tea, the prisoner drew the charges out of my
fowling-piece. He pricked the end of the cartridges and threw away the shot 4 which
he replaced with bullets, that is, one bullet for each cartridge. Having so reloaded the
gun, he handed it to Byrne, saying, “ You take that, give me yours.” Byrne gave him
his, which was an old-fashiohed qiie, with a large bore. He held both guns in his
hand, and said to Byrne, “ One of them is for you, if you don’t obey me.” Byrne
asked me if Lsmoked, and I said “ Yes.” He said. “ Well, fill your pipe and have a
smoke.” I fiired-&y pipe, and Byrne asked me for tobacco, which I supplied to him.
The prisoner also asked m| for tobacco, and I gave him some. All this transpired in
ten or fifteen minutes. During this time they, the gang, kept possession of their guns.
At the end of this time I heard prisoner say, “ That will do ; go to your places, boys.”
Prisoner went over to the fire and took the guns with him. Byrne and Dan Kelly went
over to the speargrass ground in the open. It was about five feet high. When they got
over there I lost sight of them in the speargrass. The prisoner concealed himself
behind a large log near the fire. He had the two guns with him.
AWhere were you at this time ?—Qutside the tent.
datPyou over ?—Yes, he called me over to him.
After concealing himself, what occurred then? —He pointed to a place on the oppo-
site side of the log, and said, “ You stand there.”
Did you go to it ? —Yes.
Then the log was between you and him ?—Yes.
Was it big ? How high was it ? —Close on three feet high.
• - Was he completely concealed on the one side ?—Yes ; and I was standing up on the
other. He had the two guns ? —Yes, and a revolver. .
When there he had a conversation ?■ —He said at first, “ Who showed you this place?”
I said, “No person showed it. We were on the beat about Mansfield,” He said,
-“ How did you come here ?” I said, we crossed Collins’s Creek and followed the
base line.” He said, “ Who are you, or what brought you here ?” I said, “ You know <
very well’who we are.” / j
You were not in uniform then ?—No, in day clothes. . ;
“ Well,” he said, “• I suppose you came after me ?” I said “No ; I don’t know that ‘
we did come after you.” He said, “ Well, you came after Ned Kelly ?” I said, “ Yes,
we came after Ned.” He said, “ Yes, and you b s would shoot us, I suppose ?” I j
said, “ No, we came to apprehend you.” He then said, “ Why did you bring so much 1
firearms and ammunition ?” I said, “We only brought powder to shoot kangaroos.” I
He asked, “ Who was that shooting down the creek to-day ?”, I said, “ I was shooting (
at parrots.” He said, “ That is very strange. Did not you know that we were here ?” 1
and I said “ No, we did not know you were within ten miles. We thought you were ]
over there,” and I pointed in the direction of Greta. He said, “ When do you expect i
these men home?” I said, I don’t think they will be home to-night; I think they ]
must have got bushed,” He had previously asked me where the others were, and I i


said 44 They are out/’ He said, 44 D—n them ! In which direction did they go?” I
pointed north-west, in the direction of Benalla, and said, 44 Over there.” He said,
“ That is very strange, for perhaps they will never come back, for there are good men
down the creek, and if they fall in with them you will never see them.” He said,
“ What are their names and station ?” am* I said. ** Sergeant Kennedy and Constable
Scanlon.” He said, 4 ’ I never heard of Kennedy and Scanlon.” I said, “ What do you
intend doing ? Surely you do not intend shooting them down in cool blood, because if
you do I would rather be shot a thousand times myself than tell you anything about
them.” He said, 44 1 like to see a good man, but it depends on their surrendering. I
will shoot no man who holds up his hands and surrenders.” I said, 44 What do you
intend doing with me. Are you going to shoot me ?” He said, 44 What wmuld I shoot
you for ? I could have shot you half-an-hour ago when you were on the log if I had
wanted to do so,” and he pointed to a log on which I sat. He said, 44 At first I
thought you were Flood, and it is a good job for you that you are not, because if you
had been I would not have shot you, but 1 would have roasted you on that fire.” He
said, 44 There are men in the force if I ever lay hands on them I will roast them.
They are Fitzpatrick, Flood, Steele, Strachan, and Strong, who has been blowing that
be would take me single-handed.” He continued, 44 How are these armed ?” I said,
44 In the usual wry.” He said, 44 What do you mean ? Have they revolvers ?” I said,
44 Yes, they have got revolvers.” He said, 44 Have they not got a rifle with them ?” I
hesitated to reply. He said, 44 Now, come, tell me the truth. If you tell a lie I will
put a hole in you.” I said, 44 Yes, they have got a rifle.” *He said, 44 Is it a breech-
loader ?” I said, 44 Yes, it is.” Fie said, 44 I think that looks as if they had been out
shooting.” I said, 44 You cannot blame them ; you know they have got their duty to
do.” He said, * 4 They are not ordered to go about the country shooting people.”
Prisoner said, 44 What became of the Sydney man.” I knew prisoner referred to Ser-
geant Willin. I said, 44 He was shot by the police.”
Did he make any remark ? He said, 44 If the police shot him, they shot the wrong
man. I suppose some of you will shoot me some of these days.”
At this stage the Court adjourned till next day, and Mr. Gaunson sent the following
• telegram to Mr. Beiry :
44 The Chief Secretary, Melbourne —I have specially to urge that the order issued by
your predecessor respecting Kelly’s right to see his relations and friends may be can-
t celled as illegal, arbitrary, and unjust to a man standing on his trial for his life.—
Gaunson,” *
The reply to this was unfavourable to the prisoner, and the application was not
entertained.
On the re-assembling of the Court on the 7th August,
Thos. Mclntyre, examined by Mr. C, A. Smythe, deposed—Ned Kelly said to me,
44 Why I broke out was that b y Fitzpatrick ; he was the cause of all this. Those
people lagged at Beechworth no more had revolvers in their hands than you have at
present. In fact, they were not there. These were the men who were there ” (nodding
towards his own mates). I said, 44 You cannot blame us for what Fitzpatrick did to
you.” He almost swore he would not let another one go, and said, 44 If I let you go
now you will have to leave the police force.” I said, 44 1 will do so. My health is bad.
I have been thinking of going some time. If I make these men surrender what will
you do with us ?” He said, 44 You had better. If they get away we will shoot you.
If they surrender we will not shoot you. We do not want their lives ; we only want
their horses and firearms.” During this time the prisoner was looking down the creek.
He had two guns resting against the log in front of him. I thought it might be pos-
sible to get one of the guns in the event of one of the other men coming up. I took
a short ready step for a spring, when Hart, who was in the tent, sang out, 44 Look out,
Ned, or that b will be on the top of you.” The prisoner coolly looked up and said,
44 You had better not, mate, because if you do you will soon find a match for you.
I know there are not three men in the force a match for me.” He asked, 44 Are there
any others out ?” I said, 44 Yes, there is another party at Greta.” He asked me who
they were, and I said I did not know, but that they were under the command of
Sergeant Steele. At this time it was getting late, being between half-past 5 and 6
o’clock. I thought the men would come home shortly. I said I would try to get them
to surrender if he would promise not to shoot them. He said he would promise. A
moment afterwards Kennedy and Scanlon came in sight. Kelly said, 44 Hist, lads, here
they are ! You go and stand at that log, and you can get no harm.” I went to the log he
pointed out, about ten or twelve yards off, and immediately afterwards the men came
in sight. They were riding, and walking their horses about 50 yards off. Sergeant


Ked Kelly’s arrival in Melbourne


NED KELLY.


Kennedy came in first, about 12 yards ahead. I do not remember if Kelly said
anything then. I stepped towards Kennedy and said out loud, so that the prisoner
could hear me, “ Sergeant, I think you had better dismount and surrender, for you are
surrounded.” At the same time prisoner cried out, “ Bail up ; hold up your hands.”
Kennedy smiled, and put his hand out for his revolver, which was in the case. Imme-
diately he did so prisoner fired at him, and missed him. Kennedy assumed a serious
aspect, and I turned to look back at the prisoner’s face. I saw him and the other three
advancing from the hut and speargrass. They had their guns, and as they advanced •
they said, “ Bail up ; hold up your hands.” When I looked round, on the firing of
the first shot, the prisoner was behind the log. resting on his right knee. Kennedy
must have seen him, for he was head and shoulders above the log before he fired. At
the time the others were advancing Kelly (prisoner) threw down his discharged gun
and picked up the one that was loaded, which he pointed in the direction of Scanlon.
I then looked at Kennedy, and saw him throw himself on his face on the horse’s neck,
and rolloff on the off-side of his horse. At the time he fell there were four shots fired,
and Scanlon, who had pulled up about thirty yards from the prisoner, was in the act
of dismounting. When he first heard the words “ Bail up ”ho fell on his knees and
caught at his rifle, and then endeavoured to get upon his feel. He again fell upon
his hands and knees, and in that position was shot under the right arm. The prisoner
covered and fired at him. Scarcely any time elapsed between the cry to “ Bail up,”
and the filing of the shots. Seeing Scanlon fall I expected no mercy to aiy one, and
I caught and mounted Kennedy’s horse, which was close to me. Before I mounted
the horse was restive, in consequence of the firing, and turned its head north and
moved about two lengths while I was struggling to mount.
Mr. Smythe—Did Kennedy say anything to you when you were mounted ! He said
nothing. While I was riding away I heard two shots fired, but by whom I could not
say. I saw a blood spot on Scanlon’s right arm when the shot was fired, and he rolled
over on his back. I rode away. I rode northerly for about twenty yards, and then
turned westerly. In riding along 1 was torn off my horse by the timber. I was in
the bush all night. I got to Mansfield at 3 p.m. on the following day (Sunday), and I '
reported what I had seen to the Inspector. Some police and others made a search
party, and I went with them. I started on the return journey about two hours after
reaching Mansfield. We got back to the scene of the murder about lor 2 o’clock on
Monday morning. That was in the middle of the night. We found the bodies of
Lonigan and Scanlon where I had last seen them. They were both dead. We searched
for Kennedy, but did not succeed in finding him. Our tent was burnt down, and what
was not burnt was taken away. All I found left was a tin plate. Sergeant Pewtress
came out in charge of that party. Dr. Reynolds afterwards examined the bodies. The
bodies were taken on packhorses, and we reached Mansfield that day. We took them
to Mr. Monk’s, at the Wombat sawmills, on packhorses, and from there in a cart. I
was at the magisterial inquiry. I saw some bullets taken from Lonigan’s body. Dr.
Reynold’s pointed them out tome. I saw three bullets altogether. I was not one of
the party that found the body of Kennedy. I saw the body when it was brought info
Mansfield, and on the following Thursday there was a magisterial inquiry on the body.
Kennedy had a valuable gold watch when we started first from Mansfield. I never
saw the prisoner again until I saw him at Glenrowan on the 22nd of June. Since the
Mansfield murders I have been attached to the detective department. Prisoner had
been arrested when I arrived at Glenrowan.
Mr. Smythe —Had you any conversation with him then ?
Mr. Gaunsou objected to this question. He said at the time the man was arrested
he vvas suffering from his wounds' and not only that, his mind was not in a fit state to
enable him to (fudergo a series of que-tious The man was orourate, an! the notice
ought not, to have q i stio* e h m.
A h*, ouvv i.;ip/vc • t nai a o. i jag’ o uib aw ol ev idctice lue couu.l be put.
The objection v\as ove. ruled.
Mr. tuny the —Did you see him on Tuesday Yes. I was not requested by prisoner
to go in and see him. Constable Kelly was present during the whole time I was with
prisoner. Senior-Constable Kelly said, “ Ned, do you know this man ?”
Mr. Gaunson again protested against these questions being put at a time when the
prisoner was prostrate and wounded. These men fastened themselves on him to get
information out of him that would criminate him. It was a blackguard proceeding
to go in uninvited at such a time for the purpose of extracting evidence.
Mr. Smythe objected to such language.
Mr. Gaunson—l say advisedly it was a blackguard proceeding.


•7 * v
The objection was overruled.
Witness proceeded—The prisoner said, “ No, it’s Flood, is it not ?” I said, No, you
took me for Flood the lasttimo we met.” He said, “ Oh, no, it is not Flood.” I said,
“Do you remember the last time we met ?” He said, “ Yes, I do.” I said, “ r Did I not
tell you then that I would much rather be shot than tell you anything that would lead
to the death of these men ?” He said, “ Yes.” I said, ‘‘ When I turned round I saw
you had my chest covered.” He said, “ Yes, I had.” I continued —“ And when I held
up my hands you shot Lonigan.” He said, “ No, Lonigan got behind some logs and
pointed his revolver at me. Did you not see that ?” I said, “No, that is only non-
sense.” I then said, “ Kennedy fired a good many shots at you.” He said, “ Yes, he
fired a lot. He must have fired nearly two rounds with his revolver.” I said, “ Why
did you come near us at all ? ’ When you knew where we were you could have kept
out of the way.” He said, “ You could have soon found us out, and if we had not
shot you, you would have shot us.” He also said, “ Our horses were poor, and our fire-
arms were bad, and we wanted to made a rise.” I asked him if I showed any
cowardice, and he said “ No.” That is all that occurred. • ■*. r
Cross-examined by Mr. Gaunson—l am an Irishman, and about 35 years old.
Since the Wombat affair I have been in Melbourne in the detective department. I
remember when I arrived at the Richmond depot. It was on the Ist of November. I
volunteered to go to Glenrowan. I asked the Chief Commissioner to let me go up.
The Chief Commissioner asked me at Glenrowan if I could identify prisoner, and I
said “Yes.”
Mr. Gaunson —Was it after some men had been roasted ? It was after I saw two
bodies taken from the fire. They might have been women. I could not tell, they
were so mutilated.
Mr. Gaunson —Did the Chief ask, is Kelly much changed, or anything further ? I
don’t remember anything further. That was on Monday or Tuesday. I went into the
lock-up at Benalla. Sergeant Whelan was in charge of the lock-up. Senior-constable
Kelly may have been in charge at the time. I suppose he was, for he had the key. I
never heard one of the constables say that Kelly had been talking about me. I went
to Constable Kelly. I said I wanted to see the prisoner. I saw him in the bedroom ;
at the barracks. He was not in the lock-up at the time. I do not remember Kelly
asking for the key.
Mr. Gaimson -So you idly visited this man ? Witness —I need not have gone if I .
had not liked. When I got in I put the questions to which I have already deposed.
Kelly was wounded and was lying down. I knew he was wounded in the arm. To
my mind he was sane. Senior-constable Kelly did not take notes of our conversation
in the cell nor in my sight. I did not speak to Senior-constable Kelly afterwards
about the conversation. I did not say to him, “ I hope you have taken notes.” I
slept at the police-station last night. I did not report to the Commissioner, but pre-
pared a written statement of the whole case, which I gave to Sub-Inspector Kennedy.
I have not been talked to concerning my evidence. I have not compared notes with
Senior-constable Kelly about the conversation. I told him what my evidence would
be and asked him if it was correct, and he said “ Yes.” 1 believe there was a third
constable present in the cell at the Benalla lock-up when I spoke to Kelly. I know
I aria the principal witness against the prisoner. I have made statements to reporters ...
about what occurred at the Wombat Ranges. I made my first report either to Sub-
Inspector Pewtress or Superintendent Sadlier. It was a written report. I wrote it
in the Mansfield Police-station. I know a Senior-constable named Maud. I read, the -
Aye principally. I cannot say if I read Maud’s report in the Argus. 1 believe it was
wrong. .i-.
Mr. Gaunson —Did you say in your first report that Edward Kelly was. the man who ; v
shot the police ? Witness —I cannot say what 1 wrote two years ago. I •;should have
done so. My report did not reach Benalla for some days. I had never seen the
prisoner or any of his gang before that morning. I read Ned Kelly’s description in,.
the Argus. I did not tell him I believed Fitzpatrick had purjured hirnself. .1 saw Ins v
photo, with Sergeant Kennedy. It had been taken in Pentridge seven ;
ago He was described in the Police Gazette as having been born in 1&56. Kelly had
hair on his face at the Wombat. When his photo, was taken in gaol he was clean
shaved. I could see a resemblance between the photo, and Ned Kelly. I could not
swear that it was a good photo. I recollect seeing a reporter from the Argus in the
Richmond Barracks.
Mr. Gaunson—Did you tell him that the likeness was a good one of Ned Kelly ?
Witness—l can’t recollect what I said four years ago. The report of the interview
23
THE KELLY OUTLAWS .


Sergeant Steele
Guard Dowsett
The capture of Ned Kelly.


Inspector O’Connor
Superintendent Nicholson
I > Bird’s-eye View of Glenrowan.
1 Jones’ Hotel 2 Out House 3 Railway Station 4 Stationmaster’s House
o Jf c ® ona ld’s Hotel 6 Platelayers’ Tents 7'Positions taken by the Police
8 Trench; Lieut. O’Connor’s and Black Trackers’ Post 9 Soot where Mr.
Hare was shot 10 Paddock where horses were shot 11 Tree where Ned
Kelly was captured 12 Road to Bracken’s Station 13 Half a mile from
this spot tiie rails were taken up.


may be correct. The only photo, which I saw of Kelly was that shown to mq by
Sergeant Kennedy. We went into the Wombat Ranges to arrest Daniel and Edward
Kelly for attempting to murder Constable Fitzpatrick. We were all armed with the
regular revolvers. Sergeant Kennedy borrowed a gun. We expected resistance.
Kennedy may have had the warrant. I did not say in my examination in chief that
we had no warrant. I had no warrant.
Mr. Gaunson said in bis direct examination the witness said there were warrants
V ’ ■■
issued. ,c Jr
Witness —-On Friday night, after we camped in the ranges, I went to look for kan-
garoos. I heard part of the evidence of Constable Fitzpatrick. A man named Skil-
lion and Williamson were tried with Mrs. Kelly. 1 heard that the three prisoners
were sentenced—Williamson and Skillion to six years, and Mrs. Kelly to three years.
1 knew that Mrs. Kelly had an infant at her breast. The infant was in gaol for one
year. I believe it was on the 15th of April that the attempt to murder Fitzpatrick
was made. A reward of £lOO was offered for Kelly’s apprehension. I would not
have shot Kelly if we had met him if he had not resisted with firearms. I believe
Constable Fitzpatrick has been discharged. I saw the notification in the Gazette .
Mr. Gaunson —Do you believe he was dismissed because he was an honest, upright,
and truthful man T Witness—lf he possessed these qualities I think he would not
have been dismissed, but he might have been dismissed for some indiscretion. I know
that a question was asked by Mr. Graves in the House about Fitzpatrick. It was upon
the evidence of Constable Fitzpatrick that Mrs. Kelly, Skillion, and Williamson were
convicted. ; *
Mr. Gaunson —Upon the evidence of a man who is not good enough for the force ?
Witness—l never saw, anything wrong with Fitzpatrick. The reward was offered by
the Government. We frequently searched for Edward. and Dan Kelly before the
28th October. I did not know why that particular locality should have been searched.
We were not in uniform ; we were in plain clothes. We were not disguised like
diggers.
Mr. Gaunson —I would like to know by what authority you scoured the country in
plain clothes, armed, and without warrants ? Witness—l was acting under the instruc-
tions of Sergeant Kennedy. When we were told to “ bail up,” nothing was said to
the effect that they (the Kelly’s) did not want to take life, they only wanted the arms.
Kelly said Fitzpatrick was the cause of all this. I replied, 44 You cannot blame us.”
I cannot remember saying 44 I know that,” in answer to Kelly, but I will not swear
I did not say so. If anything was said about Sergeant Steele having given evidence to
•back up Fitzpatrick Ido not remember it. I was quite cool after having been stuck
up. When Kennedy and Scanlon were returning, Kelly said, 44 Look out lads ; here
they come.” I walked towards Kennedy, Edward Kelly being about ten or twelve
yards from me.
Mr. Gaunson —Is it not true that the instant Kennedy got off the horse you
seized it and left him in the lurch ? Witness —I took the horse when it had been
abandoned.
Mr. Gaunson —You have, in your direct examination, said Kennedy smiled. Did he
smile at you when you ran away with the horse? Witness —I did not swear that.
Kennedy was not dead at the time when I got on the horse. I did not look round
because the timber was thickf and if I had done so I would probably have been knocked
off. I have sworn that when the prisoner fired at Kennedy he missed him.
Mr. Gaunson —How long after that was it you seized the horse ? Witness —At once.
I cannot say what the feeling of the police with regard to Kelly is. I' have spoken
to them, and have spoken to Dwyer and Steele about him.
Mr. Gaunson —Is the general feeling against him ? Is it their wish that he should
escape ? Witness —I can’t say. Many of the men have said be should be hanged. # I
can t say what the feelings of others are. Ido not know whether Steele wishes Keily
to be hanged,
Mr. Gaunson—l will have you in the hands of a man better able to deal with you,
and turn you inside out in the Supreme Court. Just one more question. How did you
distinguish between the prisoner and his brother. Witness —From description.
.Mr. Gaunson having read the depositions, asked why he had said to Ned Kelly,
“ No,” when he asked if he and the others had come out into the Wombat Ranges for
him ? Witness —When I said *• No, I did not know we were coming after you,” I
considered that I was giving Kelly an evasive answer. Kelly said in the
Wombat, 44 What brings you out here at all? It is a shame to see fine
strapping fellows like you in the lazy loafing of policemen.” He


• also said, il If you get the others to surrender we will handcuff them, but we
will let you go in tjie morning ; we will let you go away on foot as we want your
horses and firearms.” I was very close to Kennedy’s horse when he dismounted. He
threw himself off the horse in order to avoid the shots. Scanlon was on the ground
when he was shot. Ido not think I ever said that Scanlon was shot whilst running
for a tree. I was annoyed with the reporters. They would suggest questions ami
answers. In my opinion there was too much publicity about the whole of the affair.
There was not too much published to prevent the fair trial of the Kelly gang. I think
1 have mentioned everything I recollect. The conversation between me and the
prisoner lasted for about a quarter of an hour. The party had four guns when they
came up ; and my fowling-piece, which they took, made five guns. I believe Hart
carried a double-barreled gun. Daniel Kelly carried a single-barreled fowling-piece.
It was a cheap gun with a common bore. I heard him discharge it, but I can’t say if
there was anything in it but powder. I swear positively that I saw smoke issuing
from the barrels of all the guns. I heard a dozen discharges at least. 1 could not
say at what object Dan Kelly was firing. I believe he Was firing at Kennedy. Hart’s
gun was also a common one. I heard him firing. Do not know if Hart’s gun was
loaded with ball. Byrne’s gun-was an old-fashioned oue, having a very large bore.
That gun was also discharged. Kelly gave my fowling-piece to Byrne. After Kelly
missed Kennedy I saw him point in the direction of Scanlon. I will not swear he
fired at Scanlon. I did not resolve to escape before I saw Scanlon shot. The moment
I saw Scanlon shot I heard three shots fired at once, and then I heard another shot.
When Scanlon was shot lat once made up my mind to escape if I could. I heard
another shot fired after that, but I don’t know by whom. I have not seen any of the
guns with which the gang were armed since.
Samuel Eeynolds, examined by Mr. Chomley, deposed—l am a legally qualified
medical practitioner;residing at Mansfield. I recollect seeing the body of Constable
Lonigan on the Stringybark Creek on the 30th of October. It was Iving on the
ground. I also saw the body of Scanlon. On the following day I made a post mortem
examination of Lonigan's body in Melbourne. I found four wounds —one through
the left arm, one on the left thigh, one on the right temple, and one in the inner side
of the right eyeball. I looked upon them as bullet wounds. The one on the thigh
traveled round the thigh under the skin, and I extracted it. The wound on the temple
I might describe as a graze. I did not find the bullet which caused the wound through
the eyeball . It entered the eyeball, and must* have caused death in a few seconds.
Mclntyre pointed out the body as that of Lonigan. I also examined the bodies of
Scanlon and Kennedy. The wound in the temple might not have been caused by a
bullet. The wound in the left arm or in the thigh would not have caused death.
The evidence of Mclntyre was then read over to him, and signed as correct. It
.occupied the clerk more than one hour to read the depositions, and whilst he was
engaged doing so Mrs. SkiJlion, Lloyd, and Hart left the Court with their friends.
Mr. Forster said to Mclntyre—l think it only right that I should inform you
that it is my opinion that you have given your evidence in an intelligent and honest
manner.
Mr. Gaunson said —I need say that it is very unusual to make such a statement before
a prisoner is dealt with. I don’t think he has given his evidence properly.
Mr. Forster said he considered it to be his duty to make the remarks, or he would
not have done so.
Mr. Smythe remarked —I think Mclntyre has given his evidence properly, and I
believe that opinion is shared by all in Court.
The furthei hearing of the case w r as postponed until 10 o’clock on Monday, Aug. 9,
when it was resumed before Mr. Forster, P.M. The Court w r as crowded as before,
ami the following witnesses examined :
George Stephens —“ lam a groom, at present out of employment. In 1878 I
w r as employed at Younghusband’s station, Faithful Greek, as groom. The station is
about four miles from Luroa. On the 9th of December, about 1 o’clock in the after-
noon, the prisoner and three other men stuck up the station. I first saw the prisoner
at the kitchen, about 1 o’clock. He asked me, “ Where is McCauley, the overseer ?”
A man named Fitzgerald, w T ho was present* said, He is not in.” Mr. Fitzgerald was
in the kitchen then. No one else was present. Kelly went away then, and 1 left the
kitchen and went dow r n to the stables. John Carson was there. I heard some talking,
and looked round to the door, and saw prisoner coming down with Fitzgerald. The
latter put his head into the door and said to the prisoner, 44 There are the other two
men,” pointing to me and Carson. Prisoner said, “ All right,” and addressing nje,


NED KELLY.
In the Guards Van on the way to Beechworth.
The shooting of Sherritt


Ned Kelly in the Bock.
Jones’ Hotel after the Fire


said, “ I suppose you do not know who I am.” I said, Perhaps you are Kelly,” and he
replied, ‘-You area d d good guesser.” I turned my head, and when I looked
round again he had me covered with a revolver. I said, ‘‘ I beg your pardon; I
thought you were joking, and not Kelly.” He said, 4< * All right; I like to see you
take it in such good part. Which is the groom ?” I said, “1 am. 1 He then said, “ I
want some feed for my horses.” I said, 44 All right; there is plenty here.” He held
up his hand while inside the stable, and the other two men come down leading four
horses. I did not know the names of the men at the time, but I have heard their
names since.”
Mr. Gaunson —Have you seen them since ?
Witness—l have not.
Mr. Gaunson —Then how can you state what their names are?
Witness—l was in the company of three men all night and part of next day, when
they left, one of them saying they were going to the back. It was prisoner who said
they were going to the bank. It was between 2 and 3 o’clock in the afternoon when
they left. When the men came up to the stables with the horses they put them in the
stalls. 1 was standing with Kelly in an empty stall. I said, ‘ 4 How about the police
murders ? He said 44 We were behind a log. I told Dan to cover Lonigan; I would
* cover the other man. I then called out, 4 throw up your hands.’ Mclntyre
did so, and Lonigan made otf towards a log, trying to draw his revolver. As he
ran he (Lonigan) got behind a log and rested his revolver on the top of it. I took
my rifle otf Mclntyre and fired at Lonigan. The ball grazed on the temple. He
disappeared behind the log. Lonigan raised his hands up in front of the log, and
when his head appeared I fired again and shot him through the head. I then sent
two men back to our hut, fearing a surprise there. I also sent Dan over the green
rise to watch the police coming while I was talking to Mclntyre. They appeared
in the open. I had just time to fall on my knees and fire. 1 very nearly burned my
knees. Mclntyre then walked to Kennedy and spoke to him. Kennedy smiled. I
then called out, ‘You wretch, throw up your hands/ Scanlon swung his rifle round
and fired at me, I then fired at Scanlon, and he fell forward. I still kept him covered,
thinking he was shamming, when his horse moved and he rolled off. During this
time Kennedy had dismounted on the off-side of his horse, and laid his revolver over
the horse’s rump. He fired at Dan Kelly as he came running up, grazing him on the
top of the shoulder. Mclntyre then jumped on Kennedy’s horse and rode away.
Kennedy made for a tree, still firing. He then made from that to another tree, still
firing.” Prisoner said the reason Kennedy got so far is— 64 l took up Scanlon’s rifle, but
had to throw it away again, as I did not know how to use it. I still followed Ken-
nedy up, when he stepped from behind a tree. I thought I was done for then, as he
fired and the ball grazed ray ribs. Kennedy then ran, and I immediately fired and
hit him on the shoulder. As he was getting back behind the tree Kennedy ran again,
and I followed. When he wheeled round and rose his hands, I fired, and shot him
through the chest. When I hit him on the shoulder he must have dropped his revolver,
and the blood running down his arm formed into a clot, which I took for his revolver.
Knowing he had one shot left when he wheeled round, I thought he was going to fire;
but I knew afterwards he was throwing up this hands.” That is all Kelly said
during that night. I was locked up in the store at Faithful Greek. There were a
number of other persons locked up with me. The prisoner was there, and one of the
other men.
Cros?-examined —I left Mr. Younghusband’s employ in 1879. I told Detective Ward
what I have said, and he wrote something in his book. I did not have any conversa-
tion with any of the other men who came with Kelly. I have read the reports in the
newspapers. I read Saturday’s newspaper. I read the Age. I did notread the whole
of Mclntyre’s evidence, and did not see how much my evidence and that of Mclntyre
might clash. I spoke to Mclntyre on Friday in the barrack-yard. Mclntyre asked
me how did Ned make his statement to me the first time. I saw Mclntyre was at
Glenrowan. I did not speak to him there. I was summoned here as a witness on
Thursday, and stopped in the barrack-yard.
Mr. Gaunson—Practically in the custody of the police. Witness—Yes, sir; I might
leave it I liked. I went straight to the barracks, and did not leave the barracks that
night. The next day 1 stopped in the witness-room. I saw Ward standing in the
passage. I did not have any conversation with the police about my evidence.
Mr. Gaunson—Then what was your conversation with Mclntyre on Friday about?
Witness—He asked me what I had to say, and I told him that Ned had told me LonL


gan when bailed up ran behind a log. That is all I told him. Mclntyre said that is
not the way it happened ; that when he wheeled round he saw four men standing
armed with guns, and Lonigan never got behind the log at all; that immediately
Lonigan started to run Kelly moved the gun and shot him. I told Ward of the con-
versation with Kelly two or three days after I saw Kelly. I made a statement to
Sergeant Dacy in Melbourne after the Glenrowan affair, and he found me in Abbot’s
saleroom in Bourke-street. He called me into Abbot’s saleyards, and took down what
I had to say. Constable Boys served the subpoena upon me. He did not say any thing -
to me about the great anxiety of the police to see Kelly acquitted. He did not say
that Kelly would be hanged. He said that Kelly, in his opinion, would be hung, and
that he ought to be hanged. I have no opinion with regard to Kelly. Ido not think he f
will be acquitted. I think he will be hung. (On hearing this Kelly laughed ) If all
is true that Kelly told me, my opinion is he ought to be hung, I believe all he told me,
I have not been promised any situation under Government. I was at Glenrowan in the
beginning of June on private business. 1 saw Kelly at Benalla. I was employed as
a‘ detective.
Mr. Gaunson—l will drag out of you what you were doing at Glenrowan. Witness—
I was employed there as a detective.
Mr. Gaunson —This is your disinterestedness. You have purposely deceived me by
saying that you did not expect a situation from Government. What have you been
doing since you left Younghusband’s ? Witness—l entered into the employ of the
Government at the end of the month after I left Younghusband’s I saw Mr. Nicholson
in Benalla, and he got me on about the end of January. The agreement was that I
was to go out and try to come across the Kellys. I was told by Mr. Nicholson that he
would give me 6s. per day ; any expenses I was out he said would be refunded. I drew
my last pay on the Tuesday, the day after they were taken. I do not think lam
entitled to any of the reward. I worked hard to earn it. I expect to get into some
Government business at the end of this trial, at least I intend to try. It was on Govern-
ment business that I went to Glenrowan. It was business connected with the case. I
sent in reports to Mr. Nicholson, from time to time, of my doings. .It was in the
middle of March I went to Glenrowan. I remained there until about a fortnight
before the arrest of the prisoner. I left to go to another part of the district, to a
farmer’s place. I was in Benalla the day on which I heard of the capture of the
prisoner. I saw the prisoner that night when he was brought to Benalla. I saw him
in the trap which brought him from the station. I was at Glenrowan for about three
months.
Mr. Gaunson—ln whose employment were you ?
Mr. Srriythe objected to the question: as the present state of the country to have the
names of people disclosed, from whom the police got information, was positively
dangerous.
Mr. Gaunson—J do not ask from whom the witness got information, I ask him by
whom he was employed. As to the dangerous state of the country, that is a mere
scare. To the witness—Were you in the employment of Patrick Hennessy, of Glen-
rowan ?
Witness—l was not. I saw Ned Kelly in the police barracks. I went there to find
the officer to get some money. The officer was a travelling bank under the circum-
stances. I did not hear any one say, “There is Ned Kelly.’’ I was not paying atten-
tion. The only occasions upon which I saw the prisoner were when he was arrested
and at Faithful Creek. I did not see Superintendent Sadlier on Monday night. On
the next day I saw him, and he paid me off until that date 1 don’t remember him
saying anything. All that took place was my taking my money. I did not say any-
thing about the shooting of Sherrftt.
James Gloster deposed—l am a draper, living at Seymour. I occasionally hawk
drapery goods about the country. I remember the evening of the 9th December, 1878.
A man named Frank Beecroft, who was in my employment, was with me. We were
going to camp at Faithful Creek Station that night. About 7 o’clock I unharnessed
the horses. Previously I was told that the Kelly’s were at the station hut. I dffi not
believe it. I was told to come back by a man, but I did not obey. I got into my
waggon for the purpose of getting my pistol, when two men came up, and each holding
a pistol, and told me to get down. The prisoner was the man who spoke. I got down
and saw that prisoner had a revolver in one hand, and a pair of handcuffs in the other
He said he had a good mind to put a bullet through me, because I did not obey. He also
said, “It is a very easy matter for me to pull the trigger if you do not keep a civil
tongue in your head.” I had been vexed with them, and asked, “ Who and what are


Incidents sketched at Glenrowan.
32
m 1C WE LL Y 0V TLA W&


Joe Byrne; from a Photograph taken after Death


you 7 ” Prisoner said “I am Ned Kelly, the son of Eed Kelly, and a better man never
stood in two shoes.” I said, “If you are, there is no use in resisting you.” He said,
“If you keep a civil tongue in your head you will take no harm. You were nearer
being shot than any man here.” He asked me if I had any firearms, I said. “ I don’t
carry firearms for sale.” He said, “ I know you have a pistol. If you don’t give it to
me I will burn the waggon.” I gave him the pistol, and he remained there until we
finished. Pie then told me to go to the kitchen, and there I saw two more men, each
of whom had a gun and a revolver. There were a number of men locked up there,
and during that night Ned Kelly remained on guard over us. He told us to make
ourselves comfortable. He talked to me most of the night with reference to the
murder of the police on the Wombat. He said, I did all the shooting on the Ranges.
The people and the papers call me a murderer, but I have never murdered anyone in
my life.” I said, “ How about Sergeant Kennedy 7 ” He said', " I killed him in a fair,
stand-up fight.” He argue 1, then, that that was not murder; that a man killing his
enemy did not commit murder. He also said that the police were his natural enemies.
Prisoner said, with regard to the death of Kennedy, “ After the conflict with Scanlon.
Kennedy and I were firing at each other. Kennedy retreated from tree to tree. One
of his shots went through my whiskers, and the other through the sleeve of ray coat,
Kennedy was a very good shot. I followed him, and he (Kennedy) turned to fire
again, as I thought ”
Mr, Gaunson objected to this evidence, as it had nothing to do with the murder of
Lonigan.
Mr. Foster ruled that the Crown Prosecutor had a right to proceed.
Witness —He continued, “ I fired at Kennedy, and he fell.” At another perio 1 of
the night he said, ‘ I had a long conversation with Kennedy when he was wounded.
We wanted to leave the ground, but I did not like to leave him in a dying state, so I
shot him. I respected Kennedy, and covered him up with his cloak.’ With regard
to the death of Lonigan, he said Mclntyre surrendered, but Lonigan ran to a log, from
which he fired at him, and hit him in the head. He also said, It is a pity he did not
surrender ; I only wished to take his arms.” At another time he said, -1 Since I com-
menced business I have stolen 280 horses, and if the police had taken me for anything
of that sort I would not have cared ; but if a man once did anything wrong the police
would not leave him alone.” The value of the revolver prisoner took from me was
£3 10s. He also took some clothing. I was twice stuck up before this time, once by
a man named Daly, and once by a man unknown. I was shot in the shoulder and face
by Daly. When stuck up by Kelly I asked him if Daly was there. I did not say this
when under direct examination, because I forgot to do so. I have not used the exact
words that Kelly used, but as near as possible. Stephens could have heard the con-
versation I had with Kelly if he had not been asleep. Prisoner threatened violence to
me by threatening to shoot me ; otherwise I was treated with the greatest kindness.
I had £lO in my pocket and valuable property in the cart. He did not offer to take
any portion of my money, nor did any of the other men. Some of the other prisoners
offered him money—some of them half a sovereign—but he would not take it, but
returned it to them, I was told at the station that the Kellys were there. I paid no
heed. I thought the people were joking. I got into the waggon. McCauley followed
me up and told me that I was a very foolish man, that another man under similar
circumstances would have been shot. When prisoner asked me if I had any firearms I
made an evasive answer. I gave up the revolver to Kelly. I put it down on a box.
I suffered no inconvenience beyond non-payment for the revolver and a few articles
of clothing. I was allowed to go on Wednesday morning. On Monday night I killed
time with Ned Kelly by conversing about newspaper reports and other subjects. The
prisoner, I presume, wanted to keep awake when speaking of the affray in the Wombat
Ranges, The expression used by me was, " The shooting of the police,” not “ the
murder,” I did not care about calling it murder. The prisoner took all the talking
about the shooting of the police upon himself, so as to screen the other members of
the o-aug. The whole of the conversation that night showed that the prisoner intended
to convey the impression that the police intended to shoot him. 1 cannot say that
Kelly impressed me with the belief that he was under that impression, or that he was
not under that impression. There was no drink takln that night, Kelly said he was
sorry he fired at Kennedy, and would not have done so if he had thought he was going
to surrender, I have not made any mistake with regard to Kennedy’s death. As to
his having shot him, rather than leave him to die, I think he made some remark about
his being sorry that he did not give Kennedy a chance to live. I know the remark
was made ; but I don’t know if it was made by Kelly. I was not the chief witness


in the prosecution of Daly ; I could not identify him. Kelly told us some of the
long conversation with Kennedy, but I forget it. I put down in writing my experience
on that occasion a fortnight afterwards. I gave it to Detective Ward ; I have not seen
that statement since. I arrived here on Thursday night by the 11 o’clock train. I
had an interview with Sub-Inspector Kennedy with regard to this case on Friday
night. I had previously applied to Detective Ward for the statement I had given him.
I did not get it. I can’t recollect if, in the communication with Ward, I stated Kelly
told me he had shot Kennedy after he had been wounded and was in a dying state.
Prisoner told me his whole history, and it was taken up with complaints about the
police. He said if a man once did wrong, the police would not afterwards leave him
alone. I understood him to mean that having done a sentence the police would not
afterwards leave him alone. He also complained of the conduct of Constable Fitz-
patrick towards his mother. He said she had been convicted on his testimony, and
that he had committed perjury. He said, “My mother has seen better days; she
struggled up with a large family, and I feel keenly her being convicted upon the per-
jured" statements of Fitzpatrick.’’ That was the effect of the language. Kelly also
told me he was not within 200 miles of the place when the attempt to murder Fitz-
patrick took place. He also said that whilst he was away Fitzpatrick swore that he
was the man who had shot him. The complaint is, that I have lost four suits of clothes
and revolvers.
By Mr. Smythe —It is eight or nine years ago since Daly stuck me up. He is now
out of gaol. The impression upon my mind was that Kelly shot the police out of a
revengeful feeling. He also said if his mother did not get justice he might possibly
upset a train. I did not state to Ward that prisoner told me he shot Kennedy. I have
no doubt he did tell me so.
Frederick Beecroft deposed —On the 9th December, 1878, I was in the employment
of Mr. Gloster. On the evening of that day we were stuck up by the Kelly gang. We
were made prisoners, and were put into the storeroom. The prisoner kept guard over
us. He remained in the room, but there were others outside. Prisoner talked to the
people in the room, and I heard him. He told us he came upon the police. There
were two of them in the camp, and he called upon them to surrender. The names of
the police were Mclntyre and Lonigan. Mclntyre threw up his arms, and Lonigan
ran towards a log. He got behind the log and fired at him. Kelly said he then shot
♦Lonigan in the head. He also stated that he was a fool to get shot by trying to get
away. Whilst talking to Mclntyre two other constables came riding up. He called
on them to surrender. Scanlon made a motion to his rifle, and he fired at him. He
fell forward on his horse, and whilst watching him and Kennedy, Mclntyre rode off.
He thought that Scanlon was shamming. Kennedy was on the ground when Scanlon
fell, he having dismounted. Kennedy fired, shifting from tree to tree. When he got
to an open space of ground he turned round and held up his hands. The prisoner fired
at him, as he thought Kennedy had turned round to fire at them. Kennedy fell, and
prisoner talked to him. He told him he could not leave him in a dying state, and as he
wanted to go he would have to shoot him. Kennedy asked him to let him live, but he
put his gun to him to shoot him. Kelly had a Spencer rifle at the station, and showed
us how to load and reload it. Kelly talked most of the night. I fell asleep towards
the morning.
Cross-examined—l am 20 years of age. My parents reside at Longwood. lam
still in Mr. Gloster’s employment. Mr. Gloster told me he had written a statement
about the affair, but he did not show it to me. Constable Me Quirk saw me at Euroa
since Kelly’s arrest in reference to the evidence I should give. I wrote a statement of
the affair. I wrote the first part in Nagambie, and finished it at Seymour. Mr.
Gloster did not see what I wrote. I told Gloster what I would say, and he told me
what he would say. I did not agree with Mr. Gloster about anything. When Gloster
told me what he had to say I did not say anything. W r e might have talked over the
matter a dozen times. I sent the statement to Mr. Ward. He saw me at Seymour.
Gloster has asked me particularly to remember the way in which Kennedy was shot.
He did not ask particularly. We have spoken of the affairs at the station when Kelly’s
name was mentioned.
Mr, Gaunson—And a story never loses in the telling. Did you ever compare recol-
lections with Gloster ? Witness —What do you mean by compare ?
Mr. Gaunson—l want to compare the evidence with that of your master on one point.
Is this giving the prisoner a fair trial ? You might as well take him out in the back
yard and shoot him there without trial at once.
Witness—l did not check my statement with Mr. Gloster; Ido not recollect if he


Finding Byrne’s body
|
fej
e
0
1
?>a


The Closing Scene


asked me if it was correct. Kelly had told me he had shot Kennedy after he was #
wounded, I don’t recollect if any one ever told me anything about the conduct of
Mclntyre. Ido not remember it being said that Mclntyre had a revolver in his belt
when he was stuck up. When I made a statement to Sub-Inspector Kennedy of the
evidence I would give, Mr. Gloster was present.
The Court at this stage adjourned until the next day at 10 o’clock. On resuming,
Eobert Scott deposed—l was manager of the National Bank at Euroa. On December
10, 1878, I saw the prisoner. About four minutes to 4 o’clock that day he was
followed into the bank by Hart. The prisoner had a revolve rin each hand, and asked
me to bail up. I said, “ There is no hurry, I suppose ? ” He pointed his revolver at
me, and I put up my hands. He robbed the bank, and ordered me, with my servant
into a spring-cart. We drove to Euroa, and spoke of the murder in the Wombat
Ranges. I asked him who shot Lonigan. He said, “ I shot him.”
Robert McDougall, bookbinder, said—l was in Euroa on the 10th of December, 1878
On that day I was returning from a shooting excursion in the Strathbogie Ranges. #
Messrs. Dudley, Casey, and Tennant were with me. We were going through Young-
husband’s station to Mr. Casey’s when prisoner came on horseback and, covering me
with a revolver, said, “ Turn round, the station is £tuck up.” I stopped, and Dudley
asked by what authority he stuck us up. I got out of the cart, and Casey, the owner,
was about to get into it again, when Kelly said, “ You are Ned Kelly ; you have stolen
that spring-cart.” Dudley said, “We have not; we are all honest men.” Prisoner
produced a pair of handcuffs, and said to Dudley, “I will put them on you.” Dudley
replied, “ I will report you to your superior officer.” We all thought he was a
policeman. Just then Mr. Tennant came up and asked, “What is the matter?”
Tennant had been riding off horseback. Dudley said, “The station is stuck up.” Ten-
nant said, “ Let us get in the cart and load the guns.” Kelly told him not to do so.
We were told to go to the station, and saw Byrne bring other men there from the
railway. Stephens, one of the station hands, introduced Ned Kelly to us. He said,
“This is Mr. Ned Kelly.” We were put into the storeroom with other prisoners.
Some time after 2 o’clock Mr. Dudley and I were standing apart from the prisoners.
Kelly said to Dudley, “ Is it not bad enough to be called a proscribed outlaw than to
be taking cheek from the likes of you ? ” Dudley had been giving him cheek when we
were first taken. He was outrageous ; I could see it. Prisoner took out a gold watch
and said to Dudley, “This is a nice watch.” Dudley said, “Yes.” Prisoner said,
“ This was pc or Kennedy’s watch. Was it not better for me that I shot the police
than have them carry my body into Mansfield as a mangled corpse ? ” He had a rifle;
but Ido not recollect his stating where he got it. I would not swear it was a police-
man’s rifle. When we were stuck up I had a double-barreled fowlingpiece, a rifle,
with about eighty or ninety bullets. We were kangarooing in the Strathbogie Ranges,
and not Kelly-hunting. When Tennant proposed to load the guns, he said to Kelly,
“We will help you.” We thought then that Kelly was a policeman. When he told us
that the station was stuck up, we did not know who it was by. I can’t swear that the
gold watch produced by Mr. Gaunson was the watch Kelly had. It might be the
watch for all I know. Tennant has a hasty temper, and was going to have a fight
with prisoner, but he thought better of it. Kelly treated us very well for all that.
The rifle, gun, and ammunition were also taken. I last saw the gun in the hands of
Byrne.
Henry Dudley deposed—l am a ledgermaker employed at the Government Printing
Office. I was in the last witness’s "company on the 10th of December, 1879, in a spring-
cart at Younghusband’s station. Tennant was on horseback, and had gone to open
the railway gates. Kelly rode up and presented a revolver at us, saying, “ The station
is stuck up.” I felt irritated, because he said, “ Where did you 4 shake ’ that horse and
trap 7” I thought he was a policeman, and said, “ How dare you charge honest gentle-
men with stealing my horse and cart. I will report you to your superior officer.” He
said, “ Hold your or I will blow your brains out.” He then ordered us to the
station, where we were locked up in the storeroom, Kelly, on one occasion, came in,
produced a gold watch, and said to me, “ That is a fine watch ; it belonged to Ken-
nedy. Was it not better for me to shoot the police than to let them carry my body a
mangled corpse into Mansfield 7 ” He did not name any of the police. Directly I got
back to Melbourne I gave a version of the affair to a reporter. Was subpoened as a
witness by Sab-Inspector Kennedy, who took my statement in pencil.
Dudley Edward Richard Living deposed—l was teller in the Bank of New South
Wales in February, 1879. Remember the 10th of that month. Soon after 12 o’clock
prisoner came into the bank. There were three other men with him armed with
38
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


revolvers, He said, “ I want money,” and he robbed the bank. We were taken into
the hotel adjoining. 1 heal'd him speaking there of the murder of the police in the
Wombat Ranges. He showed a revolver which he said had been taken from the
police. Other people were asking him questions with reference to the shooting of the
police. He said, “ The gun I 'shot'the police with was old, but it was a good one.
The stock was bound up with wire, but I could shoot round a corner with it.” I said |
something about the bank’s books, and the prisoner told me to follow him. He asked
Richards, the constable, who was with us, “ Where is the newspaper man, Gill ? ” We
went to Gill’s place, but he was away somewhere. Kelly told Mrs. Gill he wanted her
husband to print something for him, and produced a roll of manuscript. Gill not being
there I told him I would take charge of it. After some hesitation he gave it me, saying,
“ Get it printed. I had not time to finish it, but will finish it another time, or a bit of
my life.” I put the manuscript in my pocket, and said, “ All right. I will see to it.”
Only part of it was published. The part I refer to refers to the murder of the police in,
the Wombat Ranges. I handed the document to Sub-Inspector Kennedy a few days
ago. Recognise "the prisoner as the leader of the gang at Jerilderie. I was in the
company of that gang for several hours. Byrne was a tall man, about 5 feet 10| inches
high, with fair hair and moustache. Hart looked like a boundary-rider, and appeared
about 20 years of age. Dan Kelly was a short man. Never made a written statement
to the bank authorities or the press. Made a statement to several reporters, which was
taken down. Sub-Inspector Kennedy saw me in Melbourne, and took down a few
particulars from me, and referred to something which he had taken out of the news-
papers. and asked me if it was correct. I told him it was. Asked Byrne if tire prisoner
was Ned Kelly. I forget his reply, but I took him to mean that he was Ned Kelly,
When I went into the bar with the police Dan Kelly was in the bar. I have spoken to
the police about the Glenrowan affair.
John Kelly said —I am a senior constable of police at Benalla. I was at theGlen-
rowan station on the 25th of June. About 7 o’clock on the morning of that day
prisoner came out of the bush. He appeared a tremendous size, and wore an oilskin
coat and something like a helmet. Some one called on him to go back, but he still
walked on. Several police challenged, but he took no notice. The police fired, and
the prisoner fired. One of my shots hit him on the hand, I think. Prisoner then got
behind a log. Steele ran from the hotel side at him. When about ten yards away
he fell. I ran up to him with others, and took some of the armor off. Several revolvers
were pointed at him. I said to the others, “No one will touch this man,” Bracken
said something to the same effect. When he saw Bracken he said to him, “ Save me
Bracken, I once saved you.” I said, “ You did not show poor Scanlon and Kennedy
much mercy.” He said, “ I had to shoot them or they would hate shot me.” I said to
him, “What have you done with Kennedy's watch?” He said, “Can’t tell you.”
The armor was made but of the mouldboards of a plough. When he was fighting the
police he struck his helmet with his i evoLver, and it rang like a bell. We took him to
Benalla. I was in charge of the lockup from 2 o’clock in the morning until 7 o’clock
at night. Mclntyre said to me, “ I would like to see Kelly.’ I replied, “All right,”
and went to the cell in the lockup, and told Constable Ryan, who was there, to go to
the stable. T-said to Kelly, “Do you know this man. Ned ? ” He replied, “No; is it
Flood ? ” Mclntyre said, “ The last time I saw you you took me to be the same man.”
Prisoner said, “I know you now; you are Mclntyre.” Mclntyre said, “I have
suffered a great deal over this. Is my statement correct?” Prisoner said" “ Yes.”
Mclntyre continued, “ Did I not tell you I would sooner be shot than betray my
mates? ” Prisoner said, “You did.” Mclntyre said, “Why did you come near us at
all ?” He replied, “ You would soon have found us, and you w r ould have shot us if you
did. Our horses were poor, we had no money, and we wanted to make a rise.”
Mclntyre also remarked, “You had me covered, and then you shot Lonigan as he was
running to a log.” Kelly said, “Lonigan got behind a log and was pointing his
revolver at me when I fired.” Mclntyre said, “ That is all nonsense. He was not
behind a log.” About 2 o’clock that same morning I gave Ned Kelly a drink. I was
supposed to visit him. 1 said, “ How about Fitzpatrick ? is his statement collect i
He replied, “ Yes ; it was I who shot him.”
Cross-examined —I have been nineteen years in the force. When I went into the
cell in the first instance it was with the purpose of giving Kelly a drink. Ryan was
close to me when I gave Kelly the drink. Kelly was lying upon a bed, and his wounds
had been dressed. It is usual for mounted police to carry their revolvers, even if in
plain clothes. I have read the accounts of the Wombat affair. If I had been in the
same business as Mclntyre I would have slept in my clothes with a revolver by my






side. I cannot give an opinion as to whether Mclntyre was to blame in failing to
carry his revolver. Lonigan had his revolver on him when shot, I arrived at Glen-
rowan about 3 o’clock in the morning, Sergeant Hare being in charge of the party.
We heard the railway line had been torn up. The special train which we were in
stopped at Benalla. I heard Bracken say, “ The Kelly's are up at Jordan’s hotel.
Have the house surrounded. They are all inside.” I have read Mr. Hare’s statement.
I did not hear Bracken mention anything to Mr. Hare about the prisoner in the hotel.
The first thing I saw was a volley fired at us from Jones’s verandah. It was moon-
light. The station was about seventy yards from Jones’s. After Mr. Hare was
wounded he went to where Mr. O’Connor was lying in a ditch. The fire was kept up
for five minutes continuously. Screams were heard, and Mr. Hare called out, “ Cease
firing,” and then he said to me, “ For God’s sake, Kelly, surround the house, and pre-
vent them escaping.” The blacks were more active in their firing than the white
men. They were told to stop several times. The reinforcements did not arrive until
5 o’clock, when Sergeant Steele’s party came from Wangaratta. Shortly afterwards
a train came from Benalla and Wangaratta. By 6 o’clock in the morning the hotel
was surrounded, and, unless the police failed in their duty, they were bound to see any
one coming out of the hotel. I fired into the house at the back when I saw the shoot-
ing coming from there. I had a Martini-Henry rifle. Up to the taking of Ned
Kelly I fired into the house about ten shots. The prisoners inside were told to lie
down. When Ned Kelly was captured I did not pull out a large quantity of his
beard. I saw Constable Dwyer kick the prisoner, but heard Constable Bracken say,
taking up his gun, that he would shoot any one who touched the prisoner. I remained
at Glenrowan till the house was set on fire. I saw the body of Byrne and the charred
remains of what were supposed to be Dan Kelly and Stephen Hart. Senior-constable
Johnson set the building on fire. I believe that was done by the order of Superin-
tendent Sadlier. I could not say if Edward Kelly was under the influence of drink.
Father Gibney was the first man to enter the burning building. I did not see him
bring anybody out.
This closed the case for the Crown, and the prisoner was committed to take his trial
at the Beech worth Assizes, which were held on October 14th.
Ned Kelly was then charged with having wilfully murdered Michael Scanlon on
the Wombat Banges on the 28th of October, 1878. Constable Mclntyre was called
and examined. He repeated the evidence narrated by him on the previous day, after
which the prisoner was fully committed on this charge.
On Thursday, 10th August, Kelly was forwarded by special train to Melbourne,
under armed escort, and safely lodged in the gaol of the metropolis, which he never
left alive.
The trial of Edward Kelly for the murder of Constable Lonigan took place at the
Central Criminal Court, Melbourne, before Mr, Justice Barry, on The 28th and 29th
October, 1880. The prisoner was defended by Mr. Bindon, instructed by Mr. Gaunson,
and Messrs. C. A. Smythe and Chomley prosecuted on behalf of the Crown. Through-
out both days the Court was densely crowded, and the trial watched with great interest.
Kate Kelly and Mrs. Skillion were present, and an unusually large contingent of con-
stables was stationed in the Court to guard all means of exit. The evidence was
similar to that given-by witnesses examined at the preliminary investigation at the
Beechworth Police Court. No evidence was called for the defence, the prisoner’s
counsel merely addressing the jury, and contending that the statements of Constable
Mclntyre were unsupported, and could not be accepted as reliable. The Judge, in
up, pointed out that the demeanour and conduct of Constable Mclntyre in the
witness-box was not that of a man who wished to deceive. After brief deliberation,
the jury returned a verdict of guilty, and the prisoner was asked if he had anything
to say. After a few desultory remarks, Kelly said he had not expected such a verdict,
and that if he had examined the witnesses himself the complexion of the case would
have been altered. He did not fear death, but regretted he*"was placed in that position
on account of his mother then in prison.
In closing what had almost amounted to an argument between the prisoner and the
Judge, His Honor passed sentence of death, and concluded with the usual formula,
• 4 May the Lord have mercy on your soul 1” “ Yes, I will meet you there,” was the
reply of this hardened offender, as removed him froin the dock to his cell.
Kelly denied the statements made by Constable Fitzpatrick in October, 1878, and
stated he was not within 200 miles of Greta, but earning a living by digging, at the.
time the supposed outrage on that constable took place. He did not justify his conduct,


though his confession was an ingenious attempt to fix the blame on others. He said; —
“ I do not pretend that I have led a blameless life, or that one fault justifies another,
but the public judging a case like mine should remember that the darkest life may have
a bright side, and that after the worst has been said against a man he may, if he is
heard tell a story in his own rough way, that will lead them to soften the harshness
of their thoughts against him, and find as many excuses for him as he would plead for
himself. For my own part Ido not care one straw about my life, nor for the result of
the trial and I know very well from the stories I have been told of how I am spoken
of, that the public at large execrate my name. The newspapers cannot speak of me
with that patient tolerance generally extended to men awaiting trial, and who are
iiwnmprl accordm? to the boast of British justice, to be innocent until they are proved
to he guilty ; but I don’t mind, for I am the last that curries public favour or dreads
the public frown. Let the hand of the law strike me down if it will, but I ask that ray
story may be heard and considered, not that I wish to avert any decree the law may
deem necessary to vindicate justice, or win a word of pity from any one. If my lips
teach the public that men are made mad by bad treatment, and if the police are taught
that they may exasperate to madness men they persecute and ill treat, my life will not
be entirely thrown away. People who live in large towns have no idea of the
tyrannical conduct of the police in country places far removed from Court. They have
no idea of the harsh, overbearing manner in which they execute their duty, how they
neglect their duty and abuse their powers.
It is the unanimous opinion of the police authorities that the Kellys were never,
as was supposed, in the Strathbogie Ranges. Their principal haunts were between
Glenrowan, Greta, and Sebastopol, and they never traveled on horseback except when
on some exploit. Their general custom was to carry a small tent, with provisions, in
fine weather, and camp in the middle of some large scrubby paddock. They would
shift their tents for a short distance every night, but would not make a great change
unless they had reason to suppose they had been seen. When their provisions became
exhausted they would have resort to their friends, and in wet and stormy weather
o-enerally sought friendly shelter. It is known for a certainty that Byrne often slept
on the premises of a man who lives within two miles of Beechworth. This man, on
hearing of the destruction of the gang and the death of Byrne, absolutely shed tears.
A singular story is told by one of the constables who was present in Sherritt’s hut on
the night of the murder. He states that a conversation was being carried on between
Sherritt. Mrs. Sherritt, Mrs. Barry, and himself, and that the subject of their remarks
was Joe’Byrne. Sherritt then proceeded to tell a yarn about Byrne and himself
having once been arrested on a serious charge. He said they assaulted a Chinaman
and nearly killed him. The Celestial, indeed, was so near death’s door that he had to
be fed with a silver tube. He himself was arresi ed some time after, but Byrne suc-
ceeded in evading the police. Whilst he was lying in the Beechworth lockup one
night he heard some one knocking outside, and on asking who it was heard Joe Byrne
reply “Itisme; lam going to help you to escape.” Sherritt said he replied, “The
Chinaman is getting better, so you had better give yourself up, and do not be a f001.,’
Byrne took his advice, surrendered, secured legal assistance, and was acquitted.
Just when Sherritt had finished this story a knock came to the door, and, as is now
well known, it proved to be the intimation of the final visit Sherritt was to receive
from Joe Byrne.
The maker of the armour which the Kelly gang wore was not discovered, but,
according to some reports, it is believed it was manufactured by the gang themselves,
whilst experts deny the truth of this statement, and assert it is the handiwork of an
experienced blacksmith. This much is known, the manufacture of the four suits occu-
pied four or five months, and a good deal of time was wasted in experimenting with
different material. Circular saws were first tried and found wanting in resistance to
bullets • iron tacks were also tried and found to be not bullet proof ; and the moulds
of ploughs were ultimately adopted. It has likewise transpired that the first suit
made was defective, and was thrown aside. The armour was used for the first time
at Glenrowan, and carried to that place on pack-horses.
On the night of the burning of Jones’s hotel, at Glenrowan, a large number of Kelly
sympathisers, well armed, were in the vicinity, and it was only from fear of shooting
a man named Ward, who was in the hotel, that they refrained from firing.
Remarkable to state His Honor Mr. Justice Barry died at his residence, East Mel-
bourne, on November 23, 1881, after a brief illness, and in less than one month from
the date on which he had passed sentence on Kelly. Superstitious persons might attach
significant meaning to the final words of the prisoner on that occasion ; but we do not


Ned Kelly’s first examination in Melbourne Gaol


Ned Kelly in Hospital
I
b
o
b
b
s
g
&


believe for an instant that the culprit was so far gifted with supernatural powers to be
able to predict the death of the worthy Judge. His vaunt “ I will meet you there,”
was evidently prompted by a heart which had lost all hope in this world.
After the sentence of death had been passed the most strenuous efforts were made on
Kelly’s behalf by sympathisers to obtain a reprieve, and the brothers Gaunson obtained
an unenviable notoriety for the prominent part they took at several meetings for that
object. Bis Excellency the Governor and Chief Secretary were petitioned, but all in
vain, the Executive were unmoved, and Kelly finding there was no hope surrendered
himself to his fate. For some days before his execution he busied himself in dictating
to a fellow prisoner various particulars respecting his career, and which were only
remarkable as indicating <he utter depravity of the man’s mind, who though he had
with his own hand shot three constables and been instrumental in causing the death of
many innocent persons, could still assert he in no way charged his conscience with the
guilt of any crime for which he should suffer death.
THE EXECUTION.
The final act in the career of Edward Kelly closed on the morning of Nov. 11, 1880,
when he paid the last dread penalty of the law. At the time appointed for the execu-
tion an immense crowd assembled in the road fronting the gaol, stared vacantly a f the
yalls. conversed on the fate of the prisoner, but made no demonstration. The con-
demnrd man, who had slumbered soundly for a few hours, and had been prepared by
bis spiritual advisers, Deans Donnelly and O’Hea, for the dread event comported him-
self with firmness, when at 10 o’clock a.m. the Sheriff, Colonel Rede, having
demanded the body of Edward Kelly, he was led by Mr. Castieau, the Governor of the
Gaol, from his cell. The condemned cell in which he was confined is on the eastern side
of the central tower, from which the corridors radiate, and the drop fronts the main
entrance. The spectators, including officials, were about fifty in number. Before
being led to the scaffold Kelly remarked to Upjohn, the executioner, “ You
necd’nt pinion me, I will go quietly;” but the usual course of fastening the prisoner’s
arms was nevertheless observed. Shortly after 10 he stood on the drop, and though
apparently firm, seemed visibly impressed with the awful nature of his position, dis-
playing neither levity or bravado. He had intended to make a speech, but evidently
changed his mind and said nothing. His spiritual advisers remained near him to the
last, repeating the prayers for the dying, and while they were so doing the criminal
looked his last on the world, the cap was drawn over his face and he was launched
into eternity. The spinal column was dislocated and death must have been instan-
taneous. though muscular action continued for many seconds after the bolt was drawn.
An inquest was subsequently held, and a formal verdict according with the facts
returned.
With the death of Ned Kelly, Australia has, we trust, beheld the last of the bush-
rangers ; but whether so or not, it will in the future be impossible for any body of
however daring, to set the laws for months at defiance, as did those whose
exploits we have related. Their history contains a moral, which the rising generation
of the colonies will do well to observe.
APPENDIX.
The report of the Royal Commission on the Police Force of Victoria, and bearing on
this matter, may be briefly summarised as follows
<* Sixty-six meetings were held, and sixty-two witnesses examined, and the Com-
missioners visited several centres of population in the disturbed districts, including
Benalla, Greta, Glenrowan, Beechworth, Sebastopol, and Wangaratta, They recom-
mended that a thorough system of police patrol should be established throughout the
colony ; that immediate steps should be taken to arm the police with the regulation
pattern Martini-Henry carbine; and that black trackers should be permanently
employed as an auxiliary to the police service.
“ They considered that prior to the Kelly outbreak the administration of the police
in the North-Eastern District was not satisfactory, and that a grave error was com-
mitted in abolishing the police-station at Glenmore, and reducing the number of men
stationed at Stanley and other places.
'• That the conduct of Captain Standish. Chief Commissioner of Police, was not
characterized by good judgment or zeal for the interests of the public service which
should have distinguished such an officer, and that much bad feeling existing amongst
the officers was due to his want of impartiality, temper, tact, and judgment in dealing
with his subordinates.
“ That Mr. Nicolson, Assistant Commissioner, has shown himself a capa*


zealous office, but that he labored under great- difficulties through undue interference
on the part of Captain Standish, and the jealousy occasioned by that officer’s favoritism
towards Superintendent Hare- In consequence of this, the Commissioners recommend
that in consequence < f his impaired constitution, caused by hardships in the late Kelly
pursuit, he be allowed to retire on his superannuation allowance as if he had attained
the age of 65 years.
“That whilst Superintendent Hare’s services in the police fr have been praise-
worthy, nothing special has been shown in his actions to warrant his retention in the
force, and he is recommended to be allowed to retire on his superannuation allowance;
and, owing to the wound he received at Glenrowan, to receive an additional allowance
of £lOO per annum
“That Superintendent Sadleir having been guilty of several errors of judgment
whilst assisting in pursuit of the Kelly gang, and his treatment of Senior-Constables
Kelly and Johnson being harsh and unmerited, he is recommended to be placed at the
bottom of the list of Superintendents.
“ That Inspector Brock lost a favorable opportunity of capturing the outlaws
at an early period of their career, viz., 4th November, 1878, and is therefore called upon
to~retire on a pension of £lOO per annum.
“ That Detective Ward, though having rendered active and efficient service during
the pursuit of the gang, was guilty of misleading his superior officers on several
occasions, the Commission therefore recommend that he be censure I and reduced one
grade.”
“ That the conduct of Sergeant Steele was deserving of censure in neglecting to take
action on his arrival at Wangaratta on November 4, 1878, on the reliable information
he had received. His want of judgment and promptitude prevented the capture of the
gang and the loss of life. The Commissioners therefore recommend that he be reduced
to the ranks.
“ That Const bles Dcross, Dowling, and Alexander, who were in the hut at the time
Sheriitt was murdered, having been guilty of disobedience of orders and cowardice be
dismissed from the service.
“ That Senior-Constable Kelly and Johnson be recommended for promotion by the
Government.
“ That Constable Bracken, for his action when imprisone I by fiie Kelly garm in
Jones’s hotel at Glenrowan, be recommended for promotion.
“ That Mr. James Wallace, State school teacher, of Hurdle Creek, having been a
- sympathiser with the outlaws, be immediately dismissed from the Education depart-
ment. H ~
“ That Mr. T. Cur.iow, State school teacher, by warning the special tr q'-and p r€
venting a terrible disaster and loss of life, deserves the highest praise, and hts servicesV
special recognition by the Government.
“That Mr. C H. Rawlings rendered important services g the attack upon the
outlaws, which deserve consideration at the Raids of the Government.
tf TE*E KELLY FAMILY. .
The history and antecedents of this now notorious family, being derived by the
Commission from the most reliable sources, will be perused with interest:
Amongst the many predisposing causes which operated to bring about the Kelly
outbreak must be included the unchecked aggregation of a large class of criminals in
the North-Eastern district of Victoria, all of whom, either by the ties of consar mity
or sympathy, wei£ identified with the outlaws. The origin and settlement m the
colony of the Kelly family therefore deserves some passing notice at, the hands of your
, Commissioners. James Quin, the grandfather of Edwa«l and Dan- Kelly Jl outlaws
was a native of the County of Antrim, Ireland. With his wife and family, dstiiig
jf six children, ha arrived in Victoria in 1839. He, in the first instance, resided in
■fPascoe Yale, and earned U subsistence by the cartage and sale of firewood i£-Mel-
bourne. In 1845. he settled in Wallan dan, in *be~Kilmore district, 'whm-e he
rented a small farib, and was enabled in the course ,a’ few years to pinv.,a.se tnc
freehold <A 700 acres of land in that locality. In 1863' which time his family had
increased to ten children, four sons and six daughters, heynSlized the landed 'ropefty
which! and with the proceed-’ , punting to t>o’-' 000, took up the
run, A iu a remote part of the North-,A. , district' The rec.
bject of this Migration has not been ascertained ; v 'but it is believed, that '
•b, having becomY otorious as a cattle stealer in the Kibnore dt>f* >t V
irons of escaping from police surveillance ; and, removing ,ck to the br-ders
"Cement and civilization, to secure for himself nd bis assocP es a safer and ira
47
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.


PX tended f eld of operations. Tne sons of old Quin were named —Patrick,
John, James, and William ; the daughters were—Mary Anne ; Catherine, married to
John Lloyd ; Ellen, married to John Kelly, the father of the outlaws ; Jane, married
to Tom Lloyd ; !iargaret, married to Pat Quin ; and Grace. Numerous progeny was
the result .of the narriages contracted by the children of the elder Quin, which
accounts for tbc Jy family being described as the most prolific in the district. |U|
James, the third old Quin, became an object of interest to the police so far back
as 1856 ; and frot i aat date down to 1879, when he was incarcerated under the Felons
Apprehension Act as a Kelly sympathizer, there were recorded against him no less
I than 16 arrests, and ten convictions for various offences, many of them of a serious M
nature, involving terms of imprisonment amounting to about nine years. John Quin,
though frequently before the courts, has escaped conviction, but when residing at
Wallan Wallan he was regarded by the authorities as the organizer of many of the i|
depredations in which the members of his family were concerned. John Kelly, who
married Ellen, the third daughter of the elder Quin, and lyho was the father of the
outlaws, was a convict, having been transported from Tipperary, Ireland, to Tasmania, |||
ip 1841, for an agrarian outrage, stated to have been shooting at a landlord with intent
to murder. He worked as a bush carpenter for a time afterarriving in Wallan Wallan,
and subsequently turned his attention to gold digging*'at which he was successful, and
was enabled to purchase a small freehold at Beveridge. Here he became notorious as il
an expert cattle stealer, and his house was known as the rendezvous of thieves and
suspected persons. In 1865, he was convicted of cattle stealing, and sentenced to six
months’imprisonment in Kilmore gaol. He died shortly after his release. At his |l
death he left seven children, namely, Edward and Dan (the outlaws), James, Mrs.
Gunn, Mrs Skillion, Kate, and Grace. Mrs. Kelly, upon the death of her husband,
settled at Eleven-mile Creek, * near Greta, where, with the younger portion c ! her
family, she at present resides. Her place was regarded for years as the reset ‘ of
law-*ss and desperate characters, including Power, who is said to have given Ned # ill
Kca bis first lesson in bushranging. Edward Kelly, the leader of the outlaws, was * : J
born in 1854. at Wallan Wallan. and from an early age was regarded by the police as
an incorrigible thief. In company with Power, the bushranger, he, on the 16th of
March. 1870, robbed Mr. Mcßean ; and on the 25th of April stuck up Mr. John
Murray, of Lauriscon. Kelly was arres.ed for the latter offence on the 4th . M ?v ' J 1
following,but escaped conviction owing to the want of identification. He vis implicated
in several outrages ; and at Beech worth, in 1871, he received a sentence of three years
r receiving a stolen horse. He led a wild and reckless life, and was always associated
b the dan' ms characters who infested *he neighbourhood of Greta until the &
outing d* .table Fitzpatrick, on the 25th of April, 1878, when he took to the
_ oush. D. > 4 Kelly w? ’ 1 origin 1861, and from the age of 16 years was, with his
elder brotaer Ned, a i riminal. Joseph Byrne, the third outlaw, was bom in
1857, and lived wi *rents, who were of Irish extraction and respectable |
antecedents, at the about seve miles from Beechworth. When but 16 'ears
of age he was in trouble and from the rst appears to have developed viciot and
cruel propensities. In 1876.* along with Aaron Mierritt, who figuies so prominently
the Kelly , so to speak, and with whom he was on terms of the
cL .Jst intimacy, he was a ted and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for
having stolen meat in his po; non ; and he was also believed to have been connected \
with serous cases of bonk stealing in the North-Eastern distiict, which ultimately "1
led 1 joining the Kelly gang. Steve Hart, the fourth member pf the gang, was C
born in i 860, and was the second son of Richard Hart, of XLruemiile Creek, near
Warn Stephen, at an early age, became the associate of disrepuLTole person
and on a »ystem of stealing horses and planting them until such time
rewa . - * ere offered by the owneis for their recovery. He ref wed a sentence
mmf in July, 1877* and subsequently was sent tc J |ol for +en months i
hoi,, On his release he rVangaratta, and fora time appeared
" to lead a more hon reptile .ie. One day, hbwerer, while at wop
cutting timber, he suddenly uown his axe, exclaiming to his mate, A short V
and a merry one.” He theif off. that he was going to New Sc nth W
>Totain fe further he him u murders of t .at th
p ' was L an ans _ his descript ‘ n Lv. . ji
as not until U robbery that his identity was established r *
1 * & 51 ol! the murderers, Ned and Dan Kelly. > f
B 1 * Bri tore
48
THE KELLY OUTLAWS.




